Microsoft Corp. patched a dangerous security issue in Bing last month days before it launched a new artificial-intelligence-powered version of the search engine.
The problem was discovered by outside researchers at the security firm Wiz Inc. It was created by a mistake in the way that Microsoft configured applications on Azure, its cloud-computing platform, and could be used to gain access to emails and other documents of people who used Bing, the researchers said.
Microsoft fixed the problem on Feb. 2, according to Ami Luttwak, Wiz's chief technology officer. Five days later, Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella introduced the new generative AI capabilities to Bing, bringing a renewed interest in the company's 14-year-old search engine.
Usage of Bing jumped, rising to more than 100 million daily active users in the month since the upgrade, Microsoft said in a recent blog.
Microsoft has been adding generative AI capabilities to much of its software and services. The new Bing can help users track down information using a chatbot backed by the technology behind ChatGPT.
Microsoft is adding the technology to its popular Microsoft 365 suite of business software. This week, the company unveiled plans to use AI to help cybersecurity experts monitor and categorize threats and attacks.
A Microsoft spokesman said the misconfiguration issue affected a small number of the company's applications that used its login management service, called Azure Active Directory.
In a blog post, Microsoft said the issues pointed out by Wiz had been fixed and outlined ways for companies and consumers to protect themselves. The company said it had taken steps to prevent this type of issue from occurring in the future. Microsoft shares rose 1.9% to close at $280.51 on Wednesday.
Wiz said there is no evidence anyone has taken advantage of the issue. It isn't clear how long it was available for hackers to use although the issue may have been exploitable for years, the cybersecurity company said.
Hillai Ben-Sasson, a researcher at Wiz said the misconfiguration allowed him to access a website used by Microsoft employees to set up trivia quizzes on Bing. Because it was misconfigured, anyone with a free Microsoft account could use it to change what results popped up on Bing for search queries.
It should have been viewable only to Microsoft employees, Wiz's Mr. Luttwak said. "We should have never seen it," he said.
The Wiz team discovered they could change some Bing search results by changing data on the Bing trivia page. They were able to make specific results show up for any search query by tinkering with the trivia page. They made the 1995 film "Hackers" pop up for anyone who searched for the term "best soundtracks."
Then they discovered something more serious: a way to get access to Bing users' Microsoft 365 emails, documents, calendars and other data.
Credit: By Robert McMillan
