Tribune Publishing Co. on Monday rejected a sweetened takeover offer from Gannett Co., insisting its turnaround plan serves shareholders better than Gannett's offer, and said a billionaire entrepreneur would take a $70 million stake in the company.
The company said it would receive a capital investment from Nant Capital LLC, which was founded by health-care investor Patrick Soon-Shiong, in exchange for 4.7 million shares of Tribune stock at $15 a share -- the same price that Gannett had proposed in its raised bid. Nant Capital will own about 12.9% of Tribune's shares outstanding, making it the company's second-largest shareholder.
In an interview, Mr. Soon-Shiong said he was approached within the past month by members of the Tribune board, but he declined to offer specifics.
According to a person familiar with the matter, Mr. Soon-Shiong was approached within the past week by Tribune non-executive Chairman Michael Ferro Jr.
Meanwhile, Tribune Chief Executive Justin Dearborn on Monday said Gannett's offer of $15 a share "is clearly inadequate as a control investment in Tribune."
Gannett signaled on Monday that it could abandon its bid if not enough Tribune shareholders indicate support for a tie-up, saying it would wait until after Tribune's June 2 annual shareholder meeting to decide whether to continue the pursuit.
Gannett has urged Tribune shareholders to withhold votes for Tribune's eight directors to show support for a deal.
Shares of Tribune fell 15% to $12.07 in midday New York, indicating doubts over a Gannett deal at $15 a share. Shares of Gannett fell 1% $15.92.
Mr. Dearborn said he has "serious doubts" about Gannett's proposal, but "we stand ready to work with Gannett to assess whether there is a path forward that will create more value for both sets of shareholders."
Tribune said it had invited Gannett to seek an agreement under which the companies could engage in discussions to see whether a transaction was in the best interests of shareholders. Gannett, in its statement on Monday, said "Tribune has been in possession of a customary nondisclosure agreement provided by Gannett for more than a month."
It appears Mr. Soon-Shiong won't be able to vote his new shares at the company's annual meeting; in Tribune's proxy filing from April, it said that to vote, shareholders need to have owned their stock by the close of business on April 15.
"Tribune again changed the composition of its board without stockholder participation," Gannett said in a statement.
Mr. Dearborn said the investment "demonstrates strong support for our plan and provides additional capital to accelerate our growth strategies for the benefit of our shareholders and all other Tribune stakeholders."
Mr. Soon-Shiong has been invited to join the company's board as a vice chairman. He will begin serving on June 2 -- the day of the company's annual shareholder meeting.
Mr. Soon-Shiong, who launched and sold two biotech startups together worth nearly $8 billion, heads a firm that funds ventures related to health care, mobile technology, semiconductors, nano-optics, artificial intelligence, cloud computing, alternative energy and scientific innovations.
Mr. Soon-Shiong said his professional background in artificial intelligence and his longtime interest in journalism happened to collide at the right moment.
"I think it's an opportunity to really benefit the local community with a medium that I think should be protected as a natural treasure," he said. "I think there's a mutual benefit to both of us."
As part of the deal, Tribune will have access to over 100 technology patents from Mr. Soon-Shiong's NantWorks LLC for use in news-media applications.
"It's the same underpinnings that can be used for anything to analyze big data," he said.
Credit: By Joshua Jamerson
