WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration announced an overhaul of the H-1B visa program for high-skilled foreign workers that will require employers to pay H-1B workers significantly higher wages, narrow the types of degrees that could qualify an applicant and shorten the length of visas for certain contract workers.
The changes, from the departments of Labor and Homeland Security on Tuesday, will likely make it tougher to qualify for one of the coveted visas.
Ken Cuccinelli, the No. 2 official at DHS, said on a news conference call that he expects about one-third of H-1B visa applications would be rejected under the new set of rules.
Mr. Cuccinelli and Patrick Pizzella, the deputy secretary of labor, said the changes were necessary to protect American workers, who the administration believes are being undercut by foreign workers on H-1B visas who are paid lower wages to perform similar jobs.
"America's immigration laws should put American workers first," Mr. Pizzella said, pointing to what he described as insufficiently stringent wage requirements on foreign workers in the H-1B visa program. "The result is U.S. workers are being ousted from good-paying, middle-class jobs and being replaced by foreign workers."
The policy changes have been expected since 2017, when the administration first announced intentions to revamp the H-1B visa program. Even before these formal changes were announced, however, the Trump administration has tightened issuance of H-1B visas, rejecting 15.1% of applications in 2019 compared with 6.1% in 2016, according to figures from U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.
Business groups and immigrant advocates criticized the overhaul, saying the Trump administration was attempting to solve a problem that doesn't exist on a broad scale.
A federal judge in San Francisco last week blocked the Trump administration from enforcing its ban against many of the biggest U.S. companies bringing in foreign workers under H-1B and other visas. TechNet, one of four business and trade organizations that brought the suit, said Tuesday's announcement flouted the court's ruling.
"Changing the requirements around H-1B and other work visas will only hurt American companies that depend on high-skilled workers who fill critical positions while we work to grow our domestic [science, technology, engineering and math] pipeline," said Linda Moore, TechNet's president and chief executive.
Jon Baselice, executive director of immigration policy at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, another one of the plaintiffs, said, "We're still evaluating these proposals, but both of these rules have the potential to inflict serious harm upon many American companies."
The Labor Department's wage-scale revision would significantly increase the required wages employers must pay their workers on H-1B visas. The requirements, which are set to take effect Thursday, are based on surveys of the range of salaries paid in particular professions.
Under the new rule, the required wage level for entry-level workers would rise to the 45th percentile of their profession's distribution, from the current requirement of the 17th percentile. The requirement for the highest-skilled workers would rise to the 95th percentile, from the 67th percentile.
Because those required wage increases take effect this week, existing H-1B holders looking to renew their visas might not qualify unless their employers raise their salaries accordingly.
The Department of Homeland Security's rule would narrow who qualifies for H-1B visas based on their education. Under the changes, an applicant must have a college degree in the field in which he or she is looking to work. That could make it tough for technology companies to hire in emerging fields like artificial intelligence or bioinformatics. Experts in such fields may have studied other subjects, or degrees in some subjects may not have existed until recently.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Requirements for H-1B Visa Shouldn't Be Overly Narrow" -- WSJ October 14, 2020)

Credit: By Michelle Hackman
