PALAU -- For Taiwan, an island democracy isolated and intimidated by its far larger rival regime in Beijing, a key to its fight for security and recognition lies in a handful of even smaller island democracies in the Pacific.
Taiwan President Lai Ching-te has been traveling across the region this week to shore up support from those countries -- three of Taipei's dozen remaining official allies -- while stopping in Taiwan's biggest, albeit unofficial, ally, the U.S.
On Thursday, the Taiwanese president arrived in Palau, the final stop of his first overseas trip since taking office this year. Lai's seven-day trip saw him making stops in the three Pacific nations with which Taiwan maintains formal diplomatic ties -- the Marshall Islands and Tuvalu, in addition to Palau.
The Pacific is a crucial diplomatic front for Taiwan, where it is hoping to prevent Beijing from poaching more of its diplomatic allies. The tiny island nations, analysts say, also could play a strategic role in a potential Taiwan conflict involving the U.S. and China.
If China managed to gain dominance over the Pacific, that would impede U.S. forces from reaching Taiwan for support in a conflict and "become a stronghold for China to attack the United States," said Chang Jung-ming, a research fellow at Institute for National Defense and Security Research, a Taipei-based think tank backed by Taiwan's military.
China's Communist Party has never ruled Taiwan but considers it part of its territory and has vowed to eventually bring it under its control.
Lai's trip included stopovers in Hawaii and the U.S. territory of Guam. Those two transits have prompted protests from Beijing, which opposes any links between the U.S. and Taipei.
On Thursday, Lai -- during a brief stopover in Guam -- held phone and video calls with members of Congress, including House Speaker Mike Johnson (R., La.), House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries (D., N.Y.) and Sen. Roger Wicker (R., Miss.), the highest-ranking Republican on the Senate Armed Services Committee.
During their talk, Johnson reassured Lai that supporting Taiwan, and facing up to challenges from China, has bipartisan support on Capitol Hill, said Karen Kuo, Lai's spokeswoman.
China has been working hard to woo Taiwan's remaining official allies. "That kind of trend is alarming, certainly for Taiwan and also for the United States," said Eric Harwit, an Asian-studies professor at the University of Hawaii and adjunct senior fellow at the Honolulu-based East-West Center think tank. "We see China using their economic power to win over those island states and also potentially expand their military influence in the region."
Nauru, a tiny Pacific island nation of 12,000 people, severed its relationship with Taiwan in January, just as Taiwanese voters elected Lai. Two months later, Nauru's president traveled to Beijing to meet with Chinese leader Xi Jinping. In 2019, the Solomon Islands and Kiribati, two nations in the Pacific, broke off their respective ties with Taipei.
Caught in the crossfire is Palau, a nation of roughly 18,000 people and more than 500 islands. Palau's location, which extends south from Japan through Guam to New Guinea, makes it a potential chokepoint in any regional conflict.
While in Palau, Lai delivered a speech at its legislature and plans to open a government building complex that Taiwan helped to build. On Friday, Taiwan and Palau are set to conduct a joint maritime-rescue drill.
Along with the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia, Palau has a wide-ranging arrangement with the U.S. known as a compact. Under such an arrangement, the U.S. will provide those countries with a combined $7.1 billion in aid during the next two decades. As part of the compact, which was renewed this year, the U.S. provides for the islands' defense.
For countries weighing a shift in recognition to Beijing, the possibility of aid and investment beckons. After Xi made the first visit by a Chinese leader to Fiji in 2014, China's aid to the Pacific region soared.
To counter China's efforts, the Taiwanese president has rolled out new offers during his trip. In the Marshall Islands, he attended the opening of an artificial intelligence-powered medical center where Taiwan has helped train surgeons. In Tuvalu, Taiwanese officials pledged to help build an undersea cable for the country and underwrite 10 years of operational costs.
Even so, analysts said Taiwan's approach might not be effective in the long run because China can offer far more financial assistance. "The trend is really going against them," said Harwit of the University of Hawaii.
Credit: By Joyu Wang and Austin Ramzy
