Whether we are trying to master a new language or play a musical instrument, the pain of making mistakes is a big obstacle, especially early in the learning curve. But novices become experts only when we push ourselves to the edge of our abilities, and errors are both inevitable and essential for moving forward.
Neuroscientists and computer scientists call this error-driven learning, as mistakes are key for acquiring new information in both humans and machines. These insights have practical applications, including for anyone preparing for a test.
Most students assume it's best to simply study the material and try to commit as much of it to memory as possible. Many standardized tests seemingly reward rote memorization. But what if students trained by testing themselves instead? Intuitively, it seems like studying is a safer bet; why risk producing wrong answers when you can just memorize the right one? Yet it turns out making errors early on can be more helpful for retaining information over time.
Curious about the power of tests as a learning tool, cognitive psychologists Henry "Roddy" Roediger and Jeff Karpicke had hundreds of students memorize excerpts from a test-preparation book for the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL). One group memorized these passages by rereading them about 14 times; another group read the passages several times and then completed three tests in which they had to recall as much of what they studied as possible. As Roediger and Karpicke reported in Psychological Science in 2006, the students who repeatedly studied the material initially performed better, but when these students were tested again a week later, the differences were stark. The students who repeatedly studied remembered around 40% of what they had learned, on average, while those who tested themselves recalled over 60%.
The testing effect has since been confirmed in many studies under a range of conditions. Its value remains undisputed, but scientists are still debating why it has such a powerful effect on memory.
The simplest explanation is that testing exposes our weaknesses. In general, we tend to be overconfident about our ability to retain information we have just learned. The initially untested students in Roediger and Karpicke's experiment thought they knew more because they had never been challenged. The tested ones had the humbling experience of struggling and sometimes failing to recall new information, of making more errors, which spurred them to work harder to hold on to whatever they had.
Yet the effect can't simply be explained by the hubris of students who are unaware of their weaknesses. Scientists are increasingly convinced that the simple act of mentally retrieving material makes people less prone to forgetting.
This would explain why retrieval attempts are useful even when they lead to wrong answers. Let's say you want to learn Swahili, but before you've had a chance to study, you're asked, "What's the definition of usingizi?" You'll have to guess, which seems silly. Generating wrong answers should be ineffective or even counterproductive. Yet, it turns out that giving your brain a chance to struggle first will help you learn and keep more information over time.
This is in line with a theory on memory proposed by cognitive psychologists Mark Carrier and Hal Pashler in the 1990s. They noted that the neural network models of artificial intelligence learn through trial and error: We train algorithms by constantly correcting mistakes. Carrier and Pashler suggested this constructive feedback loop might work the same way for humans. That is, we may be similarly more likely to encode the right information if we make a wrong guess first.
To understand how error-driven learning might work in the brain, my Dynamic Memory Lab at the University of California, Davis, used neural network models to simulate what happens in the hippocampus -- a critical brain area for rapid learning -- when people repeatedly attempt to memorize the same information. Our results, published in PLOS Computational Biology in 2021, clarified that the human brain can learn and retain far more through trial and error than from rote memorization.
This is because when we stress test our memories, we expose the weaknesses of existing neuronal connections in a way that ultimately strengthens what's useful and prunes away what's not. Rather than relearning the same material over and over -- rereading the same textbook, say -- it's more efficient to pinpoint the exact areas where our memory fails us, and then to update our memory with the right information. Of course, this works only if we understand where we went wrong, so we can correct for it. The point is to struggle, not to flail aimlessly.
Many of us are already exploiting this feature of memory when we actively learn by doing rather than passively by memorizing. Athletes who run plays in a scrimmage and politicians who hone their message in mock debates intuitively use the power of error-driven learning. It's why driving around a new neighborhood and making a few wrong turns is a far better way to understand an area than traveling the same streets as a passenger or studying it all on a map. It's why taking practice tests for the SATs is often more helpful than spending hours memorizing countless words.
These benefits can be maximized not only by optimizing how we learn but also when we learn. Our lab simulations showed that when we space out our attempts to learn things, we force our brain to struggle and therefore revise our memories of what we've learned -- a phenomenon known as the "spacing effect." These findings will soon be published in the journal Psychological Review.
In college, I often crammed weeks of material into a single night of studying before an exam. It was effective in the short run, but most of what I learned slipped away soon after a semester ended. This is because the hippocampus generates memories by tying our experiences to a particular context, such as our desk at night or a cafe in the morning. It isn't too hard to recall information we studied the night before because our mental context hasn't changed much since then. But as time passes and our contexts change, it becomes harder to retrieve the information we learned when we were jacked up on caffeine one night at 3 a.m.
Instead of studying for six hours straight, it is far more effective to return to the same information in shorter sessions over several days. This is because relearning the same material in different settings forces our hippocampus to continually update these memories until they have no discernible context, so they are easier to retrieve any place or time.
Error-driven learning can explain how everyday memories can change over the years. When we revisit our memories for any reason, we update them so that they no longer take us back to a specific moment, which makes them more accessible. This helps clarify why well-honed anecdotes come to mind easily, but don't make us feel as though we are reexperiencing that moment each time we retell the story. In contrast, a rarely experienced taste or fragrance or song can trigger the memory of an otherwise buried moment of childhood, which transports us back in time to its original context.
We learn and retain far more when we push ourselves to the edges of our knowledge. So, perhaps instead of rewarding mastery, we need to celebrate the struggle -- the real work of learning.
---
Charan Ranganath is a professor at the Center for Neuroscience and director of the Dynamic Memory Lab at the University of California, Davis. This essay is adapted from his new book, "Why We Remember: Unlocking Memory's Power to Hold on to What Matters."
Credit: By Charan Ranganath
