Derek Jeter launched a venture-capital-backed platform for sports-card collectors in an effort to capitalize on the booming market for sports memorabilia.
Mr. Jeter and the other founders of the platform, Arena Club, are attempting to digitize the card-trading process. Arena Club said that collectors will work out of digital showrooms -- inspecting online versions of trading cards -- while the company stores the physical cards in a vault.
Buyers get a digital proof of claim showing they own a card in the company's vault, Arena Club said. They can also request that the card be sent to them in what the company, which launched on Thursday, calls a protective slab.
Mr. Jeter, a former New York Yankees star, can trade his own vintage cards on the platform. His digital showroom has multiple cards spanning his 20-year career, including some in mint condition.
Mr. Jeter, an ex-shortstop, has launched a number of business ventures since he retired in 2014. He was part of an investment group that purchased the Miami Marlins in 2017 for $1.7 billion and was chief executive of the franchise. Earlier this year he parted ways with the team and sold his 4% stake in the club. He also helped start an athletic clothing line, Greatness Wins.
Mr. Jeter, 48 years old, is helping to launch Arena Club at a time when the market for sports memorabilia, and baseball cards in particular, is gaining in popularity.
Investors have purchased high-end trading cards during the Covid-19 pandemic, experts said, to diversify their financial holdings or to own a high-value item that can withstand inflation. Others were stuck at home during the pandemic and had more time to bid on cards.
A number of high-end sports trading cards have sold for record prices in recent months. A 1952 mint condition Mickey Mantle baseball card sold in August for $12.6 million. The businessman who sold the card had bought it for $50,000 in 1991.
Arena Club has raised around $9 million from backers including venture-capital firms Lightspeed Venture Partners, Defy.vc and BAM Ventures. Brian Lee, a tech entrepreneur and a founder of Arena Club, is a co-founder of BAM Ventures. He also co-founded Honest Co. with actress Jessica Alba.
The company said it would use artificial intelligence to grade the trading cards on its platform. A grade helps determine a card's quality, price and authenticity.
"We recognize that there is a real need in the grading industry for clarity, speed and trust," Mr. Jeter said.
Fanatics Inc., a sports-merchandising giant valued at $27 billion earlier this year, launched a trading-card venture last year. The venture, which aimed to be a one-stop shop for trading-card buyers and sellers, received $350 million in Series A funding.
The Fanatics trading-card venture ended Topps Co.'s dominance over baseball-card trading. After news of the venture came out last year, Topps canceled its plans to go public through a special-purpose acquisition company worth approximately $1.16 billion.
Credit: By Alyssa Lukpat
