MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. -- Google rarely talks about its secretive search algorithm. Now the tech giant has taken a stab at transparency, unveiling changes that it says will surface more accurate and intelligent responses to hundreds of millions of queries each day.
Top Google executives, in a media briefing, said they had harnessed advanced machine learning and mathematical modeling to produce better answers for complex search entries that often confound its current algorithm. They characterized the changes -- under a new sequence of code called "Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers," or "Bert" -- as being among the largest improvements to search in half a decade.
Google, a unit of Alphabet Inc., said one in 10 queries would elicit better results.
The new algorithm will also be used on advertising, one executive said.
The briefing offered a rare window into Google's continuous effort to fine-tune the software at the core of its $136 billion a year advertising business.
To illustrate the changes, the company took as an example the search query "do estheticians stand a lot at work." Such queries have long proved difficult for a computer to parse because a word like "stand" carries multiple meanings, and "at work" is essentially slang. Under Google's old system, the top search result for the example bordered on irrelevant: It was a local newspaper article on free-standing beauty schools.
Bert, however, is able to slice through the complexity, in part by ignoring transition words and other noise that may be grammatically necessary in speech but tangential to the substance of the query. In the estheticism example, the new system produced a highly relevant result on the physical demands of such jobs.
The new system isn't perfect. Take the search "What is south of the state of Nebraska?" Google's old algorithm came close to the right answer, but Bert overthinks it, serving up a link to the tiny community of South Nebraska, Fla.
Google search executive Pandu Nayak said the company will continue to employ thousands of manual testers to ferret out results of that sort.
The search changes are being rolled out now, though they may take some time to go live depending on a user's location, Google said.
At the briefing, executives showed sample screenshots of searches that didn't include the multiple lines of advertising that in real life appear above so-called organic search results. Mr. Nayak said he wasn't able to explain exactly how Google's advertising team is incorporating the machine-learning methods. "I'm sure they must be applying it, I just don't know" the details, he said.

Credit: By Rob Copeland
