A big payday doesn't always keep a chief executive employed.
Just over a year after CS Disco shareholders approved a CEO pay package worth nearly $110 million -- one of the biggest of 2022 -- the company's co-founder and chief executive, Kiwi Camara, resigned with little explanation.
His departure, disclosed in a securities filing on Monday, could mean Camara loses the stock options that made up nearly all of the pay package. Camara didn't respond to requests for comment.
CS Disco shares fell nearly 20% Tuesday following the disclosure. Shares in the company, which provides software used by lawyers, are trading below $8 after going public at $32 in July 2021.
Camara had run the Austin, Texas, company since he co-founded it in 2013. He is known in legal circles for graduating from Harvard Law School at 19 before becoming a lawyer and technology entrepreneur. The 2022 pay package made Camara, now 39 years old, one of the highest paid CEOs of 2022, just ahead of Apple CEO Tim Cook, The Wall Street Journal reported.
CS Disco said in January that it would lay off 62 employees, or about 9% of its staff, to improve its profitability. In its June quarter, the company recorded a net loss of $14.9 million on revenue of $34.3 million.
CS Disco's tools, which it describes as powered by artificial intelligence, are designed to help lawyers and law firms with discovery, document-review, case-management and other functions.
In a securities filing, CS Disco said Camara's resignation wasn't the result of disagreements over policy or operations, but it didn't elaborate. The company, which named an interim leader, didn't respond to requests for comment.
Joe Sibley, Camara's former law partner who last saw him over lunch on Tuesday, said he expects his longtime friend to take some time off before diving into whatever comes next.
"My understanding is this has been something he's been pondering for a little while -- I'm sure it's very exhausting doing what he does," Sibley said. "He just had so much on his plate with work that it was very difficult for him to find any leisure time."
Sibley, who also was a classmate at Harvard Law School, recalled that he and Camara struck up a conversation at the orientation and he was surprised to discover how young the other man was.
"Something didn't seem quite right with his timeline," said Sibley, who was one of the class's older students. "Then I realized this guy had skipped high school and had gone straight to college, and I was talking to a 17-year-old."
Sibley said he isn't entirely surprised that Camara might leave money on the table. "I just don't think he's a guy who's built where money is the driving factor behind what he does," Sibley said.
Under the terms of his employment agreement and equity awards, Camara would forfeit the 4.37 million options he received in May of last year if he departs before the company meets certain stock-price targets, ranging from $150 to $900 a share. CS Disco hasn't traded above about $66 a share, a level it last reached in 2021.
Camara wouldn't forfeit the award under some circumstances, such as if he was terminated by the board without cause or if he left after being demoted or in conjunction with an acquisition of the company, securities filings show.
CS Disco didn't address severance or Camara's options when it disclosed his departure. Companies often revise pay and severance when top executives depart, and such discussions might continue days or weeks after a departure is announced, according to attorneys specializing in executive pay.
Camara made about $500,000 in salary last year and just under $1 million, all cash, in 2021, CS Disco reported. As of mid-April, he also owned a 7% stake in CS Disco, which is currently worth about $32 million.
"It has been an incredible experience growing this business from an idea to an industry leader," Camara said in a statement Monday. "Disco is in excellent hands."
He was succeeded on an interim basis by Scott Hill, a former Intercontinental Exchange executive who has been on CS Disco's board for about two years, the company said.
Credit: By Theo Francis
