[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Microsoft may have put out a fire around its most important technology move in years. But fires leave scorch marks -- and sometimes flare up.
A leadership crisis at OpenAI over the weekend threatened to singe the world's second-largest company by market value. That is because OpenAI developed the key generative artificial-intelligence technology that helped power Microsoft's aggressive move into the field. Microsoft invested a total of $13 billion into the company and launched commercial products and services based on its technology, including a chatbot-enabled Bing search engine and a superpowered digital assistant called Copilot that can render emails, spreadsheets and PowerPoint presentations.
But $13 billion doesn't buy what it used to. "Microsoft has no board seat and no control," OpenAI's website proclaims, after a lengthy explanation of the company's unique nonprofit ownership, which is aimed at "remaining unencumbered by profit incentives."
Microsoft's largess didn't even buy it an early heads-up on the news that OpenAI's board made the decision to fire co-founder and Chief Executive Sam Altman -- who has become AI's most visible proponent. Microsoft reportedly found out about Altman's firing minutes before it was announced Friday afternoon, an announcement that took nearly 2% off Microsoft's stock price before the market closed.
Microsoft's stock clawed back all those losses and a bit more on Monday, after CEO Satya Nadella said late Sunday that he hired Altman and other key OpenAI figures to "lead a new advanced AI research team."
He noted that Microsoft remains committed to its partnership with OpenAI, where two-thirds of the workforce sent an open letter Monday morning threatening to quit the company if Altman and former President Greg Brockman aren't brought back. The situation remains fluid and even more puzzling; one of the signatories of the above letter is the co-founder and chief scientist who reportedly led the boardroom effort to push Altman out.
Whatever the outcome of the latest twist, Microsoft appears to have shielded itself from the worst of the fallout.
Hiring Altman and other key OpenAI talent would give Microsoft more direct control over the technology that is seen as key to its future.
Having Altman return to OpenAI under a different leadership structure could accomplish much of the same, given that OpenAI will still need Microsoft's financial support and computing backbone to develop its technology.
Microsoft's early relationship with OpenAI gave the software giant a pole position in what has turned out to be the biggest tech race in years. And it is a race that Microsoft has been seen as winning. Microsoft's market value has surged more than $980 billion since the company's last OpenAI investment was reported in January, with the stock also outperforming its big tech rivals Apple, Amazon and Google-parent Alphabet in that time.
Stifel analyst Brad Reback said, "this is the first time in over two decades the company is not playing from behind in an emerging tech trend" in a note to clients on Monday.
But the lack of control demonstrated by the recent drama also shows a key weakness in Microsoft's AI armor. And the company's current chosen path of essentially acquiring OpenAI by hiring its key talent poses its own risks, given the distinct possibility of legal challenges that could arise from such an endeavor. "As the board of OpenAI controls the nonprofit and the for-profit entities, it controls collaboration with Microsoft, and therefore the future of Microsoft," Pierre Ferragu of New Street Research wrote in a note Sunday, before the news of Microsoft hiring Altman.
Microsoft's AI fate rests in the hands of large corporate clients who shell out millions of dollars annually for the company's software; Wall Street currently expects Microsoft's revenue to average 14% growth annually over the next three years even as it approaches the $300 billion mark.
Those clients will need to know that Microsoft's vital code can't be scrambled by a Silicon Valley soap opera.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
