Google fled mainland China for Hong Kong in 2010 to escape the Beijing government's censorship and cybersnooping. Now a court ruling threatens to censor the search giant in Hong Kong -- and in the process please opponents of free speech from Beijing to Brussels.
Hong Kong's High Court ruled last week that local tycoon Albert Yeung, whose businesses include pop music, casinos and luxury retailing, can sue Google for defamation over its "autocomplete" feature. Mr. Yeung objects that when Internet users type his name into Google, the site offers terms such as "triad," "Sun Yee On" and "14K" -- references to Hong Kong organized crime. Mr. Yeung was convicted of illegal bookmaking and obstruction of justice in the 1980s, but he denies any connections to organized crime and charges that Google effectively defames him every time anyone searches his name.
Google retorts that its autocomplete suggestions simply reflect common searches by Web users, with Google serving as a "passive facilitator" of that information -- not a publisher controlling its content. Nor would such control be possible, the company says. "The entire basis of the Internet will be compromised if search engines are required to audit what can be assessed by users using their search tools," Google's lawyer told the court. Given the billions of searches conducted, that would be an "infinite duty" that "should not be foisted on Google."
Judge Marlene Ng apparently disagrees. She ruled that "Google Search does not simply convey information" but rather publishes suggestions "distilled pursuant to artificial intelligence set up by Google." So Mr. Yeung has "a good arguable case" against the company, and a jury can decide what damages may be appropriate. Google meanwhile will likely scramble to start auditing its search tools and heading off litigation from other Hong Kongers happy to shake down a tech colossus.
Hong Kong thus joins the growing global campaign to cleanse the Internet of information that some person or another wants to make disappear, even at the expense of the public interest. In May the European Union's highest court blessed a "right to be forgotten," giving individuals the power to demand that search engines and social-media platforms withhold links to certain Web pages. The ruling included a nominal public-interest exception, but no one knows what courts will decide to protect and what to order erased. Is your years-old bankruptcy outdated personal information, or still valuable for potential business partners or creditors?
Tech firms would rather alter search results than face capricious courts, so the censorship has begun. Google, which in June reported receiving 10,000 privacy requests per day, has informed several European news outlets -- including the BBC, the Guardian, El Mundo and The Wall Street Journal -- that it now withholds search results for certain articles on their sites.
In ruling against Google last week Justice Ng mentioned the European right to be forgotten only in passing, but Hong Kong privacy commissioner Allan Chiang is already pushing for the territory to follow the EU's lead. "As a responsible enterprise, Google should also entertain removal requests from other parts of the world to meet their privacy expectations," he said before a meeting of 15 regional privacy czars in June.
Such high-minded rhetoric about privacy obscures the inherent authoritarian risks in heightened information controls, whether concerning Albert Yeung's autocomplete results or official European records. As law professor Eugene Volokh wrote presciently in 2000: "The difficulty is that the right to information privacy -- the right to control other people's communication of personally identifiable information about you -- is a right to have the government stop people from speaking about you." Inviting such government power is no path to greater individual privacy or security.
