Microsoft Corp. tried through the years to compete in a range of buzzy consumer businesses, but it was Chief Executive Satya Nadella's focus on selling humdrum yet rapidly growing computing services to companies that allowed it to reclaim the title of world's most valuable company.
Microsoft unseated Apple Inc. for the top spot, closing Friday with a market cap of $851.36 billion, nearly $4 billion higher than the iPhone maker. To get there, Microsoft also had to outpace Amazon.com Inc., Facebook Inc. and Google owner Alphabet Inc., once red-hot tech titans that have been roiled by congressional hearings, investor concerns about growth and caustic tweets from President Trump, controversies Mr. Nadella has largely avoided.
The resurgence -- Microsoft last wore the most-valuable crown in 2003 -- can be traced to Mr. Nadella's vigorous pursuit of web-based services known as cloud computing, which had threatened to undermine Microsoft's own business selling productivity and data-center software companies and people installed on their own computers.
"They built a strategy for the cloud when the cloud was really starting to emerge," said Matt McIlwain, managing director of Madrona Venture Group, a Seattle firm that invests in cloud startups. "Enterprises started embracing the cloud just as Microsoft was starting to get it right."
Microsoft's first ascent up the market-cap mountain was powered by its ubiquitous Windows operating system and Office productivity software, and the aggressive leadership of co-founder Bill Gates. The CEO leveraged his Windows monopoly to move into new markets, a strategy that launched battles with regulators in the U.S. and abroad.
Settling those matters led to new rules for Microsoft's conduct that slowed the company's growth. Its stock stagnated for a decade. Since Mr. Nadella took over as CEO five years ago, Microsoft's shares have tripled, buttressing the statuses of Mr. Gates and former CEO Steve Ballmer -- still two of Microsoft's biggest shareholders -- as some of the world's wealthiest individuals.
At The Wall Street Journal's WSJ Tech D.Live conference in November, Mr. Ballmer said enterprise business powers Microsoft today. Mr. Nadella took a company with good profit streams and technology "to whole new levels," he said.
Microsoft's Azure cloud business has been key, with revenue climbing more than 76% every quarter since the company began reporting the metric in October 2015.
Mr. Nadella has sought to change Microsoft's culture. On his watch, it has taken public positions on contentious issues, calling for regulation of facial-recognition tech and responsible use of artificial-intelligence software. He moved away from some of Mr. Ballmer's bets, dismantling the company's mobile-phone business, and prioritized working with partners in the cloud and elsewhere, putting popular Microsoft apps on Apple's iOS and Google's Android software.
Wall Street expects the cloud to keep booming. Gartner estimated the world-wide market for cloud-infrastructure services like the ones Microsoft and Amazon sell will grow to $63 billion in 2021 from $23.6 billion last year.

Credit: By Jay Greene
