In a Covid-19 outbreak that has locked 25 million people at home, the city of Shanghai has reported more than 130,000 cases since March 1, but says there have been no deaths and currently only one patient with severe illness.
The absence of deaths, and the low incidence of severe illness recorded in Shanghai as cases rise, stands out compared with outbreaks elsewhere, even accounting for the fact that Covid deaths often lag behind infections by several weeks.
Hong Kong has followed a similarly strict model as mainland China in the pandemic, and saw a steep rise in deaths following a recent outbreak there. In March, the city reported tens of thousands of cases and hundreds of deaths a day. Taiwan, with many fewer cases than the mainland, reported a Covid death on Saturday, the fourth this year.
But health and data experts caution that calculating and comparing Covid's toll in China and elsewhere is difficult because of challenges including determining exactly how people have died, differences in vaccination rates and diverging methods for testing and recording pandemic data.
Attributing deaths to any specific disease is more challenging than it seems, said Sean Sylvia, an assistant professor of health policy at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. When reporting deaths, if there is a choice between attributing them to Covid-19 or to some underlying conditions, there are sometimes strong incentives not to attribute them directly to Covid-19, he said.
In China, "we just don't know what the true number of deaths is," he said. "That is true globally, too. We have estimates. But in a lot of places, it's very uncertain, and China's one of those places."
China's National Health Commission referred a request for comment, made during the weekend, to the Shanghai city government, which didn't immediately respond.
A community's death rate can also be affected by factors like the age distribution and racial makeup of its population, vaccination status, type of vaccine and average distance to a healthcare facility, as well as which Covid-19 variant is causing infections, said Ryan Tibshirani, a professor of statistics and machine learning at Carnegie Mellon University, who leads a prominent U.S. lab in influenza and Covid-19 forecasting.
On Wednesday, Wu Zunyou, chief medical expert at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said China has been able to keep death rates low because of its efforts to detect and curb outbreaks at an early stage, its high vaccination rate and an approach of treating all infected patients, which he said helped prevent mild cases from turning into severe ones.
According to data aggregated and analyzed by the Johns Hopkins University Coronavirus Resource Center, China has recorded one of the lowest death rates by population, bested only by Burundi, in Africa.
But China's case-fatality ratio, which Johns Hopkins calculated cumulatively over the pandemic, is on par with many countries including the U.K., Spain, and Greece -- partly reflecting how China's "zero Covid" strategy resulted in very few cases in the period between the Wuhan outbreak and the recent Omicron wave.
Credit: By Liyan Qi and Karen Hao
