WASHINGTON -- White House officials promised to keep the U.S. in the lead on emerging artificial-intelligence technologies, despite competition from China and worries about potential impacts on American workers.
At a White House conference on artificial intelligence, Trump technology adviser Michael Kratsios pledged that the administration would make a priority of advancing artificial-intelligence research, through greater research funding and other steps.
"America has been the global leader in AI, and the Trump administration will ensure our great nation remains the global leader in AI," said Mr. Kratsios, deputy assistant to the president for technology policy, according to prepared text of a keynote speech.
In addition to increased federal funding, Mr. Kratsios raised the possibility that AI researchers might eventually gain expanded access to the government's network of national labs, and the government's "vast troves of taxpayer-funded data, in ways that don't compromise privacy or security."
Artificial intelligence is software that enables computers to emulate human intelligence, handling tasks such as recognizing and processing images or language in applications including autonomous driving.
Experts view AI technologies as a big potential growth area for U.S. businesses. But it has raised concerns about the potential for job losses and other harms.
AI also has emerged as one of the areas at the center of intensifying competition between the U.S. and China for global technology supremacy.
The administration hoped to strike a balance with the event, welcoming the benefits of artificial intelligence while also acknowledging potential political challenges.
Already, legislation to speed development of autonomous vehicles has run into opposition in Congress this year, in part over safety concerns.
Arvind Krishna, director of IBM Research, said one point of discussion was how to make AI more understandable, to build public confidence.
"It's really important that people trust AI, and for them to trust it, it has to be explainable," he said. "That resonated with a lot of the other folks."
Justin Kershaw, CIO of Cargill Inc., said, "I think some learning happened and some ideas were exchanged."

Credit: By John D. McKinnon
