HANGZHOU, China -- Alibaba Group's sprawling campus has collegial workspaces, laid-back coffee bars and, on the landscaped grounds, a police outpost.
Employees use the office to report suspected crimes to the police, according to people familiar with the operation. Police also use it to request data from Alibaba for their own investigations, these people said, tapping into the trove of information the tech giant collects through its e-commerce and financial-payment networks.
In one case, the police wanted to find out who had posted content related to terrorism, said a former Alibaba employee. "They came to me and asked me for the user ID and information," he recalled. He turned it over.
The Chinese government is building one of the world's most sophisticated, high-tech systems to keep watch over its citizens, including surveillance cameras, facial-recognition technology and vast computers systems that comb through terabytes of data. Central to its efforts are the country's biggest technology companies, which are openly acting as the government's eyes and ears in cyberspace.
Companies including Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., Tencent Holdings Ltd. and Baidu Inc., are required to help China's government hunt down criminal suspects and silence political dissent. Their technology is also being used to create cities wired for surveillance.
This assistance is far more extensive than the help Western companies extend to their governments, and the requests are almost impossible to challenge, a Wall Street Journal examination of Chinese practices shows.
Unlike American companies, which often resist U.S. government requests for information, Chinese ones talk openly about working with authorities. Tencent Chief Executive Ma Huateng, also known as Pony Ma, and Alibaba founder Jack Ma both have voiced support for private companies working with the government on law enforcement and security issues.
"The political and legal system of the future is inseparable from the internet, inseparable from big data," Alibaba's Mr. Ma told a Communist Party commission overseeing law enforcement last year. He said technology will soon make it possible to predict security threats. "Bad guys won't even be able to walk into the square," he said.
In practice, China's internet giants, which have benefited from trade policies shielding them from foreign competition, have little choice but to cooperate in a country where the Communist Party controls both the legal system and the right to function as a business.
Tencent, the world's largest online videogame company, dominates Chinese cyberspace with news, video-streaming operations and its WeChat app, used by nearly one billion people to communicate and for mobile payments.
Beijing activist Hu Jia said he bought a slingshot online after a friend recommended it for relieving stress. He paid with WeChat's mobile-payment feature. Mr. Hu said he was later interrogated by a state security agent, who asked if he was planning to shoot out surveillance cameras near his apartment.
A few years earlier, Mr. Hu said, he had messaged a friend headed to Taiwan with the names of activists he might want to see while traveling there. Later, he said, state security agents showed up at the friend's house and warned him against meeting Mr. Hu's acquaintances.
"Experience has proven that WeChat is completely compromised," especially for people on the government's watch list, Mr. Hu said. "Everyone has a spy watching them. That spy is their smartphone."
Neither Tencent nor Chinese security officials responded to requests for comment.
When discussing their cooperation with the government, Chinese companies point to disclosures by former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden, which detailed how U.S. tech and telecommunications companies granted U.S. government agencies access to user data. Earlier, many American phone companies had complied with a secret National Security Agency program to intercept the communications of some U.S. citizens without a court warrant.
U.S. government requests for information about U.S. citizens or legal residents now have to be approved by a court. Chinese police, by contrast, can rely on a search warrant issued by the police themselves.
"I would disagree with the premise that the central government has access to all this corporate data. That's just not true," said Joseph Tsai, Alibaba's executive vice chairman, at the Journal's D.Live conference in October. "If they want data from you, just like in the U.S., they have to have a reason."
Alibaba and other tech companies push back if they believe a Chinese government request for data isn't warranted, said a Chinese police official familiar with the operations of the country's cyberpolice. He said law enforcement must follow set procedures to gain access to private information.
China's government, however, has the last word. There is no independent judiciary to approve or review government requests -- or for companies to appeal to if they disagree with a demand.
It is unlikely any Chinese company could mount the sort of challenge Apple Inc. did when it refused to comply with a request by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation to unlock the iPhone of a suspect in the San Bernardino mass shooting in 2015.
Over the past year, Chinese regulators have ordered three popular internet platforms to stop streaming videos with political content not in line with government policy, and they more recently warned that companies that didn't comply with new social-media rules would be shut down. Facebook Inc. was banned in China in 2009, without a stated reason.
On June 1, a new cybersecurity law went into effect that requires companies running internet platforms in China to help authorities ferret out content that "endangers national security, national honor and interests."
That goes far beyond U.S. government demands on internet service providers or platforms, which are required by law to report suspected instances of child pornography when they discover it and take down material that has been found to infringe on copyrights.
Chinese government authorities didn't respond to requests for comment for this article.
In one of the first significant actions under the new law, China's Cyberspace Administration this fall slapped maximum fines on Tencent, internet company Baidu and others for allowing users to spread banned content, including "false rumors" and pornography.
Tencent said it "sincerely accepted" the punishment and vowed to do a better job. Baidu outlined a plan to use big data and artificial intelligence to better identify and dispel rumors. A Baidu spokeswoman said the new platform was developed in collaboration with police and other public and private agencies, and was designed to ensure users get accurate information.
Alibaba has data on hundreds of millions of Chinese citizens who use the company and its affiliated services to shop online, stream videos, pay rent, send text messages, make comments on social media and more.
The job of monitoring traffic on these platforms falls to its Alibaba Security Team, whose Chinese name -- Shendun -- can be translated as "Magic Shield."
At the company's Hangzhou campus, computer programs sweep Alibaba's internet commerce sites and flag anything that might be prohibited, such as guns and pornography, according to current and former Magic Shield agents.
The security team scans the websites for suspicious sales, one former staffer said, such as tea being sold for an exorbitant price, an indication it might really be illegal drugs. Agents then review and remove objectionable content, and in cases of scams such as monetary fraud, will alert the police, the current and former agents said.
In a video published on the team's Twitter-like Weibo site, the Magic Shield team is shown working at computer screens. "Guns, rubber bullets, drugs," the narrator says. "As long as it's illegal, it will not escape our control."
The team has assisted police in "several thousand cases," the video says. The team also is called in to help police with criminal investigations, people familiar with the operations say.
Plans to set up police outposts at tech companies were disclosed in 2015 on China's Ministry of Public Security website, which said the intent was to "find out about criminal activity at its first instance."
An Alibaba spokeswoman said the company's campus includes "a designated meeting space where law-enforcement staff visit occasionally to communicate the latest updates on regulation. If there are established criminal cases, our team will also use this space to discuss the extent of our assistance in those investigations as required by law. There are no police officers stationed on our campus."
Unlike their Chinese counterparts, U.S. tech companies, including Apple, Facebook and Alphabet Inc.'s Google, routinely disclose their government cooperation in transparency reports.
Google, whose services are mostly blocked in China, said there were 23 Chinese government requests for Google to remove content in the second half of 2016, mostly for national security reasons.
Apple disclosed that more than 35,000 user accounts were affected by 24 Chinese law-enforcement requests in the first half of this year, many in connection with fraud investigations. It said it provided information on about 90% of them.
Chinese companies don't release any information on the number of requests from the government, the nature of the requests or the compliance rate.
Tencent's online monitoring operations use computers to filter its streamed videos, news feeds and other online platforms for obscene and politically sensitive content, according to people familiar with the operation.
Censors at Chinese companies are responsible for blocking unfavorable references to the Communist Party and senior leaders, as well as foreign news stories casting China in a negative light. Computers are programed to spot thousands of words and phrases and delete most of the offensive content, according to the people familiar with the censorship operations.
Users of Tencent's WeChat app who run large group chats say they have received automated warnings about politically sensitive content. Some political activists say their WeChat accounts have been suspended or closed for posts critical of the government.
During important political events, China's internet regulator sets up shop at Chinese content providers to catch anything that might slip through the cracks, people familiar with the operations said. The regulator, the Cyberspace Administration of China, didn't respond to a request for comment.
Along with access to online data, China's government wants something else from tech companies -- the cloud computing prowess to sort and analyze information. China wants to crunch data from surveillance cameras, smartphones, government databases and other sources to create so-called smart cities and safe cities.
Alibaba's computers and artificial-intelligence algorithms power a "city brain" in Hangzhou that improves traffic flow and clears the path for ambulances by using mobile mapping and data from traffic cameras to time traffic signals.
Maya Wang, a Hong Kong-based researcher for Human Rights Watch, contends the proclaimed benefits of such wired cities mask their true purpose. "This whole safe city idea is a massive surveillance project," she said.
The government-sponsored Smart Cities Work Committee didn't respond to a request for comment.
---
Xiao Xiao and Lingling Wei contributed to this article.

Credit: By Liza Lin and Josh Chin
