Shares of Sema4 Holdings Corp, a genetic-testing and health-data analytics business spun out of the Mount Sinai Health System, are set to start trading Friday after the business combined with a blank-check company backed by Casdin Capital and Corvex Management.
Investors in the special-purpose acquisition company, CM Life Sciences Inc., agreed to a deal that values the company at about $3 billion, a spokeswoman said. Backers of the Stamford, Conn., business include Blackstone Group Inc. and Deerfield Management, regulatory filings show.
Sema4 joins a parade of companies that have gone public through SPACs, the shell companies that issue shares to raise capital to buy a business and bring it public.
In this year's first half, 75 companies took the SPAC route to a public listing, with a total deal value of about $167.21 billion, excluding debt, according to data provider Dealogic.
This month, 18 more SPAC deals valued at about $29.32 billion have been done, the data show.
With business valuations running sky-high, Sema4 considered a traditional initial public offering, founder and Chief Executive Eric Schadt said. Ultimately, the SPAC offered a way to achieve the same ends more quickly, he said.
Started as Mount Sinai Genomics Inc., the company operated as Sema4 until it combined with the SPAC led by Casdin Founder Eli Casdin and Corvex Founder Keith Meister. Sema4's stock will trade on Nasdaq under the SMFR ticker.
The company offers what is known as precision, or personalized medicine, tailoring a patient's treatment to her genetic profile.
Sema4 generates and processes massive amounts of health data and uses artificial intelligence and machine learning to find health indicators and the risks of developing new conditions, such as cancer, according to Mr. Schadt.
The results can improve diagnosis and treatment, he said.
The company's database includes some 12 million patient records, many with genomic profiles, although personal information is removed. The data are used to help doctors diagnose and tailor treatments to their patients.
"We consider ourselves a health-information company, but we really operate almost more as a cybersecurity company," Mr. Schadt said, adding that data security is "core to our survival."
Sema4 has about 1,000 employees and generated more than $175 million in revenue last year, even though its reproductive health business took a big hit from the Covid-19 pandemic. Fertility clinics, among others, were forced to shut.
Credit: By Maria Armental
