The head of Tesla Inc.'s Autopilot semiautonomous-driving system departed for Intel Corp., adding new turmoil to a key program for the auto maker that is already beset by executive departures and safety questions.
Jim Keller left the company for a job at Intel focused on microprocessor engineering.
Mr. Keller joined Tesla in 2016 from chip maker Advanced Micro Devices Inc. to serve as vice president of Autopilot hardware. He assumed control of Autopilot software as well last June, following the departure of Chris Lattner, who left only six months after Tesla hired him away from Apple Inc.
Tesla has had several departures from its senior ranks since the start of last year, including its top sales executive and chief financial officer. The company is struggling to ramp up production of the Model 3, a sedan that is supposed to help make the electric-car producer more mainstream.
Autopilot, a driver-assistance program that can keep Tesla cars in highway lanes and at speed, has helped Tesla's image as a technologically advanced car company. The program, however, has been racked by several departures as Chief Executive Elon Musk has pushed the team to bring out a fully driverless system -- something he promised in 2016 to demonstrate by the end of last year but failed to do.
Autopilot program director Sterling Anderson left Tesla in January 2017 to begin a competing self-driving-software startup called Aurora Innovation Inc. He was succeeded by Mr. Lattner.
Tesla's Autopilot program also is under new scrutiny after a Model X driver died using Autopilot in a crash south of San Francisco last month. The National Transportation Safety Board and National Highway Traffic Safety Administration are probing the crash. Tesla has blamed the driver for the crash and defended the safety of its system.
That was the second fatal crash involving Tesla's Autopilot in the U.S. to draw federal review. The NHTSA found that Autopilot wasn't defective in a fatal 2016 Florida crash while the NTSB laid partial blame on Tesla, saying the system allowed the driver to keep his hands off the wheel too long and did too little to constrain the system to roads for which it was designed.
Tesla said Mr. Keller's responsibilities will now be shared by two executives.
Andrej Karpathy, an expert in computer vision and deep learning who joined Tesla in June, is taking responsibility for Autopilot software, while Pete Bannon, a former Apple chip executive who joined Tesla two years ago, will lead Autopilot hardware.
"Tesla is deeply committed to developing the most advanced silicon in the world," the company said in a statement. "We plan to dramatically increase our investment in that area while building on the world-class leadership team we have in place."
For Intel, hiring Mr. Keller brings on an accomplished engineering leader who helped design competing products from rival AMD that have been gaining traction in the market. Besides his work at Tesla and AMD, Mr. Keller worked on pioneering semiconductor efforts at Digital Equipment Corp. in the late 1990s and Apple's early iPhone and iPad chips in the late 2000s.

Credit: By Tim Higgins and Ted Greenwald
