Since becoming chief executive of Sony Corp. in 2012, Kazuo Hirai has driven a restructuring that has seen the company shed some businesses and focus more on those that promise the greatest growth opportunities.
He sat down with The Wall Street Journal's editor in chief, Gerard Baker, at the WSJ.D Live conference to discuss Sony's plans for businesses from image sensors for smartphones and other devices to TVs, movies, robots and more.
Here are edited excerpts of their conversation.
MR. BAKER: You think one of your core growth areas is going to be making parts for phones and cameras and various other things.
MR. HIRAI: Indeed. We've always had cutting-edge image-sensor technology, both in terms of the technology of the sensors themselves, as well as the manufacturing that goes into it.
And we have the No. 1 market share. We've had that for a long time. And we want to make sure that that's part of a strategy for continued growth of Sony.
MR. BAKER: You're still making televisions. And that hasn't been a core growth area for you, and its profitability perhaps isn't that strong. Is that something you would be looking to get out of?
MR. HIRAI: We are committed to the television space. Through a lot of creative products and also a lot of restructuring, cost reductions, efficiencies, we were able to turn the business around to profitability last fiscal year. And because we're not in white goods, it's very important that we have the Sony brand presence within homes. So it's going to be a very important part of our business, going forward.
From a branding perspective, it's very important. And for the technology and a lot of the R&D efforts that we put into our television business. We still do a lot of R&D to enhance the picture quality. And that has a rub-off effect on, for example, the image quality of our smartphones or camcorders or even our digital imaging products, not to mention some of the things that kind of rub off into the PlayStation business.
MR. BAKER: Are you committed to the movie business? Is that something that will be part of Sony for the foreseeable future?
MR. HIRAI: Absolutely. Our entertainment businesses are essential growth drivers for Sony Group, going forward. The motion-picture business, as a part of that strategy, is a very important pillar of that growth strategy for Sony overall.
MR. BAKER: You've been hiring a number of engineers in robotics. And I think also everybody wants to be in autonomous driving right now.
MR. HIRAI: We have some great technology in image sensors that manifests itself in a lot of the digital imaging products and smartphones around the world.
And we wanted to see if the technologies that we have also have applications outside of the imaging world, most likely in automotive.
The issue is [auto makers'] requirements, in terms of specs, are quite different from smartphone manufacturers and digital-camera manufacturers.
So one of the discussions we're having now is, in order for us to really get into that business, is there a meeting of the minds and meeting of the specs, if you will, of what they require and what we can bring to the table.
MR. BAKER: What about other artificial intelligence or robotics in particular?
MR. HIRAI: A lot of the robotics that we look at are internal, in the manufacturing process, to see how much we can automate the manufacturing of, for example, the PlayStation 3 or the PlayStation 4 console, and just make it more efficient and reduce cost. And so we have a lot of engineers that do a lot of R&D in that space. We also are looking at a lot of applications for robotics in the consumer space. But right now it's really just basic R&D. And from a product perspective, it hasn't gone that far.
MR. BAKER: What are the next frontiers in games? I know you've got a virtual-reality headset coming out, is that next year?
MR. HIRAI: That's coming next year. Right now we are actually showing it to a lot of people at various trade shows and just getting a lot of fantastic feedback.
MR. BAKER: Through PlayStation and particularly through PlayStation Vue, you've been growing in the business of content distribution. Tell us how that's going. PlayStation Vue has been very favorably reviewed as a device to compete with AppleTV or Roku.
MR. HIRAI: Over the next several years it is going to become more and more an important part of the growth strategy for our PlayStation business or our network services overall, which therefore has an impact on the overall Sony Group strategy as well.
PlayStation is one of the growth drivers, in addition to entertainment and semiconductors, for Sony. So that videogame business overall is very important to us as well.
Credit: By Gerard Baker
