Never let the facts get in the way of a good story, at least if you're selling investment funds. Rampant demand for fashionable investment themes is being satisfied by hundreds of exchange-traded funds selling the idea of battery technology, hydrogen power, 3-D printing and space exploration among others. The trouble is there aren't enough stocks to go around, so the same ones are being recycled into many different funds -- leading to some portfolios that border on the absurd.
The latest is ARK Investment Management's Space Exploration and Innovation ETF, known as ARKX, which promises to invest 80% of its assets in space exploration and innovation. To be engaged in space exploration isn't quite as exciting as in the days of Neil Armstrong: ARK redefined the term to include beneficiaries of space technology, such as tractor maker Deere & Co. (satellite-guided farm machinery) and Netflix (more people might stream video if satellites bring fast internet to rural areas).
I can see why ARK stretched the point. There are few pure-play space stocks. Virgin Galactic is one, but Elon Musk's SpaceX remains private, and aside from a handful of satellite firms, the biggest space operations are parts of other companies with far bigger core businesses, such as Boeing, Lockheed Martin and Airbus. Star Trek fans hoping to cash in on a mission of discovery are unlikely to want Boeing's focus on passenger jets or Lockheed Martin's advanced weaponry, the prospects for which are far more important for their shares than their space divisions.
Even the stocks of narrowly focused companies can qualify for several different themes, as investors blindly chase the latest fashionable idea.
The stock of 3D Systems Corp. is a natural for ARK's 3-D printing ETF. It is slightly surprising that this ETF -- and so 3D Systems -- should be held by ARKX, but it is true NASA has 3-D printers on the International Space Station.
But if you're an investor in 3-D printing, is it because it will be a winner from exploring space, or a winner from robotics and artificial intelligence, as for those who bought it via the iShares Robotics and AI ETF? Perhaps you, like me, came across 3-D printing for your children's orthodontics, and prefer 3D Systems for its healthcare prospects -- in which case you'll be pleased to hear it features in the Legal & General Healthcare Breakthrough ETF.
It is possible to prosper from dentistry, space and AI all at once. And the multiple qualification means the shares get pushed up if any of the three themes comes into fashion. But they might be sold off if one of the themes goes out of fashion and the ETF is dumped, surprising those who bought it for other reasons.
Bigger companies can qualify for even more themes, as each division satisfies some fund manager's marketing criteria. And each theme is even less likely to be the dominant driver of its share price.
Daimler is an example of a stock offering something for everyone. The maker of Mercedes cars and heavy trucks qualifies for a hydrogen ETF, a battery ETF and a DWS future mobility fund, which is amusing for a firm that traces its lineage back to the 19th-century inventors of the first gasoline-powered cars. It launched its first fully electric car in 2019 and is aiming to test hydrogen-powered heavy trucks with customers in three years. Daimler might indeed be among the winners in the next generation of vehicles, but it brings a lot of baggage to any bet on hydrogen or batteries and currently makes its money from old-fashioned internal-combustion engines.
As to the future of mobility, this is truly a broad bet. At least judging by the ETF, which tracks a Nasdaq index, this future involves all the companies making cars, along with suppliers, chip makers such as Nvidia and, umm, Facebook.
AI is similarly broad-minded. Is IBM an AI play? Certainly: It is in plenty of AI ETFs and its executives mention AI whenever they can. What about quantum computing? Sure, it's in QTUM, the quantum computing ETF. It works on electricity distribution, too, so it features in the smart grid ETF, GRID. Also cloud computing, new economy and transformational change.
The result is that shareholders who want to bet on quantum computing or new power grids might be quite happy even if IBM's quantum breakthroughs go nowhere, as long as clients keep buying IBM's cloud services at a fat profit margin.
But they shouldn't fool themselves that the former typewriter manufacturer is mainly a bet on quantum success or next-generation power grids.
The core problem here is that thematic investors want something that in many cases isn't possible: broadly diversified exposure to a new and exciting story. Where there aren't enough pure-play companies in the business, investors should accept that the best an ETF can do is provide an eclectic mix of stocks with exposure to a bunch of other industries -- jet aircraft, dentistry, microchips, video streaming, IT consulting -- that they probably didn't want.
Generate image description

Credit: By James Mackintosh
