A handful of warehouse robots helped American Eagle Outfitters Inc. cope with a flood of online orders during coronavirus lockdowns as consumers loaded digital shopping carts with hoodies, leggings and loungewear.
Now the company is stepping up its use of automation. The company is installing 26 more piece-picking robots at its main U.S. distribution centers, making it the latest company to deepen its logistics technology investments as the coronavirus pandemic upends sales channels and supply chains.
The kiosk-size units from robotics provider Kindred Systems Inc. use mechanical arms, computer vision and artificial intelligence to sort through piles of apparel. They provide steady labor to help workers organize orders and reduce crowding on the warehouse floor, where the company said one human can manage multiple robots instead of standing next to other associates.
"During non-Covid times, if demand grew by 50% I would go hire 300 more people," said Shekar Natarajan, senior vice president of global inventory and supply chain logistics for American Eagle Outfitters, which said e-commerce sales for its American Eagle and Aerie brands shot up after stores closed in March.
Now, Mr. Natarajan said, "It's really tough because you're also trying to make sure you're keeping the associates safe. . . . You cannot actually bring in 1,000 to 2,000 untrained people into the distribution facility and maintain safe working conditions."
Upheaval from the coronavirus pandemic is pushing more companies to consider automating distribution and fulfillment, as the consumer rush to online shopping and social distancing practices within warehouse operations add to the challenges in strained logistics networks. Although fulfillment operations still rely largely on human labor, companies have been incorporating more technology in recent years as they seek to boost output and handle swings in demand more efficiently.
Covid-19 is accelerating that shift.
More than half of warehouse operators responding to a recent survey by Honeywell Intelligrated, Honeywell International Inc.'s warehouse automation business, said they were more willing to invest in automation as a result of the pandemic. E-commerce companies showed the biggest shift, with 66% saying they were more willing to do so, followed by food and beverage companies and logistics providers, at 59% and 55%, respectively.
About half of the respondents who had invested in automation said it was helpful for the business during the pandemic, with many citing their ability to continue operating with fewer staff on-site as a benefit, according to the survey, which polled 434 U.S.-based professionals in April and May.
The pandemic has highlighted the importance of operating flexibility that some newer types of automation can provide, said Thomas Boykin, a leader of Deloitte's supply-chain practice.
"The ability to scale up quickly or scale down without laying off workers or reconfiguring workers has become more important," Mr. Boykin said.

Credit: By Jennifer Smith
