[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Nvidia has a very big crowd to please these days. The company has managed to pull it off this time.
The chip maker that is now the world's third-most-valuable company unveiled its latest artificial-intelligence systems during the kickoff of its annual developers conference on Monday.
The event, known as GTC, had been held virtually since 2020, when Nvidia was generating about $11 billion in annual revenue mostly from the sale of graphics processors for videogaming PCs.
Nvidia's business mushroomed nearly sixfold since then, thanks to booming demand for the company's data-center chips used to power generative AI services such as ChatGPT.
That rapid ascent has given the company and Chief Executive Officer Jensen Huang rock-star status, with more than 11,000 people filling a sports arena in Silicon Valley on Monday to catch Huang's keynote address.
The event included the first official details of the company's Blackwell B100 systems, which will succeed its popular H100 systems that have become the workhorse of generative AI workloads. Even those chips are still catching up with demand.
The B100 chips offer a significant performance boost over the H100 family, especially for inferencing, which is when AI models use the data they are trained on to start generating answers. This has been an area where Nvidia has some perceived vulnerability to competition.
But the strong performance specs of the B100 were in line with some early hints from the company, and Nvidia had already surprised investors last month when it disclosed during its fiscal fourth-quarter earnings call that about 40% of its AI revenue was coming from chips used in inferencing work.
At a conference earlier this month, Morgan Stanley analyst Joseph Moore described his reaction to that disclosure thusly: "I just about fell out of my chair."
That left little room for Nvidia to spring any big surprises this week. Nvidia's share price slipped a little after Monday's keynote, though it has picked up about 2% since.
The company's stock has been caught up in a recent selloff that has taken the entire chip sector down a peg after a major AI-driven run.
Nvidia's shares are still more than 2% below their record high from March 7. The PHLX Semiconductor Index is down 7% over the same period.
Investors needn't worry about Nvidia's competitive position. Analysts agree that the B100 systems will maintain the company's strong lead in AI computing, even with rivals such as Advanced Micro Devices poised to pick up some sales.
Tim Arcuri of UBS said Nvidia's new chips "will reassert its undisputed technical lead in performance," while Vivek Arya of BofA Securities said the B100 -- and other new developments unveiled at the conference -- "continues to fundamentally widen Nvidia's competitive moat" in a note to clients.
The bigger risk for Nvidia -- or at least to the incredible sales momentum it has been enjoying of late -- is if the generative AI services being propagated by companies such as Microsoft, Google, Amazon.com, Meta Platforms and Adobe see tepid demand from consumers and business customers.
Adobe's first-quarter report last week fell flat with investors as the results and accompanying forecast showed little uplift from the company's new Firefly service.
The Wall Street Journal reported last month that early corporate testers of Microsoft's Copilot are mixed on whether the new AI tools are worth their premium price.
Such a trend could ultimately cool the billions that those companies are currently dropping on Nvidia's chips. But even that doesn't seem in the cards this year based on the capital-spending forecasts in the latest round of earnings reports.
It is out of Nvidia's hands. What Nvidia can do is keep its strong technical edge that also allows the company to maintain the pricing power that has driven its operating-profit margins to record high rates.
That in turn has made its stock's valuation cheaper than many of its chip peers that aren't seeing the same sort of artificial-intelligence sales boom.
Nvidia's shares closed Wednesday about 36 times forward earnings -- below nine others on the PHLX index and about 35% below its multiple a year ago, according to FactSet data.
With its latest chips likely to drive another strong year ahead, even a $2 trillion Nvidia isn't such a stretch.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
