SALESFORCE
CRM -20%
The clouds are rolling in at Salesforce. The cloud-software provider on Wednesday posted lower-than-expected quarterly revenue, cut its outlook for subscription and support revenue, and issued a downbeat forecast for the current quarter. Salesforce said demand slowed from customers taking longer to place orders. Meanwhile, the excitement around the company's artificial-intelligence products has yet to pay off. The new tools use AI to improve marketing emails and business intelligence, and Chief Executive Marc Benioff expressed enthusiasm that they will help boost sales, especially with the competitive advantage of Salesforce's access to customer data. Salesforce shares plummeted 20% Thursday, and the Dow component's move dragged on major stock indexes.
MARATHON OIL
MRO +8.4%
ConocoPhillips agreed to acquire Marathon Oil in a $17.1 billion all-stock deal. The takeover is a bid for ConocoPhillips to catch up with rivals. Exxon Mobil, Chevron, Occidental Petroleum and Diamondback Energy have built up their oil and gas properties with deals totaling about $150 billion. This deal allows ConocoPhillips to expand its presence in U.S. shale basins including in Texas and North Dakota. Marathon shares rallied 8.4% Wednesday, while ConocoPhillips shares fell 3.1%.
AMERICAN AIRLINES
AAL -14%
American Airlines Tuesday cut its outlook for the second quarter and is parting ways with Chief Commercial Officer Vasu Raja, who spearheaded the airline's pivot away from traditional business of corporate travel. American cut sales staff and shifted away from corporate booking channels in favor of direct bookings on American's website or app -- a move that dragged down the airline's revenue and drove away lucrative corporate customers. American Airlines shares dropped 14% Wednesday.
TRUMP MEDIA & TECHNOLOGY
DJT -5.3%
Donald Trump became the first former president to be found guilty of a crime, when he was found guilty Thursday by a New York jury of 34 felonies for falsifying records to cover up hush money paid to porn star Stormy Daniels. The next day, shares of Trump Media & Technology -- the parent company of his Truth Social platform -- were highly volatile. Trump Media shares fell 5.3% Friday.
KOHL'S
KSS -23%
Kohl's department store posted quarterly sales and earnings that missed expectations, extending a streak of disappointing results. Over the years, Kohl's has made moves to improve sales, like adding Sephora beauty shops and allowing shoppers to return Amazon items at its stores. The company has also been targeted by activist investors who tried to oust its former chief executive, and in 2021 reached a deal to add three directors to its board. Kohl's shares dropped 23% Thursday.
GAP
GPS +29%
Gap's new style is paying off. The apparel company on Thursday posted higher quarterly sales across its four brands, ending a run of disappointing results. The earnings and revenue surprises are a sign that Chief Executive Richard Dickson's turnaround plans are starting to yield results. Dickson, who took over at the retailer last year, said it was the first quarter in years that all four brands -- Gap, Old Navy, Banana Republic and Athleta -- posted gains. Gap shares jumped 29% Friday.
Generate image description

Credit: By Francesca Fontana
