European Union antitrust authorities have begun a preliminary investigation into Amazon.com Inc.'s treatment of other merchants that sell products using its platform, opening a new regulatory front against an American tech giant.
EU Competition Commissioner Margrethe Vestager said Wednesday that investigators recently sent out questionnaires to merchants that sell through Amazon. The probe focuses on whether Amazon is gaining a competitive advantage from data it gathers on every transaction and from every merchant on its platform, Ms. Vestager said.
"The question here is about the data," Ms. Vestager said, adding that the investigation was in its "very early days" and that her office has "no conclusions" about whether to open a formal probe.
A spokesman for Amazon didn't have any immediate comment.
As the EU's antitrust chief, Ms. Vestager has emerged as one of the world's major technology regulators, helping inspire investigations into tech companies from Brazil to the U.S. Most recently, she fined Alphabet Inc.'s Google twice, for a total of 6.76 billion euros ($7.9 billion), for allegedly abusing the dominance of its search engine and Android operating system to favor its own services -- decisions the company has either appealed or said it would appeal.
Under her watch, the EU also ruled that Amazon must pay some 250 million euros in allegedly unpaid taxes to Luxembourg, an order that the Seattle-based company has appealed.
Amazon is also drawing increasing scrutiny in its home country. President Donald Trump has repeatedly criticized the online-retail giant for hurting traditional retailers and what he views as misuse of the U.S. Postal Service for its deliveries. Sen. Bernie Sanders has also introduced a bill aimed at taxing big companies whose employees rely on federal benefits to make ends meet, targeting Amazon specifically.
Policy experts say there is little room to more heavily regulate Amazon under current U.S. law. At the same time, there is a budding advocacy in some policy circles for reshaping the country's antitrust laws to address the rise of a handful of globe-spanning tech firms.
In Europe, Ms. Vestager has made no secret of her pursuit of cases where companies might be abusing the data they amass to thwart competitors.
Indeed, it is one of the hotter topics in competition law in recent years. Some lawyers argue that data is fungible and replicable, while others contend its use to nourish self-learning software and artificial intelligence can confer a lasting advantage to bigger firms.
So far, the EU hasn't found anticompetitive use of data. The bloc raised the issue when considering Facebook Inc.'s 2014 purchase of chat service WhatsApp, but later cleared it as posing no competition issue.
In 2008, the EU approved Google's acquisition of advertising-services company DoubleClick, finding that other companies would still have ample access to data after the merger.
The Amazon marketplace investigation follows on concerns raised by retailers in the course of an inquiry last year into so-called dual-role platforms within the e-commerce sector.
An example of such a platform is Amazon which, on the same website, offers marketplace services to third-party sellers and itself sells products in direct competition with those third-party sellers.
Amazon might thereby gain access to information on the availability, prices, return rates and popularity of competitors' products that it could use to boost its own retail activities at the expense of third-party sellers on its marketplace. The purpose of the preliminary EU investigation is to determine whether these concerns have merit and warrant further review.
Amazon has ramped up the production of private-label merchandise in recent years, with analysts estimating it now has more than 100, including items like batteries, toilet paper and clothing. Some brands and sellers have complained that Amazon's access to other merchants' data has helped it decide what categories to enter. In addition, Amazon's own products frequently get top billing in search results and in responses from its voice assistant, Alexa.
An EU questionnaire sent recently, the authenticity of which was confirmed by a person familiar with the probe, asked retailers about the importance and availability of certain data, such as competitors' return rates, and sought examples of Amazon-offered products that compete with those of third-party merchants.
Some Amazon marketplace sellers contacted Wednesday said they hadn't yet received questionnaires from the EU, but expressed support for the inquiry.
One major seller in Europe, who declined to be named, complained that Amazon had raised fees for selling media products by as much as 50% in some countries, but said Amazon was so big his company had no choice but to continue using it.
Christian Mayrhofer, chief executive of Dodax AG, a Switzerland-based merchant that makes about half of its revenue on Amazon, said the platform has undercut his own sales, while charging higher fees to third-party sellers.
"We are more and more moving onto our own site and trying alternative platforms," Mr. Mayrhofer said. "But in all honesty there is nothing that can compete against Amazon."
The Amazon spokesman didn't immediately have any comment about seller concerns.
---
Laura Stevens contributed to this article.

Credit: By Sam Schechner and Valentina Pop
