One of China's fastest-growing technology startups is in talks to obtain a loan from banks that are hoping to win a role on its coveted initial public offering later, according to people familiar with the matter.
The startup, Beijing-based Bytedance Ltd., which owns a popular Chinese news-aggregation app called Jinri Toutiao, is in talks to borrow as much as $1.5 billion from a clutch of Wall Street banks based in both the U.S. and Europe, the people said.
The six-year-old company also owns TikTok, a short-video app that has 500 million monthly active users world-wide and which recently merged with U.S. social-media app Musical.ly.
The transaction could take place in coming weeks, the people said, though they added that there is no guarantee a deal will be reached. A spokeswoman for Bytedance declined to comment.
The financing being discussed includes a term loan and a revolving credit line, one of the people said.
The banks in talks with Bytedance include Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Morgan Stanley, Citigroup Inc., UBS Group AG and Bank of America Corp., some of the people said.
The company initially planned to borrow $500 million from banks, but the potential deal size has expanded due to interest from many banks, one of the people said.
The loan talks are coming on the heels of a recent $3 billion equity fundraising round, which valued Bytedance at $78 billion -- more than double what the company was worth in late 2017.
Investors in the latest round included SoftBank Group Corp. and private-equity firm KKR & Co, the Journal reported earlier.
Bytedance has defied a weak fundraising market for both public and private technology companies, thanks to the startup's rapid growth.
TikTok has been one of the most downloaded apps in the U.S. in recent months, while Jinri Toutiao -- whose name means "Today's Headlines" -- has drawn hundreds of millions of loyal users by using artificial intelligence technology to curate news.
The company could seek a multibillion-dollar initial public offering as soon as next year, the Journal previously reported.
Banks often try to establish lending relationships with companies before they go public in the hopes of getting hired as underwriters on future stock sales, which generate higher investment banking fees.

Credit: By Julie Steinberg and Stella Yifan Xie
