Corrections & Amplifications
Max Scherzer of the Washington Nationals is a right-handed pitcher. A Sports article Saturday about starters incorrectly identified him as left-handed.
(WSJ October 17, 2017)
Years from now, when baseball teams deploy cyborgs who throw 150 mph and pitch when an artificial intelligence bot in the dugout tells them to, people may remember 2017 as the moment the future of pitching became clear.
The past looks something like this: A dominant starting pitcher goes deep into a game, and before long, the ball is handed to the closer for the all-important ninth inning.
The present, and very possibly the future, involves starting pitchers being quickly replaced by relief pitchers, starters being used as relievers and the distinction between the two becoming ever murkier.
By the end of the division series, there had already been 14 instances this postseason of a starting pitcher failing to last four innings, tying the all-time high. Relievers had thrown 51% of all postseason innings, which would be the highest on record if it holds up.
Whatever the new model becomes, the old one -- in which the game is primarily a starter-versus-starter contest -- has been shattered in this postseason as in no other.
"Except for the exceptional ones, starting pitchers' worth is less than it has ever been," said former major-league pitcher and current TBS analyst Ron Darling. "More and more, teams are figuring out that the way for them to win is to take guys out early if they don't have it."
The baseball playoffs are notoriously fluky, making it difficult to extract larger truths from a handful of games. But the endangerment of this species of players isn't merely an October phenomenon.
The average start by a pitcher in the regular season lasted just 5.5 innings, a record low. Now, managers who have quickly grown accustomed to going to their bullpens earlier than ever face the added urgency that the postseason brings. Not surprisingly, their patience this time of year becomes even shorter.
"That's probably the hardest decision, is when to take your starter out," Cleveland Indians manager Terry Francona said, "just because during the course of the regular season, I defer to trying to let them find their rhythm or their footing. You get into games where they're so meaningful, have so much impact, sometimes it is hard to do that."
Francona showed as much in Game 1 of the ALDS against the New York Yankees when he pulled ace Corey Kluber after just 2 2/3 innings; Kluber made it through 3 2/3 innings in Game 5. Likewise, Yankees manager Joe Girardi yanked his ace, Luis Severino, with just one out in the first inning of the AL wild card game.
He was able to do this because of his personnel. Recognizing the growing value of the modern bullpen, Yankees general manager Brian Cashman loaded his roster with top-tier relievers, ending up with no fewer than four who could be closers on another team. The Kansas City Royals may have started the trend, appearing in consecutive World Series in large part because of a dominant trio of relief pitchers, success that has inspired copycats around the league.
Increasingly, the stars of the game are the pitchers trotting in from beyond the outfield wall. The starting pitching phase often becomes more a prelude to be endured than a marquee event to be extended.
"It is hard for starters a lot of times to get through a lot of innings because there's tough at-bats," Girardi said. "There's a reason there's tough at-bats, because you face good offenses because they're good teams, and you do have to rely on your bullpen a lot."
Baseball has been moving in this direction for a while. The St. Louis Cardinals won the 2011 World Series while using their starters for an average of five innings per postseason game. If that showed the unnecessity of workhorse starters, recent years have shown the irrelevance of traditional roles.
The notion of the ninth inning as the apex of relief pitching, to be entrusted only to a team's best reliever, has been shattered in large part by Indians left-hander Andrew Miller. His ability to dominate in virtually any inning, coupled with Francona's willingness to use him at various times and for various lengths, has been pivotal for Cleveland.
But this postseason, more than others, has laid waste to the entire idea of set pitching roles. The Boston Red Sox beat the Houston Astros in Game 3 of the ALDS on Sunday with David Price, their $217 million starter, starring in a relief role. The following day, by the fifth inning, both teams had brought in their top starters in relief, with Justin Verlander earning the series-clinching win for Houston.
"It is unreasonable to think that you can carry this out over six months," Astros manager A.J. Hinch said. "It is reasonable to think that when you're at full strength, you can utilize a little strategy that helps you."
There is still a level of prestige that comes with being a starter. Most relievers tried to make it as starters at one point or another and failed. Starters tend to fetch richer, longer contracts. But many of them have had to grow comfortable with the idea of being more like the first runner to carry the baton in a four-man relay.
"In the postseason, it really doesn't matter as long as you're out there keeping your team in the game," Chicago Cubs pitcher Jake Arrieta said. "If you're out in the fifth or sixth inning with the lead, or in a tie game, that's an ideal situation."
Even the starters who seem to exemplify the traditional model also show why it is changing.
One of the best outings by a starting pitcher this postseason came from Washington Nationals lefty Max Scherzer in Game 3 of the NLDS against the Cubs. He took a no-hitter into the seventh inning, yet still only lasted 6 1/3 innings, at which point he had already thrown 98 pitches. The Nationals still required eight more outs to preserve a 1-0 lead. They lost, 2-1.
"Your identified ace, they only pitch two-thirds of the game, and that's a great game," Darling said. "They are becoming a dying breed."

Credit: By Brian Costa and Jared Diamond
