When Masayoshi Son's SoftBank Group struck a 2016 deal to buy chip company Arm, he was so excited he said the $32 billion purchase was "very much my destiny" after decades of tech investing.
"You can say almost with confidence," the billionaire chief executive told analysts, "that it will grow 5x in five years."
It didn't.
Arm remains a leading designer of components for chips used in smartphones, computers and cars, but SoftBank's largest-ever deal has fallen well short of its lofty goals.
Arm's revenue is up 65% since 2016, slightly ahead of the broader chip sector but well behind sector leaders. A huge increase in research spending has yet to convert to the higher profits Son foresaw. And a bet on the Internet of Things -- envisaging a future where connected refrigerators, doorbells and other gadgets became ubiquitous -- fell flat.
The market's verdict on Arm and its years under SoftBank's custody is due this month, when the chip designer lists on the Nasdaq Stock Market, in what will likely be the year's largest initial public offering. The Japanese technology conglomerate is expected to sell a roughly 10% stake.
Arm is eyeing a target valuation between $50 billion and $55 billion, according to people familiar with the matter. Some analysts peg Arm's worth at between $45 billion and $50 billion, while SoftBank recently valued Arm at $64 billion when it bought out a stake held by its own SoftBank Vision Fund.
An IPO at the Vision Fund price would double SoftBank's original valuation -- and that would require investors to be particularly bullish on Arm compared with other chip stocks, given its comparatively modest revenue and profit growth in recent years.
Money invested in a tech- or chip-sector index has done better. Since the takeover closed in September 2016, $100 invested in the Nasdaq Composite turned into about $267, including reinvested dividends, FactSet data as of Thursday show. An investment in the Philadelphia Semiconductor Index would have fared even better.
Part of the problem, analysts say, is Arm was so dominant in its main smartphone business that it had little more room to grow. They credit SoftBank with investing more in research and development, where outlays can take years to pay off.
Arm "was able to accelerate R&D investment in a way that they never could have as a public company," said Kirk Boodry, an analyst at Astris Advisory who estimates Arm's valuation at between $47 billion and $50 billion. It "seems well-positioned for growth," he said.
Two issues will be vital for prospective investors: China and artificial intelligence. Nearly one-quarter of Arm's revenue last year came from China, and Arm warned this made it "particularly susceptible to economic and political risks." Growth in China is slowing, geopolitical tensions are simmering, and Arm depends for sales on its affiliate Arm China, the subject of an earlier tussle for corporate control.
Meanwhile, euphoria over AI has generated huge stock-price gains for Nvidia and other companies this year.
An AI boom is considered likely to boost demand for chips that go in servers, rather than in smartphones and home computers, where Arm is biggest. Still, Arm pitches itself as a likely beneficiary, saying growth in AI-enabled systems, such as self-driving cars, could mean more demand for chips using Arm designs. "Arm will be central to this transition," the IPO prospectus says.
Arm spent heavily to build a cloud-based business where companies could feed device data onto a SoftBank-run platform. Still, its market share in cloud computing is roughly 10%, half the 20% target it once set for 2021. In autos, it boasts a 40% market share -- but the emergence of chip-intensive self-driving cars has proved slower than expected.
Credit: By Eliot Brown
