The Nasdaq climbed to a record, as investors geared up for the second half of 2024 after a gangbusters start to the year.
The tech-heavy index advanced 0.8%, its 21st record close of the year. The S&P 500 advanced 0.3%, which was just shy of its high. The Dow Jones Industrial Average increased 0.1%, or 50.66 points.
The gains built on an expectation-defying first-half performance, which was fueled by Wall Street's unflagging enthusiasm for the potential of artificial-intelligence technology. Some investors expect the rally to continue, given the prospect of interest-rate cuts and the tendency for stocks to deliver positive returns during presidential election years.
"Stocks tend to do well in an election year because both parties are making promises to their constituency, and that leads to a little bit of euphoria," said Daniel Siluk, head of global short duration and liquidity at Janus Henderson Investors. "And when the Fed's cutting cycle begins, that can also lead to a little bit more risk-taking."
Boeing gained 2.6% after the jet maker said it would acquire Spirit AeroSystems, a fuselage manufacturer, in an all-stock deal.
Electric-vehicle maker Tesla jumped over 6% ahead of its expected report on second-quarter deliveries this week.
Chewy shares ended a volatile day of trading 6.6% lower after meme-stock maven Keith Gill, also known as Roaring Kitty, disclosed a 6.6% stake in the online pet-supplies firm,
In economic data, an Institute of Supply Management survey suggested U.S. manufacturing contracted more than expected last month, while a government report showed construction spending slipped 0.1% in May, also missing forecasts.
"We've seen some consistent moderation across a variety of macro indicators. If the macro data continue on this trajectory, there will likely be a fair amount of accommodation coming in the form of rate cuts," said Michael Hans, chief investment officer of Citizens Private Wealth.
On Friday, investors will get a fresh look at the labor market with the release of the June jobs report.
Economists expect the U.S. economy added 200,000 jobs for the month, which would be a slowdown from the 272,000 added in May. Signs that the job market and inflation are cooling have bolstered hopes that the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates at its September meeting.
On Monday, investors and analysts pinned a sharp rise in Treasury yields on the fiscal implications of a potential Republican sweep in November. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note settled at 4.478%, from 4.342% on Friday.
Overseas, France's CAC 40 gained 1.1% after the country's first round of parliamentary elections suggested the far right was less likely to win an overall majority -- reducing the risk of runaway government spending or a more confrontational relationship with the European Union.
At midday Tuesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.4% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 1%. S&P 500 futures were down 0.2%.
Credit: By Vicky Ge Huang
