Fake and spam accounts remain a persistent problem on Twitter, even as new owner Elon Musk has taken steps to stamp them out.
Several researchers say such accounts are still easy to find on the social-media platform. By at least one measure, the degree of bot activity after Musk took over in October was consistent with its level before.
"It's clearly the case that bad bots remain pervasive on Twitter," said Jonathan Mayer, an assistant professor of computer science at Princeton University who co-wrote a recent monthslong study of the platform and observed heavy bot-like behavior throughout.
Musk said last month that Twitter has eliminated at least 90% of scams on Twitter, telling attendees at The Wall Street Journal's CEO Council that there has been "dramatic improvement" in Twitter's ability to detect and remove troll armies.
There is no universal definition of fake or spam accounts, and determining a precise, authoritative number on a platform as big as Twitter is difficult. Researchers say a specific figure isn't required to determine that the issue continues to affect users because it only takes a small number of sophisticated programs to do significant harm.
They also say the problem is impossible to solve entirely as operators are constantly improving their methods and that some have recently started using generative artificial intelligence to evade detection.
The accounts are typically controlled by automated programs known as bots. They can hurt the user experience by spreading financial scams, propaganda, false information and other harmful content, and by artificially promoting content.
They also muddy the platform's utility for advertisers, who accounted for about 90% of Twitter's revenue before Musk's takeover and want to see their paid promotions reach real users.
Cybersecurity firm Cheq found that the percentage of paid advertising traffic driven by bots to a sampling of clients -- roughly 12% of the total traffic -- was around the same in the first quarter of this year as it was a year earlier. The Israeli company made the comparison to help its more than 15,000 corporate clients, which span a range of industries, determine the best course of action for their advertising needs after Musk's takeover. The findings, based on more than 2,000 real-time cybersecurity tests to determine each visit's validity or lack thereof, show bot traffic remains consistent, said a Cheq spokeswoman.
Twitter and Musk didn't respond to a request for comment.
The proliferation of fake and spam accounts has been central to Musk's interest in and plans for Twitter. He said last year, before the $44 billion deal was completed, that part of his goal was to "defeat the spam bots or die trying!"
As owner, one of his significant platform changes has been to tie user verification to an upgraded version of Twitter Blue, a subscription service, in part to help eradicate the problem.
"It is the only way to defeat the bots & trolls," Musk has said about the verification feature. Musk launched the upgraded service late last year for $8 monthly via web browser or $11 monthly via app stores, betting that scammers and other bad-bot creators wouldn't want to pay for it and that even if they did, they couldn't become verified en masse because the process requires providing a phone and credit-card number.
Cybersecurity specialists say it is easy for scammers and the like to come up with phone numbers or payment accounts, including purchasing disposable phones or obtaining credit-card numbers on the dark web. "There is an entire ecosystem already in place that needs to be considered when evaluating the efficacy of any countermeasure," said Dan Woods, global head of bot and risk management at F5, a Seattle software company that works behind the scenes to make sure apps are secure and perform smoothly.
While the cost of signing up might be an obstacle for some, well-funded scammers might be willing to pay because their tweets get more exposure, which is often the ultimate goal anyway. "When elections today are won or lost by a few thousand votes, it is not a stretch to conclude that our adversaries are likely using bots and fake social-media accounts to influence" them, Woods said.
Some evidence indicates that Twitter Blue has actually added to the problem of fakes and bots because the way it changed the verification process has left many users unsure which accounts are real and which are fake. Subscribers can now purchase check marks that Twitter used to reserve for accounts the company had deemed authentic and notable. Some famous users who previously had blue check marks now don't, leaving those accounts vulnerable to imitators.
"Users are worse off in trying to delineate trustworthy and not trustworthy accounts," said Princeton's Mayer, whose study indicated that most U.S. adults don't understand the platform's criteria for assigning blue check marks to profiles.
Musk's claim that Twitter is now mostly scam-free "seems far-fetched," said Tamer Hassan, chief executive of Human Security, which specializes in preventing bot attacks and online fraud. The platform might have fewer bots, "but that is not possible to tell from the outside," he said. "We still see verified accounts for sale."
---
Alexa Corse contributed to this article.
Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
