Chinese leader Xi Jinping is preparing to name loyalists to top positions in the Communist Party hierarchy, according to people close to party leaders, in a move that would strengthen his hand as he confronts mounting challenges at home and abroad -- from a sluggish domestic economy to Western resistance to Beijing's ambitions on the world stage.
One of the allies Mr. Xi aims to promote is Li Qiang, currently the top party official in Shanghai, the people said. Earlier this year, Mr. Li shouldered blame for a weekslong Covid-19 lockdown during which tens of millions of residents in the country's financial center struggled to access food and medical care.
Mr. Li is likely to be elevated to the Politburo Standing Committee, the party's top decision-making body, according to the people, who say the 63-year-old is also considered a leading contender to be named premier at China's annual legislative gathering in the spring.
China's premier has traditionally assumed responsibility for the country's economy, which has been battered in recent months by Mr. Xi's zero-tolerance approach to Covid-19, a dramatic downturn in the property market and a regulatory crackdown that has created uncertainty for business.
China's National Bureau of Statistics postponed the release of third-quarter gross-domestic-product data on Monday, a day before it was set to be published. An official at the statistics bureau cited unspecified work arrangements as the reason for the delay.
Others likely to join the Standing Committee include Mr. Xi's chief of staff, Ding Xuexiang, and the top party official in Guangdong province, Li Xi, who once worked as a secretary to a veteran of the Communist revolution with close ties to Mr. Xi's family.
The people close to party leaders cautioned that final deliberations on the makeup of the Standing Committee won't be revealed until Sunday, when the party elite is due to complete the membership of its top decision-making bodies for the next term.
China's State Council Information Office didn't respond to requests to comment.
The makeup of the next Standing Committee and the identity of the next premier have been the subject of intense speculation among Chinese politics watchers ahead of this week's twice-a-decade party congress, where Mr. Xi is poised to break with recent precedent and claim a third term as party leader.
While Mr. Xi seems guaranteed of securing five more years in power, growing public frustration over his management of Covid-19 and the economy has provided ammunition to potential rivals trying to check his power by ensuring his allies don't monopolize senior appointments.
If Mr. Xi gets his way, despite the pushback, he would surround himself with like-minded officials and upend succession norms that the party had honed over recent decades to prevent a return to Mao-style dictatorship. This might make it easier for Mr. Xi to pursue his priorities, but it also raises the stakes should that agenda fail, political analysts said.
"The risk of things going wrong and him getting the blame is much greater," said Ryan Manuel, managing director of Bilby, a Hong Kong-based artificial-intelligence firm that analyzes Chinese government documents.
With more allies holding key positions, Mr. Xi, who turns 70 next year, may start to delegate some of his authority to his trusted lieutenants as he gets more advanced in age, some of the people said. He has fewer political opponents to worry about, having neutralized many of them with anticorruption purges and cut off retired party elders from meddling in politics, they said.
China's current premier, Li Keqiang, is due to step down in the spring after completing two five-year terms -- the maximum allowed under China's constitution. Li Qiang, Li Xi and Li Keqiang aren't related.
Credit: By Josh Chin
