Artificial intelligence is making its way into daily Chinese life -- including a surge of AI-driven fraud.
Beijing, which has adopted some of the world's most-restrictive regulations to govern its internet, has become something of a pioneer in curbing the use of hyper-realistic AI-generated content.
In recent weeks, police around the country have cautioned on their official social-media accounts that criminals have employed AI software to generate deceptive text and impersonate friends of the people they target.
In April, a man surnamed Guo received a video call from an impostor on the Chinese messaging app WeChat. Impersonating a friend of Guo, the scammer persuaded him to transfer the equivalent of $600,000 to a bank account in Inner Mongolia within 10 minutes. He complied, and it wasn't until he contacted his friend to confirm the transfer that he realized he had been swindled.
"We had a video chat, and I recognized the face and voice in the video; that's why I let my guard down," Guo told authorities, according to a social-media post by Inner Mongolia police.Authorities were able to halt the transfer of most of the funds and were working to recover the rest, according to the post on the police's WeChat account.
The same month, police in the Anhui province in eastern China detained scammers who tricked a man into transferring a large amount of money to a supposed friend using AI face-swapping and voice-synthesis technology, according to the local state-owned newspaper Xin'an Evening News.
Regulators around the world have struggled to govern so-called deepfakes, in which a person in an image, audio or video is swapped with someone else.
In January, the country's internet watchdog, the Cyberspace Administration of China, started enforcing new rules that prohibit the use of AI-generated images, audio and text to spread misinformation or content that violates the law or is deemed disruptive to the economy or national security.
Guo's plight struck a nerve in China. It trended on the social-media platform Weibo with the hashtag #AIFraudIsEruptingAcrossChina once the police made his case public in May.
Chinese authorities have in recent weeks clamped down on disinformation generated by AI chatbots -- sometimes seemingly modeled on previous incidents that sparked social-media storms.
Last month, in the province of Gansu, authorities detained a man who allegedly created an article on ChatGPT about a nonexistent train crash by using news clips he had gathered online. The article generated 15,000 views, police said.
Also in May, authorities in Henan province alleged that a man generated disinformation about a violent scuffle in a restaurant in an attempt to attract clicks.
Credit: By Shen Lu
