Companies developing ChatGPT applications must navigate privacy and security questions about how the artificial-intelligence bot handles potentially sensitive data.
German online fashion retailer Zalando plans to introduce a shopping assistant using the enterprise version of OpenAI's ChatGPT in the coming weeks to analyze customers' search queries. The assistant might, for example, issue a prompt for clothing for a certain place or season, and suggest certain products.
Jan Wittrodt, Zalando's head of privacy, said the retailer decided not to share customer data to train ChatGPT's algorithm. Any data users enter when they search for items is deleted after 30 days, Mr. Wittrodt said. These safeguards protect customers' privacy, even if they accidentally enter private information when using the assistant, he said.
"From a privacy perspective, in reality, the impact is not too high," Mr. Wittrodt said.
OpenAI introduced several changes to its public ChatGPT service last week, allowing users to opt in if they want their searches to be used to train the tool's algorithm. Unsaved searches are deleted after 30 days. The changes don't affect the enterprise service available to corporate customers, which already had similar features, Mr. Wittrodt said.
ChatGPT has been in regulators' crosshairs in Europe and the U.S. since its debut in November. The Biden administration is considering drafting new rules to regulate AI tools such as ChatGPT amid criticism over their potential use for discrimination or harmful disinformation.
Italy's data protection regulator temporarily blocked the tool from operating in the country last month, citing violations of the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation, and demanded changes to how OpenAI handles data and prevents children under 13 from using the bot. On Friday, the regulator rescinded its temporary ban, saying OpenAI had implemented most of its demands, including giving more details about how it processes information.
The European Data Protection Board, the umbrella group of regulators from the 27 European Union countries, has set up a task force to look into ChatGPT.
OpenAI founder Sam Altman has said that in the long run he wants to set up a global governance structure that would oversee decisions about the future of AI and gradually reduce the power OpenAI's executive team has over its technology.
Britain's RELX, which owns business and medical publisher Elsevier and legal information service LexisNexis, is exploring how it might use ChatGPT but isn't yet deploying the tool in any services, said Michael Lamb, RELX's global chief privacy officer.
Mr. Lamb said there is legal uncertainty surrounding how ChatGPT uses data. Legislation tailored to address AI risks such as bias, accuracy and discrimination is a better method to regulate the area, compared with the EU's broader GDPR, he said.
"It's about the overall training, the use of the algorithm and the impact on society, whether or not it involves personal data," Mr. Lamb said.
Companies might need to issue disclosures to users or anyone whose data they collect for an application built with ChatGPT, he said.
Credit: By Catherine Stupp
