Regarding Ray Kurzweil's "When Computers Beat Humans on Jeopardy" (op-ed, Feb. 17): Librarians often receive requests for information as cryptic as "Jeopardy!" clues, from people who are sometimes not even sure what they're seeking. Watson is, in essence, a librarian that retrieves facts.
Regarding natural language processing and fact-retrieval systems like IBM's Watson, medicine is about cognition. It's about human judgment born of experience in dealing with ambiguity, not just of language but also, and this is critical, of observations, findings, lab data, image interpretation, etc. It is about human intuition, assemblage and the integration of a huge amount of disparate information in ways not well understood even by its practitioners. The end result is not just the recall of a piece of information, obscure as the information might be.
I consider predictions of Watson spearheading cybernetic miracles in medicine to imply just as grandiose a valuation to the technology as the statements I heard two decades ago about the health information technology of the day, or even today, "revolutionizing medicine." That has not happened.
A cybernetic librarian is no physician. As for me, for now I'll stick to people in my own medical care. Let Mr. Kurzweil see the machine for his ailments.
Scot Silverstein, M.D.
Philadelphia
---
"Jeopardy!" and IBM could have leveled the playing field regarding the "signaling device" factor that delivered a huge advantage to Watson, but that is irrelevant to assessing artificial intelligence. On almost every softball question, and there were many, it was obvious all three contestants knew the correct response but Watson scored by virtue of winning the button-pushing battle. In fact, the humans seemed to do better in many instances when the question content was more subtle or obscure.
None of this changes the implications of the contest or IBM's achievement. But it did make for some viewer frustration and took some fun out of the experience.
Alan Grube
Vancouver, Wash.
---
There is a sad poverty to this conception of what it means to be human, and free will is only part of what's missing. In what sense would a Turing-qualified computer experience emotion? Mimicking emotion I can understand, but experiencing it? Contemplate its future? Write poetry for the sheer pleasure of it? Grieve? Worship?
Frankly, I'm not attracted to a world in which aptly named "artificial" intelligence is considered to be human.
Bruce Phillips
Atlanta
---
I hate to remind Watson, the recent "Jeopardy!" winner, about his "DNA." I suppose that his father was Deep Blue, the chess champion, but his spiritual grandfather, the Hal 9000 in Stanley Kubrick's "2001: A Space Odyssey, had a few problems. ". . . Dave . . . Dave."
Walter Reichert
Salt Lake City
---
I for one will hold out for a computer that can create the likes of, say, Handel's "Messiah," or Beethoven's "Ninth," or Milton's "Paradise Lost," or Einstein's "Theory of Relativity" before I'm willing to concede that it's more like a human than a machine.
Miles Meyer
Portage, Mich.
