Japan's SoftBank Group Corp. is poised to launch the world's biggest technology fund as early as Saturday, capping months of negotiations in which the tech giant haggled with the fund's main Saudi investor over control of the money, investment strategy and questions about its commitment.
The birth of the Vision Fund, which is expected to start with just under $100 billion in investments and a 12-year term, ushers a huge, new force into a tech-investment world long dominated by Western bankers and Silicon Valley financiers.
The deal combines the deep pockets of a Saudi prince with one of the world's most ambitious tech investors. The fund has also won SoftBank Chief Executive Masayoshi Son access to President Donald Trump, with Mr. Son's promise to invest $50 billion to create 50,000 new U.S. jobs.
But getting to this point took far longer than expected, according to interviews with about a dozen people close to the talks.
The protracted negotiations revealed the two principal partners' divergent interests and outlooks, wsith Mr. Son eager to move ahead quickly to capitalize on what he sees as fast-moving changes in areas like artificial intelligence, robotics and biotech. "We can't wait. We need this now," one SoftBank executive recalled Mr. Son saying in February.
Meanwhile, Mr. Son's counterpart in the deal, Mohammed bin Salman, the 31-year-old deputy crown prince of Saudi Arabia, wanted to ensure his country not only would stand to profit financially but also would gain knowledge that could help develop the country and the wider Gulf region.
Saudi negotiators wanted to make sure the country's sovereign-wealth fund wasn't merely treated by its foreign partners as an easy source of capital or "a sovereign deemed to have deep pockets," said a person familiar with the Saudi side's thinking.
The Vision Fund was the brainchild of Mr. Son, 59 years old, a Korean-Japanese entrepreneur known for his brash investment style, and Prince Salman, also known by his initials MbS. He is viewed as the face of change in the insular kingdom and a major proponent of weaning the country off oil.
Mr. Son yearned to become a technology power outside of Japan, where his investments helped turbocharge the country's broadband and smartphone industries. But SoftBank's multibillion-dollar purchases of mobile operator Sprint Corp. in the U.S. and semiconductor design firm ARM Holdings Inc. in the U.K. had saddled it with too much debt to continue spending freely, and Mr. Son fretted he would miss out on an investment gold rush.
Prince Salman was looking for ways to implement a reform plan that calls for increasing investment in everything from technology to financial services. The prince had money: He controls Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund, a sovereign-wealth fund that stands to be the primary recipient of the money raised from the a proposed listing by state-owned oil giant Saudi Arabian Oil Co., or Saudi Aramco.
The pair agreed to join forces during a 45-minute meeting in Tokyo in September, and they announced the agreement to launch the Vision Fund in October, with $45 billion from PIF and $25 billion from SoftBank.
Other investors such as technology giants Apple Inc. and Qualcomm Inc. were signaling interest, and Mr. Son pushed to get the deal closed by the end of December.
One factor hampering the negotiations was that each step required formal approval on the Saudi side from multiple levels of government. Many measures needed approval from the prince himself, whose reformist initiatives such as eliminating energy subsidies have been controversial at home. Prince Salman "wants absolute control over anything, especially any matters concerning strategy," said a person close to the prince.
The back-and-forth from the Saudi negotiators made SoftBank executives begin to wonder if the Saudis were stalling. On at least one occasion, SoftBank executives sought assurance from PIF that the fund wouldn't be scuttled.
SoftBank already has lined up a dozen deals of a billion dollars or more for the fund to invest in, said a person who helped set up the fund.
SoftBank executives initially envisioned having complete control over decisions about what to invest in.
PIF repeatedly sought assurances from SoftBank that the Vision Fund invest in companies and technologies that could help the kingdom's quest to diversify its economy.
The Saudi negotiators focused on who would be on the investment committee, how and when investors would get information on deals in the pipeline, and how much say they would have.
SoftBank agreed to let the Saudis sit in on deal meetings, although they won't get a vote on the investment committee.
But PIF insisted it get the right to veto deals. Eventually, SoftBank agreed to grant veto rights for deals over a certain size, with both sides accepting a high threshold.
---
Alex Frangos, Jenny Strasburg and Summer Said contributed to this article.
Credit: By Mayumi Negishi and Nicolas Parasie
