A Chinese investor group made money from every shot this weekend at the U.S. Open Finals, and in large part it's due to tariffs on tennis balls made in China.
The Chinese consortium, led by Anta Sports Products, recently bought Wilson, the brand that supplies the tournament with balls. The company I run, the Head Penn Sports Group, is Wilson's main competitor. My firm currently supplies more than half the tennis balls bought in the U.S. If you're one of the 18 million Americans who play, chances are you've used Penn balls at some point.
Penn is American. It was established in Pennsylvania in 1910 and today is based in Phoenix. Penn relies on a network of distributors and sales agents spanning the U.S., but it makes its balls at a factory in China -- one of very few facilities world-wide that has the capacity to meet the U.S. market's needs. For that reason, my company has been subject to a 15% tariff since Sept. 1.
Wilson and its new Chinese owners won't face this problem. It manufactures balls in Thailand and has done so since before President Trump took office. The Chinese consortium therefore stands to gain -- from the tariff against China.
That's because the tariff hurts Penn, which needs five years to shift its manufacturing out of China. If meanwhile we try to charge our U.S. customers more to compensate for the tariffs, we're bound to lose market share to Wilson and its Chinese owners. Alternatively, Penn can absorb the 15% tariff, but only by cutting American jobs and investment in research and development. These distortions strike me as the exact opposite of what the president is trying to achieve.
In fact, some of the profits the Chinese investor group makes on Wilson could be used to develop technology Washington doesn't want Beijing to have. The consortium includes the investment conglomerate TenCent, which has significant interests in artificial intelligence and other technologies. Last year its platforms -- including WeChat and TenCent News -- hosted 55% of China's mobile internet usage.
I suspect my own experience is shared by many U.S. businesses operating in other sectors. It is becoming clear that by targeting manufacturing in China broadly rather than specific major Chinese companies, the Trump administration's tariff policy risks damaging U.S.-based businesses, while giving Chinese-owned rivals with offshore manufacturing processes a significant advantage. The final irony is that this translates into profits that the Chinese can invest to obtain precisely the technological advantage that American policy is seeking to prevent.
I endorse Mr. Trump's call for U.S.-owned businesses to relocate manufacturing away from China. But we all need help -- in the shape of an exemption from tariffs -- during the time that it will take to shut down a Chinese factory and move production elsewhere. Otherwise, the policy risks turning into a self-inflicted double fault.
---
Mr. Eliasch is chairman and CEO of the Head Penn Sports Group as well as the former special representative of the U.K. prime minister.

Credit: By Johan Eliasch
