Google won't allow its artificial-intelligence products to be used in military weapons, the company said, as it tries to balance its "Don't Be Evil" mantra with the wide-ranging applications of its technology.
In a new 8,000-word set of ethical principles and guidelines, Google outlined how it plans to manage -- and in some cases limit -- the application of artificial intelligence, a powerful and emerging set of technologies that Google views as key to its growth.
Google, the primary business unit of Alphabet Inc., has recently come under criticism from its own employees for supplying image-recognition technology to the U.S. Department of Defense, in a partnership called Project Maven. Google told employees earlier this month it wouldn't seek to renew its contract for Project Maven, a person familiar with the matter said at the time, and that decision in turn was blasted by some who said the company shouldn't be conflicted about supporting national security.
Google's artificial intelligence also recently generated public alarm after the company demonstrated a robotic voice that can trick humans into thinking it is real.
Google is having to expand its definition of ethics as its technology seeps more into the institutions of public life, from scientific research to military intelligence.
"These are not theoretical concepts," Google CEO Sundar Pichai said in the blog post sharing the new principles. "They are concrete standards that will actively govern our research and product development and will impact our business decisions."
The principles are aimed at helping the company avoid missteps in developing new technology that could have harmful side effects.
They are also an attempt to give outsiders a window into the complex decisions that go into developing smart new machines.
While the principles go into great detail about the many ethical considerations of AI, they stop short of drawing clear lines that would prevent Google from undertaking controversial projects.
In its principles, the company said it won't pursue "technologies that cause or are likely to cause overall harm," nor will it develop AI for use in weapons. It is unclear whether this principle would have prevented Google from continuing its work on Project Maven, which supplied imaging tools used by drones. A company spokesman has said it isn't used for the purpose of firing offensive strikes.
Google is bidding for a multibillion-dollar contract to move the Pentagon's data into the cloud. The Pentagon's Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure cloud contract, known by the acronym JEDI, could be worth billions over a decade for cloud computing.
Google says new applications of AI should benefit society as a whole, seek to avoid unfair bias and be tested for safety.

Credit: By Douglas MacMillan
