A German investigation into Facebook Inc. shows that multinational companies could face probes from several data-protection regulators in Europe over the same missteps.
The data-protection regulator in Hamburg is looking into whether Facebook violated the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation by transcribing the Facebook Messenger voice messages of five users in Germany this summer without their knowledge.
A Facebook spokesman said that although the voice-transcription feature was offered only to U.S. users, voice messages from 48 users in EU countries were transcribed by artificial intelligence and reviewed by a human. That might have occurred because the messages were sent to U.S. users who had enabled the service, the spokesman said.
The case is unusual because Facebook, whose European headquarters is in Ireland, normally falls under the Irish regulator's purview.
But under the GDPR, any authority in the EU could investigate the company's voice-transcription service because it was operated by the parent company, not by Facebook Ireland Ltd., said a spokesman for the Irish data-protection commission.
The Irish regulator isn't investigating the case, though it tipped off authorities in other jurisdictions after Facebook told it that the data collected involved 14 EU countries, the spokesman said.
The Irish regulator said this month that it could announce decisions for some of the 11 investigations of Facebook's other potential GDPR violations by the end of the year, The Wall Street Journal previously reported.
"It's an awkward situation and it's new for us," said Ulrich Kuhn, Hamburg's deputy data-protection regulator.
Despite legal distinctions between operations in the EU and other countries, multinational companies might violate the GDPR by offering products in specific countries that affect consumers elsewhere too, Mr. Kuhn said.
"That's a consequence of this global setup," he said.
The Hamburg regulator has taken interest in voice-transcription services at other companies. Last month, it ordered Alphabet Inc.'s Google to stop processing Europeans' voice recordings from home-assistant devices.
The Facebook investigation points to a risk facing multinationals that so far hasn't been a main feature in GDPR probes. The law took effect in May 2018 and sets strict rules for how companies handle personal data.
Mr. Kuhn said it is likely other companies process data through a business unit outside the EU without following proper procedures to comply with the GDPR.
He said his office is in contact with the Irish regulator about the Facebook voice-transcription case, but no other EU authorities.
Although companies might believe they are subject to one regulator's jurisdiction, the complex nature of global data transfers could open them up to investigations from various European regulators. Each regulator could take a different approach to its investigation and penalties, said Odia Kagan, a partner at law firm Fox Rothschild LLP.
In theory, each authority could impose separate fines, which, under the GDPR, can be as much as 20 million euros ($22 million) or 4% of a company's global revenue, whichever is larger.

Credit: By Catherine Stupp
