FTX made political donations in employee names using stolen customer funds, former executive Nishad Singh said Monday during the trial of FTX founder Sam Bankman-Fried.
Singh told the jury that former FTX executive Ryan Salame, who has pleaded guilty to his role in the campaign-finance scheme, logged into his bank account and entered the details for the money to be sent to political causes. Then Salame would ask Singh to approve the transaction in an encrypted Signal chat, he said.
"My role was to click a button," said Singh. For other donations, he said he gave signed blank checks to a team led by Bankman-Fried's brother that used them for the contributions.
He said he was aware of -- and uncomfortable with -- being a straw donor, and knew that his donations came from customer funds.
Singh said the contributions, largely to center-left recipients, were made in his name for optics purposes. "It was useful for my name to be associated with some donations, even if the end recipient understood they were really coming from something else," he said.
Former FTX engineering director Singh is cooperating with the government, the third member of Bankman-Fried's inner circle to testify against him since the trial's early October start. Prosecutors have previously called as witnesses Gary Wang, FTX chief technology officer, and Caroline Ellison, the former chief executive at FTX's sister hedge fund, Alameda Research. Ellison is also Bankman-Fried's ex-girlfriend.
Bankman-Fried, 31 years old, faces seven counts of fraud and conspiracy. Prosecutors have accused him of misusing billions of dollars in FTX customer funds and lying to investors and lenders of the exchange and Alameda. Bankman-Fried has denied wrongdoing. His lawyers have said he acted in good faith in trying to steer the exchange through a crisis.
Singh, 28, testified clearly and confidently, occasionally veering into technical language that drew questions from the judge.
Singh told the jury that he committed financial crimes, including defrauding customers and investors, while working at the crypto exchange. He said he objected to what he viewed as excessive and lavish spending by Bankman-Fried.
Prosecutors walked Singh through a spreadsheet of endorsement agreements, which included deals with the Miami Heat's arena, Major League Baseball, comedian Larry David and former quarterback Tom Brady and model Gisele Bundchen.
A lawyer representing the celebrities didn't respond to a request for comment.
Some of the spending directed by Bankman-Fried included investing in venture capital, such as $500 million for Anthropic, an artificial-intelligence startup, and an investment in cryptocurrency mining in Kazakhstan.
Singh told jurors that Bankman-Fried was wowed by the celebrity connections he could gain with an investment in venture-capital firm K5 Global. Prosecutors introduced as evidence a photo of Michael Kives, a K5 co-founder and former Hollywood agent, with a grinning Bankman-Fried and celebrities including actor Orlando Bloom and singer Katy Perry. K5 didn't respond to a request for comment.
Bankman-Fried would invest $700 million in the firm, using funds prosecutors say were stolen from FTX customers.
Bankman-Fried's lawyers are expected to cross examine Singh on Tuesday.
---
James Fanelli contributed to this article.
Credit: By Corinne Ramey
