BEIJING -- Baidu Inc. founder Robin Li is shifting operational command to a former top executive with Microsoft Corp., as the Chinese internet giant seeks to double-down on its advances in artificial intelligence and move past a string of controversies.
The new president, Qi Lu, was a key deputy to Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella and oversaw the Office products and Bing search engine.
"I want to gradually shift the day-to-day management work from my own shoulders," Mr. Li, 48 years old, said at a press conference on Wednesday. He said he planned to spend more time on general strategy and investment decisions for the company.
Mr. Lu, 55, will be tasked with helping to turn around a flagship Chinese tech company that has China's most advanced artificial-intelligence and autonomous-car technology, but which has lagged in launching mobile initiatives compared with rivals Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Tencent Holdings Ltd.
Often compared with Google, Baidu started in internet search, but has branched out into maps, images, cloud storage, and more recently, artificial intelligence and autonomous vehicles.
Analysts say that while Baidu has strong research capabilities, its corporate culture has prevented it from rolling out as many popular products as Alibaba and Tencent in recent years.
"They are the old guard," said Chris DeAngelis, general manager of consultancy Alliance Development Group. "Their DNA is a bit more like a state-owned entity. Alibaba and Tencent are more market-driven."
Baidu's new focus, artificial intelligence, is about building computer programs that can do things more intelligently than humans can by mining huge fields of data.
The company is using it to make their search engine and other products more efficient, and is working on smart robots and self-driving cars.
Mr. Lu said he joined Baidu because its focus on AI aligned with his own interests.
A naturalized U.S. citizen, Mr. Lu earned a Ph.D. in computer science from Carnegie Mellon University in 1995, then worked at International Business Machines Corp., Yahoo Inc. and Microsoft.
At Microsoft, Mr. Lu led a team that worked on next-generation helper bots that can converse with people.
"I personally think that Chinese companies will definitely innovate faster than American ones in the next few years," Mr. Lu said.
Mr. Lu left Microsoft in September, citing injuries sustained in a bicycle accident. He said on Wednesday that he has recovered.
Mr. Li is still fully in control of Baidu's direction. He and his wife, Melissa Ma, together control 69% of the company's shareholder votes, mostly through their special Class B shares, according to calculations by The Wall Street Journal.
Baidu's stock, which is listed on Nasdaq, closed up 0.3% at $176.96 on Tuesday after the new president announcement. Its shares are up 6.6% during the past year.
A key challenge for Baidu will be moving beyond several controversies that occurred last year that sparked widespread criticism about the company's business standards.
In January 2016, Baidu was accused of selling an online forum where patients of the blood disorder hemophilia exchanged information with private hospital operators, for which Mr. Li later apologized.
A few months later, a cancer patient died after seeking an alternative treatment advertised on Baidu's search engine.
On Wednesday, Mr. Li said the company had learned from its mistakes and was now focused on artificial intelligence, a field in which Baidu has invested heavily and leads over its Chinese rivals.
Baidu's artificial-intelligence and big-data research has advanced during the past two years under the direction of chief scientist Andrew Ng, the Stanford computer scientist who founded Google's artificial-intelligence project Google Brain.
Mr. Ng said in an interview on Monday that Baidu's speech-recognition rate has risen to 97% from 83% three years ago, reaching an accuracy level where it can be a help rather than a hindrance.
"The difference between 97% and 95% is not just 2%," he said. "It's the difference between being frequently annoyed and using it all the time."
Mr. Lu, based at Baidu's Beijing headquarters, will now help direct the commercialization of these types of technologies.
---
Yang Jie contributed to this article.
Credit: By Eva Dou
