Amazon wants employees in the office five days a week.
In a message posted to the company's website Monday, CEO Andy Jassy said Amazon believes there are significant advantages to having employees in the office full-time.
Like many companies, Amazon let some employees work from home because of the Covid-19 pandemic. Amazon staff were required to be in the office at least three days a week since May 1, 2023. The return-to-office requirement will take effect in early January 2025.
Amazon is joining other large companies, including UPS, JPMorgan Chase and Boeing, that called at least some workers back to the office full-time. The moves reflect some executives' efforts to refill office buildings and rebuild cultures that existed before the pandemic. The mandates so far haven't led to a broader filling of desks, however. The average office occupancy in 10 major U.S. cities has hovered around 50% for months, according to data from security-provider Kastle Systems.
Jassy has said he values in-office culture and the five-days-a-week decision comes after Amazon invested in its office spaces in recent years and pushed its employees to be close to their teams.
When employees are in the office, he said, "We've observed that it's easier for our teammates to learn, model, practice, and strengthen our culture; collaborating, brainstorming, and inventing are simpler and more effective; teaching and learning from one another are more seamless; and, teams tend to be better connected to one another."
Amazon, like other tech rivals, has been ramping up its spending in artificial intelligence, as it looks to cut costs in other areas. Jassy has said generative AI could be one of the largest technological transformations in decades.
Jassy also said Amazon is moving to have fewer managers overseeing teams, pledging to tackle bureaucratic impediments such as what he called "pre-meetings for the pre-meetings for the decision meetings."
The company will now have a dedicated method for employees to flag any "bureaucracy or unnecessary process that's crept in and we can root out," he said. Some employees have said Amazon hasn't done as good of a job at keeping the startup culture that fueled its success.
Amazon last year told many employees they would have to relocate to what the company calls "main hub" locations, such as its headquarters in Seattle, or offices in New York or San Francisco. The decision prompted some staff to leave or be pushed out, and some speculated the return-to-office rules were another way to thin out the workforce. Amazon laid off more than 27,000 employees from late 2022 to early 2023 and cut its workforce across divisions such as entertainment and its Alexa department.
Even as early as August 2020, Amazon indicated that its future would be at the offices it opened throughout the country. The company that year expanded its offices in six U.S. cities, and executives spoke about the importance of working in person. The company expanded in New York, Dallas and Phoenix, among other cities, and has large offices in Arlington, Va., and Nashville.
Jassy said the policy would allow for remote work in extenuating circumstances, such as having a sick child, as it did before the pandemic. Approved exceptions to the return-to-office policy will be respected, he said.
The move could prompt other tech companies to follow suit, said Rob Sadow, CEO of Flex Index, a software firm that tracks return-to-office efforts.
"Major tech companies will now think about their policy again, potentially, in light of Amazon making this change," Sadow said. He said it is also likely to trickle down to the decision makers at smaller companies that look up to the tech giant. "It will cause a bit of churn and some meaningful reflection, I think, in a lot of technology companies," he said.
In the third quarter of 2024, 33% of all U.S. companies required employees to come to the office full-time, according to Flex Index's data. Among technology companies with more than 1,000 employees, only 7% had such a requirement.
Executives at some companies have tried to lure employees into offices more often, hoping staffers see value in working side-by-side with their employees or in learning from colleagues in person.
"I'm very carrot, not stick," said Sarah Franklin, CEO of Lattice, a human-resources technology company that has a hybrid in-office policy. "I would like more people back in the office, but we're doing well, and people feel like they're adults, they're trusted, they're not being tracked."
Many have come to accept that employees will spend at least some of their working time at home, and that hybrid work arrangements will be tough to abandon altogether.
"Hybrid is the most complex environment to actually orchestrate or pull off," said Paul Knopp, CEO of the professional-services firm KPMG US. "The other two are sort of simple: either you're at the office all the time or you're fully remote."
Credit: By Victoria Albert, Sebastian Herrera and Chip Cutter
