[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Arm is doing very well these days. But is it doing three times as well as Nvidia?
The British chip designer's strong fiscal third-quarter results and forecast sparked an effective run on its stock, sending the shares soaring by 48% on Thursday. Excitement over artificial intelligence seems a major factor; Arm Chief Executive Rene Haas mentioned AI 17 times in the earnings call on Wednesday, noting that demand for energy-efficient computing sparked by the technology leaves the company feeling "very, very strongly positioned for growth."
Other chip stocks such as Nvidia, AMD and Broadcom have likewise enjoyed an AI bounce -- those three are the only ones on the PHLX Semiconductor Index to have seen their stock prices more than double over the past 12 months.
But Arm's jump puts it at a whole other level. The stock's midday price of $122 represents a valuation of nearly 97 times Wall Street's projected earnings for the next four quarters. That's 64% higher than the most expensive stock on the PHLX Index -- and nearly three times Nvidia's multiple. Note that Nvidia's much larger business is growing much faster than Arm's due to AI chip demand. Nvidia's annual revenue is estimated to have more than doubled for the fiscal year that just ended in January. The high end of Arm's own forecast has revenue rising 20% for its March-ending fiscal year.
Hence, Arm's new valuation could prove rich even for some of the company's biggest fans. At $122, the stock price exceeds the highest targets currently set by Wall Street analysts, according to FactSet.
And that's after many boosted their targets following the strong results, which pushed the Street's median target price from $70 at the end of January to $95 now. BofA analyst Vivek Arya raised his target price from $80 to $110, but noted Arm's high multiple "could continue to enhance stock volatility." Pierre Ferragu of New Street Research took his target to $90 but added "valuation getting fuller" in his note to clients.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
