With a Little Help
By Cory Doctorow
Sweet Home Grindstone, 360 pages, $14.50
Cory Doctorow's latest collection of short stories is one of the best, most closely focused collections that science fiction has ever produced. Its territory is the near future -- a future so near we are already starting to feel anxious about it. But you can't buy it in a bookstore. "With a Little Help" is only available as a printed book online.
The book is what Mr. Doctorow calls an "experiment in publishing." You can buy a trade paperback -- choosing from one of four covers -- through Mr. Doctorow's own website (craphound.com), through the print-on-demand service lulu.com or through Amazon. You can purchase a handbound, limited-edition hardcover for $275. Or you can download it, free, as an e-book, leaving a donation of whatever you wish. For a price, presumably fairly high, Mr. Doctorow will even write a story to order, on your premise.
This unusual business model makes more sense when you understand the author's artistic vision. For Mr. Doctorow shares the master-belief of science fiction, which is that technology, not ideology, is the agent of change. And he is determined that the direction of that change should be toward devolution of power -- away from publishing companies and every other centralized authority.
Mr. Doctorow's novel "Little Brother" (2008) contradicted Orwell's thesis -- that centralized state power would become beyond challenge -- by showing a bunch of kids with computers and cellphones and video-links defeat the great organs of state. In "Makers" (2009), the great manufacturing corporations go down before micro-businesses empowered by cheap, computerized machine tools.
So far so good, but "With a Little Help" shows that Mr. Doctorow isn't starry-eyed about what will happen next. State bureaucracies can use technology as well as individuals, and a struggle has already started over who will control the Internet. The evil side of the IT revolution is that the state can check on everything, and its data-banks get bigger all the time. Who has not cracked a joke in an email, or made some electronic comment, that could be taken the wrong way? Once you've attracted attention, the story "Scroogled" points out, "scroogled" is exactly what you could be.
Another Doctorow thought: Computer-guided traffic could be much more efficient, right? But would it be fair, or would the road clear magically for government apparatchiks and guys with the right microchip, while all the lights turn mysteriously red for those on some secret gray-list? The story "Human Readable" puts both sides of the argument.
Mr. Doctorow's visions are steadily contrarian, fairly unsettling and in the end still strangely optimistic. "Pester Power" starts with the NYPD executing a no-knock warrant against someone breeding a pet artificial intelligence. It ends with all her guards' turned-off phones ringing at once: Her pet is still looking after her. But pets could turn rogue: See the ending of "Epoch," though your sympathies there might still be with the AI. You have to work at reading these stories, but they repay the effort.
A blogger and tech-oriented activist who is co-editor of the popular website BoingBoing.net, Mr. Doctorow is certainly trying to make his future happen. "With a Little Help" goes a step further in the direction of writer-power. First, Mr. Doctorow is using the Internet to avoid major publishers altogether. Second, this is a collection of short stories -- a form that authors of science fiction have struggled to find a market for in recent decades.
Sixty years ago stories were the heart of sci-fi (and of fantasy, then a junior partner), along with the magazines that promoted them. The daddy of the magazines was Astounding, with its consciously hard-science bent (reinforced by the name-change to Analog in 1960). Its long-term editor, John Campbell, launched Isaac Asimov, Robert Heinlein, Frank Herbert, A.E. van Vogt and Lester del Rey -- and dozens more. The magazine Galaxy took a lighter tone; one called Fantasy and Science Fiction had a broader remit. There were many others: Worlds of If, Amazing, Fantastic, and on and on. Collectors' guides list more than 200 of them pre-1980, though many lasted but an issue or two. Only a few survived the 1980s.
If the short story was the quintessential sci-fi format in the genre's infancy, it was eventually displaced by its opposite: the multi-part epic. The success of Tolkien, beginning in the 1950s, showed publishers there was a market for a trilogy that was well over a thousand pages total. Frank Herbert's "Dune" (1965) was another hit: It started in Astounding as a three-part serial but was then continued in an unprecedented five parts to make an eight-part total. It went on to generate five sequels by Herbert himself, with a dozen more co-authored by his son.
Book publishers liked these series. They concluded that what sells books is not new ideas but the familiar. From this idea sprang what one might call the modern shapeless epics, especially the fantasy ones, which just go on and on: Robert Jordan's "Wheel of Time" sequence, Terry Brooks's "Shannara" stories, Stephen Donaldson's "Covenant" trilogies. But as the market for short stories declined, many aspiring sci-fi authors struggled to publish anything original, simply because they lacked the experience to write the 150,000-word book now preferred.
Mr. Doctorow's idea of going direct perhaps suggests a way out of this predicament. Publishers are not yet running scared at the prospect of being cut out of the loop, and Mr. Doctorow's financial results don't necessarily suggest they should be. As of early May, he had brought in around $37,000 from sales of "With a Little Help," and his profit has been about $14,375. (The author's advance for his last conventionally published collection was $10,000, he told National Public Radio last year.) Donations for the free downloads average about $10.
All this gives Mr. Doctorow the freedom to experiment. "For me -- for pretty much every writer -- the big problem isn't piracy, it's obscurity," he writes in the introduction to "Little Brother." "I'm more interested in getting more of that wider audience into the tent than making sure that everyone who's in the tent bought a ticket to be there."
When it comes to new models of publishing in the era of e-books and print on demand, science-fiction readers may be an indicator of where the industry is going. They are tech-oriented already. Many do not have any emotional attachment to print and are happy with e-books. This is where the question of decentralization really becomes interesting.
More than any other genre, science-fiction fans are also potential science-fiction writers. If there were a new, cheap market for sci-fi short stories where what you need most of all is a good idea, one can imagine a near-future where fans are setting up websites, swapping stories on cellphones and building a following till they can start turning a profit -- all at a lower break-even point than is now economically viable.
In the realm of fantasy, "fan fiction" has not been a success: Fantasy depends on world-creation, which takes time and skill. Science fiction, notoriously idea-oriented, could be different. Then what fans know about technology -- and many fans are, like Mr. Doctorow, knowledgeable people -- could leak out to the rest of us. Back in the '60s and '70s, science fiction helped inspire the space program, and then the space program advertised science fiction. Maybe this could happen again.
---
Mr. Shippey regularly reviews science fiction for the Journal.
Credit: By Tom Shippey
