Two hundred years ago on New Year's Day, a third-rate publisher issued an anonymous novel with an outlandish premise, quickly discounting most of the 500 print copies after slow sales. Despite this inauspicious beginning, Mary Shelley's "Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus," has haunted us all the way to a time when life is routinely reinvented in a lab.
Why are we still reading this book, which (according to the Columbia University-based Open Syllabus Project) is assigned in more college classes than any other novel? With its lengthy epistles, extended monologues and gothic sentimentality, it would be easy to dismiss it now as a period piece that somehow falls between the shelves of literature and philosophy, just as some early reviewers disdained the lurid tale of murderous revenge as shocking and even impious.
When word got out that its author was a 20-year-old woman, the literary establishment was even less inclined to favor Shelley's work. But the novel had champions, including authorial titan Sir Walter Scott, and even its critics admitted how startling, how new and how fascinating this literary experiment was.
Frankenstein hit Western culture a little like the news of a new scientific discovery: disbelief, followed by efforts at duplication. In a few short years the book had been adapted for the stage and translated into French, and begun its alchemical transformation from imaginative fiction to modern myth. When the curtain went up on the 1823 "Presumption, or the Fate of Frankenstein," the English Opera House in London theatrically warned the public "do not take your wives, do not take your daughters, do not take your families." The next year George Canning, the Foreign Secretary, used "Frankenstein" to argue against abolition, likening slaves to Victor's creature, ready to attack their former masters out of a sense of vengeance untutored by a moral education. Already, the story had become metaphor, a ubiquitous cultural shorthand in politics as well as the arts.
Think about all the ways you know about Frankenstein today, even if you've never cracked the book. You've seen one of the hundreds of film or TV characters based on Victor Frankenstein and his creature, or you've worn the Halloween costume, or seen a political cartoon, or you've eaten the breakfast cereal -- or eaten genetically engineered "frankenfood" or "frankenfish." We encounter this creature so often we've made it into a prefix for any new phenomenon or combination of ideas we perceive as dangerous.
This durability derives not just from the fact that Frankenstein is a great work of literature, but from the way it encompasses our anxieties about scientific creativity and responsibility. Victor Frankenstein, the novel's protagonist, predates the first usage of the word "scientist" by at least a decade. Before we even had the calling of the modern scientist, we had this depiction of a deeply flawed initiate pursuing knowledge at any cost. Before we had scientific ethics, we had Frankenstein's characters anticipating the success of their technical endeavors and agonizing over unexpected consequences.
And yet, 200 years into the new editions, adaptations, rip-offs and remixes, we might only now be ready to learn what Frankenstein has to teach us. The story's central, science fictional premise -- that a human can create life with scientific tools and knowledge -- is no longer speculative. High-school students create organisms as part of the annual International Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) contest in Cambridge, Mass. The basic tools for gene-editing are advancing so rapidly and publicly that we often lack the vocabulary to even describe what is possible in the lab -- or outside of it. Artificial-intelligence research is careening forward at a similar pace, with machines outperforming humans in chess, driving and a rapidly growing list of workplace jobs.
In other words, the story's central dilemma about the consequences of creation, and especially the creation of life, is directly before us. Frankenstein -- and not the B-movie, mad scientist caricature -- has something to tell us: For all the murder and mayhem that upset 19th-century reviewers, Victor's failure to care for his creature, to recognize its agency and his own obligations in bringing it to life, is the central crime of the novel, the sin from which all else springs. Frankenstein is more about what happens after the moment of creation, as Victor comes to terms with his own responsibility, than about his creative act in the first place.
Today humanity is shambling through the vast space of things we can do trying to find the things we should do. Our generation of creators is conceiving new machine-learning algorithms and genetically engineered microorganisms, and our own children will grow into this newly reanimated world. It is their performance in the role of Victor that will help answer the motivating questions of the novel, and so much of contemporary science: what is life, what does it mean to be human, and what are our responsibilities as creators?
These questions point out the Promethean path we will be traveling on for the next 200 years: as a species that is actively making the planet, and ourselves, whether we accept responsibility for those interventions or not. We are as gods, Stuart Brand wrote in the 1960s, so we might as well get good at it. Doing that will require more than technical knowledge -- it depends on judgment, responsibility, anticipation and, most important, imagination. To build the world we want our children to inhabit and theirs to inherit, we have to believe that such a world is possible and we have to populate it with concrete details, real aspirations, tangible dreams.
We accomplish that through the myths we choose to keep around, and Frankenstein's longevity speaks to its power as an incisive model of humanity at a scientific crossroads. If we're going to survive in the shadow of our success, we need to be literate as well as technically adept inhabitants of this story we call human progress.
---
Mr. Finn is assistant professor of arts, media and engineering and director of the Center for Science and the Imagination at Arizona State University. Mr. Guston is foundation professor and director of ASU's School for the Future of Innovation in Society. Together they run ASU's Frankenstein Bicentennial Project.

Credit: By Ed Finn and David H. Guston
