The venture market stayed depressed in 2024. Does that mean it was a good time to invest?
Global venture fundraising, startup investment deal count and aggregate deal value are on track for a third straight year of declines, according to data from research firm Preqin. Conventional wisdom suggests there is a silver lining -- investors can buy into strong companies at lower valuations and boost future returns.
However, that may not be quite true in today's market.
Median early-stage valuations for U.S. companies jumped to a record $44.8 million in the first three quarters, exceeding a prior peak in 2022, according to PitchBook Data. Venture funds are still bidding up valuations of select companies, especially in the generative artificial intelligence space.
"Valuations are very high as companies are raising successive rounds very quickly at steep markups to the previous round, often without significant milestones or risk reduction," said Matt Murphy, a partner at Menlo Ventures.
Some AI startups have been raising at billion-dollar valuations before creating a product or generating revenue.
Some of the largest venture financings in Silicon Valley history, meanwhile, were happening in the market this year. Data-analytics company Databricks, for example, was finalizing a $10 billion investment, The Wall Street Journal reported earlier this month.
In that way the market of 2024 has been odd. There was less money to go around -- but what money there was, was concentrated in the hands of a few mega funds and a group of rising gen-AI startup stars.
This year also was the first in which venture funds of $1 billion or more attracted the majority of all venture fundraising in the U.S., according to PitchBook data through the third quarter and going back a decade. Flush with cash, a few venture funds have been going into bidding wars over a few generative AI startups.
What are the implications of this strange dynamic for future returns? There is reason to be worried. Short-term returns have already suffered because venture funds overbid for startups during the market's highs in 2021.
"Venture's short-term underperformance is largely driven by the downward correction in valuations on unrealized venture investments made at a market peak in 2021 to the less lofty environment of today," said Andrea Auerbach, global head of private investments at investment and research firm Cambridge Associates
Some investors would argue that it is different this time -- generative AI is a fundamental technology shift and new GenAI startups are going to demonstrate fundamentals worthy of the valuations.
"Investors may have been paying fantastic prices for their companies and that's a recipe for destroying value," said Cameron Joyce, global head of research insights at Preqin. At the same time, however, "there are a lot of reasons to be optimistic. AI is a trend that's here to stay and the fact that we have softer sentiment [overall] is good for those who are looking to deploy capital."
By Yuliya Chernova
