A friend told me about a recent playdate that took an unexpected turn. The 7-year-old boys thought it would be funny if they asked a burning question of Amazon's Alexa, the voice-activated assistant built into the Echo speaker that the family had recently purchased. "Alexa, what is poop?" said one child.
After a pause, the speaker gamely replied: "Defecation is the final act of digestion, by which organisms eliminate solid, semisolid, and/or liquid waste material from the digestive tract via the anus." (The definition comes from Wikipedia.)
The boys snickered. My friend, caught off guard as other moms looked on, explained to the children that Alexa was not to be used for scatological humor.
I've been hearing a lot of stories like this lately, as more of my parent-friends jump on the voice-controlled-assistant bandwagon. (Google Home is another product with similar capabilities.) Sure, it's convenient to be able to use your voice to order diapers while you wash dishes or to cue up a rousing rendition of "She'll Be Coming Around the Mountain" when your kids need to get their wiggles out. But welcoming a blindly obedient digital being into your family can be tricky.
Here are some tips on how to best use your new AI assistant in a child-appropriate way.
Keep Alexa Family-Friendly
When I introduced the Amazon Echo into our home, I told my 7-year-old son he could ask Alexa anything he liked. I didn't expect his first request to be, "Alexa, play 'Baby Got Back.'"
"Playing 'Baby Got Back,' explicit version, by Sir Mix-a-lot," replied Alexa.
Part of me was proud he went straight to classic '90s hip-hop, but I quickly put the kibosh on this. "Alexa, stop!" I said, explaining to my son that he wasn't to access this type of music. You can turn on parental controls in Amazon Music to restrict children's access to songs with explicit lyrics.
Keeping Alexa age-appropriate requires self-discipline on the part of parents, too. For instance, even though it's undeniably hilarious, do not under any circumstances install the Alexa Skill called "4AFart," which will, on command, play a sound of flatulence with "varying levels of repugnance." To children, it will never not be funny.
Limit Her Power
You've probably heard stories of children using Alexa to order expensive toys unbeknown to their parents -- at least until a gigantic Amazon shipping box shows up on the doorstep.
To avoid this, disable voice-commanded ordering in Alexa's settings. Another option is to require a PIN for purchases (although in most households, it might be hard to keep those numbers secret).
What most concerns me, however, are Alexa Skills, or optional third-party applications you can install from the likes of Domino's (which allows you to voice-order pizza delivery), Uber (call for a car) and Fandango (pre-purchase movie tickets). Many do not offer the option to establish a PIN to insure only adults are placing orders. (The developer would need to implement this feature.) Which means that, until the technology evolves, your children can order as many Wisconsin 6 Cheese pizzas and Parmesan Bread Bites as they like.
Lay Down Ground Rules
Another couple was telling me how their children keep hijacking the household Spotify queue. One minute the adults are happily preparing dinner to Fleetwood Mac's "Rumours." The next thing they know, "Thomas the Train" theme songs are blaring through the sound system. (In my house, Drake's "One Dance" is a common disrupter.)
When you first had kids, you probably never thought you'd have to teach them playlist etiquette, but in the age of voice commands, this is important to address.
Other parent friends of mine shared their sensible house rule to solve this issue: They told their 4-year-old daughter that she needs to ask them permission before she queries or commands Alexa.
"It's worked about 80% of the time," the father told me. Not a bad a rate of compliance, as far as house rules go.
Teach Respect for 'Elders'
Even though children may understand that Alexa is just a computer, they should still speak to her politely. Saying "please" with each request mitigates the fact that the child is essentially ordering around a virtual adult. You don't want kids barking orders at Alexa in a tone that might carry over to the classroom or playground.
Dr. Alan Kazdin, professor of child psychology at Yale University and director of the Yale Parenting Center, suggested teaching proper Alexa etiquette through modeling, or demonstrating appropriate interactions yourself. This requires your being on your best behavior at all times. "It's not righteousness or lecturing," he said. "You show and [they] see the behavior."
And what if your children won't listen? Of course, there's an Alexa Skill for that: "Eyes on You." It will make Alexa announce, "Sally [or whatever your child's name is], Alexa is watching you." According to the developer's description, "This is just a goofy skill that I created so that my kids would think someone is watching them so that they would behave." It's up to your discretion how far to take this little joke.
Strengthen Bonds
Alexa doesn't have to cause strife in a family. Parents just need to clearly define appropriate and inappropriate ways to interact with her, said Dr. Kazdin.
He suggested designating "child-only" times for Alexa, where children, under adult supervision, are free to explore her abilities in whatever ways they choose. Not only does it teach both adults and children what these devices can do, it offers a chance for bonding as well.
"Have it so it's only usable for an hour a day and then expand it if things are going well," said Dr. Kazdin. "You can even make it a reward for the child. Give some choice, give some time and give some togetherness."
He also suggested that I turn over complete control of the music to my kids from time to time, too: "If the parents could sit through five minutes [of their children's music], that would be good."
OK, I relent. Alexa, play Drake.
Credit: By Mike Ayers
