Volcanoes are one of the most important geological forces on the planet. Their activity can halt air travel, impact air quality, force evacuations and damage communities.
It isn't currently possible to predict when one might blow or for how long. But there are important indicators, including changes in seismic activity, temperature, gas emissions and the shape of the ground, that can alert researchers whether a volcano may be shifting from dormant into a more explosive mode, scientists say.
Increasingly, volcanologists are turning to artificial intelligence to help them sift through these data streams, which come from sensors on the ground, in the sky and in space. Their aim is to eventually build a cloud-based system that can more accurately forecast volcanic activity based on input from many volcanoes around the world.
"The machine can look for the patterns," says James Reilly, the director of the U.S. Geological Survey, which is tasked with building a national volcano early warning system. AI-generated insights can then be used to devise emergency-mitigation plans to limit the threat volcanoes pose to human life and property, Dr. Reilly says.
Few volcanoes today are outfitted with enough sensors to give scientists a full picture of the interrelated processes that trigger eruptions, though that is starting to change. In the U.S. alone, there are 169 potentially active volcanoes. Less than 50% have even one seismometer to detect the tiny earthquakes generated by the underground movement of magma that can signal an eruption might be coming -- and only three have continuous gas sensors, according to a 2017 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine report.
"You need multiple technologies on a single volcano," plus a "good portfolio of volcanoes out there" to really understand how eruptions happen generally, says Emily Brodsky, a University of California, Santa Cruz, professor of earth sciences.
With more dense data streams, researchers would be more likely to record multiple types of eruptions on which to train AI systems. In theory, that could enable more accurate forecasts of impending eruptions, including their potential strength and duration, with less -- or even no -- human involvement.
Scientists are working on developing and deploying more and better technologies that would provide the necessary data to make an accurate AI for eruption forecasting possible. Here, we highlight some of them.
(See accompanying graphic -- WSJ Aug. 14, 2020)

Credit: By Daniela Hernandez
