Venture-capital firm Lux Capital has closed two new funds with a total of $1.48 billion as it continues to look for startups pushing the boundaries of technology, particularly in life sciences.
The fresh capital sits in a $675 million early-stage venture fund named Lux Ventures VII LP, which is focused on seeding and backing founders, and an $800 million opportunities fund named Lux Total Opportunities LP, which will help support the growth of the most promising companies on the firm's roster. The new injection takes Lux's assets under management to $4 billion.
With the added firepower, Lux will pull the trigger on investment opportunities it already has identified. "We will be very actively investing shortly. This is not designed as something we are putting on the shelf for the next year," said co-founder and managing partner Peter Hebert.
When Mr. Hebert launched Lux in 2000 together with Josh Wolfe and Robert Paull, they set on a mission to invest in businesses at the intersection of technology and life sciences, a strategy that began to resonate with mainstream institutional investors only in recent years. "At first it was viewed as heresy that life sciences generally, and not just drug discovery but also things like medical technology and medical devices, will be absolutely transformed by technological tools," Mr. Hebert said.
Lux also invests in science and technologies that were once viewed as esoteric but have now made their way into venture capitalists' portfolios: 3-D printing and imaging, nuclear waste cleanup, machine learning, drones, and robots that conduct microsurgery. The firm plans to deepen its investments in other areas with the dry powder. One of them is space, where an opportunity lies with "factories in space that build pure materials for life on Earth," the firm said.
In the past year, 12 companies in Lux Capital's portfolio either have been acquired, listed publicly or announced plans to do so, representing a total enterprise value -- which factors in equity, debt and cash on hand -- of $20 billion. They include autonomous-vehicle company Zoox Inc., which agreed to be acquired by Amazon.com Inc. in June 2020, and property-technology company Matterport Inc. which announced a special-purpose acquisition company deal in February.
Lux has around 75 active core investments and 10 investment professionals. Mr. Hebert and Mr. Wolfe, who is the other managing partner of the firm, are based in Menlo Park, Calif., and New York, respectively. The bulk of the firm's 30-person team is concentrated around the two hubs. Mr. Paull is a venture partner at the firm.
Credit: By David Carnevali
