LONDON -- Hewlett-Packard Co. has accused Mike Lynch of fraud in connection with its $11 billion purchase of his former company, Autonomy, in 2011.
But in England, the 49-year-old Mr. Lynch -- who dismisses H-P's fraud allegations -- has reinvented himself as a deep-pocketed startup investor, forming a venture-capital firm he says has $1 billion to spend.
The British establishment has embraced him as one of the country's tech luminaries. He sits on a board that advises the prime minister on science and technology, and he was recently inducted into one of the country's most-prestigious scientific associations. Over the summer, he was received by Queen Elizabeth II.
As H-P pursues plans to split itself in two, trying to right the ship after years of scandal and missteps, Mr. Lynch, who the company blames for one of its biggest recent scandals, says he has moved on.
"We raised a billion in about six weeks," he said of his new firm, Invoke Capital Partners. He runs it from an office along London's posh Pall Mall, with a team of about 50 people split among London, Cambridge and San Francisco.
"He's put together an amazing team," said Sherry Coutu, a tech investor and London Stock Exchange Group board member, who has invested alongside Mr. Lynch. "And that's great news for us here."
That isn't an assessment many senior H-P executives share. H-P told shareholders in November 2012 that it would take a $8.8 billion write-down on its acquisition of Mr. Lynch's Autonomy. The U.S. company has accused Mr. Lynch and others in the Cambridge-based software maker's former management of "serious accounting improprieties, misrepresentation and disclosure failures."
H-P claimed Autonomy's former management fudged growth figures for years, inflating annual revenue by as much as 29.6% through a series of fake deals, subsidized transactions and misclassified sales. H-P outlined some of the accusations in court filings in a shareholder lawsuit related to the Autonomy purchase.
In the filings, H-P said that during its due diligence on the purchase, Autonomy said its fourth-largest contract was a $11.6 million deal with a customer in a European government. H-P said it later learned the customer was U.S.-based reseller MicroTechnologies LLC, and that the ultimate user of the software was expected to be the Vatican Library. The Vatican, however, ended up choosing another vendor.
A spokeswoman for Autonomy management said these accounting practices were valid under international accounting standards. The spokeswoman said H-P had specifically asked which sector the end user was in, and had fully reviewed the paperwork on the deal before the acquisition
Mr. Lynch, who joined H-P as part of the acquisition deal, left after about six months. He and other former Autonomy executives deny there was fraud, say H-P mismanaged the software maker after the acquisition and that it had outsize expectations of its value.
Mr. Lynch periodically posts documents, analyses and open letters online on behalf of his former management team that he says support that view. Mr. Lynch said H-P's accusations were "incendiary and defamatory."
H-P has referred the case to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and Federal Bureau of Investigation and to Britain's Serious Fraud Office.
The FBI declined to comment. The SEC didn't respond to requests for comment. A spokeswoman for the SFO said its investigation is continuing. Mr. Lynch said he hasn't been interviewed by authorities.
A spokeswoman for the former Autonomy executives said they hadn't received any questions from the SFO since spring 2013.
Mr. Lynch said "serious, intelligent investors" shouldn't have a problem investing with him. But scrutiny of the H-P deal has tarnished his reputation in Silicon Valley.
"I would definitely do an extra level of diligence," said Venky Ganesan, managing director at California venture-capital firm Menlo Ventures.
In Europe, Mr. Lynch has found willing partners. Daniel Bertholet, the investment director at Geneva-based Endeavor Vision, which recently invested along with Mr. Lynch in a biotech startup, said he wasn't worried about Mr. Lynch's tangle with H-P.
"It's none of my business," Mr. Bertholet said. "Some people are complaining because [H-P] overpaid."
Despite Autonomy's reputation in the U.S., Mr. Lynch has embraced his relationship with his former company. Invoke is stacked with former Autonomy executives, including its former finance chief, Sushovan Hussain, who now heads investments and mergers and acquisitions at Invoke. Mr. Lynch declined to identify specific investors in his fund, but says he has put $100 million of his own into it.
Half his time, he says, is taken up by ceremonial and advisory roles. As member of the prime minister's Council for Science and Technology, he helped write a paper about machine learning -- a type of artificial intelligence -- for the prime minister's office.
He also is a Suffolk County "deputy lieutenant," a ceremonial military post bestowed on a few dozen people in the county east of London. In that role, he attends events on behalf of Queen Elizabeth II. And he has traveled with a U.K. trade agency to China, Cyprus and South Korea.
Early this year, Mr. Lynch gave a talk at the Cass Business School at City University London titled "Building a Brilliant Business." In April, he was elected as a fellow of the Royal Society, a 350-year-old scientific academy. And in June, he was received by the queen at Buckingham Palace as one of about 350 people invited to celebrate the success of the British technology sector.
In 1998, Mr. Lynch, then 33, became the toast of Cambridge University -- where he earned his Ph.D. in signal processing -- when he took his one-year-old artificial-intelligence software company public. He built Autonomy into Britain's biggest software maker. It later became the linchpin in H-P's attempt to reinvent itself by changing from a hardware maker to a software company.
These days, Mr. Lynch is on the lookout for new tech success stories. One of his personal bets, Blinkx, a video advertising company spun out of Autonomy, has come back to haunt him, making headlines after a Harvard professor questioned its accounting. The company says the professor's doubts are wrong.
Mr. Lynch is stepping down as a nonexecutive director at Blinkx at the end of the year because of the company's shift from what he described as a technology business to "more of an advertising business, an area I have little interest in."
Credit: By Lisa Fleisher
