For decades, Eric Loper has woken up almost every morning thinking about one thing: how to design the best golf ball on the planet.
Loper has obsessed over polymers and urethanes, the depth and shape of the dimples on its surface, and what constitutes the perfect shade of white. He looks at a ball and sees a range of scientific disciplines at work, from mechanical engineering and aerodynamics to finite element analysis and computational fluid dynamics. It's why Callaway hired him a few years ago as their senior director of golf ball research and development and gave him free rein to chase his dream.
Now, after a career that has been consumed by a 1.68-inch sphere, Loper feels as if his life's work is complete. He has built a ball with the type of speed and softness that golfers dream about.
The Callaway 2024 Chrome Tour ball flies farther and faster than other top golf balls on the market, according to company tests performed by a robot and supervised by Golf Laboratories, an independent testing lab. It also travels with more consistency and with less deviation from shot to shot. It's the ball that Xander Schauffele used when he won last month's PGA Championship and that a growing number of players will have in their bags when they tee off at this week's U.S. Open at Pinehurst in North Carolina.
"When you know what your golf ball is going to do, it just gives you confidence," says Schauffele, who worked with Callaway's engineers on the new design. "They can speak a different language than I speak, but they heard what I wanted."
To produce golf's premier ball, Loper and his team spent countless hours working with players and iterating through hundreds of different designs. Callaway poured $100 million into golf ball manufacturing, the company says, a sum that financed upgrades to their testing capabilities, funded engineers to run tests before sunrise, and, strangely enough, paid for an industrial quantity of fresh spinach.
"In the end," Loper says, "I really like making players play better golf."
Loper, 50 years old, didn't get into the industry because of a lifelong passion for the game. "It's a little embarrassing," he says. "I was not a golf nut. I did play golf. I found it incredibly difficult."
But he always knew he wanted to be an engineer because he enjoyed troubleshooting problems. And when he was looking for work after college, he found an opportunity the old-fashioned way: He responded to a classified ad in a print newspaper for a test engineer at TaylorMade.
Loper wound up spending 22 years there, until Callaway hired him away in 2020, and members of his new team say there was a clear strategic shift when he came aboard. They started to devote more time to their tour-quality products -- the high-end ones that pros use -- and less on the cheaper ones that might find their way into a pond at the local muni.
Schauffele says he was specific about the elements he wanted to improve, such as how the ball held up in the wind. He wasn't the only one. Callaway's engineers heard the same feedback from several players: Late in its flight, they were told, the ball sometimes seemed wavy and didn't hold its line.
The odd part, to the engineers, was that none of that appeared in their data. That presented them with two options. They could tell Schauffele and the players that they were wrong. Or they could trust the players and examine whether the problem was with their numbers.
They chose the latter, which turned out to be a pivotal moment in the Chrome Tour's evolution. At that time, Callaway was also building out more robust testing capabilities, including new scanning systems that could inspect a ball down to microscopic levels. Eventually the engineers could actually see what they had only heard about anecdotally. "The most important tool," Loper says, "is the ability to listen."
Another request from the players was a ball that felt slightly softer, for more control around the green. ("They don't want it to feel like a marshmallow," Loper says.) Often, though, softer also means slower -- a non-starter in an era when power reigns supreme.
Solving these problems began with simulations that use artificial intelligence, before Loper's team developed and tested prototype models. Even the smallest tweak required a new batch of tests, including when they made the bright red number on the ball slightly longer and changed the white coloring to make it brighter and less yellow.
Design changes also require people like Ryan Stefen, a senior manager of research and development, who has spent an extraordinary amount of time thinking about the size and shape of dimples. He noticed that the top of the ball had relatively shallow ones, which he thought might be causing some of the instability in flight. So he put some round dimples on the top, mixing them in with the hexagonal ones that cover the rest of the ball, which helped solve some of the aerodynamic issues that had been observed. "That," Stefen says,"was a kind of icing on the cake."
Those were hardly the only things that got overhauled. They changed the rubber system on the inside to a new polymer that enabled them to make the ball faster with the same compression. On the outside, they landed on a softer urethane cover that generates more wedge spin.
Every time they came up with a new ball, Nick Manzi knew what that meant. Once again, he would literally lose sleep over his job. "I was tired last year," Manzi says.
Manzi is in charge of the performance testing -- examining speed, spin, launch angle and apex distance -- and the robot that hits a golf ball over and over to test for consistency.
He feels that way after they spent so much time together at odd hours. There were about 200 versions of the ball, with each one requiring both Manzi and the robot's attention. To run the tests with the least wind, he would usually arrive to work at around 5:30 a.m. Sometimes he'd return at 8 p.m. that night. While Callaway has sensors that can track the wind, Manzi wanted the most controlled environment possible.
One of the other tests was slightly less formal. They called it the spinach test. To simulate what the ball looks like after rolling in grass, they'd go to the grocery store and pick up some leafy greens. Then they'd throw the spinach in a barrel with a bunch of balls and shake the whole thing up.
"We buy a lot of spinach," says Nick Lannes, a senior golf ball research and development engineer.
The design solution Loper is most proud of is also one he can't talk too much about. The typical construction of a golf ball is that there's a top and bottom half of the cover. After the core gets placed in one of them, they're pressed together and that creates a parting line that gets buffed out. That buffing process can affect the ball's dimples -- and hurt its performance depending on whether it's struck inseam or cross-seam.
Loper says they came up with a new process that significantly reduces that difference, which is backed up by the testing data. What he can't say is how they did it. That's a trade secret.
Credit: By Andrew Beaton
