Hundreds of millions more surveillance cameras will be watching the world in 2021 as governments and companies invest more in security networks, according to a new report.
The report, from industry researcher IHS Markit, said the number of cameras used for surveillance would climb above one billion by the end of 2021. That would represent an almost 30% increase from the 770 million cameras today. China would continue to account for a little more than half of the total.
Fast-growing, populous nations such as India, Brazil and Indonesia would also help drive growth in the sector, the report said. The number of surveillance cameras in the U.S. would grow to 85 million by 2021, from 70 million last year, as American schools, malls and offices seek to tighten security on their premises, IHS analyst Oliver Philippou said.
He said government programs to implement widespread video surveillance to monitor the public would be the biggest catalyst for the growth in China. City surveillance also was driving demand elsewhere.
"It's a public-safety issue," he said in an interview. "There is a big focus on crime and terrorism in recent years."
The global security-camera industry has been energized by breakthroughs in image quality and artificial intelligence. These allow better and faster facial recognition and video analytics, which governments are using to do everything from managing traffic to predicting crimes.
China leads the world in the rollout of this kind of technology. It is home to the world's largest camera makers, with its cameras on street corners, along busy roads and in residential neighborhoods.
Chinese companies Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology Co. and Dahua Technology Co. are the biggest camera manufacturers by far, accounting for almost 38% of total installations, according to the report. But there are major non-Chinese names in the business as well, including South Korean maker Hanwha Techwin, and Panasonic Corp. of Japan.
Other countries are increasingly adopting similar technologies, triggering debate on the implications and regulations of the growth of surveillance cameras. In the U.S., cities such as San Francisco and Oakland, Calif., have passed laws banning government agencies from using facial-recognition technology.
Unlike in China, city surveillance in the U.S. is only a small part of security-camera demand. Still, public monitoring is growing. Cities such as Detroit, Washington and Orlando are testing the use of facial-recognition video feeds in policing and security, according to a report this year by Georgetown University's Center on Privacy and Technology.
The U.S. rivals China in terms of security-camera penetration, with one camera for every 4.6 people, not far from China's one camera for 4.1 people.
"Coverage of the surveillance market has focused heavily on China's massive deployments of cameras and AI technology," Mr. Philippou said. "Future debate over mass surveillance is likely to concern America as much as China."
China's efforts to build an all-encompassing city surveillance network for policing and stifling dissent in its restive Xinjiang region have come under fire from human-rights activists and United Nations experts.
The House passed a bill on Tuesday requiring sanctions on officials responsible for the widespread detention of Uighurs, a Muslim minority group, in Xinjiang. China has said it would retaliate if the U.S. pressed forward with the move.
Developing countries, including India, Brazil and Indonesia, will overtake markets such as the U.K. and Japan as the world's largest markets for security cameras as CCTV networks become more affordable, Mr. Philippou said.
The Singapore police force has installed at least 80,000 cameras in key public areas, and plans to install more. Many are so-called smart cameras that are supposed to be capable of running video analytics to aid authorities in the early detection of criminal and terrorist threats, the country's minister for home affairs, K Shanmugam, said in April.
"Residents, do they respond by saying that my privacy is being violated?" he said. "In Singapore, they respond by telling us that it gives them an added measure of security."

Credit: By Liza Lin and Newley Purnell
