Tesla reported surprisingly strong earnings for the third quarter, helping the electric carmaker to regain momentum after a tumultuous start to the year in which its profit fell for two straight quarters.
Net income was $2.2 billion for the July-to-September period, a 17% increase from a year earlier and lifted in large part by higher sales of regulatory credits to other automakers and the strength of Tesla's energy business.
Global deliveries also rose in the third quarter, helping to boost revenue by 8% to $25.2 billion.
Tesla's stock was up 12% in after-hours trading Wednesday, following the earnings release and call.
Chief Executive Elon Musk, who hasn't set a sales-increase target for this year, said Wednesday that Tesla could see 20% to 30% "vehicle growth" in 2025. That increase would mark a significant improvement from this year, in which global deliveries are down nearly 6% for the first three quarters of 2024.
"These are just my best guesses," Musk said on the earnings call.
Musk confirmed Wednesday Tesla has abandoned plans for a long-awaited $25,000 electric car. The company will instead release lower-cost versions of its existing models that will be priced below $30,000 after subsidies, he added. Those cars will arrive in the first half of 2025.
After that, its next car will be the dedicated robotaxi, with no steering wheel or pedals.
"Having a regular $25,000 model is pointless," Musk said. "It would be silly"
The Austin, Texas, automaker said quarterly revenue recognized from sales of regulatory credits was its second highest ever. These credits -- essentially pure profit for Tesla -- are sold to other automakers who buy them to meet emissions requirements.
The company's energy business also stood out, achieving a record gross margin of 30.5% in the third quarter and helping to offset a decline in selling prices for many of its models.
Overall, Tesla's closely watched operating margin was 10.8%, up from 7.6% a year earlier.
The Cybertruck, which had been losing money since its launch last November, achieved a positive gross margin for the first time in the third quarter.
Tesla's core auto business remains a focus as the profit driver behind Musk's future bets on artificial intelligence and robotics. The company said it plans to spend more than $10 billion on capital expenditures this year as it expands its data centers and takes other steps to improve software core to Musk's autonomous-driving future.
Next year, Tesla plans to release a fully autonomous version of its driver-assistance technology, a feature the company calls "Full Self-Driving." Tesla will initially release the software on a test fleet of vehicles before allowing customers to download it to the cars, said Ashok Elluswamy, its vice president for Autopilot.
Tesla also plans to make its paid ride-hailing app available next year, Musk said.
Tesla's global sales got a boost in the third quarter, aided by its strong performance in China and a slew of financing deals that helped counter the impact of high interest rates. Still, its global deliveries are trailing last year's results, putting pressure on Tesla to deliver an unusually strong fourth quarter to beat 2023's performance.
Questions also remain about Tesla's ability to continue expanding its car business long term, especially as competition gets tougher in the electric-car space. The company has already resorted to price cuts and other sales promotions to help stimulate sales for some of its older models, denting its profitability in recent quarters.
Musk has urged investors to view Tesla as an AI and robotics company, arguing these technologies could boost its market value to more than $30 trillion. However, those bets are still a few years away from becoming a reality.
Credit: By Becky Peterson
