Remember when Republicans cared about budget deficits? Alas, spending discipline like free trade has fallen out of fashion on the political right. Some Republicans are now linking their robotic arms with Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer to spend hundreds of billions of dollars on artificial intelligence.
If China is "going to invest $50 billion, and we're going to invest in nothing, they'll inevitably get ahead of us," Mr. Schumer said Wednesday in unveiling a "roadmap" for AI policy with Republicans Mike Rounds and Todd Young and Democrat Martin Heinrich. Invest in nothing? Didn't Washington pass massive climate, infrastructure and semi-conductor spending bills?
Mr. Schumer used the same justification in 2022 to pass the $280 billion Chips and Science Act, though China trailed the U.S. by years in semiconductors. Now President Biden is doling out money to chip makers at campaign stops, including $19.5 billion this spring for Intel at a chip plant in Arizona.
More than half of the bill's spending was for non-chips scientific research, much of which hasn't been spent. Nonetheless, the Senate AI report calls for Congress to pass $32 billion a year in "emergency" spending for non-defense AI. What's the emergency? Perhaps the November election.
The AI report refers to recommendations of a 2021 independent national security commission on artificial intelligence. "This is not a time for abstract criticism of industrial policy or fears of deficit spending to stand in the way of progress," the commission's leaders wrote. That's what advocates of industrial policy always say.
AI innovation is accelerating. ChatGPT has undergone iterative improvements since it was first released in November 2022. As has the rest of the AI field. Mr. Schumer said Wednesday that AI is hard to regulate because it "is changing too quickly." Fair point. But then why does Washington need to subsidize it?
Goldman Sachs estimates that U.S. private investment in AI will total $82 billion next year -- more than twice as much as in China. Big tech was late to catch the AI wave. But businesses of all sizes are now using AI to develop medical treatments, improve productivity and logistics, assist customers and more.
Government has been a laggard in adopting AI, but it usually is with new technology. It's true Beijing is spending heavily to boost its AI capabilities, especially for military uses. However, one reason the U.S. leads China in innovation is that about three-quarters of R&D is directed by private industry. Beyond pure research that private actors won't do, government is a poor allocator of capital.
Much of Washington's AI spending would be redundant. Many universities that Republicans want to de-fund because of their response to antisemitism would ironically benefit from the largesse. So would progressive think tanks that want to hamstring business innovation and say AI discriminates against minorities.
Mr. Schumer appears to be trying to cajole Republicans to sign up for his AI spending binge by dangling more money for defense-related AI. "It's going to be a very large number," Mr. Schumer said. There may be an argument for Washington to spend more on AI military applications, but then Congress should simply increase the defense budget.
Now's not a time for more pork-barrel spending. The Navy could buy a lot of ships to help deter China with an additional $32 billion a year.
