I read that Brad and Angelina are redoing their kitchen, and I'm so curious to know what color scheme they are thinking of. By a freakish coincidence, my wife and I are considering a kitchen remodel, and I just know that Brad and Angelina would be wondering the same about us. Unlikely, you say? A new study agrees, pointing to the deep cognitive roots of the cool kids' indifference to the rest of us.
Watching monkeys to figure out their dominance hierarchy, scientists can learn a lot by simply noting the group's "attentional structure" -- that is, who looks at whom or stops what he's doing to track someone's actions. Overwhelmingly, it is subordinate individuals vigilantly watching dominants. After all, it's good to know if someone ranking higher than you is in a bad mood, so you can avoid him. In contrast, dominant individuals ignore the peons below.
Rhesus monkeys are willing to "pay," by forgoing the reward of some juice, to see pictures of higher-ranking individuals, but they must be paid in juice to deign to look at subordinates.
A monkey's look at a higher-ranking individual activates a brain circuit involving part of the frontal cortex (a region central to tracking outcomes of social interactions), the ventral striatum (involved in anticipation of reward) and the amygdala (involved in fear). This is no abstract exercise for a monkey but an expression of hope and anxiety: Is the appearance and rank of this other monkey good or bad news for me? These brain circuits combine to monitor the social value of other individuals.
And we're just like those monkeys. If Bill Gates stood in the next checkout line at Wal-Mart, you'd pay more attention to him than to the guy behind him. Moreover, like monkeys, we pay to look at high-status individuals and to get information about them -- for example, by subscribing to People magazine.
New research shows the similarity of the underlying neurobiology. Publishing in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Noam Zerubavel, Kevin Ochsner and colleagues at Columbia University examined what occurs in our brains when we track people's popularity. Their subjects belonged to student organizations, and each person rated the popularity of other group members. Pooling these ratings generated overall popularity rankings. Subjects then underwent functional brain imaging while looking at pictures of each group member. As in monkeys, the more popular the person pictured, the more activation of that "social evaluation" neural network (whether or not the subject liked the individual).
Interestingly, pictures of more-popular people also activated a second circuit (consisting of a different part of the frontal cortex, the precuneus and the temporoparietal junction) that mediates "mentalizing" -- that is, trying to understand someone else's thoughts and perspectives. Activating the evaluation circuit set off the mentalizing circuit. In other words, popular faces elicit signals that motivate trying to understand that person's state of mind.
Unpopular subjects fired up evaluation and mentalizing networks at almost anyone else's face. But when popular people looked at faces, no networks activated -- unless they were looking at another popular person.
Part of what makes this research fascinating is that, rather than generating status differences in some artificial experimental setting, it focuses on real-world social networks. And thus we've gained important neurobiological insights about a primatological fact most of us learned in middle school -- that we hoi polloi don't even register with the popular kids.
Credit: By Robert M. Sapolsky
