The Biden Administration is expected to unleash regulators on business. So it's good timing that the Supreme Court on Wednesday will hear a case (AMG Capital v. FTC) challenging the Federal Trade Commission's abuse of its regulatory power.
Congress has empowered the FTC to prevent, prohibit and punish "unfair or deceptive" business practices. The Federal Trade Commission Act doesn't define these terms, so the FTC is supposed to know them when it sees them. The agency increasingly sees them wherever it looks.
Consider the case of Scott Tucker, who managed companies that provided short-term loans over the internet that automatically renewed -- a common feature of financial products. In 2002 the FTC began investigating Mr. Tucker. Ten years later, with no prior notice of legal violation, the FTC sued him and his businesses.
The agency says he engaged in unfair and deceptive practices by not disclosing loan terms with sufficient clarity. The FTC asked the district court to enjoin him and his associates from making these loans and fork over $27 million in restitution, which would go to the U.S. Treasury if "direct redress" to consumers was "impracticable."
Mr. Tucker says this exceeded the FTC's legal authority, and he has a strong case. In 1973 Congress stipulated that the FTC can seek injunctions for practices that are unfair or deceptive. Congress added in 1975 that the FTC can seek monetary relief, but only when a business has violated a cease-and-desist order or rule-making that expressly prohibits a practice. The FTC must also prove in court that a "reasonable man would have known under the circumstances" that the conduct at issue "was dishonest or fraudulent."
Businesses sometimes deserve to be rapped, and the FTC can use its injunctive power to force them to take corrective action or cease certain behavior. Consumers can also file class actions. But the FTC can't dun businesses for doing what neither it nor Congress has prohibited.
Like other administrative agencies, the FTC often legislates through enforcement. But Congress provided businesses some due process by limiting when the agency can impose penalties. Starting in the Obama Administration, the agency has ignored this restraint. Since 2012 the FTC has sought monetary relief in twice as many antitrust injunctions than during the prior four decades. Between 2012 and 2018, FTC penalties increased more than 23-fold.
The FTC has sought in particular to punish pharmaceutical companies for striking "pay-for-delay" deals with generic manufacturers, which don't violate a law or rule-making even if they may lead to higher drug prices. Cardinal Health was dunned for allegedly monopolizing local wholesale drug markets. Volkswagen had to pony up billions for allegedly misleading "clean diesel" marketing.
All of this is likely to increase during the Biden Administration. Liberals have urged the FTC to crack down on tech companies that use data, facial recognition and artificial intelligence for purposes they oppose. Congress has too often abdicated its legislative power and let regulators define illegal conduct willy-nilly. The AMG case provides the Justices an opportunity to reinforce that the Constitution still protects due process.
