Facebook Inc. published on Tuesday new details about how it conducts research using the personal information it collects on Facebook users, amid a flurry of efforts to create privacy and ethical standards for corporate research involving human data.
Facebook collects data on about 1.6 billion people, including "likes" and social connections, which it uses to identify behavioral patterns such as voting habits, relationship status and how interactions with certain types of content might make people feel.
In June 2014, Facebook published a study about a 700,000-person psychological test to determine whether omitting content with words associated with positive or negative emotions could alter mood. The survey sparked controversy about the company's ethics.
In October 2014, Facebook had announced it was adding an internal review process but declined to divulge specifics.
Because "the issues of how to deal with research in an industry setting aren't unique to Facebook," the company decided to release more details, said Molly Jackman, Facebook's public-policy research manager and co-author of the paper published in Washington and Lee Law Review.
To assess the ethical impact of each research effort, the Menlo Park, Calif., company has established a five-person standing group of Facebook employees, including experts in law and ethics.
The company declined to identify the five members of the board, which can consult outside experts if deemed necessary.
If a manager determines that a research project deals with sensitive topics such as mental health, the study gets a detailed review by the group to weigh risks and benefits, as well as to consider whether it is in line with consumers' expectations of how their information is stored.
Managers have the authority to simply approve proposals that they deem more innocuous. Which research gets a full review is up to the discretion of the manager.
The review group is modeled on the institutional review boards, or IRBs, that assess the ethics of human-subject research at academic institutions.
Facebook hired longtime Stanford University IRB manager Lauri Kanerva, who co-wrote the paper, to oversee its research review process.
The publication comes as tech companies are grappling with how to ensure the ethical conduct of research using their customers' personal data.
Dealing with research ethics is "definitely an emerging field that everyone in the industry is struggling with," said Joetta Bell, senior compliance program manager at Microsoft Corp., who led the ethical review board that the company's Microsoft Research arm launched in 2015.
The amount of information Facebook collects on people enables their researchers to study a "deeper and broader" cross-section of the population than ever before, said Jeremy Birnholtz, a communications professor at Northwestern University who worked at Facebook last year as a research fellow studying the company's data.
Tech companies are increasingly hiring academics from fields ranging from the life sciences to artificial intelligence to mine social-media data, internet searches, purchasing behavior and publicly available data sets to improve their products, place ads and track health trends.
Last week, for instance, Microsoft published a study that suggests that search queries could provide clues that a person might have cancer, even before a diagnosis. In 2013, the company used searches to detect adverse effects of drugs.
Government officials are proposing changes to federal policies that regulate human research, known as the Common Rule that would, among other things, make it easier for research participants to give scientists broad consent to use their data and tissue samples for future studies.
But that regulation "doesn't apply to private companies such as Facebook, which don't accept any federal research funds," said Michelle Meyer, the director of bioethics policy for the Clarkson-Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai bioethics program.
"Certainly, tech companies have not had IRBs," which are often regarded as bureaucratic, said Duncan Watts, a principal researcher at Microsoft Research. But that is changing, he said.
Some, including gene-sequencing company 23andMe, hire an external IRB to vet the majority of their research proposals, according to 23andMe's Vice President of research Joyce Tung. Its review process has been in place since about 2008.
Microsoft and wearables maker Fitbit Inc. also contract with external IRBs for some of their research projects. The rest largely are reviewed internally. A subset of Fitbit's research undergoes an ethics review described in a report published in collaboration with the Center for Democracy and Technology in May.
"Within the entire industry, there's a lot of people doing experiments, and there's no visibility on how they're doing it," said Fitbit's vice president of research Shelten Yuen. "We wanted to disseminate [our process] . . . so that startups wouldn't have to reinvent this for themselves."
Credit: By Daniela Hernandez and Deepa Seetharaman
