NEW DELHI -- Vishal Sikka resigned Friday as chief executive of Infosys Ltd., citing a resistance to change at the company that deteriorated into ugly accusations of mismanagement at India's second-largest software and outsourcing company.
The Bangalore-based company said Mr. Sikka had the support of the board but had been harassed into leaving by Infosys founder N.R. Narayana Murthy, who it claims tried to slander Mr. Sikka in letters to the media.
"Mr. Murthy's continuous assault . . . is the primary reason the CEO, Dr. Vishal Sikka, has resigned," Infosys said in a news release Friday.
Responding to the statement Friday, Mr. Murthy said he is simply concerned about how the company he founded and left voluntarily in 2014 has been managed, and hasn't been trying to get money or control of Infosys.
"I am extremely anguished by the allegations, tone and tenor of the statements," he said in comments released to local media. "My concern primarily was the deteriorating standard of corporate governance which I have repeatedly brought to the notice of the Infosys board."
Earlier this year, Infosys hired international law firm Gibson Dunn to investigate allegations -- some circulated anonymously -- of impropriety and governance issues ranging from how a couple of acquisitions were done to Mr. Sikka's compensation and travel expenses. Gibson Dunn found no evidence of wrongdoing.
Mr. Sikka said the battle was undermining Infosys's operation and staff morale.
"It is an untenable situation," he said in a news conference in which he appeared through a video link from America. "I don't want to do this anymore." He will stay on as executive vice chairman. Pravin Rao, a 30-year Infosys veteran, will serve as interim CEO while the company searches for a replacement.
Mr. Sikka was appointed in 2014, becoming the first outsider ever to head the company. He was scouted from software companySAP SE to upgrade Infosys -- a trailblazer of the outsourcing model and one of India's largest and most profitable companies. In recent years, it has struggled to adjust to new technology trends -- such as cloud computing, automation and artificial intelligence -- and has faced political headwinds as some in the U.S. and the U.K. have questioned the value of outsourcing.
The company was hoping that Mr. Sikka could makeInfosysan industry trendsetter again. Instead, it seems he faced unrelenting resistance, leading to anonymous letters making claims against Mr. Sikka and others.
"The constant drumbeat of the same issues over and over again, while ignoring and undermining the good work that has been done, take the excitement and passion out of this amazing journey," he said in his resignation email, which was released by the company.
---
Karan Deep Singh contributed to this article.

Credit: By Eric Bellman
