When Bitcoin began its crazy run-up this month, I was pleased to discover the $100 investment I made on a lark in 2014 suddenly was worth $1,200. Free money! And just in time for some holiday shopping.
But it's harder to spend Bitcoin in New York City than one might expect.
Determined to shop local with my little windfall, I tried a gift shop, grocery, pet store and kitchen-supply joint. None accepted Bitcoin, and the clerks looked a little creeped out when I asked.
I found several prospects on Coinmap, an online directory of businesses that accept Bitcoin. But if these shops took Bitcoin in the past, they sure don't now -- most were out of business.
A more recent listing looked promising: something called "the Bitcoin Store" in lower Manhattan. When I clicked on its website, however, I was startled to encounter a wide selection of drugs including XTC, codeine syrup and "High Grade Premium Quality Cocaine."
"Well," said a friend, "there's your Christmas shopping!"
Experts say it's no surprise most stores still refuse Bitcoin.
Amine Rahal, founder of digital-marketing firm IronMonk Solutions, tells clients that they can increase sales by accepting Bitcoin. "A lot of people these days have more Bitcoin than they have dollars," he notes.
But while it's as simple as accepting PayPal -- thanks to Bitcoin payment-processing services, shoppers can simply select a Bitcoin-payment option and send money from their online Bitcoin wallet -- "most small businesses are super busy, and when it comes to new technology they are intimidated," he says.
Bitcoin has drawbacks, says Patrick Chen, the founder of tech shop xCubicle who sold me my original Bitcoin. During high-volume periods, processing speeds slow down, while transaction fees climb, making small, in-store purchases impractical.
BitPay is among the most popular processing services that accept Bitcoin payments for retailers and convert it into U.S. currency. The fee is 1%, compared with 2-3% typically charged by credit-card companies. However, the Bitcoin system itself charges an additional fee for transactions.
During low-volume periods, the fee often is just a few cents per transaction. But in recent weeks, when supply has outstripped demand, it can cost $10 or more, according to BitPay. In many cases, the customer pays this in the form of a transaction charge tacked on by his wallet provider.
Still, there are a few area outfits that happily accept Bitcoin. Bullion Exchanges, a precious-metals retailer in Manhattan's Diamond District, offers a small discount to those who pay in Bitcoin rather than a credit card.
Visiting the tiny storefront last week, I told clerk and managing partner Ben Tseytlin about my windfall, now worth $1,800. "You could buy a gold coin with that," he said.
I wouldn't be the first to swap Bitcoin for gold.
"We've done more Bitcoin business in the past two weeks than we have all year," says Eric Gozenput, another managing partner at Bullion Exchange. "It's gone up 2,000%, so people are moving it into something underperforming."
Most business owners who accept Bitcoin, like Mr. Gozenput, are Bitcoin enthusiasts. "It was to show support for cryptocurrencies," says Tom Capo, owner of KPODJ Lighting & DJ Gear in Hopatcong, N.J., of his decision to accept Bitcoin.
Only a few customers have paid in Bitcoin, he says. "But if 1% of our transactions in 2018 are cryptocurrencies, I think it would be really cool."
My best bet looked to be Astro West, an Upper West Side shop offering minerals, meteorites and fossils. Who wouldn't want a piece of the asteroid belt for Christmas?
Gemologist Filip Klein, decked out in a three-piece suit and long braid, showed me mineral formations in a big display case, including a $600 azurite, a gigantic $45,000 amethyst and a spectacular $500,000 tourmaline. He also shared his pet Bitcoin theory. Some say the currency was invented by an artificial intelligence.
"By getting us to build computers and do more Bitcoin mining, we're building the body of the artificial intelligence," he said. "It's terrifying."
Astro West owner Marc Tanjeloff declared himself a Bitcoin skeptic. Like many retailers, he only accepts Bitcoin online, using a service that immediately converts it to U.S. dollars. "Cash is still king," he says. "And wire transfers are better."
I never managed to spend my Bitcoin, but no matter -- my $100 investment just hit $2,360. And if I hang on, Mr. Chen tells me, it is likely to be worth 50 times that.
Meteorites for everybody!
---
anne.kadet@wsj.com

Credit: By Anne Kadet
