[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
For China, technological leadership is an existential issue.
The world's second-largest economy has a lot of problems: heavy debt, a rapidly aging population and increasing hostility from its largest trading partner, the U.S. Yet the nation's dynamic information-technology sector is a reason for optimism.
Recent research from the International Monetary Fund highlights just how important this growth driver has become in recent years -- and how critical it is to the country's future.
Technological innovation is key to all economies, but the fate of China's high-productivity IT sector has taken on outsize importance. One reason is the government's failure in recent years to push through reforms that would boost the productivity of the rest of the economy.
Meaningful interest-rate reform remains in limbo. State-enterprise reform, previously aimed at shrinking the inefficient state sector, is now primarily about shoring it up. And a shadow-banking crackdown has choked off private-sector financing without offering an effective alternative.
Many private companies -- previously China's real growth engine -- are suffering. The exceptions are often big-data, artificial-intelligence, network-technology companies and the like, in part because they align with the political goals of monitoring-obsessed Beijing.
China's IT sector also is key to addressing two other big problems facing the country: a declining labor force and fewer high-return investment opportunities.
One of the central questions on China's future is where the country's massive savings can be productively invested. For its income level, China already has exemplary infrastructure and a lot of apartment buildings. Capital Economics estimated last year that mainland China's capital stock per capita in 2014 was already around three times as high as Taiwan's was in 1977, when the island was at the same income level.
The IT sector offers a solution: investment in robots, computational firepower and network infrastructure to better use scarcer human work hours. China needs to find ways to employ its shrinking labor force more efficiently in the years ahead.
An analysis by Longmei Zhang and Sally Chen at the IMF finds that the contribution of digital technology to overall Chinese productivity growth already has been substantial over the past decade. Without continued rapid growth in the digital economy -- including both the upgrading of traditional sectors to incorporate IT and the growth of IT industries themselves -- China will struggle to sustain GDP growth above 5% by the mid-2020s, according to their calculations.
Nothing less than the continued success of China's economic model depends on its capacity for innovation and the health of tech giants such as Huawei, Alibaba and Tencent. One implication for outsiders is that Beijing is unlikely to give much ground on its IT-heavy industrial policy, even if aspects of that are counterproductive. Unless China can find a way to allay concerns over security and fair play -- and the U.S. can grudgingly accept China's technological rise -- further clashes with the U.S. seem inevitable.

Credit: By Nathaniel Taplin
