Warner Music Group Corp. plans to layoff about 4% of its global workforce, according to a memo from new Chief Executive Robert Kyncl, citing the need to reposition the company toward technology.
The job cuts mark the first major strategic move made by Mr. Kyncl, who joined the company in January after departing Alphabet Inc.'s YouTube as its business chief. About 270 jobs will be eliminated.
Mr. Kyncl said the company is reallocating resources toward new skills for artist and songwriter development. His appointment was seen as a bet on tech development as the music industry increasingly looks to social media, gaming, the metaverse and artificial intelligence for licensing opportunities and future revenue growth beyond streaming.
"I want to be clear that this is not a blanket cost-cutting exercise," Mr. Kyncl said in the memo to the company's staff. He said the company is reducing discretionary spending and open positions.
Warner Music, the third-largest major music company, is home to superstars including Ed Sheeran and Madonna. Shares in the company, which went public in 2020, rose less than 1% to $32.63 on Wednesday.
In February, the company reported lower earnings for its first quarter amid weakness in the recorded music division. In a letter to investors at the time, Mr. Kyncl pointed to a challenging business environment but said the company expected to have a strong release schedule in the second half of the year while managing costs.
Warner Music owns labels including Atlantic, Elektra and its flagship Warner Records, as well as Warner Chappell Music, the third-largest music publisher by revenue. The company's roster includes Lizzo, Dua Lipa, Coldplay and Prince. It also owns the catalogs of David Guetta and David Bowie.
Also Wednesday, Warner Music announced changes in its U.K. operations, including Isabel Garvey, known for her work at Abbey Road Studios, taking on a newly created chief operating officer role. At the company's Parlophone Records label in the U.K., the co-presidents and general manager will depart, the company said.
In January, Spotify Technology SA said it would lay off about 600 employees, or roughly 6% of its workforce, as part of broader cost-cutting measures after the streaming company went on a spending spree during the pandemic. The streaming giant also shook up its top ranks, with a top architect of its podcast strategy departing and the company reorganizing under two longtime executives.
Credit: By Anne Steele
