Last week, a group of Chinese startup founders and investors made a pilgrimage to Silicon Valley. They toured a Tesla assembly line, complained to senior Apple executives about its slow app-reviewing process in China, and brunched on baked eggs and avocado at Russian billionaire investor Yuri Milner's mansion.
Silicon Valley has loomed large in China's tech world in the past two decades. China's internet industry started by copying Silicon Valley technologies and business models. That's why there's the Google of China (Baidu), the Uber of China (Didi Chuxing Technology) and the Groupon of China (Meituan-Dianping). Some of the biggest Chinese internet companies, such as e-commerce giant Alibaba Group Holding, were funded by Silicon Valley money.
So the trip to Silicon Valley is something of a rite for ambitious Chinese startups and investors looking for inspiration in global technology's mecca of innovation.
But for most of the 18 entrepreneurs and investors, and especially for those in their 20s and 30s, the visit largely failed to impress. To many in the group, Northern California's low-rise buildings looked shabbier than the glitzy skyscrapers in Beijing and Shenzhen. They can't believe Americans still use credit cards and cash while they use mobile payment for almost everything back home. Office buildings don't use facial recognition to gain entry.
As China's internet companies have become more competitive and confident, Silicon Valley's allure is fading. "The age that Silicon Valley serves as the teacher and China follows step by step is becoming the past, at an accelerating pace," Li Gen, founder of online media startup QbitAI in Beijing, wrote about the trip on his company's official WeChat social-media account.
That feeling was reinforced throughout their trip. Mr. Milner, an early Facebook investor who has also backed big Chinese startups, told his brunch guests that China leads the world in mobile payments, e-commerce and online services.
At several meetings, presentations included slides showing the volumes of China's online meal delivery and mobile payments are many times that of the volumes in the U.S. Their slides also said e-commerce makes up more than 20% of China's retail revenue while making up less than 15% in the U.S.
"I've read about this before from the media and wasn't sure if it's for real," says Ding Jichang, founder and chief executive of Mobiuspace, a mobile app developer. "Now I know we're not self-delusional."
That Chinese entrepreneurs had to travel to the U.S. for a shot of confidence about their tech prowess isn't so strange. China blocks Facebook, Google's search engine and some other U.S. internet services while Chinese companies are hitting barriers in the U.S. too. As a result, the biggest companies in the two markets rarely compete head-to-head.
Last week's tour was put together by Kai-Fu Lee, CEO of Beijing-based venture firm Sinovation Ventures and former head of Google China. Mr. Lee believes China has the talent to go head-to-head with the U.S. in the next important tech frontier: artificial intelligence.
Still, Mr. Lee thinks Chinese tech entrepreneurs have much to learn and should be less focused on financial results and on going public. He tried to expose the group to the more creative side of Silicon Valley, arranging for them to listen to futuristic ideas at Singularity University. Think tank co-founder Peter Diamandis wowed the group with his asteroid-mining venture, Planetary Resources, in which Sinovation Ventures is an investor.
They were wowed again when meeting with two startup founders funded by Coatue Management, a hedge fund. One of the founders, a serial entrepreneur working on an artificial-intelligence chip startup, told the group that his firm has spent $30 million in two years on research and development and won't have a product until later this year.
While the few older 40-somethings in the group admired Silicon Valley's idealism, the younger ones were less impressed. They said that moonshot ideas and long development times don't work in China because investors are less patient and copycats are so rife that businesses have to get products to market superfast.
"China is like a startup. The U.S. is like a big corporation," says Mr. Ding, whose company is developing an app to improve video-watching. "China runs very fast, tweaking along the way. The U.S. runs at a steady pace, doing a lot of research and development. It's hard to tell who will win in the end."

Credit: By Li Yuan
