Google's advertising sales fell short of Wall Street's expectations, sending shares falling despite strong growth in other areas of the search giant's business.
Google recorded $65.5 billion of total advertising sales in the fourth quarter, an increase of 11% from the same period last year. Those financial results missed analyst expectations but were a marked turnaround from a year ago, when Google reported its first drop in ad revenue since the beginning of the pandemic.
Alphabet, parent company of Google, reported fourth-quarter revenue of $86.3 billion, up more than 13% from the same period last year. The results marked the company's fourth straight quarter of accelerating sales growth.
Google's ad and cloud-computing businesses have faced heightened scrutiny following recent earnings reports, as the company attempts to overcome the perception that it has fallen behind rivals in artificial intelligence while trying to maintain business growth.
Sales in Google's cloud-computing business climbed 26%, recovering somewhat following a disappointing third quarter that some investors viewed as a sign of weak demand for the company's AI services. Revenue in that unit increased to $9.2 billion, reversing a slowdown in growth.
Google's shares, which had gained about 10% this year through Tuesday's close, dropped more than 5% in after-hours trading.
Google is pouring resources into artificial-intelligence systems, an area that has also captivated fellow tech giants such as Meta Platforms and Microsoft. Alphabet reported operating income of $23.7 billion, an increase of 30% from the fourth quarter last year.
The company recently signaled plans to continue a cost-cutting drive that has stretched for more than a year. It laid off hundreds of employees this month, including in its digital-assistant and hardware divisions.
Alphabet Chief Executive Sundar Pichai told employees this month they should expect additional cuts throughout the year, though the reductions won't reach the same scale as last year's layoffs affecting 12,000 employees.
Speaking to analysts Tuesday, Pichai cited the reorganization of the hardware division as an example of efforts to simplify the company, saying the changes would help the company pool resources behind its own line of phones and smartwatches.
Alphabet Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat said a division that develops new companies in high-tech areas would be spinning out more startups as independent businesses with backing from external investors. In the past, the incubation unit had largely spun out new startups under Alphabet's ownership.
Porat said she expects capital expenditures, which includes hardware such as the chips powering AI programs, to be "notably larger" in 2024 compared with last year.
Alphabet reported full-year revenue of $307.4 billion, up 8.7% from the previous 12 months. The company's operating profit rose 13% to $84.3 billion for the full year.
YouTube, the Google-owned video platform, made advertising revenue of $9.2 billion, an increase of 16% from the same period last year.
Pichai said the company's annual subscription revenue reached $15 billion, an increase of five times in the same number of years.
That includes services like the online cable bundle YouTube TV and Google One, a consumer cloud storage offering.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
