QXO, a new player in building-products distribution, is taking a technology-first approach in a sector where many deals still happen over the phone, naming a chief artificial-intelligence officer with plans for a Silicon Valley presence.
The unsexy, under-the-radar building-products distribution industry, which involves buying construction materials like plumbing supplies, HVAC systems and lumber wholesale and selling them to contractors, is ripe for disruption, said QXO Chairman and Chief Executive Brad Jacobs, who has built multibillion-dollar companies in logistics and other sectors through acquisitions.
As part of that push, QXO named Ashwin Rao as its first chief AI officer. The founder of AI startup CX Score, who was formerly Target's first-ever vice president of AI, starts Monday. His plans include opening a QXO office in Silicon Valley and tapping industry connections to build out the company's new AI team, which could ultimately consist of a few dozen people.
Rao will apply advanced AI to inventory management and demand forecasting -- the same goal he had at Target in 2016, which remains a challenge.
"We will employ a lot of domain knowledge along with AI to solve the problem. So I think having the talent that understands AI and operations will help us do it faster, cheaper, more efficiently," Rao said.
While AI can make predictions based on historical data sets, results can be choppy because the world keeps changing, Rao said. The demand patterns of two months ago might be different after an election, fluctuations in the macroeconomy, a pandemic or even a competitor having a going-out-of-business sale. The growing ability of AI to process larger and larger data sets will help, he said.
Using AI to offer a better, more-personalized e-commerce experience as well as using tools like copilots for internal workplace efficiencies will also be top of mind, Rao said.
The $800 billion building-materials distribution industry has been slower to modernize than other sectors, said Jennifer Castenson, vice president at construction management software company Buildxact.
Many sales are still done over the phone, in person or via fax machine, and software systems can be decades old, she said. Although that makes the process slower, companies are hesitant to automate because they see personal contact as important to their competitive advantage, she added.
Rao said a talent shortage is another reason the industry hasn't evolved faster: Top AI minds typically want to work at trendy, high-paying companies like Google or Goldman Sachs rather than help sell pipes and toilets.
Jacobs said a large technology budget, top-tier talent and the same strategy he used to attack the logistics sector are poised to help QXO capture market share quickly. Jacobs didn't specify the size of the budget, but he noted that at his previous company, supply-chain heavyweight XPO, the tech budget was over $500 million before the company's two spinoffs.
Jacobs built XPO through a series of splashy acquisitions before effectively unwinding the business and spinning it out into three separate publicly traded companies.
In December, Jacobs and others agreed to invest about $1 billion into a small, publicly traded software company, SilverSun Technologies, and renamed it QXO. The company, which has yet to make any acquisitions in the building-materials sector yet, has raised another $4.1 billion in two private placements from investors including Jared Kushner.
Jacobs expects QXO to grow to $50 billion in revenue over the next decade.
More-established companies in the industry also have been investing in better technology. Ferguson Enterprises, which had almost $30 billion in sales last year, recently started implementing a new third-party inventory management system that leverages AI for more detailed and accurate inventory forecasts, said Ferguson's senior vice president of supply chain, Michael Jacobs.
"It's using technology as an enabler, not the only driver of our connections with our customers," he said.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
