OCWEN FINANCIAL
Job Cuts Represent
10% of Workforce
Ocwen Financial Corp. plans to cut about 300 residential servicing jobs at its Waterloo, Iowa, facility, accounting for about 10% of its total U.S. workforce.
The mortgage-servicing company said the employees can apply for jobs at other Ocwen facilities and will try to lease out half of the building.
After more than a year of problems with regulators, Ocwen has worked to sell some of its mortgage-servicing rights and concentrate on mortgages that are not owned by government agencies.
In May, the company said it would discontinue residential-servicing operations at its Houston facility, affecting about 140 employees.
-- Chelsey Dulaney
---
CARL ICAHN
New Website for
Investor to Air Views
Billionaire investor Carl Icahn is launching another website to make his views known.
The new site, CarlIcahn.com, adds to a series of websites and social media accounts on which Mr. Icahn periodically posts commentaries and announcements that fall under public disclosure rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
By far, Mr. Icahn is most active on Twitter, where @Carl_C_Icahn describes himself as "Chairman of Icahn Enterprises LP; etc., etc.," and boasts that while "some people get rich studying artificial intelligence. Me, I make money studying natural stupidity."
It was on Twitter that Mr. Icahn said he would accept the Treasury secretary nomination if Donald Trump were elected president, an offer he previously had said on his blog that he would turn down, saying: "I am flattered but do not get up early enough in the morning to accept this opportunity."
-- Maria Armental
---
MORTGAGES
Average Rates Fall
Average fixed mortgage rates in the U.S. fell in the latest week, according to Freddie Mac. For the week ended Thursday, the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage averaged 3.86%, compared with 3.91% a week earlier. Rates on 15-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 3.08%, from 3.11%.
---
MONEY FUNDS
Assets Increase
Assets in money-market funds rose $13.96 billion in the week that ended Wednesday, as a net increase in institutional money-market funds offset a decline in retail funds, according to the Investment Company Institute.
