Venture capitalists during the pandemic pumped billions of dollars into startups applying digital technologies to healthcare. Making a return on those investments has proven difficult.
Interest in sectors such as telemedicine propelled record venture investment in U.S. digital-health startups, which raised $29.2 billion in 2021, according to Rock Health, an investor in the sector.
Funding slipped the next two years as acquisitions declined and interest rates rose. In 2023, venture firms put $10.7 billion into digital health, Rock Health said.
This year, investment is rebounding as artificial intelligence draws investors to the industry. The $5.7 billion that digital-health startups raised in the first half puts this year on track to top last year's total and the $8.2 billion collected in 2019, Rock Health said.
Cashing out of investments has been difficult because relatively few startups are going public or being acquired. The number of acquisitions of U.S. companies has declined each of the past two years and is on pace to fall further in 2024.
Acquirers purchased 278 digital-health companies in 2021 but that fell to 147 in 2023 and 66 in the first half of this year, according to Rock Health. Two digital-health companies staged IPOs in the first half, an increase from zero in all of 2023, the firm said.
"There's tremendous potential of what can happen in the space," said Dennis McWilliams, a managing director with Sante Ventures. "But if we're going to build a healthy ecosystem, we need to see liquid dollars coming back to investors."
Startups often face headwinds when selling into the medical system, McWilliams said. Each segment -- healthcare providers, insurers, patients and physicians -- has its own dynamics, and cracking the code of selling effectively to each is challenging, he added.
One problem for virtual-care companies is that consumers often can switch easily from one to the next, said Charlotte Ross, a partner with venture investor Inspired Capital. "When you think about the moats for companies that deliver care virtually, there aren't many," Ross said.
Many digital-health startups have some traction but not enough to generate escape velocity, or momentum that catalyzes an acquisition, IPO or sizable venture financing, said Craig Schedler, a managing director of Northwestern Mutual Future Ventures. "You have a large number of startups in this quiet struggle," he added.
Much of the increase in first-half investment stems from investment in AI. Investors see opportunity to apply the technology to make healthcare more efficient, effective and to improve research and drug discovery. One in three digital-health dollars invested in the first half went to startups using AI, Rock Health said.
With so many startups pitching themselves as AI-enabled, investors must determine which companies have a true competitive advantage, such as a proprietary data set.
"Everyone is trying to call themselves an AI company, so it's really important to dig deeper and find out, 'What does that mean?,' " said Rachel Feinman, managing director of TGH Ventures.
The conventional venture-capital playbook of bringing new technology to a legacy industry is harder to use with AI because most large, incumbent businesses already have an AI strategy, said Matt Bettonville, who leads digital-health investments for venture investor Yosemite.
Generate image description

Credit: By Brian Gormley
