PRAGUE -- The head of the U.K.'s Secret Intelligence Service said Russian President Vladimir Putin is under pressure as fissures in his inner circle appear and his forces have little chance of regaining momentum in Ukraine.
In a rare public speech, Richard Moore, who heads the spy agency known as MI6, said Putin's offer of clemency to Yevgeny Prigozhin after the mercenary leader's march on Moscow was "humiliating" for the Russian leader.
Prigozhin seems to still be at large and there are "deep fractures" in the elite circle around Putin, Moore said.
Wagner's operations in Africa appear to continue to be functioning, but the group is no longer active in Ukraine, he said.
The British intelligence chief said he remains hopeful Ukraine can gain the upper hand as "there appears now to be little prospect of the Russian forces regaining momentum." In the past month, Ukraine has recovered more territory than Russia captured in the past year, Moore said, urging Western allies to arm Ukraine for as long as it takes. Ukraine's counteroffensive is progressing slowly in an attempt to keep losses down, he said.
Moore, who like his predecessors is referred to by the initial "C" and has headed MI6 since 2020, made a public call for Russians to spy on the Kremlin to avoid being on the "wrong side of history."
"I invite them to do what others already have done this past 18 months and join hands with us," he said. "Our door is always open."
The spy chief criticized countries backing Russia. He singled out Iran for selling weapons to Moscow for cash. He also called out African dictatorships that pay Russian mercenaries. He asked if the mercenaries could be trusted."If Russian mercenaries can betray Putin, who else might they betray?" Moore said. "If they advance on Moscow, what other capitals might they threaten?"
China remains the main priority for MI6 and the agency devotes more resources to that country than anywhere else, Moore said.
In particular, the spy agency is worried about Beijing's ability to collect vast amounts of data from around the globe to build highly advanced machine-learning tools and artificial intelligence. "China benefits from sheer scale," he said, adding that it had, for example, forced countries to hand over health data in return for accessing Chinese-made Covid-19 vaccines.
China's diplomatic ties with Moscow remain firm, Moore said, but the relationship is becoming increasingly lopsided, with the Kremlin more subservient to Beijing as the war progresses.
The reason behind Putin's decision to cut a deal with Prigozhin to allow him to flee with his life to Belarus was one "even the chief of MI6 finds a bit difficult to interpret," said Moore. That deal with Prighozin still holds, he said. Putin's grip on power remains and there doesn't appear to be any threat to it, but "he has to realize that something is pretty rotten" within the Russian system, he said.
Credit: By Max Colchester
