For a long time, for many tech companies, the idea of getting a listing, especially on Nasdaq, was one of their highest goals. In the past few years, though, more companies are choosing to stay private or delay their listings.
Meanwhile, Nasdaq is implementing a big change in the form of blockchain -- a system that underpins the digital currency bitcoin and allows companies to make and verify transactions on a network instantaneously without a central authority.
For a look at what these changes might mean, The Wall Street Journal's Gerard Baker spoke with the chief executive officer of Nasdaq, Bob Greifeld. Here are edited excerpts of their conversation.
MR. BAKER: The phenomenon we've seen in this tech boom is the unicorn -- companies that don't go public, don't list. Or at least they delay their listings. Some of them are already enormous companies. They are weighing out very carefully the pros and cons of a listing, the onerous reporting requirements, against the demand for liquidity. How do you see it?
MR. GREIFELD: We typically counsel companies to think long and hard about going public. When you go public, you're obviously taking in money from shareholders who don't know you. Your reporting requirement as a result of that is quite onerous. And because they don't know you, they have to buy into a fundamental investment thesis. And that investment thesis better match your business model, and that communication has to be clear.
Now that business model does not have to say I'm going to make X% growth quarter after quarter in profits. It could be a model that talks about a story, but then you have to deliver on that story.
As I like to say, as a CEO of a public company, I get my report card every three months, right? We have to report every three months. And if you're not ready for that scrutiny, then you should wait until you are in fact ready to go there. So in terms of the companies that have gone public, that have been successful, the investment thesis matches the operation of the business.
MR. BAKER: Let's talk about China. Nasdaq was a favored destination for a lot of Chinese companies. Companies have pulled out, partly because of some reporting issues and partly because of some scandals there.
What's going on? Are investors more wary of some of these Chinese companies? Are the Chinese companies themselves more nervous?
MR. GREIFELD: We had a rush of Chinese companies that came to market, that did not fully understand the reporting regime and the scrutiny they would be under. So we had a period of delisting of those companies. [Now] our pipeline for Chinese companies coming to the U.S. is as strong as it's been in half a decade. A decade ago, it was really very ebullient in terms of companies rushing to come to the U.S. It's not that, but I think it's at a healthy level.
We think we'll come out with something approaching 10 Chinese companies listing in the U.S. in 2016. That's, I think, a healthy number. And in the context of the fact that the overall U.S. IPO market has been depressed, as a percent it's quite healthy.
MR. BAKER: There had been some issues with a number of very prominent companies, most recently Alibaba, announcing that it was subject to an SEC investigation of some of its accounting practices. Is this raising broader concerns about the reliability of reporting in China?
MR. GREIFELD: I don't know any details on Alibaba, but I think it's also a little bit unfair to say, wow, a Chinese company has a reporting issue, because we would have a very, very long list of American companies that have had reporting issues.
MR. BAKER: But there were a succession of Chinese companies.
MR. GREIFELD: We went through that phase five or six years ago. I think we're at a healthy balance today. We have many companies that have to learn as they go along and get better at reporting.
MR. BAKER: Let's move on to some broader technology questions. Tell us how you are changing. You've talked a lot very excitedly about blockchain and the changes that it's making to the way you can work. Tell us a bit about how that's affecting Nasdaq.
MR. GREIFELD: With respect to Nasdaq, I've always felt that we are a technology company. If you take away the imprimatur, or the exchange license, we're a transaction-processing business. In buzzy terms, we run our business in the cloud. It's software as a service, we get paid per use.
We're on the cusp of a golden age of technology, and it feels exciting. Blockchain and machine learning are really going to change the world that we live in. [With blockchain] you can obviate the need for the trusted intermediaries. And when you start thinking in those terms, it's amazing how many trusted intermediaries there are. That whole middle layer that exists and represents friction in the system will go away.
The first real thing we did with blockchain was in Nasdaq Private Market. In December, we did a trade, a liquidity event, where we traded, settled, cleared and moved the money in 10 minutes. That sounds interesting. It sounds great when you see if you bought or sold Apple that day, it would take three days.
In terms of the limitations of blockchain today, it can handle about 10 transactions per second. In the trading in our market today, we handle millions of transactions a second. So it's apples and oranges. I think where blockchain will come in on the transaction side is when the volume of trading and activity is less active and there's more dimensions to the order.
So, an equity trade is the easiest thing in the world because you've got to buy a thousand shares of Apple at a price. As you get into over-the-counter instruments, derivative instruments, you have a whole series of dimensions to it. And that would be more appropriate for blockchain.
Credit: By Gerard Baker
