ABOARD THE NOBLE BULLY 1 IN THE GULF OF MEXICO -- This new type of drill ship developed by Royal Dutch Shell PLC to help extract oil at once-inaccessible ocean depths, doesn't look anything like a conventional vessel of its kind.
Equipped with a new generation of digital technologies, the Noble Bully 1 -- a 30,270-gross-ton behemoth as long as two football fields -- can guide a 21.5-inch-wide drill bit thousands of feet below the water's surface to the center of a target about four square feet in size.
The ship's design helps Shell drill wells faster, more safely and at a lower cost than ever before, and is part of the technological revolution fueling North America's oil-and-gas boom, increasing the continent's energy independence.
These new technologies haven't dispelled all Shell's production challenges. On Wednesday, the company was struggling to rescue a drilling rig that ran aground this week in rough waters off the Alaska coast.
But innovations in information technology, including powerful new data-imaging tools and predictive analytics, are making it possible for companies like Shell, BP PLC and Chevron Corp. to map and exploit previously uncharted oil-and-gas fields locked in shale and "tight" rock formations, or buried far below the ocean floor and obscured by thick layers of salt.
"Since I started out, the water has gotten deeper, the wells have gotten deeper and the technology has gotten much more challenging," says David Loeb, Shell's deep-water operations manager in the Gulf of Mexico, who joined the company in 1975.
Seven to eight feet narrower and 160 to 260 feet shorter than conventional offshore drilling vessels, the Noble Bully 1 can operate in depths of 150 feet to 8,250 of water -- and as deep as 12,000 feet, with some safety upgrades. Shell says it can drill as much as 40,000 feet below the seafloor. A second ship using the same design, the Noble Bully 2, operates off the coast of Brazil.
Shell says it hasn't had a major spill in more than 30 years of deep-water drilling, but on Tuesday it reported that one of its drilling rigs, the Kulluk, struck an island about 300 miles southwest of Anchorage.
No injuries or spills were reported as Shell and the Coast Guard began salvage operations, but the accident handed ammunition to critics of Arctic drilling, who say the region's extreme weather and remoteness makes the chances oil spills and worker injuries there too high.
The Noble Bully 1's main distinguishing feature is its fully enclosed white tower, which replaces the open-derrick structure that has been used in oil rigs for generations and looks something like a smaller version of the Eiffel Tower. The enclosed tower encompasses two hoists -- one for active drilling, and the other for linking together 40-foot sections of pipe to create drill pipes that extend from the ship into the earth, miles below.
Although smaller, Shell says the Bully has as much thrusting power and storage capacity as conventional drilling ships.
The Bully's technology, which includes built-in GPS, wind sensors, motion sensors and compasses, a hydraulic system, and computer-controlled thruster propellers on the bottom of the vessel, allows Shell to drill wells with new precision.
Mr. Loeb helped conceive and now manages the Bully, which was developed by Shell and Frontier Drilling, now owned by Noble Corp. It is drilling wells for Shell in the Mississippi Canyons section of the Gulf about 120 miles south of New Orleans.
That's an important place in the history of deep-water drilling. Shell made the first deep-water discovery there in 1975. And the area was the site of the historic Deepwater Horizon oil spill. The Horizon, drilling about 40 miles south of the Louisiana shore, at the Macondo field, exploded and sank in 2010, killing 11 people and causing catastrophic economic and environmental damage to the region.
The Noble Bully 1 is operated by Noble, which co-owns it with Shell. The vessel is drilling wells for a new platform, to be called Olympus, which will provide the surface infrastructure for two deep-water developments, West Boreas and South Deimos. The Olympus will be a tension leg-platform, meaning it will float in the sea like a cork, tethered to the ocean floor with cables.
The project, known as the Mars B development, has relied on new technology from start to finish. Shell explored the area in 2007, using a new kind of seismic technology called ocean bottom sensing, which replaced fixed cables outfitted with underwater listening devices with lighter, movable lines closer to the floor of the Gulf. Other companies also use the technology, Shell said.
The new sensors picks up more data than their predecessors from sonic blasts sent out by an exploration ship.
Then, Shell scientists working on shore analyze the data with artificial intelligence the company developed, and produces three- and four-dimensional maps of the oil reservoirs, using computer chips similar to those found in advanced videogames, and make the maps available to the crew.
The ship has unmanned submarines, equipped with robotic arms and high-definition video cameras, that, if needed, can be uided to the drilling operation on the ocean floor.
Noble operates the highly automated drill ship with 160 workers -- 40% fewer than required on a typical drill ship.
The savings in staff lowers operating costs and improves safety by reducing the number of people in the ship's drilling area. The smaller ship also contains less steel and uses less fuel than more conventional designs.
Shell says it has never had a major spill in 30-plus years of deep-water drilling, but safety is an almost constant topic of conversation aboard the Bully, where anyone -- even visitors -- have the authority to stop work if they think something isn't right, a ship's officer said.
In an increasingly automated work environment, chief drillers on the Bully sit in "drill chairs" and manipulate the speed and direction of the drill pipes using joy sticks and computer screens.
"Today, it is a whole lot safer," said Timothy Craft, a Noble veteran who worked his way up from roustabout and roughneck to assistant driller and is now training for a job as a chief driller.
"You don't have to worry about employees being in harm's way, you don't have to put your hands on as much. It is really great," he said.
Shell is just scratching the surface of automation, according to Jonathan Crane, its vice president of wells-technology deployment. He says that the judgment of veteran drillers -- such as Mr. Loeb -- is as much art as science. "Some of these guys are legendary, because of their intuition about how to move the drill," he says.
Mr. Crane's group is interviewing one of those legendary drillers, so that his experience and judgment can be captured in algorithms that automate the drilling process. Early experiments show that some of these algorithms are capable of matching or exceeding the performance of the average human driller, he said.
Subscribe to WSJ:
Credit: By Steven Rosenbush
