Matt McClure's obsession with cleaning his $100,000 Tesla Cybertruck started well before he had even laid eyes upon it.
Worried about the stainless-steel exterior attracting fingerprints and smudges, the Leesburg, Va., resident spent hours scouring the internet for tips on how to keep the outside looking tidy.
He then shelled out $500 for cleaning products and settled on a multistep process to wash and coat the truck -- ultimately sharing his method in a 2,300-word post online to a Cybertruck owner's forum.
"Our entire dining room table was filled with Tesla cleaning supplies," said his wife, Teri McClure. "It was hysterical."
Most car exteriors are covered in layers of paint and coatings, giving them a glossy finish that is stain resistant and easy to clean. The Cybertruck is a rarity in that its outer panels are made of a stainless-steel alloy that is tough enough to withstand dents, dings and even certain-caliber bullets. It also needs no painting, leaving it with a dullish finish that enhances its futuristic, sci-fi vibe.
But cleaning it -- well, that requires some extra thought.
Since the truck went on sale last year, Cybertruck-cleaning advice has flooded the internet. Debates roar over what products to use -- and avoid.
Joint-lubricator WD-40 is the way to go, one Reddit user exclaims. No, retorted another -- glass cleaner is the safest option. Adhesive-remover Goo Gone has its proponents too, while others swear by Bar Keepers Friend, an all-purpose cleaner created in 1882 that can tackle "rust, mineral deposits, baked-on food and other tough stains," according to its website.
Then, there is the Windex controversy. Some say it effectively shines up the truck's panels, while others argue the ammonia in the blue spray can damage window tinting.
Tesla has taken a side. Sort of. The Cybertruck owner's manual recommends hand-washing with a soft sponge and a mixture of water and a pH-neutral soap, such as a car shampoo. Window cleaner and isopropyl alcohol are also OK for small stains.
But owners beware. The manual cautions they should steer clear of the following: hot water, detergents, highly alkaline cleaning ingredients and windshield treatment fluids. Rough cloths and washing in direct sunlight are also no-nos.
Automatic carwashes are discouraged too, although the truck does come with a "car wash mode" to seal gaps.
Adding to the pressure, Tesla advises Cybertruck owners to "immediately remove corrosive substances (such as grease, oil, bird droppings, tree resin, dead insects, tar spots, road salt, industrial fallout, etc.)"
"Do not wait until Cybertruck is due for a complete wash," it warns.
Tesla didn't respond to requests for comment.
Chris Leiter, an information-technology specialist in Maryland, who got his Cybertruck in April, said he pays little mind to Tesla's specific guidance.
"If you read any manual of any car, it'll say to clean things a certain way," Leiter said. "'Don't leave stains on. Clean it immediately. Clean off the bugs.' Blah blah blah blah."
He gave Bar Keepers Friend a try and now it is his go-to for cleaning the truck. His first attempt took about two hours.
"I did a wax on, wax off situation," he said.
In daily use, Leiter often worries about the stainless-steel panel above the front bumper becoming a massive graveyard for bugs.
He at one point guessed there were upward of 3,000 squashed bugs on the truck front. (Seeking a more accurate count, he later submitted a photo of the bug massacre to ChatGPT, which estimated about 4,600 deceased.)
Costco's Kirkland-brand baby wipes are the new cleaning weapon for Kevin Tieman, of Buford, Ga., who took home his Cybertruck in June.
He discovered their power while visiting his grandchildren. Frustrated by pesky water spots on the truck, he tried alcohol wipes unsuccessfully, then remembered he had baby wipes stashed away.
With its unconventional looks, the Cybertruck is a head-turner, Tieman said. But that can make him self-conscious if the pickup is less than pristine.
"You just feel like so many people are looking at the vehicle," Tieman said. "They're going to get the wrong idea."
Some owners have been eager to experiment -- just not on their trucks.
One Reddit user, while still on the wait list for the truck, said he tested dish detergent, vinegar, WD-40 and mineral spirits on a stainless-steel cooking range hood -- a stand-in for the Cybertruck's panels. His efforts showed Bar Keepers Friend yielded the best results.
That doesn't surprise Paul SerVaas, president of SerVaas Laboratories, which owns Bar Keepers Friend. He said the product was a fan-favorite among owners of the DeLorean, the last vehicle released with an exterior made of unpainted stainless steel more than 40 years ago.
Douglass Moody, of Chico, Calif., has been selling a gel to remove graffiti from road signs and restaurant walls for three decades. When his son bought a Cybertruck, he saw a potential new use.
CyberKleen was born. The spray, which he sells for $29 a bottle, would take paint off any car if left there long enough, but that isn't a concern for the Cybertruck, he said.
Tesla has its own $130 detailing kit for the Cybertruck, but as of Monday, it was sold out on the company's website.
For McClure, a credit risk director at Freddie Mac, his step-by-step method isn't only meant to clean the truck but protect it from unsightly smudges.
His process: Wash with car shampoo. Apply a stainless-steel rust remover. Clean with Bar Keepers Friend and Windex. Dry thoroughly. Wipe the vehicle down with isopropyl alcohol. Finish with ProtectaClear, a coating for metal that helps hide fingerprints.
McClure admits he probably spent too much time researching the topic. "But if you're not a crazy person like me, watching YouTube videos until your Cybertruck arrives, it's easy to make mistakes."
Credit: By Ben Glickman
