I had a weird dream last night. I'm sure you've said that many times. But why? From Sigmund Freud to Carl Jung to Calvin Hall, dreams have been researched ad nauseam and there's still no good answer to what shapes them. Unconscious desires? Keeping neurons active? Memory consolidation? Psychosexual wish fulfillment? No one knows. Even Freud supposedly noted, "Sometimes a cigar is just a cigar."
But clues are starting to emerge from artificial intelligence and its use of brain-mimicking neural networks. In 1968, Philip K. Dick published the novel "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?" -- on which the 1982 movie "Blade Runner" was based. Turns out the answer is yes.
First, a quick and oversimplified primer on neural networks. They contain digital layers of interconnected nodes, modeled on the human brain's neurons and synapse connections, which are great at finding patterns. Based on numerical weightings in each node after scanning millions of photos, a layer might conclude that a roundish object with eyes, nose and mouth is a face. Then that data moves onto the next layer, which looks for patterns in those patterns. Perhaps it determines whether it's a cat's or dog's face. Then another layer finds patterns of patterns of patterns until, for example, it can identify the dog's breed as a Siberian Husky. And so on.
Theorized in 1943, trainable neural networks have been around since 1958, when psychologist Frank Rosenblatt demonstrated the Perceptron machine at the Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory. But only in the past decade has AI scaled to the masses and gained the ability to understand your voice or recognize faces in photos.
What changed? Faster processors and cheaper memory certainly helped, but neural networks in the past often got stuck by "overfitting" data to a conclusion, such as determining that everything with feline-shaped eyes is a cat. Or concluding that dinosaurs built Stonehenge. We do that too when we knock on wood or wear our lucky socks because our team won last time we did. Computers can be superstitious like us.
In 1970 Finnish student Seppo Linnainmaa proposed "back-propagation" -- again oversimplifying here -- sending errors backward through neural-network layers to generalize the weightings and better find patterns. It wasn't until a 1986 paper "Learning representations by back-propagating errors" -- whose co-authors included Geoffrey Hinton, a patriarch of neural-network research -- that back-propagation research took off. It took another 20 years for the method to scale, which is why voice and facial-recognition AI work well today.
Now the current theories: In 2020 neuroscientist Erik Hoel, then a professor at Tufts University, postulated that human brains get stuck overfitting in the same way and need to generalize to overcome the problem. Mr. Hoel suggests the brain "does that by having wild, crazy experiences every night." He hypothesized that "dreams as a form of purposefully corrupted input likely derived from noise injected into the hierarchical structure of the brain." Sound familiar? Yes, maybe dreams are back-propagation that inject noise and errors to unfit or generalize our own pattern recognition. That would explain why our dreams are so weird.
Mr. Hoel even writes that maybe "fictions, like novels or films, act as artificial dreams, accomplishing at least some of the same function" of injecting noise and errors. Not a bad reason to watch all 31 films (and counting) in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Maybe someday virtual reality will partially replace weird dreams and cure sleep deprivation.
Another problem for neural networks is "catastrophic forgetting" as new data overwrite old information. A recent paper by Maxim Bazhenov, a sleep researcher at the University of California, San Diego medical school, notes "the human brain learns continuously and incorporates new data into existing knowledge" which is "best when new training is interleaved with periods of sleep for memory consolidation." He posits that the same is true for AI neural networks -- they learn better when they get some sleep. Perhaps this is why Microsoft limits its Bing chatbot to 20 replies. The early word on ChatGPT 4, the latest iteration, is that it's more accurate but not very creative. Maybe it needs a good night's sleep.
Between overfitting and catastrophic forgetting, our brains need to incorporate new experiences with old memories without forgetting the past. I once heard chess champion Magnus Carlson tell the story of playing against his younger self in an old chess app he released years ago. He said it was a bit surreal but fascinating to see how far he has come. And maybe that's why we dream, not to erase old memories, but to de-emphasize and fine-tune them so we can mature and progress. With ChatGPT and AI research, we're going to learn a lot more about ourselves. Sweet dreams.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
