The Fox network released its schedule on Monday for the fall TV season. This year that qualifies as a major achievement.
The coronavirus pandemic has ground to a halt most television production, leaving broadcasters without much in new programming and making it difficult to forecast what they can put on the air in September, when the TV season starts.
Fox Broadcasting Co., a unit of Fox Corp., had slightly more clarity than others, in part because some of its top shows are animated productions that have been able to continue making new episodes during the crisis. Its schedule includes new seasons of "The Simpsons" and "Family Guy." Fox is also expecting to resume production in August for its top-rated reality show, "The Masked Singer," which is also on the schedule.
Walt Disney Co.'s ABC, Comcast Corp.'s NBC and ViacomCBS Inc.'s CBS are rushing to come up with their own fall lineups and aren't expected to make any programming announcements this week.
Normally this is the time of year the broadcast networks unveil their fall schedules to advertisers in splashy presentations. They are the precursor to negotiations when the networks sell a big chunk of their commercial time for the TV season.
Advertisers typically commit to spending billions on network programming. The sales pitch has gotten tougher for networks, as viewers turn away from traditional television in favor of streaming services, such as Netflix Inc., Amazon.com Inc.'s Prime Video and Disney's Hulu.
This year, the negotiations are especially fraught, given the uncertainty about what networks will have available to broadcast and what the state of the U.S. economy will be in the fall. Many advertisers have pulled money out of television or delayed spending.
CBS has said it plans on bringing back 23 current shows next season when production resumes, a move in keeping with its generally conservative approach to launching new programs. For now, the network has ordered three new shows: "Clarice," inspired by the movie "The Silence of the Lambs"; a reboot of "The Equalizer"; and "B Positive," a romantic comedy from Chuck Lorre, whose credits include "The Big Bang Theory."
ABC, which is losing its longtime hit "Modern Family," has a sequel to its 1980s yuppie-angst drama "thirtysomething" in the works called "thirtysomething(else)" about the children of the original show's main characters. Another hot prospect is "Rebel," which is inspired by the movie "Erin Brockovich."
NBC will hope to fill the void left by the departure of "The Good Place" with a new Ted Danson comedy produced by Tina Fey about a rich businessman who becomes mayor of Los Angeles.
Two dramas that Fox planned to launch in the spring, "Next," a thriller about artificial intelligence, and gothic drama "The Filthy Rich," will instead debut in the fall. Fox also bought rights to air episodes of the police drama "L.A.'s Finest," which has until now only been available to Charter Communications Inc. subscribers.
Fox said it also anticipates having new episodes of the hit "9-1-1" and its spinoff, "9-1-1: Lone Star."
Fox Corp. and Wall Street Journal parent News Corp share common ownership.
---
Suzanne Vranica contributed to this article.

Credit: By Joe Flint
