The dual Hollywood actor and writers' strikes are starting to test the entertainment industry's patience -- and solidarity.
Bill Maher and Drew Barrymore are crossing the picket line to put on talk shows without the scribes who pen their monologues and jokes.
Disney, Warner Bros. and others are suspending deals with a growing list of producers, including Gina Rodriguez and J.J. Abrams. Meanwhile, some showrunners are putting pressure on the Writers Guild of America to return to the negotiating table.
The Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, the coalition representing the major producers of content including Netflix, Disney and Warner Bros. Discovery, said Thursday the Writers Guild of America reached out to ask for a meeting to move negotiations forward. The group said it is working to schedule a meeting in the coming week.
Optimism from a few weeks ago that a resolution was in reach faded as each side traded missives. Meantime, a lack of work has taken a toll industrywide, and sown frustration, straining unity.
In the case of the talk shows, stars say they have other employees that need to work and are changing their programs to operate without scripts. The writers aren't buying it.
"Any production that comes back during the strike undermines all our efforts and prolongs the strike," said Chelsea White, 40, one of the three co-head writers for "The Drew Barrymore Show," who was picketing in New York City on Thursday.
Most writers' rooms have been shut down since May, when thousands of scribes for movies and TV shows went on strike. Productions went dark, including daytime and late-night talk shows that depend on fast-thinking writers to make jokes out of the day's news. Initially, the strike unified Hollywood creatives. Celebrities held signs on the WGA picket lines, and talk-show hosts shut down production. Now some hosts, like Maher, are reconfiguring their shows to run without writers.
HBO's "Real Time with Bill Maher" is scheduled to return next week as a panel discussion with the host and guests, without the comedian's monologue and other written segments.
"I love my writers, I am one of them, but I'm not prepared to lose an entire year and see so many below-the-line people suffer so much," Maher said in a statement.
Barrymore dropped out of hosting May's MTV movie awards in solidarity with the strike. This past week, she said that she decided to start filming her talk show again as a way to bring people together.
"I own this choice," she said in an Instagram post, adding that last season ended in April before the strike. A spokeswoman for CBS Media Ventures, which produces "The Drew Barrymore Show," said the show has always been "largely unscripted" and that in resuming filming "no one has stepped in to do the work of WGA writers."
"In a world where you make shows every day and have to trust each other and work fast and take risks, relationships are important," said Greg Iwinski, a late-night writer on WGA's negotiating committee who has written for the "Late Show with Stephen Colbert" and "Last Week Tonight with John Oliver." "It really hurts that relationship to tell people we can do your job without you," he said.
Several top showrunners have reached out to the WGA to express concern about the lack of negotiations, including "Shameless" producer John Wells, "Riverdale" producer Greg Berlanti and Ryan Murphy, whose credits include "Dahmer -- Monster: The Jeffrey Dahmer Story," according to people familiar with the matter.
The union and studio group can't even agree on whose turn it is to make an offer: Both sides claim the ball is in the other's court. There have been no talks since Aug. 22 when several chief executives met briefly with WGA negotiators in a last-ditch effort to get the union to accept their latest offer. The studios' August offer made some concessions to the WGA including guaranteed minimum length of employment, controls around the use of generative artificial intelligence, wage and residuals increases and quarterly reports on viewing hours per title for streaming shows. The group also said it would agree to a WGA request regarding minimum staffing and a guaranteed length of employment for writers, though its offer included fewer guaranteed writing jobs than what the writers sought.
The WGA rejected the offer and told members that while progress has been made, the language of the proposal was typical of the AMPTP in that it was "giving with one hand and taking back with the other."
The AMPTP then released many details of the deal publicly in the hopes of persuading the union to accept it.
Sony Pictures Entertainment Chief Executive Tony Vinciquerra said at an investor conference earlier this week that the AMPTP is tired of negotiating against itself. "You can't settle a negotiation unless both parties come and say they want to deal," he said.
---
Joseph Pisani contributed to this article.
Credit: By Joe Flint and Alyssa Lukpat
