Generative artificial intelligence has sparked predictions that the technology will change marketing on a fundamental level, spawned countless entrepreneurs and startups selling some form of AI marketing services, and even led to AI marketing certifications from businesses and universities.
But it hasn't yet led big brands to shuffle their org charts or hire for AI-specific leadership roles.
"I've not seen or even heard or even come remotely close to a VP of AI marketing leadership role," said Richard Sanderson, who runs executive staffing firm Spencer Stuart's marketing, sales and communications officer practice in North America. "If we're led to believe the impact is going to be so widespread, why are we not seeing it? What is going on?"
It is unclear when such roles will appear, some experts said, if they appear at all.
The number of open marketing jobs whose descriptions mentioned AI in November 2023 was 8% lower than a year earlier, spanning the months when artificial-intelligence startup OpenAI captured the public's imagination, according to data from job board Indeed.
Indeed itself has used generative AI to save $10 million on content development this year, according to Jessica Jensen, the company's chief marketing officer. But AI appears to have had a less-pronounced effect on marketing than on other practices when measured by job descriptions. From November 2022 through November 2023, listings for sales jobs were nearly three times as likely to mention AI as marketing job listings, according to Indeed.
Titles like chief AI officer and head of AI aren't completely new to the marketing world. Some business-to-business companies and advertising conglomerates such as WPP have in recent years appointed such leaders in roles that focus on promoting their own products and services to business clients.
But big consumer brands have largely not taken similar steps.
Coca-Cola has been one exception. After releasing its first AI-generated ad campaigns earlier this year, the beverage giant in June signaled its dedication to the new technology by promoting two executives to the newly created roles of global head of generative AI and global head of marketing AI.
Coca-Cola established the roles to accelerate its teams' adoption of generative AI tools in their day-to-day work, said Manuel "Manolo" Arroyo, Coca-Cola's global chief marketing officer.
"In our organization that has more than 2,000 marketeers today around the world, as you can imagine, there's probably 1,999 that have already jumped into AI, and everyone wants to do stuff with AI. So we're trying to orchestrate all of that," Arroyo said.
A number of large brands are likely to follow Coca-Cola's lead in the coming months, said Jamie McLaughlin, chief executive and founder of marketing and communications recruiting firm Monday Talent.
"It seems to be you have one central evangelist for AI, and they are, within reason, overseeing marketing across the company," McLaughlin said.
Such positions may be necessary for consumer-facing companies struggling to properly address the rapid evolution of these tools, said Rex Briggs, who joined marketing technology firm Claritas this month as chief artificial intelligence officer.
Credit: By Patrick Coffee
