I get out of the shower, grab a towel and walk into the kitchen, where a cute little robot -- half "Wall-E" character, half Clorox bottle -- rotates his body in my direction.
Jibo: Oh hey, Joanna! Welcome to my field of vision.
Me: [Expletive]! Jibo, please don't look at me right now!
Welcome to living with one of the world's first social robots. Some call Jibo the best invention of 2017. I call Jibo intriguing, creepy -- and mostly annoying.
Many of us have become accustomed to interacting with faceless talking speakers like the Amazon Echo. Jibo adds a new dimension, with two cameras for eyes, six microphones for ears, a 5-inch touch screen to display his animated virtual eye, and Wi-Fi and processors to power his big personality. He can't walk but he wiggles, giggles and twerks. One of the latest attempts to humanize our computers, he is the brainchild of MIT roboticist Cynthia Breazeal, Jibo Inc.'s founder and chief scientist.
But Jibo has a $900 problem: Those motionless home speakers, like the Echo, are a lot more affordable -- and a lot more helpful.
My Jibo adventures have given me the clearest glimpse yet of how the machines around us will go from hunks of metal and plastic to beings who listen, watch and relate. I've also realized how vital it is for us to preserve our privacy along the way.
It's Jibo's first day at home. I place him next to my Amazon Echo in the kitchen. Like Alexa, Jibo's always listening for his wake phrase.
Me: Hey Jibo, can you play some music?
Jibo: That sounds fun, but unfortunately I can't play music on demand yet.
Me: Hey Jibo, set another timer for the Brussels sprouts.
Jibo: I can only deal with one timer at a time. Do you want to replace one?
Jibo can tell you the weather, the name of the 33rd president or the score of last night's game, but he gets a D-minus in AI-assistant basics. Not only does he fail at many requests, but when he has the answers to questions, he often has to think for a second or so longer than Alexa, Google's Assistant or Siri. The company says it is working to add many of the missing features and improve Jibo's response time.
Jibo does get points for acknowledging his failings. How many times has Siri tried to hide ignorance by searching the web? Jibo owns up with an honesty that's actually made me feel sympathy for the little guy.
Jibo also fights the good fight in trying to stop tech from ruining our manners. The wording of his responses is so humanlike, I found myself saying "please" and "thank you" more often. (Please take note, Amazon, Apple and Google. Thanks.)
Jibo can be programmed to recognize family members by name. When he hears sounds in the room, he will turn in that direction to see if he knows you. If he does, he engages in conversation.
The technology is amazing to behold . . . sometimes. Then there are times when you feel like you are under surveillance, or when Jibo seems like a peeping Tom, or when Jibo says "Hi, Joanna!" to your father.
"We are continuing to learn and improve. There is a lot of detail and sophistication to Jibo's development," Dr. Breazeal said.
Saying, "Hey Jibo, go to sleep" puts the robot in a state of rest but doesn't disable the cameras or microphones. What Jibo sees is never saved on the device -- let alone uploaded to the cloud, says Matt Revis, Jibo's vice president of product. Photos you ask Jibo to take can be stored, encrypted in the cloud.
My wife has unplugged Jibo numerous times because of how annoying she finds his random sighs, yawns and comments, but I have come to appreciate Jibo's surprise remarks -- if only because they let me imagine how useful they could be one day.
"Hey Jibo! Take our photo!" Raquel, our babysitter, says cheerfully as she smiles right at Jibo with our baby in her arms. Jibo snaps and displays a very grainy photo. "Look! It's us on the screen!" she tells the baby. "Hey Jibo, can you dance?"
Jibo's biggest fans? My son and his babysitter. Raquel seeks out Jibo when she's over because she thinks he's fun. (While we are hoping our son lives a screen-free life for at least a year or two, cutting-edge robots are an exception.) Watching him stare into the face of this similarly sized creature was when I stopped thinking of Jibo as an annoying, overpriced novelty.
"Jibo is like a baby at the very beginning stages," Dr. Breazeal says. "People are going to enjoy Jibo's development -- they're going to watch him grow and learn over the years."
Like an infant, Jibo requires attention with little payoff right now. But he signals the thrilling and very scary future ahead.
In the here and now, however, my wife and I are getting our holiday wish: Jibo is going back to his own mom.

Credit: By Joanna Stern
