Chip maker Nvidia said revenue in its recently completed quarter more than doubled from a year ago, setting a new company record, and projected that surging interest in artificial intelligence is propelling its business faster than expected.
Nvidia is at the heart of the boom in artificial intelligence that made it a $1 trillion company this year, and it is forecasting growth that outpaces even the most bullish analysts' projections.
The company's chips are the computational muscle behind lots of popular AI tools, including OpenAI's ChatGPT and similar language-generation systems made by Google, Microsoft and others. Nvidia has invested in making chips and software for AI for more than a decade and has no competitors who can yet match it.
"The race is on to adopt generative AI," Chief Executive Jensen Huang said, describing a new computing era where companies are transitioning from general-purpose computing to digital infrastructure geared for AI.
Nvidia's stock, already the top performer in the S&P 500 this year, rose 7.5% in after-hours trading following the results, which would be about $87 billion in market value.
The company said revenue more than doubled in its fiscal second quarter to about $13.5 billion, far ahead of Wall Street forecasts in a FactSet survey. More strikingly, it said revenue in its current quarter would be around $16 billion, besting expectations by about $3.5 billion.
Net profit for the company's second quarter was $6.19 billion, also ahead of forecasts.
The results show that a wave of investment in artificial intelligence, which began late last year with the arrival of OpenAI's ChatGPT language-generation tool, is gaining steam. Companies and governments are increasingly seeking to harness AI's power in business and everyday life. Many companies see AI as indispensable to their growth and are making large investments in computing infrastructure to support it.
In May, the company said it expected revenue to be around $11 billion for its fiscal second quarter, almost $4 billion more than Wall Street expected. Its shares rose 24% the following day, adding almost $184 billion to its market value and eventually propelling the company's market value above $1 trillion.
This year, Nvidia's stock has more than tripled, and investors in the options markets had been betting heavily that the shares would rise further after Wednesday's results.
Nvidia's sales surge has come with challenges. The outsize demand for chips adept at AI computation has strained the company's ability to supply them. The company doesn't itself make chips, but outsources its designs to companies including Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing, leaving it susceptible to a slowdown if that company doesn't expand production rapidly enough.
In May, Nvidia said it had secured higher supply for the second half of the year. On Wednesday, Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress said in prepared comments the company had purchase commitments and other obligations that were just over $11 billion, up from about $7.3 billion in the previous quarter. The rise, she said, reflected increased spending on long-term supplies.
"Our supply partners have been exceptional in ramping capacity to support our data center supply chain," she said in a call with analysts. Supplies are expected to increase each quarter through the next year, she said.
Nvidia said its board approved increasing its share repurchase plan by $25 billion and that it expects to continue buying back stock this fiscal year. In the second quarter, the company repurchased about $3.4 billion in shares.
The growing attention on artificial intelligence in society and business has also put Nvidia under a sometimes uncomfortable spotlight. The U.S. last year placed export controls on advanced AI chips sold to Chinese companies -- a move that mostly impacted Nvidia, given its leadership in those kinds of chips.
Nvidia said at the time the restrictions could cost it as much as $400 million in quarterly sales. Since then, it has developed a less-powerful version of its chips for the Chinese market, but the Biden administration is considering further curbs that would prohibit sales of those chips without a government license.
Revenue from China was within the company's historical range of between 20% and 25% in the second quarter, Kress said, adding that in the long term, restrictions prohibiting the sale of its products to China would result in a permanent loss of opportunities for the U.S. industry in one of the world's largest markets.
Nvidia became a juggernaut in AI by allowing software developers to tinker with its graphics-processing units starting over a decade ago. The company had long been a leader in graphics chips that make PC games run more smoothly and in higher resolution, but was seeking new uses and new markets for its chips.
Scientists found that the chips were good at running physics simulations. Cryptocurrency miners found they excelled at computations needed to mint new digital tokens. And researchers discovered they could speedily produce and deploy AI systems.
On Wednesday, Nvidia said revenue in its data center segment, which houses chips widely used in AI computation, was $10.3 billion, more than double from the prior year.
The company's gaming segment had $2.5 billion of revenue, up 22% from the year earlier. Videogaming demand had been in a lull after a pandemic-era boom, and Nvidia and other chip companies have been waiting for elevated inventories to slim down and purchasing to resume. Kress said demand for the company's latest generation of computer-graphics chips was strong and that inventories had normalized.
Huang has described the company's harnessing of interest in generative AI tools like ChatGPT as its "iPhone moment," a crystallization of its investments in the technology and related software.
The world has around $1 trillion worth of data centers, Huang said on a call with analysts Wednesday, "and that trillion dollars of data centers is in the process of transitioning into accelerated computing and generative AI."
Nvidia currently has about 70% of AI chip sales, according to analyst Lucas Keh of New York-based Third Bridge Group, a research firm.
Its competitors are increasingly biting at its heels. Advanced Micro Devices, which also makes graphics processors and is challenging Nvidia in advanced AI chips, as well as other companies from Intel to a range of startups and cloud-computing giants, have their own plans and products that aim to capture a slice of the burgeoning market.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
