Meta Platforms won't be training its artificial-intelligence models using data from European Instagram and Facebook users anytime soon. But it's already tapping into information from U.S. accounts and using it to make its chatbot smarter.
Meta planned to update its privacy policy June 26 so that it could train its AI models on anything shared publicly on European Union and U.K.-based accounts. Users complained on social media and provided pointers -- some wrong -- about how to stop sharing data. Backlash from regulatory agencies made Meta pause those efforts indefinitely in the region.
The U.S. is different. Meta has been incorporating public data from U.S. accounts into its generative-AI features since last year, and there isn't a way to opt out. There are, however, some ways to limit Meta's use of your data.
"Across the internet, public information is being used to train AI. This is not unique to our services," Meta said. "We're committed to building AI responsibly and believe it's important that people understand how we train the models that power our generative AI product."
Generative AI is poised to change many aspects of our lives, and the tech industry is in a race to develop the smartest and most capable AI models. Winning that race requires ever more fresh-training data.
Some companies, such as Open-AI, have struck deals with publishers, while others like X have tapped into information they already own. (The Wall Street Journal owner News Corp has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI.)
Meta's access to posts from its billions of users could give it a boost -- but it also raises questions about privacy.
AI companies like Google search the web for public data to inform their models, but what you share on your social-media profiles often isn't included, says Avivah Litan, an AI-security analyst at Gartner. "Meta is very different because it has every personal detail of your life that you posted," she says.
Meta taps into the U.S. user information to identify language, geography and other patterns to ensure responses delivered by its AI features are relevant, a Meta spokesman says. It isn't building a database based on a user's individual posts and personal identity, he says.
The information helped it develop features such as the Meta AI assistant, AI Stickers and the Imagine image generator the company introduced in September.
EU users will be able to fill out a form to opt out of sharing their data with Meta. No such option exists in the U.S. Instead, Americans can make their Instagram profiles private and not share anything publicly on Facebook.
Meta only uses information you share publicly to train its AI. If your Instagram account is public, Meta can access the photos and videos in your feed, captions on your posts and Reels.
And on Facebook, Meta can use anything shared with a public audience. It doesn't use anything from private, direct messaging on Facebook and Instagram, even for people with public accounts. And Meta doesn't currently train AI using Facebook and Instagram stories, or data from Threads.
Despite what you may have seen on social media, you will gain nothing by posting on your feed that you don't want Meta to use your data. To limit what it can access, head to your settings.
Make your profile private on Instagram in iOS by selecting the profile tab and tapping the three lines in the top right corner to open Settings and activity. Tap Account privacy and toggle your account to private. If you only share posts through the Close Friends filter, those also are considered private and won't be used by Meta.
On Facebook, select the Menu and tap Settings & privacy. Then select Settings and scroll to where it says Audience and visibility. Tap Posts, then select an option other than Public, such as Friends or Only Me.
If you make your Instagram and Facebook profiles more private now, Meta won't use anything you post going forward. But the changes aren't retroactive: Your older public posts have potentially already helped Meta's AI learn how to think and talk more like a human.
Credit: By Cordilia James
