A machine-learning algorithm that can detect malicious domain names as soon as they are purchased has piqued the interest of at least one corporate IT executive.
Invented by five researchers at Princeton University and the University of California, the code works by scanning for 22 "features," or red flags that are consistent with suspicious behavior. They include names that are registered in bulk by the hundreds, names that are variations of the same name, random-looking names, and names with numerical characters.
The tool would be helpful if it were used by the hundreds of registrars offering domain names for purchase to stop cybercriminals planning attacks as they are purchasing the names, said Vincent Weafer, senior vice president at McAfee Labs at Intel Security.
If the technology one day became ubiquitous, chief information officers and chief information security officers could take comfort in the fact that employees browsing the web could have extra protections against malware, fraud and spam, he said.
"This is a good example of trying to build trust at the source, versus what we have now, which is web scanning, email scanning and file scanning technology," which try to detect and block malicious activity at the time of the attack, said Mr. Weafer, who added that McAfee Labs has been tracking the researchers' work on the subject.
The research is also proof, Mr. Weafer said, that certain domain names activities can be attributed to cybercriminals, and machine learning could help identify suspicious behavior in real-time, before it is too late.
By purchasing domain names, which map websites to IP addresses, criminals can coordinate spam, malware attacks and "phishing" attacks, in which criminals obtain personal and financial information from users who enter information on fraudulent websites that appear trustworthy.
To thwart cybercriminals, network operators try to curate blacklists of suspicious domain names, but researchers say that is difficult because 80,000 new .com domain names are registered daily. Existing systems also end up finding malicious domain names after an attack is under way.
The algorithm developed by the researchers and published in a research paper is called PREDATOR, which stands for Proactive Recognition and Elimination of Domain Abuse at Time-of-Registration.
In a five-month study of registration logs of 12.8 million ".com" and ".net" domains, the algorithm could determine 70% of malicious domains at the time they were registered, days or weeks faster than existing technologies that blacklist domain names.
PREDATOR is faster mainly because the algorithm can identify several more red flags than current blacklist technologies, the researchers say.
They plan to release their code to the open-source community in the near future, for developers and companies to replicate the process and build on top of it.
"One of the biggest contributions here isn't the code, it's the features that are really indicative of the attack," said Nick Feamster, professor of computer science at Princeton University and a researcher on the PREDATOR project.
The research found that noncriminals usually choose domain names that are easy to remember, whereas criminals choose random names because they are buying in bulk in hopes of decreasing their chances of all their domain names being blacklisted.
In phishing attacks, variations of an established domain name or names with digits are used to trick users into clicking on a seemingly legitimate website, such as a bank account.
The researchers said they have been studying domain names since 2009, but the proliferation of cyberattacks and advances in machine learning and big data have only recently made it possible to develop an algorithm that could identify the attributes of a malicious domain name.
The research was conducted by researchers at Princeton University, the University of California, Santa Barbara, and the University of California, Berkeley.
Credit: By Sara Castellanos
