Graphics-chip maker Nvidia Corp. posted record quarterly revenue, capping a year dominated by pandemic-fueled demand for its chips as the company grappled with supply shortages.
Nvidia on Wednesday reported fiscal fourth-quarter revenue of $5 billion, up 61% from a year earlier, generating $2.31 in earnings a share. It also sees about $5.3 billion in revenue for the current quarter, ahead of Wall Street's expectations.
Demand for some of Nvidia's chips has been so hot that it has outpaced the company's ability to increase production, adding to chip-supply shortages riling the semiconductor industry.
Nvidia's newest graphics cards were a holiday sensation, Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress said during an earnings call. She added that some inventories are likely to remain low in the first quarter even as Nvidia increases supply. "Throughout our supply chain, stronger demand globally has limited the availability of capacity and components," Ms. Kress said.
President Biden on Wednesday signed an executive order directing a broad review of supply chains for semiconductors and other critical materials.
Nvidia's game-chip business posted a record $2.5 billion in revenue for the December quarter, up 67% from a year earlier. The company's graphics chips have proved useful for other tasks as well, including artificial-intelligence calculations that underpin gadgets such as smart speakers and product-recommendation engines.
Nvidia's high-performance chips have also been popular with cryptocurrency miners. The company estimates it had $100 million to $300 million in cryptocurrency-related sales, Ms. Kress said.
The company this month launched a chip aimed at the cryptocurrency market and estimated it would derive about $50 million in revenue from cryptocurrency in the current quarter, she said.
Through Wednesday's close, the Santa Clara, Calif., company's shares have more than doubled over the past 12 months. Nvidia last year surpassed Intel Corp. as the most valuable U.S. semiconductor company.
Shares in Nvidia fell 3.2% in after-hours trading after the earnings report.
Chief Executive Jensen Huang wants to expand Nvidia's focus with the proposed $40 billion acquisition of U.K.-based chip designer Arm Holdings from SoftBank Group Corp.
Credit: By Maria Armental
