Your Brain
The Franklin Institute
Philadelphia -- We know how the human heart works -- at least from a scientific perspective. The brain is another story. The science of brain function, including the mysteries of consciousness, memory and language acquisition, remains a work in progress. That is both an important takeaway and a key challenge faced by the Franklin Institute's ambitious new permanent exhibition, "Your Brain." After all, if scientists don't really understand the brain, what hope is there for the rest of us?
The show, which tries valiantly to make complex concepts both accessible and concrete, zigzags through the second floor of the $41 million, 53,000-square-foot Nicholas and Athena Karabots Pavilion. Designed by Saylor Gregg Architects, this limestone and glass addition completes the science museum's planned footprint and blends neatly with its original neoclassical structure.
The pavilion's most dramatic feature, on the museum's southern facade, is the environmental artist Ned Kahn's "Shimmer Wall." Its nearly 11,000 5-square-inch anodized aluminum panels reflect the sky and ripple with the wind, creating constantly changing patterns -- a lovely and riveting enhancement to the streetscape.
On the ground floor of the Karabots Pavilion are conference facilities and classrooms, while a third-floor gallery hosts traveling exhibitions. The inaugural offering, through Sept. 1, is "Circus! Science Under the Big Top" -- a blend of history, culture and science that should keep adults entertained while young children try on costumes and older ones test their acrobatic skills.
But "Circus!" is only the sideshow. "Your Brain" -- at 8,500 square feet, billed as the largest exhibition on the brain in North America -- is the main event. As we've come to expect from the Franklin, the show's methodological signature is interactivity, with about 70 "interactive experiences" that range from antediluvian knob turning and panel flipping to more cutting-edge touchscreen and virtual-reality technology.
To its credit, the exhibition also fosters social interaction. At least one activity, suggesting how memories can differ, requires partners with a shared history. Others simply encourage collaboration and conversation. Visitors can compete to see who is able to recall a longer string of numbers as they struggle to open a safe. In a trial of perception, they can attempt virtual-reality tennis -- then stand back, watch others play and observe what they might have missed: a series of changes in the court and its backdrop.
"Your Brain" begins with a well-lighted introductory gallery, displaying a plastinated human brain and spinal cord, a squid neuron, brain scans and imaginative sculptural renditions of the brain. We learn that we use 100% of our brain, and that it is always changing as we acquire knowledge and experience.
Next is the exhibition's show-stopper, "Neural Climb," particularly enticing for children. Located in a dramatically darkened space, it is inspired by the institute's most celebrated exhibit, its walk-through "Giant Heart." In an arresting, immersive environment resembling an art installation, visitors can ascend a series of glass platforms encased by webs of netting. The experience, simulating a journey through a neural network, is punctuated by bursts of light and sound.
After the fun, visitors encounter a gallery that probes more deeply into the (often impenetrable) science of the brain. Here we run head on into neurotransmitters, axons, dendrites, glial cells, myelin and the "connectome," a sought-after map of individual neural connections that parallels the idea of the human genome.
One exhibit, involving tubing, light and Ping-Pong balls, allows visitors to "fire a model neuron" to show how chemical changes and electrical signals combine to transmit information. Another, producing vibrations affecting either hands or feet, demonstrates differences in processing time.
The next gallery, "Pathways," explores aspects of brain function, such as why we see stars after a concussion and the unexpected burning sensation -- "the thermal grill illusion" -- that results when we simultaneously touch hot and cold coils. The standout exhibit in this section, probably too frightening for young children, employs a faux electric chair. Once seated, the participant places a finger on a sensor that detects pulse rate as an ominous voice predicts a frightening occurrence. The payoff is a visual representation of the fear response.
After passing under, or around, a piano suspended from the ceiling (testing our decision making and capacity for risk), visitors enter the Disney-like setting of "Street Scene," with storefronts decorated with optical illusions. We can walk up to a movie theater, past posters with figure-ground illusions, strap ourselves in and watch Fred Astaire do his famous ceiling dance as the theater and screen begin rotating -- a dizzying experience.
The penultimate gallery, "Real Life," is rich in content. It explains how the brain changes as it ages, how expectations affect perception, how dopamine enhances focus and concentration -- and just how difficult it is to drive and text without triggering a video car crash. Garbled sounds, we learn, suddenly become completely intelligible after their meaning is revealed. And what we see alters what we hear.
The last stop is "Ethics & the Future," a gallery that is unduly cacophonous and probably too small. Visitors are asked to comment on bioethical quandaries and quizzed on their research priorities, while a white-clad woman filmed against a white background outlines neurological conundrums. Any of these -- including the origins of consciousness, the causes of autism and just how language acquisition works -- would make a good subject for a future exhibition.
"The brain is a vast universe that we have only just begun to explore," a concluding label says. "Your Brain" serves as a reasonably engaging -- if occasionally abstruse -- introduction to the territory.
---
Ms. Klein is a cultural reporter and critic in Philadelphia and a contributing editor at Columbia Journalism Review. Follow her on Twitter @JuliaMKlein.
Credit: By Julia M. Klein
