California winemakers are using artificial intelligence developed by a software startup to help salvage grapes damaged by smoke from the state's massive wildfires.
Ahead of next month's peak grape-harvesting season, dozens of vintners are using an AI-powered model from Tastry Inc. to identify viable blending options that mask unwanted smoky flavors, according to the seven-year-old San Luis Obispo, Calif., company.
Narrowing the options can reduce production delays and get wines onto store shelves faster, compared with the time and expertise needed to taste-test as many variations as possible, winemakers said.
Tastry said that during last year's wildfire season it helped mitigate the loss of over 300,000 cases of wine for more than 100 California producers.
Blending in smoke-tainted grapes adds an extra layer of complexity to the winemaking process, said Alexandre Remy, managing partner at Napa, Calif.-based Altas Wine Co.
Mr. Remy said he used Tastry's system last year to help find a blend that successfully incorporated smoke-tinged grapes into the company's Pinot Noir.
Wildfires aren't directly threatening Atlas Wine's vineyards on some 3,500 acres, including land in California's Calaveras and El Dorado counties, he said.
So far this year, wildfires have burned more than 2.4 million acres in 104 large blazes nationwide, double the expanse at this time last year, according to the National Interagency Fire Center. In California, wildfires have burned more than 1.3 million acres so far this year, compared with some 890,332 acres burned at this point in 2020, according to Cal Fire.
Roughly a quarter of Atlas Wine's grapes were damaged by wildfire smoke last year, including 10% that were "highly impacted by smoke," Mr. Remy said, adding that the company's Pinot Noir and Cabernet grapes were especially hard hit.
The full effect this year won't be known until grapes are harvested, he said.
When wood burns, it releases compounds known as volatile phenols that can cause an overpowering chemical, smoky and ashy taste in grapes and the wines they produce, said Anita Oberholster, a researcher in the Department of Viticulture and Enology at the University of California, Davis.
While smoky can be part of a wine's complex flavor profile, too much is unpalatable, she said.
"In the case where levels are high enough to cause a taint -- commonly referred to as smoke taint -- it can make wine unsalable," Ms. Oberholster said.
There isn't a reliable method for winemakers to predict how severe smoke damage will be, she added, and vineyards have no fail-safe way to protect grapes from unwanted smoke.
That's where AI comes in.
Tastry conducts chemical analyses of the many chemical compounds in different grapes to create unique flavor profiles. The profiles are converted into digital form, and include intricate combinations of flavor characteristics such as cherry or chocolate, according to Tastry.
That data is then combined with a data set of digitized responses from proprietary consumer-palate surveys. Survey participants are asked if they like black coffee, the smell of fresh-cut grass, and hundreds of other sensory-related questions.
An AI model then analyzes all of the data on compounds and survey responses together to identify patterns of combinations that predict which blends would have the biggest market, said Katerina Axelsson, Tastry's chief executive officer.
As a separate service, Tastry analyzes the level of smoke damage in grapes. The company was initially focused on providing winemakers and vintners with consumer insights into their products.
"If your grapes are tainted by smoke, Tastry's palate profiles and AI can run all kinds of combinations of compounds to arrive at a blend that most people will like," Ms. Axelsson said.
So far, the system has proven to be more than 90% accurate in predicting consumer-product scores on a range of wines, according to Tastry.
Josh Baker, general manager and winemaker at San Luis Obispo-based Phase 2 Cellars, said he uses Tastry's AI systems to blend wines for his customers, which include larger buyers. That includes wines that incorporate smoke-tainted grapes.
"Our work with Tastry has dramatically increased our efficiencies from a blending standpoint," Mr. Baker said.
Phase 2 Cellars works with local growers to produce wine for bulk buyers of Central Coast grapes, and only a small percentage of grapes last year were tainted by wildfire smoke, he said.
After three months on the market, Atlas Wine's Pinot Noir, blended with the aid of Tastry, is "selling very well," Mr. Remy said.
But, he added, AI isn't about to replace the expertise of vintners, who will always rely on tasting to make a final determination on blends.
The software tool is "an extra light in a cave," he said.
Credit: By Angus Loten
