Google is shaking up its top finance role as it shows signs of accelerating sales growth following a postpandemic malaise.
Google Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat will become president and chief investment officer of parent company Alphabet, ending an eight-year run during which she helped pitch the company to Wall Street.
Porat will begin the role in September and will continue to serve as CFO until Alphabet chooses her successor, the company said. She will be responsible for Alphabet's investments in units such as the self-driving car company Waymo in the new position and report to Chief Executive Sundar Pichai.
The shake-up, announced following a quarter in which Alphabet exceeded almost all key analyst expectations, comes after a tough stretch for management. Alphabet announced the largest layoffs in company history in January, and some investors have pressed Porat to cut costs even further.
Alphabet reported $74.6 billion in revenue for the April-June quarter, up 7% from a year earlier.
In an interview on Tuesday, Porat said she was ready to move to a new position after working in CFO roles for 14 years.
"I thought it was the right time to take on a different set of challenges, discussed the need for a new role with Sundar, and it goes right to what I love to do," Porat said.
The results mark Google's second straight quarter of accelerating growth following an extended slowdown coming out of the pandemic, which boosted demand for internet services. Online advertisers have increased spending in recent months, analysts said, providing some relief to technology companies that rely on the income to support research in artificial intelligence and other far-flung ventures.
The earnings, the first full quarter of results since Microsoft updated its Bing search engine with conversational AI features, also provided an early glimpse into whether new web-search experiences have made a dent in Google's core business: so far, not much.
"What we're really seeing, in particular, is the continued resilience of search," Porat said during the interview.
The company's shares climbed more than 6% in after-hours trading after the results.
Google reported operating income of $21.8 billion for the second quarter, up 12% from a year earlier.
Porat, a former banker and CFO of Morgan Stanley, has been credited with bringing greater cost discipline to Google and easing the company's transition to the Alphabet corporate structure, which resembles a holding company like Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway. Google said in an April proxy statement that Porat was 65 years old.
The search giant, which gets most of its revenue from ads running alongside web links, is in the middle of a battle with other big tech companies and more startups hoping to capitalize on recent advances in AI.
Microsoft's revenue growth slowed last quarter amid sluggish corporate demand, even as the company and other cloud-computing providers are benefiting from growing interest in AI services.
Google co-founder Sergey Brin, Alphabet's second-largest individual shareholder, has recently been working with researchers at headquarters about three or four days a week on Gemini, its next big AI system, The Wall Street Journal reported last week. The company said he doesn't have a formal role other than co-founder and board member.
Persistent economic uncertainty and concerns about competition from products such as the ChatGPT bot developed by Microsoft-backed OpenAI have weighed on Google this year.
The company provided some relief to investors in May, unveiling a raft of AI-infused products including a new version of its search engine at an annual developer conference.
Pichai said Tuesday the new search engine was progressing ahead of expectations. The product, currently in limited testing, provides lengthy summaries in response to a range of queries and invites users to ask follow-up questions.
"You will see us continue to bring it to more and more users," Pichai said on a call with analysts. "Over time, this will just be how search works."
Pichai said Google would continue experimenting with ad formats in the new search engine in response to a question about whether the product would eat into sales. "We have a lot of experience working through these transitions," he added.
Google's cloud-computing division, a central piece of its AI strategy, reported $8 billion in revenue, up 28% from a year earlier. The unit recorded its second straight operating profit, bringing in $395 million during the period.
Alphabet's share price has risen roughly 37% since the beginning of the year, matching gains in the broader Nasdaq Composite Index but trailing rival Microsoft.
Google reported $58 billion in advertising revenue, up about 3% from a year earlier. The company reported falling ad sales in the past two consecutive quarters, a rare decline for one of the tech industry's most stable businesses.
YouTube, the Google-owned video platform, reported a 4.4% jump in ad sales to $7.7 billion, the first year-over-year increase since the second quarter of 2022. The YouTube Shorts video service, a competitor to TikTok, had more than two billion monthly users, up from 1.5 billion one year ago, Pichai said.
Some advertisers have sought refunds following a report last month alleging Google violated promised standards when placing video ads on other websites. In a statement this month, the company said the study relied on faulty methodology.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
