[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
In a gold rush, sell picks and shovels. If you really want to play three-dimensional chess, buy the company that makes those picks and shovels.
Chip giant Nvidia is getting a major boost from the artificial-intelligence boom. Every tech firm from Microsoft to Google has rushed to join the frenzy, sparked by the success of ChatGPT. But Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., or TSMC, which makes Nvidia's AI chips, could be another significant beneficiary.
Nvidia shares jumped 24% Thursday, a day after the company projected revenue to jump more than 64% to $11 billion for the current quarter. That guidance -- more than 50% above analysts' expectations on S&P Global Market Intelligence -- would be the highest quarterly sales ever for the company.
Surging demand for Nvidia's chips, used in data centers for AI calculations, is a main reason for the blowout forecast.
If Nvidia is expected to sell that many more chips, TSMC, which actually manufactures those chips, should also see an increase in orders. TSMC's Taiwan-listed stock rose 3.4% Thursday. TSMC's high-performance computing segment, which makes data-center chips like Nvidia's but also more consumer-focused products such as processors for personal computers, is its biggest revenue contributor, making up 44% of total sales last quarter.
In the near term, the AI boost may not be enough to offset weaknesses in other areas such as smartphones and personal computers, where the market is still digesting chip inventories piled up in the past couple of years. TSMC said last month it expected its revenue to drop by a low-to-mid-single-digit percentage for 2023.
But Nvidia's rosy outlook should give investors more confidence that the AI boom will translate into more concrete earnings growth for TSMC -- probably much sooner than most market participants had anticipated. And Nvidia won't be the only customer for AI chips. Other companies that wish to design their own chips will likely need TSMC too, given its leading position in chip manufacturing, as well as its new technology in advanced packaging. Being the sole supplier, more or less, for the weapons needed for an epic battle for AI dominance among Google, Microsoft and nearly every other big tech firm is a rather envious position to be in, as Nvidia itself is clearly demonstrating.
TSMC's stock trades at 17 times next-12-month earnings, slightly below its five-year average of 19 times, according to S&P Global Market Intelligence. That compares with 61 times for Nvidia. Clearly, TSMC isn't a pure AI play, meaning it may not see quite the same levels of explosive growth as Nvidia, and it is also a more capital-intensive business.
But it could be a cheaper bet to ride the AI boom, particularly if the chip-price cycle as a whole ends up bottoming out in the second half of 2023.
Credit: By Jacky Wong
