[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Give CrowdStrike credit at least for trying to punch up.
The provider of cloud-based cybersecurity software has been one of the hottest names in the space, and for good reason. Revenue growth has averaged 67% annually over the past three years -- well above the 45% average growth over that time shown by other cloud-software companies generating at least $2 billion in annual revenue. Still, CrowdStrike's annual revenue is about what Microsoft Corp. generates in sales every four days, and the tech giant has recently locked its gaze on CrowdStrike's end of the security market with offerings such as its Defender software.
The competitive threat from Microsoft became apparent after CrowdStrike issued a disappointing forecast in November. Its fiscal third-quarter results at that time also showed an alarming slowdown in growth for net new annualized recurring revenue, a key measure of new business added during the period. CrowdStrike at the time painted this as a result of corporate tech budgets getting tightened, but analysts later raised the issue of Microsoft's growing presence in the cybersecurity market.
Joshua Tilton of Wolfe Research downgraded CrowdStrike to a "neutral" rating following that report, noting that "our checks indicate that over the last 12 months Microsoft's offering has significantly improved." CrowdStrike's shares slid nearly 15% on its weak guidance, and the stock has lagged behind several notable cybersecurity peers so far this year.
Hence, Microsoft was a major topic at CrowdStrike's annual investor day late Tuesday. And the company didn't pull its punches. Chief Executive George Kurtz mentioned Microsoft 11 times in his introductory remarks alone, accusing the software and cloud-computing giant of using "the same failed model that McAfee and Symantec have been using for the past 25 years." He also claimed that -- on competitive deals -- CrowdStrike wins against Microsoft 8 out of 10 times.
That message largely resonated with analysts -- 88% of whom already had a "buy" rating on CrowdStrike's stock. But it fell a bit flat with investors, who sent the stock down nearly 7% by Wednesday's closing bell. A major selloff across the tech landscape during the day didn't help, but CrowdStrike also left unchanged from a year ago its target of achieving $5 billion in annualized recurring revenue by its 2026 fiscal year, up from its current level of $2.56 billion. The unchanged forecast suggests that the company is at least baking in some caution, given that its business has grown well over the past year. Brad Reback of Stifel cited near-term pricing pressure, a "moderating customer demand environment" and competitive pressure from Microsoft as reasons CrowdStrike might not be able to reaccelerate growth in this year's latter half.
Microsoft is under the same economic pressures to grow its business any way it can. It has also made Defender an early market to deploy its new Copilot -- a generative artificial-intelligence tool based on the popular ChatGPT technology -- which could drive customer interest even further. Fatima Boolani of Citigroup estimates Microsoft has annual cybersecurity business of $20 billion a year, but notes that pure-play vendors such as CrowdStrike still have some important advantages given the fragmented nature of cybersecurity, and the risk of bundling key security technology with broader software offerings, which theoretically raises potential for catastrophic hacks. CrowdStrike just has to keep the hits coming.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
