The potential macroeconomic benefits of generative artificial intelligence and machine-learning technologies are staggering. Generative AI, by some estimates, stands to double the rate of U.S. productivity growth after a decade of widespread adoption and add trillions of dollars a year to global economic output.
The microeconomic disruption of such game-changing innovation in the workplace is a more complicated story. The technology behind the ChatGPT application will take tasks from millions of employees higher on the wage ladder more than it does from those whose jobs were diminished by factory or warehouse robots in recent decades. So-called knowledge workers and white-collar professionals will feel more pain this time around.
Generative AI algorithms can, or are expected to soon, read and summarize into bullet points business, medical and legal documents. Startup AI firms are developing chatbots as well as generators for text, computer code, images, video, design, voice and music. Illustrators, healthcare workers, actors, educators, legal researchers, office workers and drug-company technicians could be the first occupations threatened with this new form of AI.
Ultimately, the issue is whether displaced skilled employees find comparable work or if they will be consigned to less economically valuable work in the AI-driven economy.
"We will not run out of jobs," said David H. Autor, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology economics professor who studies labor-market impacts and technological change. "It's a question of whether we will have jobs that make use of scarce skills where people are valuable or whether we have jobs that are much more menial."
Some professionals already find themselves in conflict with AI. In Hollywood, the actors union is striking in part over the threat of "digital replicas" -- a form of AI -- and the potential that studios could produce entertainment without actors' physical presence or consent, and without compensating them for it.
The union says studios could profit from these replicas while the actors have no control over their images or creative output. "We see it coming and there has to be guardrails," said Duncan Crabtree-Ireland, the chief negotiator for SAG-Aftra.
Jim Weatherall, vice president for data science and AI at drug company AstraZeneca, said the company has been using generative AI, or a form of it, for several years. There was a time when a biologist could read all the available scientific literature out there.
Generative AI allows researchers to "intelligently interrogate" the information and it is envisioned that it could then go to the next step and suggest untapped areas for developing drugs, Weatherall said.
Jack Kokko, chief executive at market-intelligence firm AlphaSense, said his company has layered a generative AI tool on its search engine of financial documents. The new product is called Smart Summaries.
The tool can summarize the financial documents in bullet points, "the kind of thing that more junior analysts or business professionals would have done manually," Kokko said.
An issue with generative AI is so-called hallucination, with the AI reaching faulty or wrong conclusions. AlphaSense has taken precautions against hallucination by, in part, linking to the underlying data and training the generative AI tool to access trustworthy business content, the company said.
Morgan Stanley has developed a generative AI tool that enables thousands of employees to query 100,000 internal corporate documents for answers.
The bank says the goal of the tool is to free up time for advisers to do more important things, such as talking with clients. They can ask the AI for research on a stock, the benefits of a Morgan Stanley product or how to open an individual retirement account. The tool reads through the 100,000 documents for text on the topic and summarizes an answer. Morgan Stanley tested the tool on thousands of questions asked of it by employees who rated the answers to help train it.
Parsing the tasks of hundreds of occupations for automation potential with generative AI, the McKinsey Global Institute estimated in a June report that 75% of the value of generative AI could fall in four areas: customer service, marketing and sales, software engineering, and research and development.
Generative AI could interact with customers, develop creative content for marketing and sales and draft computer code based on natural-language prompts, the report said.
McKinsey's research estimates generative AI could add the equivalent of $2.6 trillion to $4.4 trillion a year globally.
In a report in July, Goldman Sachs estimated generative AI could raise annual labor productivity growth in the U.S. by 1.5 percentage points after 10 years of broad adoption. Of U.S. work tasks, 25% could be automated over time with the AI advances, according to the report.
Assuming a 40-hour workweek, the 1.5 percentage points would be equivalent to accomplishing an additional 36 minutes of work.
"A boost of this size would roughly double the recent pace of U.S. productivity growth, and would be about the same size as the boost that followed the emergence of prior transformative technologies like the electric motor and personal computer," Joseph Briggs, senior global economist at Goldman Sachs, wrote in the report.
The productivity gains of the type that Goldman Sachs is talking about amounts to $400 billion to $600 billion a year said Mark Zandi, Moody's Analytics chief economist.
Goldman said the productivity gains wouldn't necessarily be realized over the next 10 years.
Credit: By Bob Fernandez
