SHANGHAI -- In a sign of its ambition to compete more in artificial intelligence, Tencent Holdings Ltd. says it has hired Zhang Tong, a Stanford-trained researcher who formerly led Baidu Inc.'s Big Data Lab, to oversee its fledgling AI program.
Dr. Zhang worked on artificial intelligence at Baidu, as part of his lab-director role there. Baidu suffered a setback in its artificial-intelligence efforts earlier this week when chief scientist Andrew Ng said he was leaving the company.
At Tencent, Dr. Zhang will lead a team of 250 researchers and engineers in a lab set up in April last year to develop technologies for its gaming, content, social media and cloud businesses. The team will also work closely with AI researchers in Tencent's product groups, the Chinese internet firm said.
Tencent, led by Chairman Pony Ma, is best known for its online games and WeChat social messaging service.
The Shenzhen-based company is expanding its investments in facial recognition, speech recognition and machine translation as it seeks to better monetize its offerings and explore new business areas.
During the company's quarterly earnings report Wednesday, Tencent President Martin Lau told investors that several of their content and advertising products would benefit from such software, and said the firm is exploring entering areas such as autonomous driving.
WeChat, a social-messaging platform with more than 889 million users, uses voice-recognition software to help translate different languages into Mandarin text.
Chinese tech giants Tencent, Alibaba Group Holding and Baidu are in a land grab for artificial intelligence talent as the technology is seen as having the potential to disrupt several traditional industries, said Cool Zhang, a research director at IDC China.
"This is the start of the AI trend now," the Beijing-based Mr. Zhang said. "Everyone, from the big companies to the startups, is jumping in this year." Still, Mr. Zhang warned that current AI technologies have yet to prove themselves as moneymakers.
Baidu has made artificial intelligence the strategic direction for the company, while Alibaba has been investing in startups that work on autonomous driving and facial recognition.
Separately, Tencent announced Thursday that it led a $350 million funding round into Chinese live-streaming startup Kuaishou, which has a large following with younger users and people in China's smaller cities.
Credit: By Liza Lin
