New York City startups have been snapping up increasingly lucrative deals in recent years.
While Silicon Valley continues to lead venture-capital funding in the U.S., investors are writing big checks to Big Apple companies. New York startups closed nearly 1,500 deals worth $12 billion last year -- nearly double the $6.3 billion in capital invested in 2014 for a similar number of deals, according to the New York City Economic Development Corp.
About 850 deals have closed so far this year, netting $9.1 billion.
James Patchett, president and chief executive of the New York City Economic Development Corp., said the city has invested in technology projects such as cybersecurity, blockchain and virtual and artificial reality. "This momentum has brought critical new investment to New York City's ecosystem, which ultimately has created critical new jobs for New Yorkers," he said.
The city's maturing market is helping boost the size of deals as companies that got seed funding several years ago secure more financing in later rounds, said David Silverman, a partner at PricewaterhouseCoopers.
Financial institutions may be helping drive the investment as they turn to technology companies for assistance with automation and data management.
Data and technology company Enigma, which combines public data with private client information to help customers with financial-risk management, underwriting and pharmaceutical safety, among other things, has thrived in its New York City location, said its co-founder and CEO, Hicham Oudghiri. Nearly all the company's clients are based in New York.
"Having New York City as a home base, and getting close and understanding how these companies work, has been very critical for us in the earlier phase of the company," he said in an interview. "I don't think we could have done this outside of New York."
Enigma, which was founded seven years ago, announced Tuesday that it had raised $95 million to expand its business and hire more data scientists and machine-learning engineers. The new funding also will help the company open a satellite office outside New York, likely on the East Coast, for data sourcing and acquisition, Mr. Oudghiri said.
"The lifeblood of the company is acquiring more and more and more data," he said.
Mr. Oudghiri declined to reveal Enigma's valuation. He said he considers data and technology companies such as Oracle and Thomson Reuters to be the firm's main competitors. Representatives for Oracle and Thomson Reuters declined to comment.
One of Enigma's investors is MetLife Inc., which has been looking for technology partners for help in areas such as data compliance and underwriting, said chief digital officer Greg Baxter.
"There's just this explosion of data and it's growing exponentially, but it's messy, it's fragmented, and it's buried in all sorts of systems," Mr. Baxter said. "It's very hard to pick trends and figure out how the data is connected."
Other New York City companies that have closed lucrative deals this year include Peloton Interactive Inc., which makes video-streaming stationary bikes and raised $550 million in August. Letgo, a mobile classifieds startup, secured $500 million this summer, and Dataminr, which analyzes social-media data, secured $392 million in June.
The continued success of New York City's tech industry will depend on whether entrepreneurs can sell their companies and invest some of that capital in startups, Mr. Silverman said. "Feeding that ecosystem is extremely important," he said. "New York has had some notable exits, but hasn't had what I'd call the mega-mega-IPO. Something like that would certainly be a huge boost."

Credit: By Kate King
