[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Micron Technology Inc.'s latest results give new meaning to the phrase "darkest before the dawn."
The memory-chip maker said late Tuesday that fiscal second-quarter revenue plunged 53% from a year earlier to about $3.7 billion. That follows a 47% drop the previous quarter, and the company projected a 57% slide for the current period that ends in May.
The memory business has long been one of volatile swings, but Micron hasn't seen a sustained sales downturn of the same degree since the industry was reeling from the dot-com crash in 2001, according to data from S&P Global Market Intelligence. Operating losses were $2.3 billion -- the most Micron has ever lost in a single quarter.
In another painful blast from the past, Micron is now barely covering its basic costs. Reported gross margins went negative in the just-ended quarter for the first time since 2009. That was mostly from a $1.4 billion write-down of piled-up inventory that the company announced Tuesday. But even without that noncash charge, Micron Chief Financial Officer Mark Murphy said on Tuesday's earnings call that gross margin would have been just 7.3% in the second quarter -- a 14-year low. He added that gross margins excluding those charges are expected to be a negative 7.5% in the current quarter and "trough" in the second half of this year, with improvement expected during Micron's next fiscal year that begins after August.
That reflects both the weak pricing that memory chips now fetch and the reality that -- even during sharp downturns -- chip makers can't fully shut down all their fabrication facilities. Those facilities include expensive and sensitive equipment plus highly paid and trained personnel not easily furloughed or replaced. This results in "underutilization," which Mr. Murphy says is now at levels "that none of us have seen before" and is expected to cost Micron $1.1 billion in the current fiscal year.
When exactly things will start looking back up is anyone's guess. Chief Executive Sanjay Mehrotra said Tuesday that he thinks revenue from cloud-service operators bottomed in the just-ended quarter, and growing demand for artificial-intelligence processors in those customers' data centers will also drive demand for Micron's memory, as AI chips need about eight times the DRAM content compared with regular server processors.
As one of three remaining producers of the crucial computing component, Micron faces little risk of long-term viability. But crawling out of this memory hole is still painful.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
