LONDON -- Masayoshi Son, the founder and chief executive of Japanese telecommunications and internet giant SoftBank Group Corp., is making another big bet -- this time on a nascent technology that might take years or decades to bloom.
Improbable, a London-based startup that makes virtual worlds for videogames and simulations of the real world, said Thursday that it raised $502 million in a SoftBank-led funding round. Improbable said SoftBank would take a board seat and noncontrolling stake in the startup, but didn't disclose the deal's terms.
The company said that based on the funding round, investors now value it at more than $1 billion, though didn't give further details.
The deal fits broadly into Mr. Son's recent interest in artificial intelligence. He has said that the promise of AI and the Internet of Things -- the idea that everyday items such as sneakers and refrigerators will be connected to the web -- has underpinned some of the big and surprising deals that SoftBank has pulled off in the past year.
SoftBank is starting a $100 billion technology-investment fund with a Saudi sovereign-wealth fund. Last year, it bought British chip designer ARM Holdings PLC for $32 billion.
The Improbable investment is being made by SoftBank, not the new fund, which hasn't launched yet.
The deal is an unusually large single investment for a startup in the U.K., which has tried to position itself as a destination for tech talent and financing. The country boasts a global research hub that includes Cambridge and Oxford, which each host world-class universities that have put new focus on innovation in tech and biotech. London, meanwhile, is home to big offices for tech giants such as Apple Inc. and Google parent Alphabet Inc.
But access to investment capital has restricted startups here, as it has in other aspiring tech "hubs" outside Silicon Valley.
Mr. Son is bringing new heft to U.K.'s global tech bona fides. His $100 billion tech fund is based in London. His bet on Improbable is another vote of confidence.
The U.K. has already raised its profile in the field of artificial intelligence research after Google in 2014 snapped up DeepMind, an AI startup founded by Cambridge alumni. Before being bought by Google, it gobbled up two other startups founded by Oxford grads.
In a statement, SoftBank Managing Director Deep Nishar said Improbable's real-world simulations "will help us explore disease, improve cities, understand economies and solve complex problems." A SoftBank spokesman declined to make Mr. Son available for an interview.
Founded by University of Cambridge graduates in 2012, Improbable currently focuses on videogames. It created a platform that lets developers of multiplayer online games create virtual worlds that adhere to real-world constraints such as population growth, traffic flow and the spread of diseases. The company then generates revenue from clients for its work.
Improbable co-founder and Chief Executive Herman Narula pointed out a recent mini-crisis at a videogame using his platform as an example. "At one point, the beetles didn't mate at a certain rate and it collapsed part of their world's ecology," said Mr. Narula, the 29-year-old son of an Indian construction magnate.
Mr. Narula said Improbable would continue to focus on gaming, but was branching out into real-world applications. He believes that government agencies and utility companies would be interested in Improbable's technology, because it can show how small changes in a city can affect traffic, telecommunications and infrastructure. He said Improbable's product could help in disaster preparation, simulating how millions of people would move, make phone calls and use electricity during a tsunami or terrorist attack, for example.
Improbable provides only the platform for such simulations. Its clients would feed information to create the simulations.
Mr. Narula said he met with SoftBank representatives before flying to Japan to meet Mr. Son, who quizzed him on the technical details of Improbable's product. He said the two had similar visions of the future, for the most part. "Masa has a 300-year plan," Mr. Narula said. "I'm not that ambitious. I have a 50-year plan."
Improbable said existing investors Andreessen Horowitz, the Silicon Valley venture firm, and Horizons Ventures, the fund of Hong Kong billionaire Li Ka-shing, made follow-up investments alongside SoftBank's contribution.
Improbable plans to use the investment to speed up its growth and hire more people in its London and San Francisco offices.
Credit: By Stu Woo
