Hewlett Packard Enterprise Co., having backed away from a key portion of the cloud computing-on-demand market, is expanding into cloud services to help companies analyze data such as photos, audio clips and comments on social media.
Haven OnDemand, which runs on computers operated by Microsoft Corp.'s Azure cloud-computing division, gives users access to sophisticated techniques such as machine learning without the need to maintain a data center or develop the underlying technology.
HP Enterprise and others, including Microsoft and International Business Machines Corp., are setting up such services in part to court software developers -- an audience that increasingly defines capabilities of all kinds of products used by companies and consumers.
"Developers are everything," said Colin Mahony, an HP Enterprise senior vice president who oversees its efforts in the field known as big data.
The company, one of two resulting from the breakup of Hewlett-Packard Co. in November, announced Haven in late 2014 and began offering it for sale last week.
Haven initially was expected to run on Helion Public Cloud, a computing-on-demand service developed by the combined H-P. But the company in October announced that it would discontinue that service, though it still helps customers develop cloud-like services run on their own premises. HP Enterprise the following month announced plans to collaborate with Microsoft Azure in several areas.
The company can use new businesses. HP Enterprise, reporting its first separate financial results since its breakup with Hewlett-Packard Inc., said earlier this month that total first-quarter revenue declined 2.5%.
Machine learning refers to programming that enables computers to make inferences. Instead of defining attributes of a face, for example, a programmer may show the computer numerous photographs of faces and allow the machine to come up with its own criteria to detect the presence or absence of one.
One initial Haven customer is Blink, a startup developing a kind of mobile speed-dating app that sets up two-minute video chats between users. The company every three seconds sends to Haven a still image from each participant's camera to verify the presence of faces -- rather than potentially obscene imagery, said Evan Gow, chief executive of the Austin, Texas, company.
If the computer determines that a face isn't present, it interrupts the video conversation.
HP Enterprise says Haven offers more than 60 such commands that invoke particular computing functions. They include the ability to recognize barcodes, transcribe speech to text from audio or video files, and analyze text for positive or negative sentiments.
Credit: By Don Clark
