The confluence of risks facing the stock market in coming days is enough to give some investors jitters.
This week brings earnings reports from many of the big tech companies whose stocks have powered the market to records. Analysts will scrutinize the companies' investments in artificial intelligence as they try to forecast the payoff from bets on AI.
While the market's rally has broadened in recent months, with shares of utilities and industrial and financial companies racing higher, the largest technology stocks continue to exert a powerful influence on the direction of the benchmark S&P 500.
Furthermore, the Magnificent Seven group of big tech companies is expected to account for nearly all the earnings growth from the S&P 500 for the third quarter, according to a FactSet analysis, heightening the importance of their results to the next leg of the rally.
"They are such a heavyweight bunch of names," said Nicholas Colas, co-founder of DataTrek Research. "Both the blessing and the curse of the S&P is that it is super reliant on seven, eight names."
Investors also are bracing for upheaval as the days until the U.S. presidential election turn into hours. Some money managers and hedge funds, believing the race has tilted toward former President Donald Trump, have placed bets that they think will pay off if he returns to the White House.
With the contest between Trump and Vice President Kamala Harris looking close, other investors are readying for the possibility that the winner isn't known on election night, prolonging the market's uncertainty about what taxes and regulatory environment businesses are likely to face.
"You're going to see a lot of volatility going into the election and coming out," said Stephanie Lang, chief investment officer at wealth-management firm Homrich Berg.
Stocks are trading near records, and at valuations that appear the priciest in years. The S&P 500 has notched 47 record closes in 2024, including four this month, and is up 22% for the year. The index traded in recent days at more than 22 times its projected earnings over the next 12 months, its highest multiple since April 2021, according to FactSet.
Optimism has faded among some investors that the market is about to climb even higher. A survey released last week from the American Association of Individual Investors showed that bullish sentiment, or an expectation that stock prices will rise over the next six months, dropped to its lowest level since April, when the S&P 500 last logged a losing month.
Stocks also are facing a potential drag from a rise in government-bond yields, which tends to make investors less eager to embrace the riskiness of the equity market. The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note last week hit 4.240%, its highest close since July, after settling as low as 3.622% in mid-September.
Analysts have attributed the climb in yields partly to strong economic data that suggest the Federal Reserve may be able to cut interest rates more slowly than had been anticipated. They also think investors may be betting on a Trump win coupled with Republican control of Congress, leading to bigger budget deficits and a larger supply of Treasurys.
The first Magnificent Seven earnings report, from Tesla last week, showed the intensity of the market's focus on the big tech stocks. The electric-car maker's shares soared 22% in their best day since 2013 after the company surprised Wall Street with strong quarterly earnings.
Google parent Alphabet is scheduled to report Tuesday, followed on Wednesday by Microsoft as well as Facebook parent Meta Platforms. Apple and Amazon.com are on tap Thursday. Nvidia, the final member of the Magnificent Seven, reports Nov. 20.
Last earnings season, investors began to worry about some of the tech giants pouring billions of dollars into AI.
Amazon shares suffered their worst day in more than two years after the company projected weaker-than-expected sales growth and said it would continue to ratchet up spending to meet demand for artificial-intelligence services. Alphabet and Microsoft shares also fell after the companies' reports.
"It's a tightrope act of spending, giving confidence that the revenues will be coming through, but spending too much and maybe the market gets overly concerned," said Aaron Clark, portfolio manager at GW&K Investment Management. "That's the needle they're all trying to thread."
Analysts expect profits from the Magnificent Seven grew 18.6% in the third quarter, compared with 0.2% growth from the rest of the companies in the S&P 500, according to John Butters, senior earnings analyst at FactSet. Those figures include the results of companies that have reported and estimates for those that have yet to release their results.
That doesn't mean the stock market is about to revert to the all-tech, all-the-time trade of the first half of the year. Markets try to anticipate the future, and in the coming quarters, the other 493 companies in the benchmark are expected to deliver profit growth in the double-digit percentages.
Many investors say that is good news for the durability of the rally.
"We can't be dependent on five companies just hitting it out of the park," said Julie Biel, chief market strategist and portfolio manager at Kayne Anderson Rudnick. "That doesn't create a lot of stability."
And there are reasons to think that companies across the economy could be poised to deliver. Economists have been feeling increasingly optimistic about growth and don't anticipate a sharp rise in unemployment. Inflation recently cooled to a new three-year low, and the Fed has begun to lower interest rates.
It is a scenario in which stocks far from the dazzle of the AI trade could perform.
"If the economy can hold up and the Fed is cutting into a solid economic picture, it should set the market on a good trajectory from here," said Homrich Berg's Lang.
Generate image description

Credit: By Karen Langley
