Google has introduced an earbud that, when paired with a new handset, will automatically translate 40 languages into English. This is terrific news for aspiring American entrepreneurs who are constantly told that if they don't learn Mandarin, they'll never be able to compete in the global marketplace.
It's great news for American diplomats wondering what the North Koreans are whispering to the Chinese. And it's wonderful for soccer fans who will be able to understand exactly what the Romanian midfielders are screaming at the Swedish refs. Something about their lineage.
But an even more exciting innovation -- one that our formidable artificial intelligence experts are doubtless developing -- would be an earbud that takes sentences spoken in our own language and translates the actual meaning of the words. English is an allusive language that relies on heavy doses of sarcasm and irony, so words do not always mean what you think they mean.
An instant translator of this type would help communicate innuendo, hidden meanings and implied threats. It would help hopelessly unsophisticated rubes understand baffling phrases like "I don't like the cut of your jib" or "I'd give that fellow a wide berth." Never again would anyone have to worry about a hapless interlocutor getting the gist.
For example, when parents say, "Skyler, would you like to set the table?" what they really mean is: "Look, kid, if that table's not set in 10 seconds flat, your PlayStation 4 is going in the trash."
Similarly, the Instant Honesty Earbud Translator could clarify seemingly pleasant comments. Thus, when someone gets a present and says, "Why, how very, very thoughtful!" the gift-giver might hear, "Do you really think I would wear that in public, you idiot? Well, I suppose this is payback for last year's orange tie."
Similarly, the device could clear up the misunderstandings that can distract from making sports-stadium events the joy they should be. Harried security guards have been taught to speak in a nonconfrontational fashion that fails to get the message across. Now, the security guard would be able to say, "Hello! Could I take a gander at those tickets?" knowing full well the earbud-carrying ticket holder will hear: "We don't let pathetic losers like you watch the game in the Platinum Level Skyboxes. Not now. Not ever."
Business would become a lot more transparent. For an earbud-wearing visitor, a contemptuous administrative assistant's greeting of "And you are?" would immediately sound like "Do you really think I'd let a slob like you go in and talk to my boss?" And corporate representatives could no longer hide behind the classic line, "We refuse to dignify those slanderous accusations with comment," which would become, "Of course we're the ones who dumped all that dioxin in the river."
The translator would also do yeoman duty in warning people to avoid potentially dangerous situations. "Private party," a restaurant bouncer would say. "Your reservation's canceled."
But the words heard by the person with the Instant Honesty device would be: "The Cosa Nostra, the Medellin Cartel, 35 motorcycle gangs and several hundred alumni of the KGB are having their Christmas party inside. Why not go have a hot fudge sundae at Applebee's?"

Credit: By Joe Queenan
