Chinese semiconductor stocks continued to rally in Hong Kong, buoyed by China's aggressive economic stimulus package as well as hopes for even more measures.
Investor sentiment was boosted by Beijing's recent package of stimulus measures as well as strong fund inflows into Chinese and Hong Kong equity markets, benefiting the chip sector, analysts said. Some think Beijing could unveil additional measures, as the country returns from National Day holidays, and investors will be monitoring the news conference by its top economic planner, the National Development and Reform Commission, on Tuesday.
China could unveil a fiscal package of up 1.5 trillion yuan to 2 trillion yuan, or $212.8 billion to $283.7 billion, in the near term, UBS economists said in a research note. They added the package could be split between supporting households and corporations, and reducing local governments' financing gap.
Shares of Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corp., China's largest contract chip maker, rose more than 20% in Hong Kong on Monday, after surging 29% on Friday. Their gains over the past two sessions added HK$93.65 billion, the equivalent of $12.06 billion, to its market capitalization, Its smaller peer Hua Hong Semiconductor gained over 40% since Thursday's close.
The strength in chip stocks is leading a market rally in Hong Kong. The benchmark Hang Seng Index rose 1.4%, taking its gain to 26% since the measures were announced.
With expectations of further stimulus from Beijing in the backdrop, the "overall foundry sector is on the pace of recovery with more stable pricing environment," Mizuho technology and semiconductor analyst Kevin Wang said.
The global semiconductor industry faced an inventory glut last year after a pandemic-driven shortage of chips. This year, Chinese chip makers were left out of the artificial-intelligence frenzy that surrounded industry leaders like Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., which produces advanced chips. That is because the Chinese foundries mostly make less-sophisticated electronic products amid U.S. sanctions that restrict the export of advanced chip-related equipment to China. Although Chinese chip makers witnessed a gradual recovery in orders from domestic clients over the past two quarters, they still face oversupply concerns.
The rally in semiconductor shares in recent sessions hasn't changed the outlook of China's chip sector, Wang said. He noted the fourth quarter is a low season, the foundry sector should continue to recover in 2025. "The only potential difference is whether strong stock market [could] drive economy and consumption in China," he added.
Credit: By Sherry Qin
