[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Rather than getting butts off sofas, Hollywood's strike may once again make people binge on Korean soap operas instead of American ones. Yet investors in Zoo Digital, frankly, don't need to give a damn.
Shares of this U.K.-based technology firm, which offers subtitling and dubbing services for movies and TV shows, have lost more than 50% of their value over the past three months, as the strike of Hollywood writers and actors has interrupted television and film production.
In 2021, Zoo was a sexy high-growth venture with an enterprise value of 80 times expected operating earnings. It now trades at a multiple of 15, barely above the average of the U.K. stock market.
The Hollywood strike isn't the only reason for the loss of confidence. Text-generating artificial intelligence could reduce the need to manually translate and caption dialogues.
Also, streaming platforms such as Netflix, Disney+ and Amazon Prime Video plan to slash expenses in an effort to become profitable after years of splurging on original content. Labor disruptions could be an excuse to cut even more.
Between the 2015 and 2023 fiscal years, Zoo's revenue grew at a compound annual rate of 29%. Its cash flow has been positive despite massive investments, and the firm said last week that profits in the 12 months through March were almost six times higher than a year earlier.
To get hooked again, investors must brush off some misconceptions: Spending on new streaming content may be a proxy for Zoo's business, but it is an imprecise one. Zoo doesn't care about movie budgets, only about streamers adding minutes to their platforms, which they are certain to keep doing.
The Covid-19 crisis showed that when there is no new content, viewers simply watch old shows or embrace foreign productions like Netflix's "Squid Game." For Zoo, which has a growing network of freelancers around the globe and is opening new regional hubs, translating from foreign languages into English is an opportunity. About 27% of the world's most popular titles were made outside of the U.S. in 2021, from 15% in 2017, Ampere Analysis data shows.
Back catalogs can be cash cows, too. Even when an old show has already been dubbed and captioned, it needs to be remastered and upgraded to the modern technical standards required by each platform. These "media services" come with higher margins for Zoo.
Only a few other firms like California's Pixelogic offer end-to-end language services for media. Zoo's cloud-based technology cuts costs by allowing many dubbing actors to work from home. As streamers hunker down, they are likely to streamline their supply chain, and Zoo could take market share.
Of course, high-growth companies come with risks. Chief among them at Zoo is client concentration: In the year through March, 74% of revenue came from a single customer, believed to be Walt Disney -- now knee-deep in a crisis due to big streaming losses, movie flops and empty theme parks. Also, AI has become good enough to caption documentaries and YouTube videos.
But Zoo recently announced it has been selected as a key vendor by a second major Hollywood platform. As for robots, they are still a ways from being able to subtitle high-quality fiction, let alone do dubbing, which is the segment where Zoo has the most growth potential.
At these valuations, Zoo may be making investors an offer they can't refuse.
Credit: By Jon Sindreu
