The Supreme Court held in 1884 that a photograph of Oscar Wilde was protected by copyright law because it was not a "mere mechanical reproduction" but "an original work of art," the product of the photographer's "intellectual invention," of which the photographer "is the author." The photographer was lucky he wasn't a monkey. The Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals held Monday that Naruto, an Indonesian crested macaque, has no right to photos he snapped in 2011.
The "monkey selfie case" began at a wildlife reserve on the island of Sulawesi. David Slater, a British wildlife photographer, left his camera unattended, and Naruto began playing with it. The stunning images went viral, and People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals sued on Naruto's behalf. The judges not only dismissed the monkey's infringement claim but ordered PETA to pay costs and attorneys fees to Mr. Slater and his publishers.
Now comes the hard part. If the monkey doesn't own the copyright, who does? Nobody, it seems. According to a guide from the U.S. Copyright Office, it "will refuse to register a claim if it determines that a human being did not create the work." It specifically excludes not only works by monkeys (and elephants), but those "produced by a machine or mere mechanical process that operates randomly or automatically without any creative input or intervention from a human author."
Animals don't contribute valuable intellectual property to our culture or economy, but machines? Computers double their capabilities every two years and are currently able to paint, draw, compose music and, yes, write. Many simple sports and financial-news stories are written by computers. Machines generate maps, databases and other valuable works. Verse-writing software has passed its version of the Turing Test by producing a poem that was accepted for publication in a literary journal by editors who assumed it had been written by a human.
Monkeys can't own copyrights, and neither should computers or artificial-intelligence programs, but does that mean that all works created by monkeys and machines are in the public domain? Such a rule threatens computer-generated works that are indistinguishable in merit, value and originality from works created by humans.
Maybe the Copyright Office's hostility to computer-generated works can be explained by the Patent and Copyright Clause of the Constitution, which states that Congress shall have the power "to promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries." Extending copyright protection to monkeys or machines wouldn't create a direct incentive for them to produce "science and useful arts." But computer-generated works, for now at least, require human beings to develop, improve, distribute and use the technology. Copyright incentives could play a role in those human activities.
The question isn't whether computers can own copyrights, but whether humans (or corporations) should be able to claim ownership of works created by computers. Copyright laws already provide that in the case of "works for hire," the employer owns the copyright, even if an employee actually created the work. Shouldn't similar reasoning allow copyright protection for humans who employ computers to create valuable works?
Several foreign nations, including the U.K. and India, already grant copyrights to persons who arrange for the creation of computer-generated works. The U.S. should join them, lest creative computer programmers and users flee the country, making monkeys out of us Americans.
---
Mr. Denicola, a copyright scholar, and Mr. Dooling, a novelist, teach at the University of Nebraska College of Law.

Credit: By Robert C. Denicola and Richard Dooling
