The cutting edge of drone warfare is the front line of Ukraine's defense against Russia, where soldiers and manufacturers are innovating to counter Moscow's battlefield advantages.
In recent months, Ukraine has launched drones that intercept Russian flying machines or incinerate tree lines by dropping molten metal. In testing are drones that carry rifles and grenade launchers.
With a smaller military and fewer resources, Ukraine relies on tech to combat Russia's might. Once limited to dropping bomblets, Ukraine's drones now do jobs from planting mines to delivering supplies.
The focused is attaining an edge cheaply, quickly and for as long as possible. Ukrainian drone hacks are often rapidly copied by the Russians, eroding any tactical advantage.
Drone manufacturers churn out hundreds of thousands of small, cheap, strong and agile quadcopters, and maintain close contact with soldiers so designs are battle-ready. "That's how we evolve," said a founding member of drone manufacturer Wild Hornets.
The devices are the basis for these innovations that are changing the battlefield:
Drone on drone: Ukraine has found a solution to a problem vexing Western defense companies: how to combat cheap aerial drones.
Instead of fighting Russian reconnaissance drones with lasers, jammers or even nets, Ukraine destroys them using small drones -- quadcopters and fixed-wing -- that fly faster and higher than standard first-person-view drones.
Their digital communication system relays better-quality images, helping to find a target, said Ukrainian activist Serhiy Sternenko, who raises funds to buy drones for the military. He says the tactic has even taken out two Russian helicopters. And while surface-to-air missiles cost hundreds of thousands of dollars each, drones are as little as $700.
Russian reconnaissance drones have all but vanished over some cities, Sternenko added. On the front line, "there is much less reconnaissance flying in the air than three months ago," said a Ukrainian platoon commander. "They can't use their artillery as effectively as before."
Eliminating Russian eyes-in-the-sky could make it less risky for Ukraine to deploy precious Western antiaircraft systems closer to the front line, where they could shield infantry against Russian glide bombs.
Russia is trying to adapt, disguising its spy drones as Ukrainian, fitting them with additional cameras and flying them higher, Sternenko said.
Success in downing reconnaissance drones is driving development of drones to intercept Iranian-made Shahed drones, which Russia has used alongside missiles to overwhelm Ukrainian air defenses.
"We already have some prototypes," Sternenko said.
'Dragon's Breath': The war is being waged from tree line to tree line, with troops using the canopy to hide from drones swarming overhead. Ukraine's Dragon's Breath drone showers enemy positions with thermite -- a mixture of finely powdered aluminum and iron oxide that produces a very high temperature on combustion, burning through equipment, provisions and cover to expose enemy troops.
Soon after the Dragon's Breath drone appeared, Russian forces deployed drones with similar capabilities.
"A good gauge of what's effective is if the Russians try to copy it," said weapons analyst Matthew Moss.
'Queen of Hornets': On the edge of a field, a Ukrainian soldier fastened a grenade launcher to a Queen of Hornets quadcopter. Drone pilot Mykhailo Kudliak donned his vision goggles, flew the drone toward the wreckage of a vehicle and fired.
The test run was a success.
Conventional armed drones detonate on impact or drop munitions from above, making them vulnerable to the antidrone force field that jammers create around targets. The drone-mounted grenade launcher can fire at a distance. Locking onto a target is a challenge -- particularly if it is moving -- but using artificial intelligence to help aim might increase the hit rate, Moss said.
Other experiments include mounting an assault rifle on a drone with a mechanism to fire it midflight. The weapon is imprecise but could be used to harass and suppress enemy fire. The aim is to preserve scarce infantry by limiting exposure to close combat.
"The dream is to sit in a lounge somewhere, open up our laptops and start fighting," said Ukrainian drone-platoon commander Serhiy Ihnatuka.
Mother-ship drones: In the early days of the war, drones carried small weights over a short distance. Today, some models transport up to 20 pounds. That has widened drone capabilities to include resupplying troops and laying mines behind enemy lines. The Queen of Hornets quadcopter can hover at a height of 2 meters, enabling it to deposit a load without damage.
A drone's range is limited by its battery life. To overcome that, both Russia and Ukraine are using larger, longer range drones as mother ships to drop off smaller FPVs with one-way munitions.
"If you can fly a larger drone undetected . . . and hit targets that aren't expecting to be hit, that's very valuable," said weapons analyst Moss.
Credit: By Isabel Coles and Ievgeniia Sivorka
