As tensions mount between President Donald Trump and his fiercest critics in Silicon Valley, Michael Kratsios has the thorny task of playing peacemaker.
Mr. Kratsios, one of the White House's top technology advisers, is developing a high-tech policy agenda that he says will spur innovation in emerging technologies such as drones and artificial intelligence.
"We are really working on issues that policy makers have never tackled before," Mr. Kratsios, the U.S. deputy chief technology officer, told The Wall Street Journal in his first major interview since his appointment in March. "It's just a question of putting smart people around a table and trying to come up with an innovative approach to regulating" new technologies, he said.
To do that, he will need to work closely with the science and tech communities -- some of the staunchest critics of Mr. Trump's policies. Leading scientists and tech executives have abandoned White House advisory councils and complained that the president's policies in areas like climate change and immigration threaten to reverse years of economic and social progress.
It may help that Mr. Kratsios, 31 years old, hails from the world of technology, having spent seven years as an executive at venture-capital firms founded by Silicon Valley luminary Peter Thiel. A former college intern for Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.), Mr. Kratsios said he hoped to eventually pursue a career in public service.
That opportunity came sooner than expected when Mr. Trump won the presidency last November, and Mr. Thiel -- one of the tech industry's most prominent supporters of the Republican -- brought Mr. Kratsios with him to New York to work on Mr. Trump's transition team.
Mr. Kratsios now oversees the tech team at the Office of Science and Technology Policy, a department that helps the president shape a range of policies, from rural broadband access to space travel.
Tech leaders say they are engaging with Mr. Kratsios's office cautiously. Brad Smith, Microsoft Corp.'s president and chief legal officer and one of the most outspoken critics of President Trump's policies, said he is "committed to working constructively with OSTP and the administration more broadly on issues where we have common ground." In September, he appeared alongside Ivanka Trump in Virginia to help announce the administration's plans to bring more coding instruction to U.S. schools.
The Trump administration drew opposition from Silicon Valley when it took steps to dismantle the International Entrepreneur Rule, an immigration policy that President Barack Obama's tech advisers at the OSTP created to help foreign-born entrepreneurs stay in the U.S. to build startups. A group representing top venture-capital investors has sued the administration, claiming it took illegal steps to prevent the rule from being enacted.
Mr. Kratsios declined to comment on the International Entrepreneur Rule, but said he supports a merit-based immigration system "that encourages the world's best and brightest to come to the U.S. and build great technology companies."
---
Vacancies Abound
At Science Office
The White House has yet to nominate a director for the Office of Science and Technology Policy, a Senate-confirmed position. Michael Kratsios, who will report to the director as deputy, declined to reveal any candidate names or the timing of a nomination.
The vacancy of that and several other key OSTP positions, as well as a sluggish pace of hiring, has led to speculation in the science and tech communities that science is a low priority for the administration.
The office currently employs about 45 people, Mr. Kratsios said. He plans to grow the office to about 60 employees -- less than half the size of the office at its peak under the Obama administration. Mr. Kratsios said he thinks he can make more efficient use of fewer people, as the OSTP tends to rely heavily on the expertise of other federal agencies.
The nomination of an OSTP director, in particular, will be closely watched for its implications on U.S. climate-change policy.
A government report earlier this month drew a direct line between human activity and the quickening pace of climate change, a finding at odds with Mr. Trump's moves to reverse policies meant to combat climate change.
"The climate is changing, and I don't think anyone is disputing that," said Mr. Kratsios, who added that he aims to promote technology to reduce emissions.

Credit: By Douglas MacMillan
