Attention, IT designers: Making chatbots seem too smart could be off-putting to users. But if you make them seem too dumb, people are unlikely to give them a try.
The need to strike a proper balance is one takeaway from new research into how humans interact with chatbots. People tend to be more critical of chatbots, the research found, if the bot immediately projects arrogance or overconfidence. But they're less likely to try it out in the first place if they don't have faith in the chatbot's competence.
"It is a double-edged sword," says Ranjay Krishna, a Ph.D. candidate in computer science at Stanford University and one of the study's researchers.
The research, published in October, is based on three studies in which nearly 300 participants interacted with an AI agent. Chatbots were described in different ways when introduced to study participants: as being like a toddler, middle-schooler, young student, recent graduate, trained professional, inexperienced teenager or shrewd travel executive.
All participants interacted with the same bot; the only difference was in the way it was described to them.
In two studies, people gave the highest marks to chatbots described in ways that projected lower confidence but high warmth. In the third study, however, participants were asked, before using them, which chatbots they were most likely to try out and potentially adopt. In this case, people were less likely to use chatbots they deemed as incompetent.
So what's a designer to do?
From a practical standpoint, the research suggests companies need to be mindful of how they portray their chatbots to the public. Are they hyping them in a way that could be perceived as arrogant or too humanlike and therefore setting users up for disappointment?
Companies shouldn't set expectations too high, Mr. Krishna says, but they "can't set too low an expectation or people won't bother to interact."
The researchers advise companies to portray their chatbots as friendly, because this makes people more likely to cooperate with them. At the same time, companies should not overpromise what a chatbot can deliver when introducing it on a website or in news releases and the like -- otherwise people are likely to be less forgiving of chatbot mistakes.
---
Ms. Winokur Munk is a writer in New Jersey. Email: reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Cheryl Winokur Munk
