[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Amazon is hardly getting out of the hardware business. In fact, Alexa even seems to be getting a bit of a promotion.
The technology giant held its annual fall device event on Wednesday. It came about 10 months after The Wall Street Journal reported Amazon's hardware business was under scrutiny by the company's higher-ups looking for areas to cut costs. Subsequent layoffs totaling 26,000 workers reportedly fell hard on the unit -- which amassed a wide portfolio of products ranging from success stories like the Kindle e-reader and Echo smart speaker, to more questionable forays like flying home-security drones, videophones for children and even a $1,600 home robot.
Still, the slimmed-down team has kept busy. At least 10 new devices were introduced on Wednesday, including the first soundbar from Amazon's Fire TV brand, along with a new device category called the Echo Hub -- a wall-mounted control panel for smart-home devices. But the most notable development involves bringing generative artificial intelligence to Alexa, the voice assistant that has been a key part of Amazon's products since its first smart speaker shipped in 2014.
Amazon previewed the GenAI-enhanced version of Alexa on Wednesday, with departing hardware chief David Limp carrying on a conversation with the digital assistant through the company's newly announced Echo Show 8 video speaker. The new version of the voice assistant will be ready early next year, and Limp noted it will even be available on the company's first smart speakers that shipped nine years ago.
Generative AI took the tech world by storm this year, and Amazon hasn't been quiet on the matter: Chief Executive Andy Jassy mentioned the term 21 times on the company's most recent earnings call last month. But the company that runs the world's largest public cloud-computing business hasn't yet announced major new services based on that technology -- at least not to the same degree as Microsoft and Google.
That created the image of Amazon being a laggard: Morgan Stanley analyst Brian Nowak noted in a June report that the company's AWS cloud business "continues to be viewed as being disadvantaged by investors."
Amazon's stock jumped 61% this year as the company addressed overcapacity issues in its core retail business, but the shares lagged behind those of Microsoft and Google-parent Alphabet over the past 12 months. The public launch of the ChatGPT chatbot in late November ignited the market's AI hype, and Microsoft and Google both started laying out their vision for the technology a few months later.
A GenAI-powered Alexa alone won't change Amazon's trajectory; the stock remained relatively unchanged during Wednesday's event. (The stock closed down 1.7%.) But the move is an early sign of Amazon's ambitions to take the technology far and wide -- well beyond its large base of corporate cloud customers. The company said this year that more than half a billion Alexa devices have sold to date.
The true payoff for Amazon will come from bringing GenAI deeper into the cloud business, which now generates more than $85 billion a year in revenue and the bulk of the company's profits. Amazon's annual cloud event known as AWS Re:Invent in late November will likely prove key; analysts are expecting an array of AI-related announcements that could help the company close its perceived gap with Microsoft and Google.
A more chatty Alexa might just be a warm-up act.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
