Advance Publications Inc., owner of the Conde Nast magazine empire and metropolitan newspapers, is on a $10 billion global shopping spree intended to diversify the company away from its traditional media holdings and cut its reliance on advertising revenue.
The Newhouse family-owned company has already spent roughly $3 billion as part of that effort, acquiring a group of European theaters, a maker of plagiarism-detection software, a majority stake in an esports analytics firm and a stake in a rocket operator specializing in low-Earth-orbit satellite launches.
"We've seen how disruption affects traditional media and the challenges that result," said Steve Newhouse, co-president of Advance, in an interview. "We're looking to diversify into different areas not as exposed to the vagaries of the advertising market."
Advance owns some of the nation's most prominent magazines -- including the New Yorker, Vogue and Vanity Fair -- and local newspapers, such as the Oregonian and the Star-Ledger. It also holds substantial stakes in television programmer Discovery Inc.; cable operator Charter Communications Inc.; and social news website Reddit Inc.
The diversification effort is being led by Janine Shelffo, a former UBS investment banker who joined Advance in 2017 after advising the Newhouse family when it sold Bright House Networks, then the country's sixth-largest cable operator, to Charter in 2016.
The portfolio being assembled is funded in part by the $2 billion in cash that Advance received after selling Bright House. It also generates cash from stock repurchases at Discovery and Charter, and from other properties it owns. Ms. Shelffo, Advance's chief strategy and development officer, said the company plans to spend $10 billion without having to reduce its percentage ownership in Discovery and Charter.
Ms. Shelffo said her mandate is to find sustainable-growth opportunities. "We're focused on what will be the most disruptive economic trends over the next 10 or 20 years," she said.
"It makes sense in the current environment to extend outside of traditional media," said Reed Phillips III, chief executive of investment-banking firm Oaklins DeSilva+Phillips, of Advance's diversification effort. "The risks are always that you are going into market segments you don't fully understand. It is more fraught than buying something you really know," he added.
Advance is closely held and doesn't report its finances. Ms. Shelffo said that so far, the performance of the businesses Advance has acquired or invested in are "in line or ahead of our investment case."
In its biggest acquisition, Advance paid $1.7 billion for Turnitin, an education-software company based in Oakland, Calif., that helps identify plagiarism. Ms. Shelffo said Turnitin's core competencies in artificial intelligence and machine learning were areas that Advance wanted to add.
Advance also bought Amsterdam-based Stage Entertainment, a theater owner in Europe that produces musicals including "The Lion King," for 975 million euros, or $1.1 billion.
Advance's media empire has shown signs of fraying as consumers move online and marketers demand more audience data, areas dominated by Facebook Inc., Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Amazon.com Inc.
Last week, Advance sold the Times-Picayune, New Orleans's oldest newspaper, to a rival publication. "We have no intention or plan to sell any other newspapers," Steve Newhouse said.
Advance has also acquired the Esports Observer, a Berlin-based, esports business-information and news website; and a majority stake in Amsterdam-based Newzoo Group BV, a provider of analytics on the videogame industry. Ms. Shelffo described the investments in both as modest.
Advance has also taken a stake in a rocket-launch company that operates as Stealth Space Co., based in Alameda, Calif., Ms. Shelffo said. The business focuses on putting small satellites into space. Low-Earth-orbit innovation "is a huge, long-term growth opportunity," she said.

Credit: By Jeffrey A. Trachtenberg
