Eric Freeman and David Gelernter's op-ed "What STEM Students Need to Know" (Dec. 19) hits the nail on the head. They are right that the U.S. is about 50 years behind in our public education system. That's about the time when teachers unions became predominant in public education. Our educational system has gotten worse ever since. There are other reasons for our education failure but the NEA is most at fault.
In my opinion, education should be the top priority in our country.
Richard E. Logan
Battle Creek, Mich.
---
Messrs. Freeman and Gelernter are right about changes being needed in the U.S. education system, but many would disagree with what's required. You don't need a degree in plumbing to work as a plumber and rent an apartment. Likewise, knowledge about transistors, conductors and circuit boards while useful for engineers, won't really help most computer-science students.
As for inventing social media in 1995, I think Messrs. Freeman and Gelernter must be joking. Usenet (the first social network) has been around since 1980.
Abe Kohen
New York, N.Y.
---
The authors' op-ed seems well intentioned but reveals a lack of understanding of recent educational reforms in both math and science. California is currently drafting computer-science standards that will require every one of its six million public-school students to gain some of the skills for which they advocate. California and more than a dozen other states have already adopted new engineering standards as part of their science curriculum. These standards require students to master core ideas in science, science and engineering practices, and crosscutting concepts that support students thinking more like scientists and engineers.
Messrs. Freeman and Gelernter could have pointed out that these standards do not emphasize the electrical-engineering concepts they feel are important, but their vague attack on the current educational landscape is not productive. We can forge better partnerships between education and industry when each side is aware of the needs and challenges of the other.
Matthew d'Alessio
Associate Professor, California State University Northridge
Northridge, Calif.
---
Messrs. Freeman and Gelernter claim that computer science builds on "discrete mathematics" rather than the continuous type used in calculus. Yes, discrete math is important, but the branches of computer science generating the most excitement these days -- artificial intelligence, big data and so on -- are mainly applications of the continuous type of math. Even Messrs. Freeman and Gelernter's tongue-in-cheek probability example would be of this type. STEM education may well need improvement, but oversimplified and misleading prescriptions such as those of the authors will make the problem worse, not better.
Norman Matloff
Davis, Calif.
