All three major U.S. stock indexes rose to records, boosted by investors' growing conviction that the post-Covid surge in borrowing costs is ending soon.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average led, adding 0.7%, or 269 points. The blue-chip index ended another good day shy of 40000 points. Industrial and bank stocks led the S&P 500 0.3% higher and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite gained 0.2%.
Stock indexes in Europe and Japan also notched highs. The Bank of England held its key interest rate steady and Switzerland became the first rich country to reduce interest rates since central banks mounted a campaign two years ago to tame inflation.
The Swiss National Bank's cut as well as comments from central-bank officials in the U.S. and Europe have indicated that rates are set to decline across the developed world despite signs that inflation is stickier than expected.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday kept its benchmark fed-funds rate at 23-year highs between 5.25% and 5.5%, though a narrow majority of Fed officials reaffirmed projections for three rate cuts this year. That sent the major U.S. stock indexes to simultaneous records for the first time since November 2021, before the central bank began raising rates.
"The outcome makes us more confident in our expectation for the first cut to come in June," said Carl Riccadonna, chief U.S. economist at French bank BNP Paribas.
Economic data released Thursday supported views that the economy is strengthening.
Artificial intelligence powered some of the day's biggest gains. Micron Technology paced the S&P 500, rising 14% after the memory-chip company swung to a surprise profit and offered a much rosier outlook than analysts had expected, thanks to AI server demand rippling through the market for data storage.
The broad index's newest member, Super Micro Computer, rebounded 8.4% after tumbling earlier this week following a failed stock offering. Chip and software maker Broadcom added 5.6% after impressing analysts at an AI event Wednesday.
Accenture was the index's worst performer, dropping 9.3% after quarterly results disappointed investors and highlighted struggles in the consulting industry.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 as well as Germany's DAX each climbed 0.9% to close at records. At midday Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.1%, but Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 2.1% and the Shanghai Composite was down 1.2%. S&P 500 futures were flat.
Credit: By Ryan Dezember
