CAMBRIDGE, Mass. -- Human creativity and problem-solving skills are still in demand in information technology, even as IT becomes more automated, chief information officers and technologists said last week at Massachusetts Institute of Technology's annual CIO Symposium.
Machines will begin to trigger IT processes that humans have traditionally executed, but as IT becomes more systematic and automatic, humans will continue to play a significant role, General Electric Co. CIO Jim Fowler said.
Employees will start to form "mission-based teams that solve a problem," Mr. Fowler said at a panel discussion. "They'll come together in small teams and form and disband at different rates," he said.
The role humans will play in IT, even as technologies such as artificial intelligence become more widespread throughout the enterprise, was a common theme throughout the day's series of panel discussions. Dozens of CIOs gathered at the conference to network and learn about issues related to talent, as well as AI, cloud strategies and security.
Mr. Fowler's assessment that employees will form smaller and more mission-driven teams in the wake of IT automation falls in line with recent analysis from Forrester Research Inc.
Within five to seven years, IT groups are estimated to be up to 40% smaller, as well as faster and more specialized because of a confluence of events including the enterprisewide shift to the cloud and automation in IT, according to Forrester.
Smaller IT groups with employees specializing in areas such as data, security and mobility, as well as new roles encompassing business processes and the regulatory environment, will add more value to the overall company because they will be free to work on technologies to boost revenue and projects that will result in competitive advantages.
Lucille Mayer, CIO of client experience delivery at Bank of New York Mellon Corp., said small teams with domain expertise and client empathy that harness digital tools are operating most successfully in today's digital era.
Technologies such as machine learning are helping the business understand and predict client behavior, but humans are crucial assets in mining for insights, she said.
"Humans are still needed to continue to raise the bar on where those insights lead," she said, adding that humans have the ability to question paradigms, experiment with new ideas and empathize with clients.
Areas where humans excel, such as creativity and interpersonal skills, won't be easily or quickly replaced by machines, said artificial intelligence experts at the event.
"In areas like coaching, advising, motivating, nurturing, a lot of those categories, people still have a big edge," said Erik Brynjolfsson, director of the MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy and a professor of IT, at a panel about AI.
Not all humans are taught in school to be creative, though. Educational systems need to emphasize creativity because creative humans will succeed in the digital era, Mr. Brynjolfsson said.
"We should be doing more to allow creativity to flourish," he said at the event.
Credit: By Sara Castellanos
