Sen. Chuck Schumer, who's never seen a camera he didn't want to jump in front of, held a closed-door meeting last week on artificial intelligence. What? Closed? To me, it suggests an agenda beyond paving the path to a fantastic future. At the meeting, Elon Musk warned that AI is a "civilization risk." Mr. Schumer declared, "We can't be like ostriches and put our heads in the sand." They sound more like dodo birds.
One clue to the hidden agenda: Besides Mr. Musk and Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg, OpenAI's CEO and other techies, the attendees included union leaders such as Randi Weingarten of the American Federation of Teachers, Liz Shuler of the AFL-CIO, Meredith Stiehm of the Writers Guild and two tech critics with "Humane" in their company names. Ugh. It looked like the ghosts of economics past had come to spook the spirit of economics future.
So of course it was held behind closed doors. It was as if the nascent AI companies were called into a meeting with a tough guy named Spike who listens and then says, "You wouldn't want anything to happen to your nice companies there, would you?" Or as if the union representatives of the horse-drawn-trolley conductors, rail-gauge manufacturers and manure sweepers were sitting in car-design meetings, demanding full employment for their guilds.
Henry Ford once said, "If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster horses." Politicians might have demanded to tax horses based on speed. Back then, no one appreciated the potential for those rickety automobiles to transform the economy. We're at the same juncture with AI today.
When politicians get involved, their agenda for any business is to slow it, tax it, regulate it, harness it, redistribute it or just plain kill it. Mr. Schumer clearly forgets, if he ever even knew, what drives economic growth.
Unions control the Biden agenda. See auto strike. It is always status quo over progress. No wonder they get to sit in and threaten cutting-edge AI creators. This won't end well. Ms. Shuler, the union boss, emailed after the meeting, "There are many conversations still to come and, throughout the process, the interests of the working people must be Congress' North Star." Is that a signal of hope or a threat?
The "slow it" agenda is spreading. Already this month, Caltech has dropped physics, calculus and chemistry requirements for admission. The Portland, Ore., school system is considering "equity grading practices." That doesn't sound like the way to turn out the AI architects we will need.
AI is the next long wave of innovation that will increase societal wealth and enable tools that will make smartphones look like abacuses. So where are we in its evolution? According to venture firm A16z's analysis, general-assistant AI products like ChatGPT are 70% of traffic, but companionship is 13% and content generation at 10%. That will change.
Still, AI has a long way to go. A recent study typed this prompt into dozens of large language models: "Sally (a girl) has 3 brothers. Each brother has 2 sisters. How many sisters does Sally have?" For those who don't like these mental puzzles, the correct answer is one. None got it. ChatGPT 4.0 got closest with "Sally has 2 sisters." Others answered three or six. Generative AI is still far from civilization risk.
Also, headlines blared last week that Wharton M.B.A.s went up against AI in a blind contest for new business ideas. Three-quarters of the winners were generated by ChatGPT. So AI won, right? Hardly. Only the market decides the ultimate winners of innovative startups. Most crash and burn quickly, especially those that win business-model contests with human judges. The home runs that come out of incubators like Y Combinator and 500 Startups are usually the dumbest-sounding ideas, like Airbnb. Most are duds. That's why these firms fund so many companies, selecting with a shotgun, not a rifle.
Why does Silicon Valley bow to those who want to straitjacket their efforts? After the meeting, Mr. Schumer gloated, "I asked everyone in the room, 'Is government needed to play a role in regulating AI?' And every single person raised their hands." According to Axios, IBM CEO Arvind Krishna recently said he was an "extreme believer" in Mr. Schumer's AI strategy. Clearly Spike is persuasive.
Doesn't the tech industry know the real goal of Congress and unions is to slow AI just enough to insert themselves into the cash, control and maybe even censorship stream? This is digital extortion. They're saying: "We'll let you grow, but we get our cut." Like business-idea contests, they should let free markets decide. Until then, when you hear about AI regulation, think "Manure Sweepers Unite."
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: No to Government Intelligence" -- WSJ Sept. 22, 2023)
Credit: By Andy Kessler
