Years ago, Mohammad Mahdi Ghassemi used to have fun with a mood ring. The liquid crystals in the stone would change color as skin temperature changed, supposedly indicating the wearer's emotion at the moment.
Now, as a graduate student in computer science at MIT, he's still at it -- but this time, he and a colleague, Tuka Alhanai, have come up with an even better technology for detecting the changing moods of a speaker.
Their system relies on the artificial intelligence of a computer algorithm that registers not just what is being said but how it is said, as well as the speaker's vital signs. The algorithm uses these inputs to assess whether a conversation is happy, sad or neutral.
The young MIT scientists aren't the first to use artificial intelligence to detect emotion. But they are pushing the boundaries by training a computer to take account of such a wide range of factors in making judgments about emotion. "As far as we know," the scientists write in a new paper, "this is the first experimental set-up to include individuals engaged in natural dialogue with the particular combination of signals we collected and processed."
Their hope is that the technology may someday be used by people who have difficulty reading the many aural and visual cues that signal emotion in human encounters. Those on the autism spectrum, for example, might benefit from having co-workers or relatives wear a device that makes continual emotional assessments. These assessments could be signaled visually or transmitted to a similar device worn by the person with autism.
The technology might also be used in classrooms, focus groups or other settings. The system could even train people in assessing the emotional tenor of a conversation or the mood of an audience, Mr. Ghassemi says.
By feeding their algorithm snippets of dialogue labeled positive or negative, the researchers enabled it to tease out telltale patterns that it could later use in its own labeling. The algorithm also was fed word definitions. Then 10 volunteers were asked to tell a story -- anything they could think of -- that was happy or sad, during which researchers asked questions to approximate a conversation.
While telling the stories, volunteers wore a Samsung Simband, a computer on a wristband equipped with sensors that capture a variety of physiological data, including the skin's temperature and its electrical resistance (a measure of stress). The device also had an accelerometer and gyroscope, which let the scientists record information about a speaker's movements. Sadder stories, for example, were typically accompanied by increased cardiovascular activity, fidgeting, posture changes and hands moved to the face.
The Simband sent data to the algorithm, which also took account of what was being said. It knew that the word "hate," for instance, isn't usually associated with happy discussions. It could also take account of intonations and distinguish between sincere and sarcastic versions of "Thanks a lot!"
The scientists found that the algorithm could determine whether a conversation was happy or sad with 83% accuracy -- and provide a helpful assessment (positive, negative or neutral) every five seconds at a rate 14 percentage points better than chance (47% vs. 33%). Mr. Ghassemi says that the "results show that it's possible to classify the emotional tone of conversations in real time."
"Predicting Latent Narrative Mood Using Audio and Physiologic Data," Tuka Alhanai and Mohammad Mahdi Ghassemi, Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Feb. 8)
Credit: By Daniel Akst
