Don't be fooled by the tiny decimal in iOS 18.1. Apple's latest software update might be small in name, but it's big in significance.
Yes, Apple's long-awaited entry into generative AI is here.
Released Monday, the software brings the first wave of Apple Intelligence features -- that is, if you've got an iPhone 15 Pro or any of the new iPhone 16 models. (Downloads are also available for iPadOS 18.1 and MacOS Sequoia 15.1, which have similar tools on supported devices.)
It includes tools to rewrite text, summarize notifications and emails, clean up photos and more.
Oh, and Siri's got a new glow -- literally. Just don't expect those new colors to make Siri suddenly smarter.
Even if you don't have one of those new phones, iOS 18.1 may have something for you.
It also includes the hearing-aid capability for AirPods Pro 2 and some other iPhone features that didn't make it into the original iOS 18 release in September.
Here's what's new -- and where to find it.
Apple Intelligence
Apple's new AI tools aren't on by default. Instead, once you download iOS 18.1 on a supported iPhone, you'll be prompted to turn on Apple Intelligence. Then . . . you'll be added to a wait list.
Apple says approval should happen within a few hours of joining. In my experience, it's been much faster. While the core of Apple Intelligence works on your device, this is the company's way of making sure it has sufficient server capacity to keep up with demand.
Here are the basics about what just arrived:
-- Writing Tools. Highlight text in most apps and you'll see a Writing Tools pop-up. From there, you'll have the option to proofread, rewrite, summarize and more.
-- Redesigned Siri. Siri isn't exactly smarter, but it's definitely cooler looking. The old Siri ball is gone. Instead, the screen's edges light up and a more human-sounding voice responds. For those moments when you can't talk to your phone, you can also now type your queries by tapping at the bottom of the screen.
-- Photo Clean Up. Don't like that stranger photobombing your family portrait? Or that ugly trash can in your scenic shot? In the Photos app, tap Clean Up and then circle or tap parts of the photo you want to remove. It works best when the background is a solid color.
Thinking, "That's it?" You're not alone. A lot of the Apple Intelligence tools the company has promised aren't available yet. Features like generated emojis (Genmoji), image creation (Image Playground) and the ChatGPT integration with Siri and Writing Tools are set to roll out with iOS 18.2, expected next month.
AirPod hearing aids
If you've got a pair of AirPods Pro 2, iOS 18.1 brings the ability to take the new clinical-grade hearing test and then, if you need the assistance, set the earbuds up as a pair of hearing aids.
People who own AirPods Pro 2 should get a prompt about the features, once the earbuds are connected to your iPhone or iPad. If you don't, head to Settings, tap on the menu with your AirPods' name, then look for Hearing Test, Hearing Aid and Hearing Protection.
You'll be taken through the interactive test, which requires a quiet environment.
Other things
Don't have an iPhone 15 Pro, iPhone 16 or AirPods 2? This update has some other stuff for you. During a phone call, you'll see a record button: You can now capture a call and get a transcript. Don't worry, the caller is informed the call is being recorded via an audible message.
While iOS 18's new Control Center is fun to customize, it can be frustrating to find and manage some settings. Why is the cellular button the size of a mouse dropping? With 18.1, you can bring back separate easier-access controls for Wi-Fi, cellular and Bluetooth.
Credit: By Joanna Stern
