Japan's SoftBank Corp. is investing $100 million in a Boston-based cybersecurity firm run by former Israel counterintelligence members, the latest high-profile cash injection into a bustling industry offering newfound defenses against global hackers.
The deal, announced early Wednesday, values Cybereason at about $1 billion, according to people familiar with the matter. The firm, founded in 2012, has raised a total of $189 million so far with investors. The latest investment isn't part of the roughly $100 billion SoftBank Vision Fund the Japanese firm launched in May with Saudi Arabia's sovereign-wealth fund.
A string of high-profile cyberattacks, including last month's WannaCry ransomware assault that was linked to North Korea and a series of breaches at internet giant Yahoo Inc., have exposed how hackers are quickly discovering new ways to unearth network vulnerabilities. A spate of startups including Cybereason are pitching a new generation of computer security products that use machine learning and computer algorithms to sniff out problems before they spread.
The WannaCry attack was spotted instantaneously by Cybereason's algorithms -- requiring no human intervention -- and no clients were affected, said Lior Div, Cybereason's chief executive, and a former decorated Israeli cyberintelligence officer, in an interview. The firm's clients, including SoftBank and Lockheed Martin Corp., use Cybereason often in tandem with legacy services offered by Symantec Corp. or McAfee LLC.
"Today we're the last line of defense, but I would argue we're the only line of defense -- because the first line of defense is not working," said Mr. Div, 39 years old.
Cybereason is one of several new cybersecurity startups attracting interest from deep-pocketed investors. Tanium, the world's most valuable cybersecurity startup, valued at $3.75 billion, and CrowdStrike, which helped the Democratic National Committee respond last year to a network breach linked to Russia, both raised $100 million last month. Another cyber firm, Illumio, raised $125 million earlier this month.
SoftBank, which spans a Japanese telecom arm, U.S. mobile carrier Sprint Corp., and U.K. chip designer ARM Holdings Inc., is increasing its investment staff around the world, betting on technology that it says will be key when everyday items like shoes and microwaves are connected to the internet.
The company recently led a funding round for London-based startup Improbable, which designs virtual worlds for videogames and simulations that can be applied to the real world, as well as Alphabet Inc.'s robot units.
Global security spending is forecast to hit $81.7 billion in 2017, according to market researcher International Data Corp., with forecasts of growth to about $105 billion in 2020. Meanwhile, information-technology startup investments rose to $3.05 billion during the first three months of this year, up 13% from the same period in 2016, according to data from Dow Jones VentureSource.
Cybereason was founded by Mr. Div and two other ex-members of Israel's Unit 8200, the equivalent to the U.S. National Security Agency.
---
Mayumi Negishi contributed to this article.

Credit: By Timothy W. Martin and Robert McMillan
