France's competition authority raided Nvidia's local offices this week on suspicion the company engaged in anticompetitive practices, the first significant regulatory scrutiny the company has faced since its rise to be the paramount supplier of artificial-intelligence chips.
The French competition authority, which disclosed the dawn raid on Wednesday, didn't say what practices it was investigating or which company it had targeted, beyond saying it was in the "graphics cards sector." But people familiar with the raid said the operation had targeted Nvidia, which is the world's largest maker of chips used both for artificial intelligence and for computer graphics.
Typically, such raids are hourslong exercises in which officials turn up early in the morning, search a company's premises, seize physical and digital materials and interview employees who arrive for work. The French authority said it had received approval from a judge for the raid.
The French authority said that its operation this week followed a broader inquiry into the cloud-computing sector, in which it cited concerns that cloud-computing companies could use their access to computing power to exclude smaller competitors.
A spokeswoman for the French authority declined to comment on the company targeted in Tuesday's raid. French business magazine Challenges earlier reported that Nvidia was the subject of the visit.
Nvidia declined to comment.
Cloud computing is led by Amazon.com, Microsoft and Alphabet's Google, who operate large data centers and rent out their computing power to other companies and governments. Cloud companies own tens of thousands of Nvidia's chips, which originally were made to process computer graphics but have become the computational workhorses behind the AI boom.
With the rise of generative AI systems such as OpenAI's ChatGPT, demand for Nvidia's chips has skyrocketed, leading to a shortage. Nvidia's sales have surged, propelling it beyond a $1 trillion valuation in June. Citi analysts estimated in June that Nvidia would have a market share in AI chips of more than 90% going forward as it introduces newer, more powerful versions of the hardware.
The French competition-authority report, published in June, doesn't cite Nvidia specifically. It notes that "increasing use of artificial intelligence will drive growth in demand for cloud services" and says that competition regulators must "ensure that established players do not hinder the development of smaller or new players" based on new cloud technologies.
Two French companies this week announced deals to expand their offerings of Nvidia's most powerful AI chips, called H100s. French telecommunications operator Iliad Group said it was installing those chips in the heart of a Paris-area data center. OVHcloud, a cloud services company, said it would add H100s to the lineup of Nvidia processors it offers its customers for AI applications.
Credit: By Sam Schechner and Asa Fitch
