Johnson & Johnson is working with International Business Machines Corp. to create consumer-focused technology apps that apply artificial intelligence to health data, in this case to provide patients with a virtual coach. Apple Inc. also is contributing to the development of the apps, which will be marketed to third-parties such as hospitals, which will distribute them to individuals.
Johnson & Johnson plans in the fourth quarter to have a working prototype of an app that provides virtual coaching to patients after knee replacement surgery, CIO Stuart McGuigan said.
It will combine IBM's Watson cognitive computing and analytics platform, Apple's user experience design and Johnson & Johnson's clinical know-how in an attempt to predict patient outcomes, suggest treatment plans and give patients targeted encouragement during the recovery process.
Johnson & Johnson plans to sell the service to hospitals and insurance companies that could use the virtual coaching and rehabilitation tools with patients. It is a bet by the company that its data and technology will provide the basis for new kinds of services.
The company also believes technology can help it forge closer relationships with consumers.
"Changes in consumer behavior and patient access to information and tools will put them front and center in the health care equation," he said.
The app also will be a test for IBM's supercomputing platform, Watson, famous for beating human "Jeopardy" champions in 2011. Today, IBM views Watson as a potentially lucrative decision-support service for a range of professions and businesses.
IBM maintains it can quickly analyze much more information than the human mind could process, which is key to professions like medicine, where the volume of knowledge that doctors must keep up with is soaring. In April, IBM launched a health-care analytics platform named Watson Health to help companies gain insights from a flood of data patient records to information coming from wearable devices.
Johnson & Johnson's app will connect to the Watson API, giving it access to IBM's data and analytics. It will also feed in patient data if the patient gives consent. IBM is adding Johnson & Johnson clinical and behavioral data to its own data sets, giving Watson more information to analyze.
Analytics could help suggest it is time for a doctor to call a patient, or could nudge a patient to take his or her medication.
"Watson can provide intelligent coaching along the way, and then analytics can help the hospital or insurance company know what to do," Mr. McGuigan said.
Credit: By Steven Norton
