Capgemini is raising its dividend after posting higher profit and revenue for 2023, a year marked by what Chief Executive Aiman Ezzat said was a slowdown in the industry.
The French consulting and technology group said Wednesday that annual net profit had increased 7% for the year to 1.66 billion euros, or $1.78 billion. Operating profit -- the company's preferred measure of profitability -- rose to 2.99 billion euros from 2.87 billion euros in 2022, generating a 13.3% margin.
The company said it would recommend a dividend of 3.40 euros per share at its May 16 shareholders' meeting, above the 3.25 euros per share it proposed last year.
The group also said it would propose renewing Ezzat's term of office as director for four years and confirm him as chief executive after the meeting.
Ezzat has been at the helm of the group since May 2020 at the height of the pandemic, when the tech industry experienced a surge in demand from businesses looking to keep their operations running after lockdowns forced them to go remote.
Capgemini said its board of directors unanimously agreed with the proposal to renew Ezzat's mandate, a vote of confidence in his strategy and push to invest in artificial intelligence. The group said last year that the technology would usher in a wave of new, specialized roles, such as generative AI architects and trainers, and is investing to train its workforce.
"Through our 2 billion euro investment plan announced last July, we continue to strengthen and upskill our teams, invest in solutions and leverage a broad ecosystem of technology partners including Microsoft, Google, AWS, Salesforce and Mistral AI," Ezzat said.
Capgemini posted revenue of 22.52 billion euros for the year, up 4.4% at constant currency, returning to a more modest growth rate after two particularly strong years. The company said macroeconomic challenges and geopolitical tensions had led to a market slowdown in 2023. In the fourth quarter, the group recorded a 0.2% constant-currency contraction in sales to 5.62 billion euros.
Organic free cash flow -- a closely watched metric by analysts and investors -- climbed to 1.96 billion euros in 2023 from 1.85 billion euros.
The group had targeted annual constant-currency revenue growth of 4% to 7%, an operating margin between 13% and 13.2% and organic free cash flow of roughly 1.8 billion euros.
For 2024, Capgemini expects constant-currency revenue growth of up to 3%, an operating margin between 13.3% and 13.6% and organic free cash flow of about 1.9 billion euros.
Credit: By Mauro Orru
