It's that magical golden hour on the beach, just before sunset, with everyone smiling and centered and not another soul around. It's a perfect photo to put over the fireplace.
Only that moment never happened.
It was actually midday, there were random strangers in the shot, and there's no one image where all the family members are smiling and looking at the camera. "Photo editing" has become "photo manipulation."
Editing family photos seems harmless. But the manipulation itself, once full of visual clues, is now harder to spot and easier to pull off. Some computer scientists are concerned that the rise of artificial-intelligence techniques to alter images means we soon won't be able to tell fact from fiction.
Fudging things to get an ideal shot isn't a new concept. Long before Photoshop tricks and Instagram filters, photographers worked in the background to turn lead into gold. An iconic standing portrait of Abraham Lincoln is, in fact, a composite of the Civil War president's head superimposed on the body of the politician John C. Calhoun.
There's even a name for it: "fauxtography."
Now this kind of work can be done by anyone, with a few quick phone taps. Google has been at the forefront of democratizing this technological innovation. Its latest Pixel 8 and Pixel 8 Pro models, available Oct. 12, make bending reality a breeze.
Are we devaluing the authentic moments in our lives? Will our own memories be changed by these altered images? It's worth considering when we use AI for editing photos.
This year's wild Pixel AI tool is a face swapper called Best Take. It looks at similar shots you've taken in succession. In a group photo, you can tap on each face and select another one you like from the series. So you can easily replace a closed-eye, mouth-agape head with one that's smiling.
You can perform a similar swap in Photoshop or other photo-editing apps, as long as you have a steady hand. On the Pixel, Google's software does the painstaking part for you.
Another new Pixel tool, Magic Editor, lets you move people around in a photo and delete unwanted objects in the background.
Say you're trying to get a picture in front of the Eiffel Tower, and you hand the phone to a friend who isn't the best at framing shots. From the photos app, you can tap on yourself, then drag your body into the center. You can also select and adjust specific parts of the image, such as the sky, to make it look like it was taken at sunset instead of high noon.
Both tools are only available on the Pixel 8 models.
You can already delete unwanted tourists and other items from the background of photos. Google expanded the Magic Eraser capability from Pixel phones to Google Photos, for all users who pay for Google storage, this year.
One tap, then boom. It's done. How does the Google Pixel know what was behind the items? It doesn't. It uses generative AI to look at surrounding pixels -- grass, trees, water, buildings -- and then approximates what should be there.
There are new capabilities for video, too. The Audio Magic Eraser can remove distracting background sounds from videos.
These new Pixel phone features are the latest in a broad movement of photo-editing software in this direction. Adobe's own Photoshop and many lesser-known upstarts use AI to fundamentally change what's in our photos.
"We have quickly entered this time where it's going to be very, very hard to tell when images -- and soon video and somewhat audio as well -- are manipulated," said Hany Farid, professor of computer science at the University of California, Berkeley.
Deepfakes, or computer-generated digital simulations, are already fooling folks. Image, audio and video forensics software can help spot some alterations, but as the detection software improves, so do the images, Farid said.
"This will be a never-ending arms race," he added.
The trouble compounds when the AI trying helpfully to augment a shot ends up changing it in some meaningful way.
"Let's say I take a photo of somebody who I think committed a crime, and the camera changes their features," Farid said. "Then it's fed to a facial-recognition system and it identifies someone different."
Google is marketing its Pixel photo features as tools for making social-media-perfect pictures. It hasn't publicly remarked on any of the larger "fauxtography" concerns. But the rise of such images is perhaps something all of us citizens of the internet should be cautious about. Did that friend really visit the most beautiful spot on earth at exactly the right time? Or have the gray skies, tourists and trash been magically erased?
"When you get into the world of altering reality, you've got to ask some hard questions," Farid said.
Credit: By Nicole Nguyen
