CallMiner Inc., a developer of speech-analytics software powered by artificial intelligence, said Monday that it raised $75 million in new venture funding from GS Growth, an investment unit of Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
The Waltham, Mass.-based company, which has about 250 employees, has raised a total of $142 million since it was founded in 2002.
CallMiner's software platform, called Eureka, uses AI to analyze conversations between customers and a company's representatives. Among other things, the platform can recommend what an agent should say and determine whether employees' answers comply with company protocols.
Eureka uses natural language processing and other techniques to understand the words and sentiment used in calls, web chats, emails, surveys and texts.
The deal marks the first investment in CallMiner by GS Growth, which is part of Goldman's merchant-banking division. CallMiner previously raised $67 million from investors including NewSpring Capital, Jackson Square Ventures and Sigma Prime Ventures. It has about 400 customers including Equifax Inc., Banco Santander SA, Sirius XM Holdings Inc. and Dell Technologies Inc.
Holger Staude, a managing director in Goldman's merchant-banking division, will join CallMiner's board. "CallMiner is well positioned to transform the way organizations operate," he said in a statement.
Jeff Gallino, CallMiner's founder and chief technology officer, said his company plans to use the money to enhance Eureka, including helping it make more prescriptive recommendations.
"I want it to be able to tell the enterprise, 'Hey, did you know when you have a caller on the line, and they mention this competitor and they're calling about product A, if you want to upsell them, here's how you do it,'" Mr. Gallino said.
Eureka has historically focused on contact-center operations, Mr. Gallino said, adding that the company wants to accelerate an expansion into other areas, such as marketing or customer experience, that could benefit from the analysis of customer interactions.
CallMiner competes against companies including NICE Ltd., Verint Systems Inc., and Genesys Telecommunications Laboratories Inc. in a category Forrester Research Inc. calls "AI-fueled speech analytics."
Enterprise demand for such technology has grown in recent years along with advances in deep-learning techniques, said Kjell Carlsson, a Forrester analyst.
Not only has the technology improved but companies are more interested than ever in improving customer experience, he added.

Credit: By Jared Council
