Amazon.com Inc. and Lions Gate Entertainment Corp. are developing a TV series based on songs by Bob Dylan, and have secured permission to use any of the 74-year-old artist's lyrics and compositions, according to people familiar with the matter.
The project is to be written and directed by Josh Wakely, an Australian writer-director to whom Mr. Dylan has given carte blanche to use any of his 600-plus songs, one of these people said. Mr. Wakely's production company, Grace: A Storytelling Company, and Lions Gate would co-produce the series, though Amazon hasn't yet signed a deal with them to make the pilot or stream the series, these people said.
Mr. Dylan isn't signed as a producer and isn't involved creatively beyond the songs he has already written. Financial terms of the deal with Mr. Dylan weren't clear, though Mr. Dylan's managers have a reputation in the entertainment industry for cutting reasonable deals for projects they believe in. He and Mr. Wakely had no prior relationship, the people said.
With its story and characters inspired by some of Mr. Dylan's narrative lyrics, the show has initially been titled "Time Out of Mind," after the singer's hit 1997 album, which won three Grammy Awards and has sold over one million copies in the U.S., according to Nielsen Music. The show spans decades but is set partly in the 1960s and 1970s in New York, where Mr. Dylan got his start.
Episodes will be peppered with snippets of Mr. Dylan's songs that serve to advance the show's plot, in addition to providing a soundtrack. Some of the back story in the first episode, for example, draws from Mr. Dylan's 1964 "The Ballad of Hollis Brown," a song about a destitute man on a South Dakota farm who shoots himself and his family in desperation. Two songs would likely be featured in each episode, including "Knockin' on Heaven's Door," "Mr. Tambourine Man" and "Joey." The stories they inspire collide in dramatic circumstances, according to a person familiar with the matter.
The songs featured in the show could be performed by singers other than Mr. Dylan, who controls his own lyrics and melodies but not his sound recordings. Those are owned by his longtime record label, Sony Corp.'s Columbia Records. Without separately paying Columbia for permission, the show's producers can't use the original recordings. Columbia didn't respond to a request for comment. It wasn't clear who might be among those potential performers.
Music-based TV shows have been cropping up in recent years, from HBO's "Vinyl," a current series created by the Rolling Stones' Mick Jagger, among others, about the record business in the 1970s, to Fox's "Empire," a hit show about the hip-hop world. Netflix Inc. plans to premiere "The Get Down," a series about the New York disco scene, in August.
But the "Time Out of Mind" series won't be centered on the music world, according to people familiar with the matter.
Mr. Wakely, who grew up in a working-class, music-obsessed family, is the creator of an animated series that Netflix announced earlier this year called Beat Bugs, based on Beatles songs. For that show, which premieres this summer, Mr. Wakely acquired the rights from Sony/ATV Music Publishing to record covers of John Lennon and Paul McCartney songs that will be woven through each episode. Eddie Vedder, of Pearl Jam, and pop star Pink are among those who have been enlisted to sing.
For songwriters, landing songs in TV shows and films is an increasingly attractive way to earn money, as music sales decline and as terrestrial radio's playlists have narrowed. Aging songwriters in particular are feeling the pinch as many radio stations redefine "oldies" for the modern era, focusing on the 1980s and '90s rather than the '60s and '70s.
Though a counterculture hero in his heyday, Mr. Dylan has been cashing checks from corporate America for years, making his debut as a celebrity pitchman in a 2004 TV ad for line of lingerie from L Brands' Victoria's Secret. He appeared alongside a model slinking around to a remixed version of his song "Love Sick" -- coincidentally from the "Time Out of Mind" album.
He participated in Cadillac ads in 2008, appeared in a Pepsi commercial that aired during the Super Bowl in 2009 and was featured in TV commercials that began airing last year for IBM's artificial intelligence software, known as Watson. "I can read 800 million pages per second," Watson tells Mr. Dylan in one IBM ad. "My analysis shows your major themes are time passes and love fades."
It is relatively easy for movie and TV producers to license the publishing rights to Mr. Dylan's songs, said Playback Music Supervision's Billy Gottlieb, who recently secured permission to use a bootleg version of "Tangled Up in Blue" for Showtime's coming series "Roadies." Global publishing rights to use a song written by Mr. Dylan in a TV show generally run between $20,000 and $25,000, said Mr. Gottlieb. "You would think Bob Dylan would be an issue -- being one of the greatest songwriters who ever lived," Mr. Gottlieb said. "But it's completely the opposite."
Credit: By Hannah Karp
