Sri Lankan authorities scrambling amid a wave of deadly bombings across the country on Easter morning blocked social media, including Facebook and the popular messaging service WhatsApp.
The curbs reflect growing concerns in many parts of the world about the spread of false information and hate speech on social media and the use of online platforms to incite or exacerbate tensions. The government's step also underscores concern that social media companies cannot control harmful content themselves.
Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe called on Sri Lankans to "please avoid propagating unverified reports and speculation. The government is taking immediate steps to contain this situation."
But others say that cutting off social media during a crisis limits the ability of citizens to seek assistance and confirm the safety of family and friends, while curbing the government's capability to refute rumors and disseminate emergency information.
Facebook and other digital spaces have come under sharp criticism in recent years as extremists have used them to stoke violence in the real world, including in Sri Lanka and Myanmar. A number of countries have focused attention on the gaps in social media companies' policing of online posts and are seeking to impose regulations on them.
In March last year, Sri Lanka's government blocked social media in parts of the country after rumors and anti-Muslim posts circulated unchecked as sectarian violence broke out. Facebook also has been used to stir up hatred and deadly attacks against Muslims in Myanmar.
Facebook has taken some steps to improve its ability to remove harmful content relating to the two countries and to respond faster to volatile situations. Facebook Inc. Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg has said the company is investing heavily in efforts to police hate speech, including hiring tens of thousands of content moderators world-wide.
Still, companies like Facebook face numerous challenges, from the limits of artificial intelligence tools to uncover hate speech to the religious, ethnic and language complexities in countries like Sri Lanka.
On the flip side, social media can also be a powerful tool in combating misinformation that is sanctioned by governments. Last week, activists in Sudan credited Facebook as a key factor in helping to topple an autocratic government, as organizers used the platform to promote protests and refute comments from officials that the movement was losing momentum.
In Sri Lanka, government officials confirmed that authorities blocked social media as part of a broader curfew order. Economy Minister Harsha de Silva called the ban temporary in a press conference, and said access would be allowed again early Monday morning.
"It's been a while since we saw a post-attack shutdown like this," said Alp Toker, director of NetBlocks, a London-based digital-rights group. "These disruptions are extremely problematic as they limit the public's ability to seek assistance and check up on friends and family in a time of crisis."

Credit: By Newley Purnell, Jon Emont and Niharika Mandhana
