Reaching one of the most-coveted positions in consulting is getting even more difficult.
The consulting giant McKinsey & Co. is admitting about 200 employees into its partnership, one of the smallest groups in years, according to people familiar with the matter. That is down about 20% from last year and half as many new partners as in recent years.
Making partner at McKinsey, like similar promotions at big law firms and banks such as Goldman Sachs, comes with higher pay and can often propel a career. But the closely held firm is looking to change how it operates and rein in its sprawling leadership structure.
Over the years, McKinsey's partnership has ballooned, raising concerns internally that the firm's leadership had grown too large. McKinsey has roughly 45,000 employees around the globe and about 3,000 partners. As recently as 2021, McKinsey had about 30,000 employees.
Major companies hire McKinsey's consultants to do everything from devise artificial-intelligence strategies to find ways to take costs out of products. Demand for consulting services spiked during the pandemic but has returned to more-normal levels this year.
McKinsey launched a 30-person "partnership modernization" task force earlier this year to debate issues tied to McKinsey's governance, including the length of a term for the firm's leader and how often it conducts elections.
In an interview with The Wall Street Journal in June, Bob Sternfels, McKinsey's global managing partner, said he wanted to find ways to make the firm feel smaller, while maintaining its global structure. He said at the time that McKinsey doesn't have a quota for the number of its partners it can add in any given year. "We have a partner evaluation committee, and they look at candidates one by one," he said.
McKinsey is still expected to expand its overall head count this year, though its partnership class has been shrinking in recent years. McKinsey elected about 250 people to partner in 2023, down from about 420 partners in 2021 and about 290 in the years before the pandemic hit.
A McKinsey spokesman said its new partners "exemplify the values-driven leadership, entrepreneurial spirit, and a record of client impact that our firm aspires to. We're thrilled for our new partners."
Business school graduates and employees who have spent years working to join the partnership often leave the firm when they miss out on the promotion. Executives talk about the firm's "up or out" culture.
Rodney W. Zemmel, a McKinsey senior partner, wrote in a recent post on LinkedIn that many qualified McKinsey consultants don't make partner -- or may not make it until another year.
"Our evaluation system is holistic, not algorithmic," he wrote. "Even as someone who loves algorithms, I can confidently say it is better this way. Holistic can sometimes result in debate and disappointment, or election delay, but it means we are electing people -- real leaders, not 'business outcomes.'"
Partners at the firm have had to contend with a range of legal issues, including a criminal probe by the Justice Department over McKinsey's past work advising opioid makers on how to boost sales. A McKinsey subsidiary also recently agreed to pay more than $122 million to resolve allegations it paid bribes to officials at two South African state-owned companies to help the firm win consulting work.
Credit: By Chip Cutter and Geoffrey Rogow
