Google's new phone isn't better than its last one. In fact, the new Pixel 3a has a slower processor and a less impressive screen, and it lacks common features such as water resistance and wireless charging. Yet this might be the most enticing Google phone ever, for one simple reason: It costs just $400.
Google announced the new device at its I/O developer conference, the Alphabet Inc. subsidiary's largest event of the year. At an airy concert venue in Mountain View, Calif., Google showed off a slew of new features: Faster, more productive voice help via Google Assistant. New privacy tools for Android users. New systems and uses for Google's ambitious artificial-intelligence projects. And two devices on which to run all that software: a new smart-home controller called the Nest Home Hub Max, and the Pixel 3a.
The phone launch follows a recent Alphabet earnings report in which the company acknowledged that the Pixel 3 -- its $800-and-up flagship device -- wasn't selling well. Alphabet and Google Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat attributed the problems to "some of the recent pressures in the premium smartphone market."
Translation: Google can't compete with the rapid-fire improvements -- and massive marketing budgets -- coming from the likes of Samsung and Apple. The Pixel 3a is the company's attempt at something different.
In the past year, the price of premium phones seems to have stabilized near $1,000. Competition at that price is fierce: Apple's latest iPhones, Samsung's fleet of Galaxy devices, even models from Huawei, LG and others. But in the midst of that, some companies have begun offering surprisingly good devices at substantially lower prices.
The Pixel 3a -- which starts at $400 for the standard model and $480 for the larger 3a XL -- is the best low-end phone I have tested. It is worth the extra $100 over models I have praised like the Nokia 7.1 or the Moto G7. It is noticeably slower than, say, the Pixel 3 or a Samsung Galaxy S10, but in practice I rarely notice the extra split-second it takes to open an app or process an HDR photo. In my testing, only one app has been consistently frustrating: Google Maps has crashed more often than I expected, and the large app can take a while to load.
In general, though, the phone's Qualcomm Snapdragon 670 processor holds up fine. As does its polycarbonate body. The phone doesn't feel as impressive as the metallic flagships but it is actually softer and lighter in my hand. Its design mirrors the more expensive models, with the two-panel back and the rear-mounted fingerprint reader.
I like the "purplish" -- Google's word, not mine -- color I've been testing, too. And here is the best news: When it comes to the camera, the Pixel 3a is no downgrade at all. It has exactly the same camera setup as the Pixel 3, and it is as good as the camera on any smartphone I have ever used. Its lowlight shots are particularly impressive, thanks to Google's clever Night Sight feature. Google places more emphasis on camera software than camera hardware. The Pixel phones only have one rear camera, rather than the two or three or 3,000 you'll find on high-end devices.
Google definitely saved money on the 3a's screen. Its OLED panel still has deep blacks and vivid colors, but the 5.6-inch, 2220x1080-pixel panel on my review unit is definitely less sharp and impressive than the screens of other devices. Besides, the large bezels above and below are much more noticeable. This is no all-screen, magic-pane-of-glass marvel.
But, like other inexpensive phones, the Pixel 3a has a headphone jack. Google thinks that people in the market for a cheaper phone probably don't want to spend an extra $200 for a decent pair of wireless headphones.
Is the Pixel 3a the best phone on the planet? No. And there are plenty of reasons to buy a more expensive device. But Google's new handset might be the best value of any phone out there.
The 3a should make Apple Inc. and Samsung Electronics Co. nervous: While those companies and others are locked in a battle to be the best, fastest, most innovative, no matter the cost, Google found a way to make a phone that is very nearly as good for a fraction of the price. Now, the trick is for Google to figure out how to sell these things.

Credit: By David Pierce
