Tesla's sales momentum slowed during the third quarter as the automaker took production offline for factory upgrades and prepared to release its long-awaited Cybertruck pickup.
For the first time in more than a year, global deliveries to customers fell quarter-over-quarter by 6.7% to 435,059 vehicles, the electric-car maker reported Monday. Tesla said the decline was due to planned factory downtime, and it kept a 2023 target of selling 1.8 million vehicles unchanged.
The slowdown will likely renew concerns among investors that Chief Executive Elon Musk will turn to further price cuts to stoke demand as he chases a sales crown that would make the automaker by far the world's top seller by 2030.
The third-quarter sales tally was up 26.5% from the same period in 2022, illustrating that Tesla continues to make gains year over year. Still, analysts are closely watching the back-to-back quarterly performance to better assess whether Tesla can sustain its breakneck sales growth.
The latest results missed the estimates of analysts surveyed by FactSet who, on average, expected deliveries to rise 34% year over year.
Tesla's stock rose less than 1% Monday.
After a rocky start to the year, Tesla's share price has roughly doubled this year as investors have regained confidence in Tesla's long-term vision and capacity to innovate.
Musk reiterated in July that Tesla is targeting 1.8 million vehicle sales this year, up 37% from 2022, but he cautioned of a slowdown in the third quarter because of a slight decrease in production as the company worked to do factory upgrades. Tesla hasn't specified the exact purpose of the upgrades.
The company needs to deliver roughly 476,000 more vehicles in the final three months of the year to meet Musk's goal.
Separately, rival electric-vehicle maker Rivian Automotive reported it had delivered 15,564 vehicles to consumers in the third quarter, a 16.5% rise over the prior three-month period.
The California-based startup said it believes it is on track to hit a target of making 52,000 vehicles for the year.
Since launching production in late 2021, Rivian has struggled to get its factory in Normal, Ill. fully ramped up, a challenge that has led it to burn through billions of dollars in cash. In the second quarter, it posted a gross loss of $33,000 for every vehicle it sold.
Chief Executive RJ Scaringe has said the loss is expected to narrow as it increases output at its assembly plant.
Tesla, meanwhile, is striving to cut production costs in half for its next generation of vehicles, which is expected to include a less expensive car that is within reach for a wider group of customers. It is also looking to make big gains in artificial intelligence, with aspirations of developing humanoid robots and cars that can drive themselves.
In the near term, however, it faces challenges. The EV market is growing more competitive by the day, especially in China, and it has been more than three years since Tesla last brought out a new passenger vehicle.
The company's next offering, the Cybertruck, is expected to be produced in relatively low volumes, particularly to start.
Tesla had suggested in April it would hold a delivery event for the Cybertruck in the third quarter to mark the start of customer deliveries, but the end of September passed with little news on the model's sales launch.
Musk had previously suggested Tesla could reach two million vehicles this year but has appeared to back away from that figure as sales growth softened.
To juice demand for existing vehicles, Tesla has slashed prices across its lineup this year, in some cases by more than a third.
Those price cuts weren't enough for Tesla to keep up with the industry's growth in global EV sales, which rose an estimated 31% year-over-year to almost 2.9 million in the third quarter, according to GlobalData.
Price cuts will likely have an effect on the company's bottom line during the third quarter, which would be disclosed on Oct. 18. Analysts forecast third-quarter profit will fall roughly 30% over the prior-year period to $2.3 billion despite higher revenue, according to FactSet.
"Looking at 2024 . . . we see considerable downside risk to earnings expectations, due to much lower volume outlook than the market believes," Deutsche Bank analyst Emmanuel Rosner wrote in a recent note to investors about Tesla.
The bank lowered its delivery expectations for next year to 2.1 million vehicles from 2.4 million.
Credit: By Rebecca Elliott and Ryan Felton
