Photo-sharing site Pinterest Inc. is considered a social network, akin to Facebook Inc. It would rather be more like Google.
The San Francisco startup plans to introduce Monday technology to let users search its site without using text. The new tool would allow a user who, for example, admires a light fixture pictured hanging above a dining-room table to highlight it, and then see pictures of other light fixtures in similar styles or colors.
Pinterest says the technology is a step toward a new type of visual search engine it calls "a discovery engine." The company's executives say it will help users find things they didn't know they liked.
"This is building serendipity," said Michael Lopp, Pinterest's head of engineering.
The new feature also is expected to help Pinterest sell advertising, an important factor to the investors who have valued it at $11 billion. In five years, Pinterest has amassed more than 100 million users, starting with do-it-yourselfers and design aficionados, who have posted 50 billion images, or "pins," on the site. The company says it has indexed roughly a billion of those images for the new search engine; it aims to index them all.
Pinterest started generating revenue in earnest this year, first with the "promoted pin," an ad that targets users based on their interests, locations or searches. It then expanded into video advertising and introduced more targeting options. In June it added a "buy" button, allowing users to purchase items without leaving Pinterest's app.
"If Pinterest wants to attract search-advertising budgets they need to have really good search," said Deborah Aho Williamson, principal analyst at eMarketer. "It's getting better, but there's a lot of work to be done."
Pinterest says it thinks visual search is crucial. It is a tough problem that companies like Google, now part of Alphabet Inc., and online retailer Amazon.com Inc. have been attacking for years.
Google Goggles, a recognition app introduced in 2009, lets users identify and retrieve information about a book or landmark by taking a photo. Behind the scenes, the search engine matches attributes like logos and artwork with its own database of images.
More recent efforts lean heavily on "deep learning," a technique in which software learns to identify patterns by sifting through large amounts of data. Google is teaching computers to understand an image well enough to add a natural-sounding caption such as "a group of people shopping at an outdoor market." Google Photos, released this spring, can automatically label places and let users search for things as abstract as "hugs."
Pinterest's goal is different than Google's, said Nigel Duffy, chief technology officer at Sentient Technologies, a Palo Alto, Calif., company that applies artificial intelligence to images. "It's much easier to find a can of baked beans using visual search than it is to find a dress that is similar in some way to another dress," he said.
For Pinterest, the payoff could be huge. EMarketer expects the market for U.S. search advertising to be $29.2 billion next year, nearly half of all digital advertising.
Pinterest has a leg up because every image on the site is picked by a user and organized into a collection. Viewing a collection is like perusing someone's book shelf. A user can view, share and follow other people's "boards," curated groups of images with titles like "living room ideas" or "weeknight dinner recipes."
The site's one billion boards give Pinterest's engineers a bird's-eye view of how people's tastes are connected, when the same image is saved to different boards. This map is the foundation of Pinterest's so-called discovery engine, say Pinterest executives.
"Google is great for finding that one thing," Mr. Lopp said. "But there is an entire other engine out there, which is for finding the thing that you don't even think you need."
Today, Pinterest uses the term "discovery" to mean recommendations based on the boards, accounts and categories a user follows, as well as search and selected pins. It attaches roughly 100 pieces of data to each image, including the original source on the Web and descriptions added by users. Then, it suggests other images based on cues like the pins a user has saved.
But the system isn't perfect. A user who clicks on an image of a woman walking down the street might be interested in the woman's shoes, her bag, the car behind her, the woman herself or the composition of the photo.
The new visual-search technology's highlight feature aims to let users define their interests more explicitly.
Credit: By Yoree Koh
