Around the world, between nations and peoples, fault lines are starting to grow. The U.S., under the leadership of Donald Trump, has seen a surge of nationalism. Some European nations are seeking more freedom from Brussels. And widespread dissatisfaction is growing about the effects of globalization.
To discuss these fissures -- and how technology could add to the troubles -- Wall Street Journal Editor in Chief Gerard Baker spoke with Klaus Schwab, founder and executive chairman of the World Economic Forum. Here are edited excerpts.
MR. BAKER: What are the main causes of the fractures that we're seeing in the world right now?
PROF. SCHWAB: We went through a phase of hyperglobalization. The World Economic Forum always raised its voice against this neoliberal globalization. We always say globalization has to be combined with social caution. Now what we see is that the people who have been left out and who have suffered more from globalization and not profited from it start to have thoughts of rebellion.
We should not forget that globalization also bought many benefits. We have to find the right balance between globalization and making sure that we maintain the social contract.
MR. BAKER: How do you think these anti-globalization forces are going to play out over the next few years?
PROF. SCHWAB: I think it's wrong to just put it into a context of globalization or anti-globalization. What we have today is a new class, people who may still have a position but who are afraid that jobs may be eroded. It's not just globalization, it's a whole context -- a division between fractions of a population who feel change is positive for the future, and those who want to maintain the past and who want to get control back over their lives.
MR. BAKER: Sticking with globalization, the response that Donald Trump has seems to be economic nationalism. Why is that wrong?
PROF. SCHWAB: I would say it's not completely wrong. I think we have to find a new balance. I would call it equitable globalization. But we shouldn't throw out the baby with the bath.
We should maintain the positive effects of globalization. But, certainly, put more emphasis on creating a national environment which takes care of those people who are left behind.
MR. BAKER: Immigration was a big factor in the election. What can be done to address the fears that some people have about it?
PROF SCHWAB: This is a legitimate concern about how the social tissue of a country would be affected. We have to rethink not how we block those countries at the borders, but how we adapt to them. So educational measures, through, let's say, helping some to learn the language very fast, taking care of their families. The whole adaptation of those people is key.
MR. BAKER: Turning to the issue of technology and what you've called the Fourth Industrial Revolution: There are great concerns about jobs going away. Artificial intelligence is advancing very, very quickly. What can the world come together and, through an event like Davos, do to come up with solutions to the human consequences of this technological change?
PROF. SCHWAB: Davos can make a contribution in that we combine the fourth revolution with the educational system.
I personally feel that our present educational system should be much more flexible. We should have modules which allow people, lifelong, to continuously update themselves.
MR. BAKER: Some people worry that President Trump seems to represent a real break from American leadership. And some people worry that not only through his tweets and his speeches, but also through his actions, he represents something completely different from what the U.S. stands for. Not in line with the Western liberal ideals, but something much more authoritarian. Do you see signs of that?
PROF. SCHWAB: It worries me because we are moving from a unipolar world to a multipolar world. China is becoming stronger, India is becoming stronger, and nonstate actors are becoming stronger. And a multilateral, multipolar world, which is now evolving, also means a multiconceptual world. We see different values. And to see that the leader of this world, which stands for liberal values, is not exercising leadership which is expected -- that's worrisome.
MR. BAKER: How do you see China's role now?
PROF. SCHWAB: China is not only becoming a major global economy, but it takes this newly developed economic strength to also develop political strength on a global scene and to exercise its influence on the global scene. What I also see is that China has recognized the significance of the force in this revolution of technology. There is an emphasis in China using new technologies to move fast forward.
MR. BAKER: Is the European Union and Europe as a whole more united now and more cohesive than it was, say, 10 or 20 years ago, or are the fissures getting deeper?
PROF. SCHWAB: When I grew up, we had first European identity and second a national identity. What has happened with new generations is that national identity for many people comes first and European identity comes second, which means it's much more difficult to find common solutions.
So that would be a more negative assessment. But if I look at the very young generations, we see much more pro-European.
I think people want to have control back. And they want not to be dictated to by Brussels in everything that they are doing.
MR. BAKER: There has been a tremendous growth in industrial concentration, big companies getting bigger. Small companies are essentially being squeezed out. There's a concern that it's not just bureaucracies and supernational institutions but companies themselves that are just too big and too remote. What can be done to address those concerns?
PROF. SCHWAB: We have to entrepreneurialize society. If we look where jobs will come from, they will come mainly from new enterprises, from medium-size enterprises. So companies and countries have to create an ecosystem which allows young people to create their own companies.
We have to create new Facebooks, new Googles, and so on. Then we have the necessary dynamic situation which maintains a certain degree of competition in the economy.

Credit: By Gerard Baker
