The next time you dial customer service, who answers your call may be determined by what you have said on Facebook.
Companies from casino operator Caesars Entertainment Corp. to wireless carrier Sprint Corp. are increasingly checking social media and other personal data to tailor calls for each customer. The practice, however, raises concerns among privacy advocates. For decades, call centers have answered requests based simply on the order they were received: First in, first served.
A startup called Afiniti International Holdings Ltd. is trying to change that. Its artificial intelligence software, which has been installed in more than 150 call centers by dozens of companies, examines as many as 100 databases tied to landline and cellphone numbers to determine the best agent to answer each individual caller.
Such matching can result in more satisfied customers and more sales, the company says.
Afiniti's technology not only pulls callers' histories for a business and credit profile, but seeks insights into their behavior by scouring their public Facebook and Twitter posts as well as LinkedIn pages. In the case of a sales operation, a caller is matched with the agent who -- based on the agent's own call history -- has been able to close deals with customers with similar characteristics.
"It's a little overwhelming, sometimes scary, to know how much information can be accumulated about you," said Larry Babbio, an Afiniti board member and former Verizon Communications Inc. executive. But, he added, the trade-off is a better consumer experience.
Afiniti declined to describe an actual case because there are so many variables at play in its matchings. However, in a simplistic example, a particular agent might show results with high-income callers from South California who post frequently about traveling in Mexico.
Within Afiniti's system, future callers of the same ilk would be routed to that agent. The personal data is used only to match callers with agents; agents can't see a caller's data and aren't made aware why the algorithm made the match.
After an agent has taken thousands of calls, "You have a very accurate prediction of likely behavior," said Zia Chishti, Afiniti's 45-year-old founder and chief executive.
"The machine-learning aspect allows us to tease out patterns . . . in a fashion that's more effective than chance."
Privacy advocates worry this type of sorting could erode trust if callers suspect they are being dealt with differently based on a hidden assessment of their social standing.
"There's a process of discrimination going on," said Joseph Turow, a University of Pennsylvania professor who studies digital marketing.
"Companies are bringing data together that we have no knowledge about, and it may discriminate against in a prejudicial sense or a positive sense, depending on who we are."
Afiniti isn't alone in profiling callers for clients. Chicago-based Mattersight Corp. matches agents with customers based on each caller's personality, a determination Mattersight makes after analyzing recordings of a person's prior customer-service calls.
Mattersight says it has a personality score for about 100 million U.S. consumers, and its system is used by companies such as UnitedHealth Group Inc. and CVS Health Inc.
---
How It Works
1. When someone dials into a call center, Afiniti's system searches as many as 100 databases linked to that person's phone number, including Experian, Facebook and LinkedIn.
2. Afiniti also looks at census archives for the area the person is calling from, as well as the customer's purchase history and contact frequency with the company.
3. Afiniti tracks how each agent performs with callers with particular characteristics, and tries to match agents with callers similar to people they have had success with in the past. Agents aren't told why they have been matched with each caller and can't see their personal data.
Credit: By Ryan Knutson
