Ford Moto Co. and Chinese web-service provider Baidu Inc. are leading a $150 million investment in laser-sensor maker Velodyne Inc., the latest bets being placed by car makers and tech companies to advance autonomous-driving technology.
The investment will allow California-based Velodyne to expand its design and manufacturing of lower-cost LiDAR sensors, which are important in helping self-driving cars gather data from the surrounding environment.
"LiDAR continues to prove itself as the critical sensor for safe autonomous-vehicle operation," Velodyne Chief Executive and founder David Hall said in a statement. The investment will help the company bring down the cost of the laser sensors and speed mass adoption of the technology in future vehicles, he said.
Velodyne has long been a leader in light detection and ranging sensors for autonomous test cars. However, the expense of such sensors remains a barrier to wider use. The first version, a 64-laser device, cost $75,000 and was large and obtrusive, sitting on the roof of a vehicle.
Velodyne aims to lower the cost of the sensors to between $300 to $500 a unit, inexpensive enough to offer in mass-market cars.
Many industry analysts believe LiDAR sensors are crucial to full vehicle autonomy because of the limitation of camera-based systems, which rely on software to recognize images and infer distance. The LiDAR sensors can provide a much richer set of data that is more easily interpreted by the car's onboard computer.
Like other major auto makers, Ford is working to speed the development of self-driving vehicles by investing in firms with enabling technologies. In addition to the Velodyne deal, the company plans to double the head count at its Silicon Valley office to 260 by the end of 2017, Ford said on Tuesday.
The move follows General Motors Co.'s $1 billion acquisition of autonomous-driving firm Cruise Automation earlier this year and other moves by car companies such as Toyota Motor Corp. and Volkswagen AG to expand their software, mapping and artificial-intelligence expertise.
---
Mike Ramsey contributed to this article.
Credit: By Christina Rogers
