The S&P 500 hit another high after new data showed the American economy remained surprisingly resilient throughout 2023.
The benchmark index rose 0.5% to 4894.16, notching its fifth consecutive record. The Dow industrials added 0.6%. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite rose 0.2%.
The Commerce Department said the U.S. economy grew at a 3.3% seasonally and inflation-adjusted rate in the fourth quarter. That beat the 2% rate economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal expected. Growth was 3.1% over the course of 2023, defying expectations for a recession.
Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve's preferred inflation measure stayed steady at 2% in the last three months of the year, a sign that the central bank is taming inflation.
Stocks made the hurdle of high expectations again. Investors expect the Fed to win its inflation fight while avoiding a recession and are anticipating up to six interest-rate cuts this year. Those hopes have propelled the S&P 500 to trade at a valuation of nearly 20 times projected earnings over the next 12 months -- the loftiest level since around the time that the Fed began raising rates.
That means earnings will likely have to outshine analysts' forecasts to propel the index much higher.
"Where does the next leg up for markets come from? I think it comes from business spending in the second half of the year," said Yung-Yu Ma, chief investment officer for BMO Wealth Management.
Tesla skidded 12%, its worst day in more than a year, after the electric-car maker said growth would slow in 2024 and its profit margin took a hit last quarter. The most actively traded stock in the market on Thursday, Tesla finished at $182.63, its lowest since May 2023.
UnitedHealth Group also dragged down major indexes, dropping 3.9%. Health-insurance competitor Humana, which fell 12%, warned that Medicare businesses are likely to suffer this year.
IBM's earnings results found a more positive reception. Shares of the legacy tech giant were among the market's best performers, rising 9.5% to $190.43, their highest close since 2013.
Strong demand for IBM's artificial-intelligence platform, Watsonx, drove the enthusiasm.
Airlines were a mixed bag. Boeing shares fell 5.75% after regulators put limits on production of 737 MAX jets. American Airlines rose 10%, its largest one-day jump in just over a year, after its earnings topped analysts' forecasts.
Steven Wieting, chief investment strategist at Citi Global Wealth, sees stocks beyond the Magnificent Seven tech giants as having the potential to power the market from here.
The 10-year Treasury yield slipped to 4.131% after settling at its highest level since Dec. 12 on Wednesday. Yields fell in part because of weaker-than-expected labor-market data lifting bond prices.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 edged up 0.3% after the European Central Bank kept interest rates on hold. Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index rose 2% while mainland China's Shanghai Composite advanced 3%. At midday Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 1.1%, but the Hang Seng and Shanghai Composite were up 0.1%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.2%.
Credit: By Eric Wallerstein
