[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Small modular nuclear reactors long seemed like moonshots with lots of promise but not enough commercial interest. That changed recently after tech giants with surging power needs for AI processing swooped in with announcements backing SMR projects.
Last month Google parent Alphabet said it signed a power purchase agreement with Kairos Power for an up-to-500-megawatt SMR project. Amazon said it would work with X-energy on a 320 MW project that is jointly backed by a utility in Washington state.
Both Google and Amazon expect their initial projects to come online by the 2030s at the earliest. Oracle is another company to watch: Chairman Larry Ellison said in September that the company is designing a one Gigawatt-plus data center with building permits for three SMR reactors.
SMRs come with the potential to solve some of nuclear energy's biggest headaches: Cost, safety and time -- at least, in theory. That is why tech companies' backing is so crucial. The industry needs to test and learn before it can prove out the benefits.
SMR technologies differ
There are more than 80 SMR designs and concepts being developed globally, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency. These differ in size, type of coolant and fuel.
Companies such as NuScale, GE Hitachi, Holtec and Westinghouse are proposing to essentially build smaller versions of existing nuclear power plants, with modifications. Those designs use water as coolant and low-enriched uranium as fuel in their SMR units, just as all operating U.S. nuclear plants do.
The Department of Energy's recent report on advanced nuclear energy notes that these types of SMRs are more likely to be deployed earlier just because they resemble existing nuclear power plants. NuScale is the only SMR company to have received a standard design approval from the agency. It applied for certification for a larger version of the reactor (77 MW) and expects approval on that by mid-2025. NuScale has a contract with Romanian nuclear energy producer RoPower for a 462 MW project that could be completed as early as 2029.
Others, including Sam Altman-backed Oklo, Bill Gates-backed TerraPower, Kairos Power and X-Energy propose using a different type of coolant (molten salt, liquid metal or gas) and a more enriched type of uranium fuel known as high-assay low-enriched uranium, or HALEU. These contain a higher percentage of the uranium isotope that produces energy during a chain reaction. Kairos is the first and only company designing nonwater SMRs to receive construction approval by the NRC for a demonstration reactor. Construction began in July, and the company's plan is to learn rapidly through such smaller-scale projects.
These advanced SMR technologies come with some promising safety features, and HALEU has longer fuel life, according to the Energy Department. But they also don't have a long record, and access to HALEU is limited: The only commercial-scale HALEU enrichment capabilities are in Russia. The Energy Department has been pushing to make the fuel available, and it recently awarded up-to-10-year contracts to companies to produce HALEU.
Cost
One reason nuclear power plants have run into cost overruns isn't so much the technology itself, but the fact that such projects were so infrequently built that there was a lack of "muscle memory" and a shrunken industrial base, according to the Energy Department report. A lack of frequent projects also means that nuclear-trained workers are aging or have moved on to other industries. Before Vogtle Units 3 and 4 in Georgia, the most recent nuclear reactors to start up in the U.S., the last nuclear project construction in the country started in 1978.
The modular, factory-built nature of SMRs means costs should decline over time as a company gains experience. Industry observers think initial SMR projects won't necessarily have a lower levelized cost of energy -- the cost over the project's lifetime -- than conventional nuclear power projects. Wood Mackenzie estimates that a first-of-a-kind SMR reactor would cost $180/megawatt-hour over its lifetime, though with subsidies that could decline to $100/MWh. Second, and third iterations should get cheaper. The Energy Department estimates 45% to 60% of cost reductions between the first and third plant. Some advanced SMR designs produce heat -- a feature that could drive additional revenue.
And, even if SMRs are more expensive per megawatt-hour, they come with less risk of cost overruns just because there are less absolute dollars required by a project. A cost overrun of $1 billion to $2 billion is a lot more palatable than going overbudget by some $15 billion to $20 billion, as Vogtle did.
Cost overruns have already caused headaches for the SMR industry, though. NuScale, for example, canceled its proposed project in Idaho late last year after the cost estimate for its 462 MW project went up to $9.3 billion, or about $20,000 per kilowatt. Vogtle, by comparison, cost about $15,000 per kilowatt.
Safety
An important safety feature of nuclear energy is controlling the rate at which neutrons split atoms so that the heat and energy don't get out of hand, causing the reactor core to melt. Nuclear fuel rods are usually immersed in some sort of coolant, typically water, and reactors also use control rods made of neutron-absorbing materials to control the reaction rate.
A typical nuclear power plant has multiple safety barriers. An initial one is the metal tube encasing the uranium fuel pellets, followed by a heavy steel reactor vessel -- 9 inches to one foot thick. A surrounding concrete wall is supposed to be the last barrier, according to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
SMRs come with potential for better safety. They tend to rely on passive safety systems -- for example, relying on natural circulation to cool the reactor core. This means there is less need for external power or human intervention to shut down systems. The Fukushima nuclear accident in Japan, for example, occurred because an earthquake disabled the power supply that provided cooling for the nuclear plant. NuScale notes that its reactor core is cooled by the natural circulation of water, rather than relying on reactor coolant pumps, pipes and valves that could fail if external power sources shut down.
Advanced SMR technologies -- those using different coolants -- come with additional safety features. Water-based coolants require high atmospheric pressure to prevent boiling. Alternative coolants typically have much higher boiling points than water, which mean reactors can operate in a low-pressure environment. This means if anything goes wrong, the fuel just melts in place instead of exploding because of the high pressure, according to Chris Gadomski, head of nuclear research at BloombergNEF. Kairos Chief Executive Mike Laufer notes that the company's coolant of choice -- molten fluoride -- is able to bind to a large fraction of fission products, providing another containment mechanism.
But these new coolants also come with other challenges. Liquid sodium explodes on contact with water, and helium has frequently run into supply issues in recent years.
These companies are also developing new ways of packaging the fuel for safety. Kairos and X-Energy are proposing to coat fuel in a material known as TRISO that is more resistant to high temperatures and corrosion.
Because of these safety features, most SMR companies say they require a smaller safety buffer zone. Nuclear energy generates about 57,000 MWh a year per acre of land, which is 18 times more land-efficient than wind and 285 times more land-efficient than solar. SMRs come with the potential added benefit of needing even less space.
Time
Permitting and construction take a long time for full-scale nuclear power plants. It is unclear if the permitting process will get any faster for SMRs, but their smaller size could mean that construction time will be shorter than mega nuclear projects, notes David Brown, director of energy transition at Wood Mackenzie. The research firm estimates that for initial SMR projects, getting from permitting to construction completion could take around 10 years.
NuScale got its design certification from the NRC in 42 months, the fastest ever, notes Chief Commercial Officer Clayton Scott. That might not be a reliable reference point for other SMR companies using different coolants and HALEU, but NuScale estimates that construction will take considerably less time than large-scale projects, which have typically taken at least a decade.
Problems to be solved?
For many of these companies, getting a good pipeline of customers is a key step to commercialization. That is why Google and Amazon's announcements led to such a surge in stock prices of publicly listed SMR companies Oklo and NuScale.
Getting a license is another big hurdle, and a costly one. NuScale spent $500 million on testing and engineering to prepare for its NRC standard design approval and another $200 million to complete the process. And the build-out of the fuel supply chain will take time, too, as the U.S. builds out HALEU enrichment facilities and SMR companies build up manufacturing capacity for their advanced fuel designs.
There are certainly reasons to be optimistic about SMRs. The U.S. power grid needs more round-the-clock electricity as dirtier coal-fired power plants retire and tech companies race to build data centers for artificial intelligence.
"Tech companies are so profitable and the pipeline of data centers is fundamental to their growth. Power supply is a necessary factor for that," says Wood Mackenzie's Brown. "They are probably among a select group of companies that can afford to pay a premium for nuclear power."
Credit: By Jinjoo Lee
