Coherence may finally be raising a semi-welcome head when it comes to the Trump trade agenda. Gary Cohn was last seen in Bob Woodward's book snatching off President Trump's desk a letter ending the South Korea free trade deal and yet in a public forum recently Mr. Cohn gave a defense of the administration's policy on China: "If we are not getting paid specifically by the Chinese for what we have invented and the Chinese are just stealing it and knocking it off, the global economy, globalization doesn't work."
Christopher Balding, a Western economist who soured on China's evolution firsthand from living there, was first to notice (and applaud) elements in the U.S.-Mexico trade deal aimed at excluding China from the North American auto market.
Larry Kudlow let the cat out of the bag this week when the presidential adviser said tariff negotiations with China are dead in the water.
Business leaders who expect the China trade dispute to end the way the Mexican and Canadian disputes did had better wake up. It won't be over soon. When a tariff is announced on Chinese production, expect it to stay on forever. By now, the U.S. has imposed initial duties on about half of China's exports to the U.S. -- worth $250 billion. More are coming.
U.S. companies are starting to be publicly pressured to reduce their reliance on Chinese suppliers and markets. Vice President Mike Pence, in a speech this month, applauded unnamed U.S. business for turning away from the China market if it requires surrendering to Beijing's technology theft agenda, adding, "More must follow suit." Apple has been laughing off Mr. Trump's demands for factories in the U.S. Maybe it shouldn't.
It's been a strange few weeks in this regard. Bloomberg News produced a detailed and elaborate account of China's sneaking hidden components into U.S. motherboards. All the U.S. companies named in the story issued stringent denials.
Then there's the odd matter of Broadcom and its latest U.S. acquisition target, CA Technologies. In response to Trump pressure, Broadcom has redomiciled in the U.S. but remains a China-influenced company. CA's roll-up business model has made it the sole-source supplier of legacy software used in U.S. banks, hospitals and power companies. A Defense Department letter criticizing the sale is reportedly a forgery. Yet if the Trump administration means what it says, the transaction is exactly the kind that might seem suspect. Look for a resurrection of the long-defunct Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, which once applied a stern hand to U.S. and allied companies to curb commercial technology flows to America's adversary in the last Cold War.
But with one difference -- last time we had a debate. Arthur Vandenberg and all that.
Maybe it's time for the Trump administration to lay out for the American people just how thoroughly it intends to shake up the hugely important U.S.-China economic relationship.
By one view, China is becoming the worst enemy of its own development. It doesn't need our help. Its surveillance and social-control agenda likely will deter its best minds from staying in China or coming back from a foreign university. The Soviet Union, in the 1980s, thought with enough bureaucratic imperative and enough stealing it could keep pace with the U.S. It couldn't. Under Xi Jinping, China seems increasingly confused about output and value -- more high-speed railways to nowhere, more towering buildings with nobody inside.
A traditional free-trade view would say if China wants to chase away foreign investment, China pays the cost, not the U.S. If China wants to tax its people to subsidize steel, solar panels and auto parts for export, we would be wise to pocket these handouts to our consumers and businesses and focus our resources elsewhere. When your adversary insists on shooting himself in the foot, let him. China's avid pursuit of artificial intelligence worries Western experts but is likely to be employed mainly in destroying the creativity and initiative of its own people.
If the Trump boom has proved anything, meanwhile, it's proved that American prosperity is still made at home. A better answer to China's perverse ambitions would be to focus on renewing our own economic dynamism, building up our military and alliances, dealing with the fiscal challenge of our welfare state. These priorities are likely to guarantee American success in the coming century, not following Xi Jinping down the path of seeking foreign scapegoats for failure and heavy-handed intervention at home.
Tempted by the potentialities of technology to create the thoroughly modern totalitarian state with himself at the center, Mr. Xi is rapidly undermining the openness that lifted China out of poverty. His personal ambition -- not any political necessity -- seems to be driving the show. That's a mistake the U.S. does not need to emulate.

Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
