[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Nasdaq made its name in stock trading. But its future may be about crime fighting.
The exchange operator has for many years been diversifying its traditional business listing and trading stocks. One move was to acquire financial-technology company Verafin. Its tools are used by banks to detect financial crimes such as payments fraud and money laundering.
These days, financial crime seems to be rampant. Nasdaq Verafin estimates over $480 billion was lost to bank fraud schemes and scams globally in 2023. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime estimated about 2% to 5% of global gross domestic product, or as much as $2 trillion, is laundered each year.
Unsurprisingly, the spending to combat financial crime is immense. Celent estimates financial institutions globally will spend some $230 billion in 2024 across technology and operations for financial-crime compliance and fraud prevention.
The biggest banks have dominated much of this spending. But smaller banks and digital "neobanks" are under some of the biggest pressure to upgrade their defenses.
Nasdaq Verafin's core customers have historically been small- to medium-size banks, and it signed up 53 of these customers in the second quarter alone.
What Nasdaq calls its financial-crime management technology business grew 25% on an annualized recurring revenue basis in the second quarter. It has projected annual growth to stay in the mid-20% range in the medium-term future.
Via a series of acquisitions, Nasdaq nowadays provides an array of services to financial institutions such as banks and broker-dealers through its broader financial-technology unit, such as risk management and regulatory compliance. A key part of its strategy is cross-selling among those businesses. Nasdaq Verafin in July added a new international tier-one bank client via a cross-sell, Nasdaq told analysts in its second-quarter report. It has signed four tier-one and four tier-two banks since 2023. Adding larger banks brings vastly more information to Nasdaq Verafin's pooled data, which customers can use to investigate potential swindlers who act across banks.
The more quarters that Nasdaq can prove out its outlook for 10% to 14% annual revenue growth in financial technology, the more it should benefit the bank's share-price multiple. Currently, Nasdaq trades at about 23 times 2025 estimated earnings, according to FactSet data. That is in line with other exchange operators. But it is below S&P 500 software and services companies, at roughly 28 times, as well as other software-and-data financial services names.
The combination of the firm's overall 50%-plus operating margin and its double-digit financial technology and solutions revenue growth rate outlook seems as if it could justify multiple expansions. Additionally, the company is deleveraging from its most recent acquisition, which should also benefit its multiple.
And if investors start to focus on companies that can actually put artificial intelligence to productive use in their businesses, regulatory and compliance processes might be an area to consider. It often involves people sifting through mountains of transactions. Nasdaq Verafin has introduced a generative-AI tool, which can help investigators review alerts more efficiently.
Crime doesn't pay, they say. But those who are combating financial crime certainly do.
Generate image description

Credit: By Telis Demos
