The mobile market Metternichs are out in force, wargaming Google's $12.5 billion purchase of Motorola's handset business. The imponderables are many.
Will partners like Samsung and HTC, which have been enriched by Google's Android phone software, abandon Google, or even look at Google cross-eyed, now that Google will own a competing phone maker? Don't bet on it.
Android has been hugely advantageous for everyone who is a successful phone maker not named Apple. Remember, Apple's premium smartphone holds up the pricing structure for the whole industry. Samsung, HTC and the rest have been selling phones into this market and pocketing huge margins because they pay nothing for Android.
Google wouldn't be human if it didn't want some of this loot, which buying Motorola would enable it to grab. But that doesn't mean, in the long term or the short term, that other hardware makers will walk away from a relationship that has lined their pockets and propelled them to the top of the rapidly growing and giant new business of making smartphones. Let's just say that while having Google as a competitor is not ideal, handset makers will learn to live with it.
The Metternichs also wonder: Did Google buy Motorola just for its patents? No. If Google buys a handset maker, it wants a handset maker. Plenty of other ways were available to lay its hands on enough patents to create the desired patent stalemate with Apple, Microsoft, Oracle and whoever else comes along.
Still, the patents are important too. Patent wars are not, at least superficially, an appealing feature of Silicon Valley. But intellectual property is complicated. Invention is more collaborative, more a matter of stealing, copying or, to phrase it nicely, "standing on the shoulders of giants," than the patent system likes to think.
At every stage of the computer's evolution, even back unto the day of the mainframe, a necessary rite of passage has been patent litigation. These tests of strength proceed in the courts for a while, and then peace is made, with checks and cross-licensing agreements passing between the parties in rough proportion to the expected outcome. In some cases, companies have bought entire other companies just to put such disputes to rest.
Google hopes to recapitulate this history in smartphone software. But Google's weakness was that it rushed into the mobile marketplace with Android without a portfolio of patents. Complicating matters, it also gave Android away free to phone makers with the idea that Google would make money by tying Android to Google's search and advertising functions.
To those competing with Google (say, Microsoft and Apple) this was both an annoyance and an opportunity. The opportunity was to raise the cost of Android above zero by slagging handset makers with patent claims. Google appears not to have seen this onslaught coming, but lately had entered the market in pursuit of a patent portfolio with which to slag back. Its urgency can only have been heightened by decisions in Germany and Australia to block sales of an Android-powered Samsung tablet over unresolved patent litigation. Even more urgently, the U.S. International Trade Commission is expected to rule this fall on a petition that could keep certain Android phones out of the U.S. market.
Verizon, which usually minds its own business, applauded the Google-Motorola deal hoping, in incantatory fashion, that an armed peace would let everyone get back to the real job of making products and serving customers. This is a reasonable hope. Once-deadly squabbles over mainframe software, the personal computer graphical interface, and the Intel-compatible microprocessor petered out with a whimper.
Finally, the Metternichs are debating whether Google is throwing up a white flag and adopting a Steve Jobs-like philosophy of the mobile phone business, unifying hardware and software. Almost certainly, the answer is yes.
"Mobile" is an inadequate word. Better to say "ubiquitous" computing, in which all your data, all your entertainment, all your snapshots are available easily from whatever device is at hand, whether a big-screen TV or a teensy mobile device, without you having to puzzle your way through an unfamiliar user interface.
Even more, this will be an increasingly lively experience, with artificial intelligence anticipating or inspiring your whims, and throwing targeted advertising at you to the extent that you are willing to let advertisers subsidize your use of online services.
Since the first Android device hit the market, a worry has been fragmentation -- a proliferation of versions and devices that all worked slightly differently from each other, some of which might be incompatible with the app you suddenly couldn't live without.
Google was going to have to rectify this problem one way or another, by exercising greater control. In some fashion, don't be surprised if Motorola is eventually put to work as an attempt to do so.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
