Nvidia's highly anticipated earnings report hasn't even landed yet, but investors retreated from the stock Tuesday at the fastest clip in months. That dragged the stock market into the red as well.
Declines were deepest in indexes that include the graphics-chip maker, with the S&P 500 retreating 0.6% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite veering 0.9% lower. The Dow Jones Industrial Average, which isn't home to Nvidia, inched down 0.2%, or 64.19 points.
Investors are keying in on Nvidia's earnings report Wednesday for clues about whether the artificial-intelligence-fueled frenzy that powered the market's monster 2023 can continue. Although the three major stock indexes are back near record levels, all three posted declines last week.
That pressure stems from Wall Street's growing skepticism that the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates at its March meeting and lower borrowing costs for companies such as those trying to digitize using technology like Nvidia's.
Shares of the chip maker slid 4.4%, their steepest decline since October, while options traders are wagering on even wider swings in the coming days. Even so, many investors doubt that short-term turbulence could derail any of the "Magnificent Seven" tech stocks that occupy an outsize portion of the market.
Nvidia shares, for instance, are up 40% this year, after tripling and leading the S&P 500 in 2023.
"These companies are already massively profitable and throwing off so much cash," said Derek Izuel, chief investment officer for Shelton Capital Management.
"Until something goes wrong, [the Magnificent Seven] are still probably good to go for a while," he added, pointing to the flood of investors funneling money into market-cap-weighted index funds.
Aside from Nvidia, five of the six other stocks in the Magnificent Seven faded. Tesla shed 3.1%, and Amazon.com declined 1.4%.
Ten-year Treasury yields inched lower as prices rose, settling at 4.276%. The benchmark yield remains higher than at the start of the year.
Meanwhile, Americans have largely withstood higher borrowing costs, keeping the U.S. economy humming and profits for many businesses buoyant.
On Tuesday, Walmart said more shoppers -- not higher prices -- led to a revenue bump last quarter. The retailer's stock advanced 3.2% in response, to a record $175.86.
Although Home Depot's quarterly sales surpassed Wall Street's expectations, Americans' continued wind-down of pandemic-era home-improvement projects contributed to a revenue decline. Its shares still managed a 0.1% gain.
Financial firms are betting that consumers will make more of those purchases with plastic rather than cash, a key reason behind Capital One's $35 billion move to create a credit-card behemoth by acquiring Discovery Financial Services. Discovery shares jumped 13%, while Capital One's pulled back crept 0.1% higher.
U.S. crude retreated 1.3% to $78.18 a barrel and natural gas veered closer toward its lowest price since the depths of the pandemic.
Albemarle, the world's largest lithium producer, dropped 6.3% amid new projections that the shift to metal-intensive electric vehicles will be slower than expected.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.1%. At midday Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.5%. S&P 500 futures were down 0.2%.
Credit: By David Uberti
