Vladimir Putin obviously didn't get the memo. The kleptocrat handbook has changed. You don't invade countries anymore because after the smoke clears, you have to fix their plumbing and heating and cell service. Instead, you hire them.
Some estimate Mr. Putin may be worth $100 billion via hidden holdings in Gazprom, Russia's state-owned energy company. But Jeff Bezos and Bill Gates are worth more and they don't control any tanks. Their success shows the world is now divided into horizontal slices, with the most productive sitting on top. The American empire, if you want to call it that, is a horizontal empire. Mr. Putin's attempt to re-create the Soviet Union's vertical empire is doomed to fail.
As digitization allowed design and control to be separated from manufacturing, the world got horizontal, organizing into stacks of companies, industries and even countries to which markets provide capital based on their value-add.
IBM vertically integrated computers, while Microsoft, Intel, Dell, Singapore-made disk drives and Japanese memory chips dominated slices of the personal-computing stack. AT&T was vertical, the Internet horizontal, with Google and Amazon sitting on top of the data-center, fiber-optics and cable-modem slices. Apple adds its operating system to smartphones after paying Foxconn to assemble Korean screens and Taiwanese chips in China. Successful companies give up owning everything to expand opportunities.
As long as the U.S. provides the stuff at the top, its horizontal empire will endure, creating societal wealth and enough technology and taxes to defend itself and its allies. These include Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, all of which have far higher gross domestic product per capita than vertical commodity-dominated Russia. Especially in trade, horizontal topples vertical.
Under the guise of reuniting the Soviet Union's footprint, Mr. Putin wants to control oil and gas distribution to clueless nuclear-reducing, wind-dependent, energy-deprived European countries. Control Ukraine and he might prevent others from delivering fuel.
This game is 150 years old. John D. Rockefeller played it in the 1870s, colluding with railroads to control the transport of oil, building pipelines to bypass competitors like the Pennsylvania Railroad, and allegedly destroying competing pipelines. It worked then, but it won't in 2022. The U.S. can ship liquefied natural gas to Europe from its fracking fields.
Today's wealth and power seekers hire what they need lower down the stack. I know plenty of startups with software-development teams in Ukraine. Estonia, Poland, Romania and India have teams of coders for hire. Countries start lower down the stack until enough talent and capital are accumulated to implement creative ideas on their own. See Israel -- and China.
It's a shame Mr. Putin has petroleum-fogged vision. Apple, Microsoft, Google and Amazon all have market caps greater than Russia's GDP. Russia has, or had anyway, a vibrant software community, including VKontakte, its own social network. But scale matters, and property rights for Russian entrepreneurs feel fickle.
Mr. Putin could have encouraged entrepreneurs or at least noted that oil and gas will eventually decline in importance and funded research into batteries and nuclear and geothermal energy. Instead, he unimaginatively invaded. The horizontal world has more power than Mr. Putin realized. Many Russian banks were cut off from the Swift interbank messaging system. Russia's central bank has been isolated and raised interest rates to protect a crashing ruble and closed its stock exchange. Reminder: It was also closed in 1917-92.
China has smartly allowed capitalism to bring hundreds of millions of people out of poverty. The Chinese Communist Party stayed in power while a market economy grew, but recently the party has felt threatened by those pulling the technology levers. Alibaba's Jack Ma was silenced, tutors shut down, videogames limited. The party took control of data access. China is foolishly going vertical, threatening its honey pot.
I can hear the criticism now: "A horizontal model exploits those in the lower slices." But it doesn't -- just the opposite. The horizontal model grows economies and raises the standard of living of everyone in the stack, with a byproduct: They can afford to buy more of America's stuff like iPhones, virtual-reality goggles, HBO subscriptions and NBA streams. Grow the pie, unlike an oligarchy that only shuffles wealth around.
Xi Jinping and the Communist Party have their eyes on Taiwan and its world-leading chip manufacturing. Is an invasion imminent? It's less likely. Mr. Xi must now see what it's like to be "Putined" -- excluded from the global financial system. It's not worth it. Let's make Mr. Putin the last to play this old game.
Commodities come and go, while productivity drives progress. Horizontal rules. This will be true in the future for cloud computing, machine learning and autonomous vehicles. But staying on top requires constant innovation. Despite all the talent in Russia, Mr. Putin never understood this. I'm not always convinced U.S. leadership does either.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
