In December, Federal Trade Commission Chair Lina Khan told the WSJ CEO Council, "competition is critical to have an economy that's thriving, to ensuring that we have robust innovation." That's idle chatter. Actions speak louder than words. Look at her agency's innovation-killing actions: "FTC seeks to block" Meta's acquisition of virtual reality app Within. Or Microsoft's acquisition of videogame maker Activision. Ms. Khan is playing checkers while others are playing chess.
In the early 1990s I raised money for Activision at a $100 million valuation. Last January, Microsoft offered $69 billion for the company -- we've come a long way. Gaming companies used to sell cartridges for videogame consoles like Nintendo and Sega or floppy disks for personal computers. Over time this changed to CD-ROMs for new consoles like Sony's PlayStation and Microsoft's Xbox. Then came handhelds. And now mobile phones. The FTC, seemingly prodded by Sony, is worried that Microsoft will "harm competition in high-performance gaming consoles."
That's laughable. It's like protecting floppy disks. While Microsoft has promised to make some games available on competing consoles, including Sony's PlayStation for the next 10 years, I doubt anyone will be selling new consoles a decade from now as everything moves to the cloud. Why? Because while 75% of today's televisions are Smart TVs, soon TVs will have graphics engines as powerful as today's videogame consoles. Then it's game over.
As usual, the FTC is still fighting the last war. The next war is over online worlds, the so-called metaverse. This makes even more bizarre the FTC's attempt, which was recently denied by a district court judge, to block Meta from buying fitness app maker Within. As if Jazzercise or "Sweatin' to the Oldies" is innovation. The metaverse already exists and videogames are, pun intended, its killer app so far.
Don't care about videogames? OK, but the future of commerce and education will live in online worlds. Microsoft will bring Azure's cloud expertise, HoloLens' headset, and even ChatGPT's conversational artificial intelligence to Activision's 3-D worlds. Chatbot avatars might replace salesmen and teachers one day.
Microsoft would make a formidable competitor to Meta. So would Apple, with its rumored headset debuting this spring and its work on fitness apps. Meanwhile, the FTC is decades behind, litigating consoles. Checkers vs. chess.
What to do? Microsoft has four options: waffle, wait, withstand or walk. Waffling would mean letting the FTC step all over the company, forcing it to make amends and promise the world to get the deal done. That would be dumb if Microsoft has any intention of making future acquisitions, which will be critical as PC sales decline.
So Microsoft fights, perhaps to wait the FTC out. Suits. Countersuits. Depositions. The whole lawyers-get-rich mess, maybe surviving two years until Ron DeSantis's or Nikki Haley's or whoever's administration drops the suit. Ugh, I hope it doesn't come to that. Microsoft could also withstand -- close the deal, similar to what Illumina did with its FTC-embattled acquisition of DNA diagnostic company Grail. If the FTC later unwinds the deal and imposes fines, so what? Microsoft's balance sheet can handle it.
But if I were Microsoft, I'd walk from the $95-a-share deal. Except for Elon Musk's offer for Twitter in April 2022, January 2022 was as close to a tech top as you could get. Mr. Musk should have walked too. A doubting stock market has Activision stock at $75. Tech stocks are down a third since last January, and Activision was around $65 when the deal was announced so the stock, absent another bidder, could drop to $50 or below if Microsoft walks. Microsoft could even buy it later. It would hurt the credibility of a $2 trillion-market-cap company, but it's a viable option.
On Feb. 1 the European Union issued a formal antitrust warning to Microsoft. Why the FTC and EU are running interference for Japanese tech giant Sony is beyond me. Their case is weak tea. Regardless, the market is a stronger enforcer than regulators. Deals don't always work. Microsoft bought Nokia -- 'nuff said.
Both sides attack Big Tech. Matt Stoller of the American Economic Liberties Project recently said, "When you get a Lina Khan at the FTC it's great, and she's doing a lot of the things conservatives demanded the FTC do. But then The Wall Street Journal will just write 15 articles about how Lina Khan is a woke Marxist." I checked, Mr. Stoller is the only one saying that. I have called her a neo-Brandeisian who is pushing a "big is bad" agenda instead of the time-tested consumer welfare standard, and still do.
The FTC should stop trying to pick winners and losers. Instead, let Microsoft, Facebook, Apple, Google and everyone else compete and out-innovate one another to bring fascinating new AI-enhanced online worlds and increase consumer welfare. The FTC needs to understand that these companies are playing 3-D chess, not old checkers.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
