[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
There are signs that the surge in drilling by shale-oil producers has ended, reducing estimates of U.S. oil output and pushing up prices.
A bird's-eye look at the oil fields shows that investors still need to watch for a quick new boost in supply, though.
The U.S. Energy Information Administration last week cut estimated U.S. crude-oil production by 1.3% and 1.4%, respectively, for the third and fourth quarters of 2017 compared with August estimates. The government may be too optimistic in the short term and potentially too pessimistic over the longer term.
The former view comes from the analysts at Kayrros, which uses satellite data and machine learning to study individual oil wells. The research firm tallied the same drilling rigs tracked by the widely watched Baker Hughes North America Rig Count. Typically oil production follows changes in rig counts some months later. Between the end of July 2016 and the end of July 2017, the U.S. rig count mushroomed by 107%, though it has since retreated slightly.
But the crucial step between drilling wells and producing oil -- completion -- has lagged behind. That means that the backlog of drilled but uncompleted wells, or DUCs, has risen and oil production may be lower than expected in the coming months. In the prolific Permian Basin alone, the number of DUCs was 2,330 in July, according to the EIA -- an all-time high and an increase of 94% compared with a year earlier. Since that figure is now nearly two months old, the number might have continued moving higher even as the rig count declined.
The official estimates of production cuts has helped push up U.S. benchmark crude prices by about 8% to just under $50 over the past two months, with Brent rising even more.
Restraint by shale drillers unable to generate decent cash returns is a bullish sign for oil prices.
Yet the buildup of DUCs is also bearish since it creates latent supply. Because the incremental cash cost to start pumping crude is low for a DUC, the payback period for an oil company is only a year or so.
Even for wells not drilled, analysts at Citigroup estimate the break-even cost to drill and complete a well is just $29 a barrel on a production-weighted basis for the drillers they cover once the costs of acreage and sunk capital costs are excluded for the companies they cover.
Higher prices could get some of these wells pumping. Oil-price bulls need to get their DUCs in a row.

Credit: By Spencer Jakab
