Silicon Valley investors have poured $2 billion into companies based on the data-collection software known as Hadoop. But a newer big-data program is stealing Hadoop's thunder. The software, known as Spark, has attracted the attention of startups and established companies alike. This week's Spark Summit in San Francisco is likely to draw 2,000 coders and entrepreneurs -- or 82% more than last year -- to explore its potential.
International Business Machines Corp. said it expected to spend $300 million over the next few years to put 3,500 coders on Spark-related projects in analytics, commerce and machine learning. Silicon Valley venture-capital firms Andreessen Horowitz and New Enterprise Associates have put $47 million into Databricks Inc., a startup that on Monday expects to make widely available an online service built on the software.
Spark helps visual bookmarking site Pinterest Inc. offer relevant images and AirBnB Inc. price rooms for rent. Startups based on Hadoop, including big-data software companies Hortonworks Inc. and Cloudera Inc., have rolled it into their product lines. It is part of a growing collection of free software that is chipping away at businesses long dominated by Oracle Corp., Teradata Corp., and other traditional database and data-warehouse competitors.
"Anyone that's going to be using data in the future is going to be leveraging Spark," said Rob Thomas, vice president of product development for IBM analytics.
Like Hadoop, Spark is used to analyze massive amounts of data. However, it is significantly faster than a core Hadoop component called MapReduce. That makes it handy for analyzing data as soon as it is generated, rather than needing to wait for data to accumulate and then processing it in a batch.
Technologists such as Mr. Thomas don't expect Spark to replace Hadoop, which is a grab-bag of big-data tools that often includes and works together with Spark. But they do expect it to accelerate the extraction of insights from the flood of information generated by Twitter feeds, fitness trackers, online ad auctions, weather sensors, electric turbines and other consumer and industrial systems.
"Spark replacing MapReduce is like a car replacing a bicycle," said Christopher Nguyen, chief executive of Adatao Inc., which offers a software platform for data-driven decision making that includes both programs. That is, each has its uses, but one is many times faster than the other in many situations.
Like Hadoop, Spark is freely available under an open-source license, creating a challenge for businesses that aim to commercialize it. Databricks on Monday expects to offer widely a Web-based service that enables companies to take advantage of Spark's number-crunching power without having to install or maintain the software in their own facilities. The company says it has 150 trial customers and 60 paying customers.
Even as it promises to deliver big-data insights more quickly, Spark threatens to complicate an already thorny landscape, said Stefan Groschupf, CEO of Datameer Inc., which makes software based on Hadoop. Code written to work with MapReduce might not work with Spark. And Spark, which Mr. Groschupf said isn't yet reliable enough for corporate use, could someday be replaced by other emerging software. The complexity is bound to confuse corporate managers, he said.
"You have different vendors hurting the overall market, trying to get people locked into their products," he said.
---
Deborah Gage contributed to this article.
Credit: By Robert McMillan and Elizabeth Dwoskin
