U.S. stocks edged up as the S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite each clinched closing highs for the year.
The broad stock-market benchmark gained 10.06 points, or 0.2%, to 4283.85, reaching its highest close since last August. The tech-heavy Nasdaq rose 46.99 points, or 0.4% to 13276.42, its highest level since April 2022. The Dow Jones Industrial Average ticked up 10.42 points, or less than 0.1%, to 33573.28.
Stocks have rebounded recently, with the S&P 500 within striking distance of exiting from its longest bear market since the 1940s. The broad index finished less than 10 points shy of entering a new bull market, which would represent a 20% jump from its recent low set in October.
The rally has been powered primarily by a slim group of megacap technology stocks. Apple, the most heavily weighted stock in the S&P 500, is up 38% this year, while Nvidia has gained 165% as investors flock to artificial-intelligence plays.
"A lot of people, like us, are assessing the extent to which tech has led the broader rally and trying to see where we go from here," said Scott Duba, chief investment officer and managing director of wealth management at Prime Capital Investment Advisors.
The major U.S. stock indexes wavered between small gains and losses throughout the session, reflecting muted trading action.
The stock market's measure of volatility continued to drop. The Cboe Volatility Index, or VIX, tracks the price of options often used as insurance against market declines. Also known as Wall Street's fear gauge, the VIX traded below 14 on Tuesday, reaching its lowest intraday level since February 2020.
"People are probably taking a bit of a pause ahead of the Fed meeting," Duba said.
The Federal Reserve is set to convene next week to discuss monetary policy and issue its next interest-rate decision. Federal-funds futures, used by traders to wager on the course of interest rates, reflected bets that the central bank would hold its target rate at 5% to 5.25% at the June policy meeting.
Investors are also awaiting the May consumer-price index next week for the latest insights into the course of inflation, which could influence whether the Fed might raise, hold or cut interest rates in future meetings.
Goldman Sachs Group lowered its expectations for an imminent U.S. recession, citing the resolution of the debt-ceiling standoff and a more modest impact from stress in the banking sector.
"You've got a situation where people are pricing out a recession and the growth side of the equation is looking a little better, but we've had a big unwind of Fed rate-cut expectations for this year," said Phillip Colmar, global strategist and partner at MRB Partners.
Financial stocks led the market, with shares of regional banks recovering some losses from the spring's selloff. The KBW Nasdaq Regional Banking Index rose about 5%. Comerica, Fifth Third and Zions were among the top gainers in the sector.
Shares of Coinbase dropped 12% after the Securities and Exchange Commission sued the crypto company for allegedly violating securities law.
In the bond market, the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury yield ticked up to 3.699% from 3.691% Monday.
Oil prices eased, reversing the gains that came after Saudi Arabia said it would slash oil production by 1 million barrels a day. Brent crude fell 0.5% to $76.29 a barrel.
Overseas, Europe's Stoxx 600 rose 0.4%. Early Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 1.4% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 1.1%. S&P 500 futures were flat.
Credit: By Hannah Miao
