The U.S. government is granting Samsung Electronics up to $6.4 billion to build chip-making facilities in Texas, the latest in a string of major subsidy awards from the Biden administration aimed at reviving semiconductor manufacturing in the U.S.
Samsung is using the grant money to help increase its investment in Taylor, Texas, just outside Austin, to roughly $45 billion, adding a second chip-making factory, an advanced chip-packaging facility and research-and-development capabilities, the Commerce Department said. It more than doubles Samsung's commitment made in 2021 to build a chip-making plant in Taylor.
The funding is contingent on due diligence from the Commerce Department, which is overseeing $39 billion of manufacturing grants under 2022's Chips Act. Samsung's grant brings to $23 billion the amount of money awarded this year by Commerce for big chip-making projects in the U.S. The Samsung projects will create 17,000 construction jobs and 4,500 manufacturing jobs, the Commerce Department said.
The Chips Act is central in a revival of industrial policy under the Biden administration, using government funds to restore domestic production of a tech component seen as critical to national security and economic growth. The U.S. accounted for more than a third of global chip production in the 1990s, a share that dwindled to about 12% in 2020.
Much of the chip supply chain is concentrated in Asia, Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo said in a call with reporters. "That leaves the U.S. supply chain incredibly vulnerable to disruption," she said.
South Korea's Samsung is the world's largest maker of memory chips and a major player in the contract chip-making, or foundry, business. It is one of a handful of players capable of manufacturing the industry's most cutting-edge logic chips, alongside Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. and Intel.
Two years ago, Samsung floated the prospect of potentially investing upward of $200 billion in 11 new chip plants in Texas over the next two decades in filings made to the Texas Comptroller's Office.
According to the Commerce Department, Samsung's two planned plants in Taylor will produce 4-nanometer and 2-nanometer chips for the firm's foundry business and begin production in 2026 and 2027.
Apple's latest iPhone 15 is known to be equipped with processors made using TSMC's 3-nanometer process. In the industry, lower nanometer numbers denote more sophisticated production technology.
Samsung's planned advanced chip-packaging facility will carry out 3-D packaging for high-bandwidth memory, or HBM, a specialized type of memory that is integral to artificial-intelligence computing. It will provide so-called 2.5-D packaging technologies employed in combining logic and memory chips into a single package to create more powerful chip systems for AI.
HBM is made by stacking several DRAM memory chips -- a type of memory that lets devices store data temporarily and carry out various tasks -- on top of one another and fusing them together. HBM has become the go-to type of memory used in high-performance AI processor chips made by Nvidia and others.
To achieve faster data-processing speeds, graphic-processing units by the likes of Nvidia and HBM are bundled together using the 2.5-D packaging techniques. Major chip makers including TSMC, Samsung and Intel are investing in 2.5-D packaging as well as next-generation 3-D packaging.
One of Samsung's selling points has been that it is a company that has all those capabilities and can streamline the production process for AI chips. The firm's memory business produces HBM, while the foundry unit is able to make cutting-edge processor chips. And the firm offers advanced-packaging solutions for integrating various chips together.
The federal funding will support facility expansions in Samsung's Austin chip factories for industries including aerospace, defense and auto.
As the disbursement of funds under the Chips Act kicks in, Raimondo suggested that with projects such as Samsung's, the U.S. is on track to make about 20% of the world's most advanced logic chips by 2030.
Last week, TSMC, the world's top contract chip maker, landed up to $6.6 billion from the U.S. to help fund its $65 billion investment toward three chip factories planned for Phoenix.
Intel earlier received $8.5 billion under the Chips Act to help fund new chip plants planned in four states. Intel's total investment in U.S. projects in the next five years is expected to exceed $100 billion, according to the Commerce Department.
Contract chip maker GlobalFoundries also received $1.5 billion in grants in February.
Credit: By Jiyoung Sohn and Asa Fitch
