Corporate IT executives see promise in an emerging technology in which the physical and virtual servers that are traditionally used to run applications become invisible to the developers building the apps.
It is called serverless computing, and according to Chris Drumgoole, General Electric Corp.'s chief technology officer, it is what the "cool kids" are thinking about.
Mr. Drumgoole predicts widespread adoption of the technology between 2019 and 2026, but analysts say it could take longer for such a shift to be implemented in organizations.
Analysts say serverless computing allows developers to focus only on writing code without having to manage servers. The process, in essence, becomes "serverless" for the customer.
The provider runs the customer's application on its own servers or inside "containers," where they are broken into small pieces and placed into software shells, allowing the pieces to be distributed to any sort of device, in a digitally orchestrated manner, and at lower cost. Enterprise customers or IT departments pay the provider every time their code is triggered, instead of doling out cash upfront for machines or virtual servers that they may not need. It is an evolution of a move toward cloud computing and greater efficiency, which began years ago when physical servers largely were replaced with virtual technology or software.
"If you're moving into the next generation of big shifts like [artificial intelligence] and machine learning, the underlying infrastructure that supports that stuff will be serverless," said Mr. Drumgoole following a Monday conference hosted by the Open Networking User Group, where business IT leaders advocate for creating open networking standards.
Companies pioneering the use of serverless computing include International Business Machines Corp., Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Amazon.com Inc.'s Amazon Web Services, which has been offering serverless computing services with AWS Lambda since late 2014. With Lambda, software developers write applications and upload their code to the Lambda compute service.
Lambda manages the code and runs it on AWS's own servers. Lambda then executes those applications at scale and bills for every millisecond that a code is triggered.
Matt Wood, general manager of product strategy for Amazon Web Services, says Lambda eliminates the need for customers to buy, manage or maintain any virtual or physical servers. Other companies are launching competitors to Lambda.
As businesses continue their shift to cloud computing, serverless computing is expected to become a permanent feature of cloud services, analysts say. It is particularly useful when running applications for internet-connected devices such as Amazon's Echo, because the apps require massive amounts of requests of short duration.
Credit: By Sara Castellanos
