Fidelity Investments named the company's technology chief as its next head of asset management, the latest sign of the firm's shift away from its stock-picking roots.
Steve Neff succeeds Charles Morrison, who is retiring in December after 32 years with the firm, Fidelity Chairman Abigail Johnson wrote Friday in a memo to employees.
Mr. Neff, who joined Fidelity 22 years ago, has held a series of technology roles in asset management. He was chief information officer of the division until 2009, and since 2013 served as the firm's head of technology and global services.
Mr. Morrison, a former bond manager, had run the division for the past five years. As head of asset management, Mr. Morrison expanded the firm's lineup of exchange-traded funds and other low-cost investments.
In August, Fidelity became the first manager to offer no-fee index funds. Fidelity announced his retirement last month.
Fidelity hasn't always picked a former investor to run the asset-management business and has chosen a technology leader once in the past. Mike Wilens, a onetime technology chief, ran the business a decade ago.
But Mr. Neff's rise reflects Fidelity's increasing move from a mutual-fund giant synonymous with stock and bond pickers to a firm that can offer products across an investor's portfolio.
Mr. Neff, 66, is a frequent writer on LinkedIn, the social-media network, where his articles cover topics ranging from leadership and workplace diversity to artificial intelligence.
Fidelity isn't alone in changing as the business of managing other peoples' money broadly follows other financial services on a path toward increased digitization. The emergence of electronic trading, exchange-traded funds, computer-driven investing and data science have required each generation of industry executive to be more technology-savvy than the last.
Fidelity's investment management business oversees more than $2 trillion in assets. While the business was once Fidelity's flagship, many younger clients may know the firm best for its brokerage services or 401(k) retirement platform.

Credit: By Justin Baer
