Melissa Beebe, an oncology nurse, relies on her observation skills to make life-or-death decisions. A sleepy patient with dilated pupils could have had a hemorrhagic stroke. An elderly patient with foul-smelling breath could have an abdominal obstruction.
So when an alert said her patient in the oncology unit of UC Davis Medical Center had sepsis, she was sure it was wrong. "I've been working with cancer patients for 15 years so I know a septic patient when I see one," she said. "I knew this patient wasn't septic."
The alert correlates elevated white blood cell count with septic infection. It wouldn't take into account that this particular patient had leukemia, which can cause similar blood counts. The algorithm, which was based on artificial intelligence, triggers the alert when it detects patterns that match previous patients with sepsis. The algorithm didn't explain its decision.
Hospital rules require nurses to follow protocols when a patient is flagged for sepsis. While Beebe can override the AI model if she gets doctor approval, she said she faces disciplinary action if she's wrong. So she followed orders and drew blood from the patient, even though that could expose him to infection and run up his bill. "When an algorithm says, 'Your patient looks septic,' I can't know why. I just have to do it," said Beebe, who is a representative of the California Nurses Association union at the hospital.
As she suspected, the algorithm was wrong. "I'm not demonizing technology," she said. "But I feel moral distress when I know the right thing to do and I can't do it."
Artificial intelligence and other high-tech tools, though nascent in most hospitals, are raising difficult questions about who makes decisions in a crisis: the human or the machine?
The technologies, which can analyze massive amounts of data with a speed beyond human capacity, are making extraordinary advances in medicine, from improving the diagnosis of heart conditions to predicting protein structures that could speed drug discovery. When it is used alongside humans to help assess, diagnose and treat patients, AI has shown powerful results, academics and tech experts say.
At the same time, the tools can be flawed and are sometimes implemented without adequate training or flexibility, say nurses and healthcare workers who work with them regularly, putting patient care at risk. Some clinicians say they feel pressure from hospital administration to defer to the algorithm.
"AI should be used as clinical decision support and not to replace the expert," said Kenrick Cato, a professor of nursing at the University of Pennsylvania and nurse scientist at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. "Hospital administrators need to understand there are lots of things an algorithm can't see in a clinical setting."
In a survey of 1,042 registered nurses published this month by National Nurses United, a union, 24% of respondents said they had been prompted by a clinical algorithm to make choices they believed "were not in the best interest of patients based on their clinical judgment and scope of practice" about issues such as patient care and staffing." Of those, 17% said they were permitted to override the decision, while 31% weren't allowed and 34% said they needed doctor or supervisor's permission.
UC Davis said in a written statement that its technology tools are a starting point for further clinical assessment, and protocols such as taking blood after a sepsis alert are recommended but not required.
"If a nurse feels strongly this does not make sense for their patient they should use their clinical judgment" and contact the doctor, the medical center said. "The ultimate decision-making authority resides with the human physicians and nurses."
It said nurses don't face disciplinary action for overriding an algorithm "unless it is something that is blatantly against standards of care."
Epic Systems, which makes the sepsis prediction model, said each health organization sets its own parameters for when alerts appear and designs its own responses.
Nurses could use the extra help. Since the pandemic, hospitals have been chronically understaffed and nurses and doctors complain of high stress and exhaustion. In a survey of more than 12,500 nurses in November 2022 by the research affiliate of the American Nurses Association, 43% of nurses said they were burned out.
Many applications are designed to ease the burden on nurses by taking over time-consuming and tedious tasks such as patient chart documentation, patient monitoring and medication verification.
Jeff Breslin, a registered nurse at Sparrow Hospital in Lansing, Mich., has been working at the Level 1 trauma center since 1995. He helps train new nurses and students on what signs to look for to assess and treat a critically ill or severely injured patient quickly.
"You get to a point in the profession where you can walk into a patient's room, look at them and know this patient is in trouble," he said. While their vital signs might be normal, "there are thousands of things we need to take into account," he said. "Does he exhibit signs of confusion, difficulty breathing, a feeling of impending doom, or that something isn't right?"
Like most trauma centers, Sparrow uses algorithms to alert nurses about changes in patient conditions. Over the past several years, Breslin has noticed that newer, digitally native nurses often trust the algorithm over their own observation skills.
If new nurses overrely on AI-based decisions, he said, "you're not going to have the same assessment skills to look at a patient and know, 'I've got to do something right away,'" he said.
A spokesman for Sparrow said "any machine or use of artificial intelligence is designed to be utilized as an aid to diagnosis and treatment, not serve as the decision maker."
Nurses often describe their ability to sense a patient's deterioration in emotional terms. "Nurses call it a 'hunch,'" said Cato, the University of Pennsylvania professor who is also a data scientist and former nurse. "It's something that causes them to increase surveillance of the patient."
Cato and Sarah Rossetti, biomedical informatics and nursing associate professor at Columbia University, led a team at Columbia to develop predictive models that attempt to quantify a nurse's intuition and use it as an early warning system to alert hospital staff to patients in trouble.
Electronic health records now generate data that tracks the frequency and type of surveillance a nurse does for a patient. The researchers discovered a strong correlation between an increase in nurse activity, such as writing notes about small changes ("seems off" or "patient not as alert") and patient deterioration, Cato said, often long before problems show up in vital signs. This predictive algorithm, called Concern, scores patients as red (high risk), yellow (at risk), or green (no risk) based on patterns of nurse activity.
The Mass General Brigham hospitals, including Brigham & Women's Hospital in Boston, have been testing the Concern algorithm, as well as "smart beds" that continuously monitor patients for deterioration, for the past several years.
Nurses were initially resistant to the AI, said Patricia Dykes, Brigham & Women's program director of research for the Center for Patient Safety, Research and Practice. "They asked, 'Does that mean the administration doesn't think we're watching patients close enough?' 'Do they think we need less nurses?'"
Hospital leaders told them the technology was intended to support nurses' clinical judgment, not replace it, Dykes said, and urged them to use the tools to assist them in assessing patients and making recommendations to doctors. When the Concern algorithm scores a patient "yellow," it should prompt nurses to use critical-thinking skills to figure out what's going on, she said. Initial results show the model warns of deterioration five to 26 hours earlier than traditional methods, such as monitoring vital signs.
Implemented this way, as an early warning system to alert the nurse to a possible problem, AI-tools can actually increase nurse autonomy, Dykes said.
Whether a nurse is confident enough to trust her own judgment to override an algorithm often depends on hospital policy. Clinicians who are penalized for making a wrong decision may start deferring to the computer, nurses say.
Cynthia Girtz, a registered nurse at Kaiser Permanente Medical Group, was on duty one afternoon at a call center in Vallejo, Calif., where she worked as what the company calls an "advice nurse," along with more than 200 other nurses, according to proceedings from an arbitration case last year. Her job was to answer calls from Kaiser members who feel sick and offer clinical advice on what they should do next.
Advice nurses at Kaiser use algorithms to categorize the illness of the caller, typing answers into a drop-down menu based on the patient's symptoms, according to the arbitration decision. The answers determine the next steps for treatment.
When Kenneth Flach, a retired professional tennis player from Marin County, called Kaiser complaining of a cough, chest pains and fever, Girtz chose Kaiser's cough/cold and flu algorithm. That protocol doesn't provide an option for an emergency room or in-person doctor visit "unless the patient was spitting up at least 2 tsp of frank [visible] blood," the arbitration decision said. Since Flach wasn't doing so, the nurse followed the algorithm's directions to schedule a phone appointment with a doctor several hours later.
Flach was later diagnosed with pneumonia, acute respiratory failure and renal failure and died several days later. The arbitrator in the case held the nurse responsible, deciding she should have exercised her clinical judgment to override the algorithm. "Pressured by this policy, Nurse Girtz viewed it as a directive," the arbitrator found. The nurse, "notwithstanding the Kaiser policy, owed a duty of care to provide a reasonable nursing assessment." Kaiser, as the nurse's employer, was ordered to pay the family about $3 million.
In a written statement, Kaiser said the algorithmic recommendations are "guidelines for triage, not directives," and nurses are expected to adapt them to the unique needs of each patient. Nurses have the authority to override protocols based on their clinical judgment.
At UC Davis earlier this spring, Beebe, the oncology nurse, was treating a patient suffering from a bone cancer called myeloid leukemia. The condition fills the bones with cancer cells, "they're almost swelling with cancer," she said, causing excruciating pain. Seeing the patient wince, Beebe called his doctor to lobby for a stronger, longer-lasting pain killer. He agreed and prescribed one, which was scheduled to begin five hours later.
To bridge the gap, Beebe wanted to give the patient oxycodone. "I tell them, 'Anytime you're in pain, don't keep quiet. I want to know.' There's a trust that builds," she said.
When she started in oncology, nurses could give patients pain medication at their discretion, based on patient symptoms, within a doctor's parameters. They gave up authority when the hospital changed its policies and adopted a tool that automated medication administration with bar-code scanners a few years ago.
In its statement, UC Davis said the medication tool exists as a second-check to help prevent human error. "Any nurse who doesn't believe they are acting in the patient's best interests . . . has an ethical and professional obligation to escalate those concerns immediately," the hospital said.
Before giving the oxycodone, Beebe scanned the bar code. The system denied permission, adhering to the doctor's earlier instructions to begin the longer-acting pain meds five hours later. "The computer doesn't know the patient is in out-of-control pain," she said.
Still, she didn't act. "I know if I give the medication, I'm technically giving medication without an order and I can be disciplined," she said. She watched her patient grimace in pain while she held the pain pill in her hand.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: AI Is No Replacement for a Nurse's Intuition" -- WSJ June 29, 2023)
Credit: By Lisa Bannon
