TOKYO -- SoftBank Group Corp. Chief Executive Masayoshi Son said Wednesday he is preparing to shift his focus from turning around U.S. wireless unit Sprint Corp. to running a $100 billion technology-investment fund.
Cost cuts have helped reduce losses at Sprint, the No. 4 mobile carrier in the U.S. With its operating profit rising, more of the day-to-day operations will be entrusted to Sprint CEO Marcelo Claure, Mr. Son said, though he added that he wanted to get involved personally in planned talks with T-Mobile US Inc. on industry consolidation.
SoftBank, whose empire spans full or partial stakes in hundreds of companies including British chip architect ARM Holdings PLC, Yahoo JapanCorp. and China's Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., is roiling the global investment community with a plan to bet billions of dollars on tech companies.
"I haven't accomplished anything I can be proud of in my 60 years on Earth," the 59-year-old Mr. Son told reporters and investors. "This is my chance."
The investment fund is nearly ready for its official launch, he said.
Mr. Son is tracking what he says will be a "gold rush" into technologies for an age when artificial intelligence exceeds human capabilities. He says ownership of ARM, whose chip architecture is used in almost all of the world's smartphones, will help him predict which technologies will win.
That argument drew a pledge to invest $45 billion from Saudi Arabia's deputy crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, as well as investments from Abu Dhabi investor Mubadala Development Co., Apple Inc., Qualcomm Inc., Foxconn Technology Group and Oracle Corp. Chairman Larry Ellison, according to people familiar with the matter. SoftBank has said it would contribute $25 billion.
By taking on the role of a fund manager, Mr. Son could invest in key technology companies without raising SoftBank's already-high debt levels. Total interest-bearing debt minus cash positions at SoftBank stood at 11.2 trillion yen ($98 billion) at the end of March, up from 9.2 trillion yen a year earlier.
SoftBank and investment teams in London and San Francisco have already lined up deals for the fund. The list includes satellite operators Intelsat SA and OneWeb Ltd., New York-based shared-office-space company WeWork Cos., Indian mobile-payment company Paytm, and a 25% stake in ARM that would be purchased from SoftBank, said people familiar with the matter.
Mr. Son said would take charge of U.S. negotiations seeking ways to combine resources at Sprint with those of other carriers to meet rising network costs. "T-Mobile is the most likely partner, but we will keep an open mind."
---
Newley Purnell in New Delhi contributed to this article.
Credit: By Mayumi Negishi
