[Big Brother]
Seventy-five years ago this month, George Orwell's indelible dystopian novel "Nineteen Eighty-Four" was published to immediate acclaim. Orwell, born Eric Blair, would not live to see the work's lasting impact; he died the next January. But the book's evocative language has thoroughly permeated the public consciousness.
"The phrases and concepts that Orwell minted have become essential fixtures of political language, still potent after decades of use and misuse," writes Dorian Lynskey in "The Ministry of Truth," his 2019 history of the novel.
Among the Orwellisms that have infiltrated the lexicon: "doublethink," "thoughtcrime," "unperson" and "memory hole." None, however, is more influential than "Big Brother," the name of the totalitarian leader who is never seen but is always watching. The constant surveillance of the state is reinforced by posters declaring "Big Brother is Watching You," with his face projected on ubiquitous telescreens. The protagonist Winston Smith secretly resists before getting arrested for his thoughtcrimes and ultimately brainwashed.
Like so much Orwellian language, "Big Brother" insidiously subverts the meaning of a familiar expression. Since the early 19th century, the phrase has referred simply to a person's older brother, and more generally to someone seen as protecting or caring for others. It also has been associated with charitable enterprises such as the Big Brothers movement, which began in New York City in 1904 to help children in need through mentoring with adult volunteers. (The movement expanded to become Big Brothers Big Sisters of America.)
Orwell wasn't the first writer to invoke a "Big Brother" figure. H.G. Wells, in his 1937 science-fiction novel "Star Begotten," used the phrase to suggest a dominant authority figure who fulfills our "cravings for protection and direction." "Our imaginations hang on to some such Big Brother idea almost to the end," Wells wrote.
It is unclear if Orwell directly borrowed "Big Brother" from Wells, however. The novelist Anthony Burgess claimed that Orwell was actually inspired by billboards in postwar England for Bennett College, a correspondence school. The founder of the college originally advertised with the slogan "Let me be your father," and when his son took over, he adapted the line to "Let me be your big brother."
Regardless of how Orwell came up with it, "Big Brother" resonated as soon as "Nineteen Eighty-Four" was published. The July 4, 1949 issue of Life Magazine introduced the novel to American readers and warned in an editorial that even the U.S. could fall under the sway of "a Big Brother" if tyranny was not resisted. Soon "Big Brother" would appear in Cold War critiques of state apparatus in the Soviet Union and other Eastern bloc nations.
When the year 1984 finally arrived, Orwellian imagery was famously exploited in Apple's TV commercial introducing the Macintosh computer, with a heroine smashing a Big Brother-style telescreen with a sledgehammer. An even more explicit allusion came in 1999 with the launch of the reality-television franchise "Big Brother" (first in the Netherlands and then syndicated internationally), in which contestants share a house under 24-hour video surveillance.
These days, the specter of "Big Brother" often gets raised in the context of tech companies gathering voluminous personal data. Artificial-intelligence ventures are sparking new fears, as seen in headlines like "Big Brother AI: Machine learning is coming for your privacy." When we seek a term for pervasive monitoring, nothing fits the bill like "Big Brother," Orwell's thoroughly pervasive phrase.
Credit: By Ben Zimmer
