Shares of Nvidia gave up early gains, pulling the S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite down from records.
The S&P 500 finished 0.3% lower, after earlier surpassing 5500 intraday for the first time. The Nasdaq Composite fell 0.8%, snapping a seven-session streak of record closes. The Dow Jones Industrial Average bucked the trend, rising about 300 points, or 0.8%.
Stocks have climbed in recent weeks, driven largely by excitement around artificial intelligence. Both the S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite closed at records ahead of Wednesday's Juneteenth holiday. Nvidia, whose chips power AI technology, also on Tuesday dethroned Microsoft as the most valuable listed company in the world, with a market capitalization of more than $3 trillion.
Shares of Nvidia couldn't keep the rally going on Thursday, falling 3.5%. That pressured the S&P 500 and Nasdaq, which are weighted by market value, meaning big companies like Nvidia have an outsize influence over the direction of the indexes.
"Nothing can go up forever," said Sandi Bragar, chief client officer at Aspiriant who is encouraging her clients to balance positions in large-cap stocks with more staid investments like bonds.
The moves came after data on housing and the labor market released Thursday suggested the economy is slowing. Housing starts and building permits fell from a month ago, according to Commerce Department data. Weekly jobless claims came in at 238,000, higher than economists expected.
Investors have been highly attuned to economic data for signs that inflation is easing, which could keep the Federal Reserve on track this year to cut interest rates, usually a boon to the stock market.
"We're getting that slow cooling of inflation," said Leslie Thompson, chief investment officer of Spectrum Wealth Management.
The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note, a benchmark for borrowing costs, rose to 4.252% from 4.216% on Tuesday.
In individual stocks Gilead Sciences gained 8.5% after the company said one of its investigational drugs had for the first time shown 100% effectiveness in preventing HIV..
Accenture climbed 7.3% after the company reported a fall in quarterly net income but a jump in new bookings, including more than $900 million tied to generative AI.
Salesforce's 4.3% jump contributed about 65 points to the Dow industrials' gains.
Trump Media & Technology fell 15% after the Securities and Exchange Commission declared effective the registration of additional shares, leaving it vulnerable to dilution.
Overseas, the Swiss National Bank caught some traders off guard by cutting rates for the second time this year. The Bank of England held its key rate unchanged, as did Norway's Norges Bank. The Stoxx Europe 600 added 0.9%.
At midday Friday, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 1.6% and South Korea's Kospi was down 1%. S&P 500 financial futures were up slightly.
Credit: By Hannah Miao
