Thousands of technology enthusiasts and others are flocking to a new wave of hackathons created to fight the coronavirus pandemic.
The low-sleep, high-octane sessions have attracted participants world-wide to team up online and suggest solutions to problems such as the equipment shortage for health providers or a better way to track the spread of Covid-19, the respiratory disease caused by the virus.
"Everyone is looking at the urgency of the situation," said Youseph Yazdi, executive director at Johns Hopkins Center for Bioengineering Innovation and Design, which organized a five-day hackathon in the last week of March that attracted 513 teams with 2,331 applicants from 34 countries.
Focus areas of the hackathon included how to communicate effectively about Covid-19, prevention of transmission within communities, and health-care equipment shortages.
Among the ideas that emerged were a location-based mobile application to track traffic in grocery stores for effective social-distancing practices, and a tool for messaging platforms to tag misinformation by analyzing keywords and redirecting users to trusted news sources.
It was the first hackathon for Helen Xun, a medical student on leave from Johns Hopkins, whose team reviewed and refined design files of 3-D printed parts such as filters and splitters so ventilators could be shared among multiple patients.
The team already prototyped parts ahead of the hackathon, but got fresh ideas on designs and materials.
"The hackathon opened this international forum for us to talk to people globally to assess the actual needs," Ms. Xun said.
Hackathons were made popular decades ago by the software community as communal, all-night sessions, often powered by pizza and caffeine. Social distancing means today's hackathons are conducted online, team members working over videoconferencing and chat tools from Zoom Video Communications and Slack Technologies Inc.
The rapid spread of the coronavirus, which caught many officials flat-footed, has paved the way for community-sourced solutions.
"Doctors are leading the fight, but a lot of people would love to find ways to engage and help," said Sam Lessin, a general partner at venture-capital firm Slow Ventures, which helped organize a hackathon last month, with about 19,000 participants from across 175 countries, working on themes suggested by partners such as the World Health Organization.
Last weekend, Massachusetts Institute of Technology hosted a 48-hour Beat the Pandemic hackathon in which 1,500 participants worked in 238 teams.
Rebecca Sereda, a researcher in the stem-cell and regenerative-biology department at Harvard University, was part of a team that in 40 hours created a mobile app that used machine learning to score individuals on immunity to Covid-19, similar to a credit score, based on data such as location, age, interactions, and health history. The team is refining the app and preparing to launch it.

Credit: By Agam Shah
