As college students across the country settle in for their first day of classes, they are getting used to a new section on the syllabus: a course's generative AI policy.
Institutions such as Cornell University and Columbia University are letting professors decide the extent to which tools like OpenAI's ChatGPT are allowed in coursework. Or whether they are completely banned.
It is a question professors and institutions have been grappling with for almost two years, since the debut of ChatGPT sowed panic in the sector, giving students the ability to whip up an assignment -- not necessarily accurate -- with a handful of prompts.
Now, after training, task forces, and trial and error, universities say they have a better grip on what AI should and shouldn't be able to do in the classroom, although they say it remains a learning process with many unanswered questions. And even when they can decide on a specific policy, it might not be easy to enforce.
Colorado State University history professor Jonathan Rees plans to tell his students they cannot use AI tools to write essays for his class. He is aware he might not necessarily be able to tell if they do, but added that he believes the quality of the AI-generated essays will be so poor that they will receive a low mark anyway.
"The policy I picked is 'Don't use AI,'" he said. "It's going to be a bad paper. So if you use AI, you're almost certainly going to fail."
It is a different story at Arizona State University, which earlier this year signed up to use OpenAI's ChatGPT enterprise product.
Since then, it has contributed feedback that aided in the development of OpenAI's ChatGPT Edu, which has controls similar to those of ChatGPT enterprise, but is less than half the cost, OpenAI said. The product can be used to cover an array of educational and administrative tasks, from personalized tutoring to helping faculty write grant applications and draft feedback, said Lev Gonick, ASU's chief information officer.
Gonick said the university didn't create a new academic-integrity policy specifically to tackle AI, but as students misuse it, they will be punished under the existing policy, much as other form
"Obviously we need to work through important challenges," said OpenAI Chief Technology Officer Mira Murati.
The Wall Street Journal previously reported that OpenAI has developed a method to reliably detect AI-generated content, but the tool has been mired in internal debate and has yet to be released.
The lack of AI-detection tools is also forcing some universities to reimagine the way they test and assess learning.
"In some courses we forbid its use," said Kavita Bala, dean of the Bowers College of Computing and Information Science at Cornell University. In other courses, where AI tools are allowed, professors may ask, "How creative can you be?" Bala said.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
