Nvidia Corp. lowered revenue expectations for its just-ended quarter by $500 million, citing weak demand in China and a rocky cloud-computing business -- a revision that clipped nearly 14% from the chip maker's already beleaguered shares.
The reduced outlook came on top of a projection Nvidia issued in November that was $700 million shy of what analysts were expecting for the quarter. Monday's revision darkens the picture for a company investors had coveted as it found new uses for its chips in cryptocurrency mining and artificial intelligence.
Jensen Huang, Nvidia's founder and chief executive, called the company's fiscal fourth quarter "a real punch in the gut." It "was an extraordinary, unusually turbulent, and disappointing quarter," he said in a letter to shareholders Monday.
The Santa Clara, Calif., company's stock sank to $138.01. The shares have fallen further than every other major technology company since an industry rout began in October -- a skid that erased more than half of Nvidia's market value.
Nvidia, which is scheduled to report its latest results in mid-February, now expects revenue of $2.2 billion for the period ended Jan. 27, down from $2.7 billion. The news sent shares of other semiconductor companies lower; Advanced Micro Devices Inc. fell 8%, while Qualcomm Inc. slid 1.3% and Intel Corp. dropped less than 1%.
Nvidia is among the world's biggest makers of graphics-processing chips for videogame playing, favored in particular by those who buy or build high-end personal computers that use dedicated graphics-card components.
And the company saw its fortunes skyrocket in recent years as it targeted rapidly growing new areas.
While artificial intelligence remains a promising market for its chips, a downturn in virtual-currency prices drove cryptomining enthusiasts from that market, leaving Nvidia with excess inventory.
The company said Monday that its performance in that segment went as expected in the fourth quarter. Instead, Nvidia blamed slowing global economic growth, including China.
Last week, Intel also cited a slowdown in China in part for missing its revenue target and for a dimmer outlook.
China accounts for about 20% of Nvidia's revenue, according to company filings. Nvidia's China revenue includes chips sold there that are used in products exported to other markets.
"It's becoming increasingly apparent that the Chinese consumer is weak," said Stacy Rasgon, an analyst at Bernstein Research. "We've seen it in smartphones, and we've seen it in cards."
Nvidia said China's economic slowdown has sapped consumers' demand for its moderately priced gaming cards. Sales of its higher-end processors also were lower than expected, likely because customers are waiting for prices to fall and are still familiarizing themselves with its newest products, the company said.
Nvidia also said it didn't close as many deals as it had expected in the last month of the quarter for its chips used in data centers.
That business had been a major draw for investors, Mr. Rasgon said, but given the limited number of large cloud-computing players, revenue from the business was "lumpy under the best of circumstances."
Nvidia said it remains well-positioned as a supplier for artificial-intelligence-driven and high-performance computing, which it said represents a large market.
---
Kimberly Chin contributed to this article.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
