China's venture-capital boom, which spawned some of the world's most valuable technology companies and dozens of rags-to-riches entrepreneur tales in recent years, has come to an end.
A year after an abrupt turn in investor confidence in the growth and profit potential of Chinese tech startups, venture-capital fundraising in the world's second-largest economy is on pace to touch its lowest level since 2013.
Investors that bet on the rising fortunes of innovative startups are now finding it difficult to cash out at a profit, as the pace of Chinese startups going public has slowed. Many venture funds are sitting on large unrealized gains that were the result of soaring valuations of private tech companies in recent years. The worry is that investors in the public markets won't pay such high prices for companies whose outlooks have dimmed as China's economic growth slows.
"In China, investors used to think they could make quick and high returns in private equity and venture capital. A lot of them have now gotten burnt," said Weijian Shan, chairman of Asia-focused buyout firm PAG Group. Investor losses from companies such as failed Chinese bike-sharing startups and struggling electric-vehicle makers have made many think twice about backing other fledgling businesses.
Some 61 China-focused venture-capital funds completed fundraising this year through October, raising $12.6 billion, according to Preqin, a financial-data provider. Without a surge in activity in the last two months of 2019, the tally -- which includes both U.S. dollar- and yuan-denominated fundraising -- will likely fall far short of the $25.6 billion raised last year by 170 funds.
The slowdown has been surprisingly fast. Two years ago, Asia was challenging the U.S. as the world's top destination in venture fundraising because of a surge of new money mostly from China. Venture funds, in turn, funneled cash into internet startups touting innovations in food delivery, truck-hailing, self-driving cars and health-care services. They helped mint dozens of unicorns, or private companies valued at more than $1 billion, over the past few years.
The exponential growth in venture fundraising outpaced tech innovation in the country, said Wei Zhou, managing partner of Beijing-based China Creation Ventures and a former China partner of Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers. "The number of good tech companies in China is still not bigger than in the U.S.," he said. "It's hard to imagine how the current level of innovation could sustain so much capital."
The industry was due for a correction, said Benson Tam, chairman of Venturous Group, a Beijing-based firm that invests in technology companies and real estate. Mr. Tam, a private-equity veteran who was an early investor in Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., said a "wall of money" chased deals and pushed up company valuations indiscriminately.
These days, deals are taking longer to complete, and some startups have fetched less money or lower valuations than they hoped.
VIPKid, a Beijing-based online English tutoring company backed by venture-capital firm Sequoia Capital and retired basketball star Kobe Bryant, set out earlier this year to raise $500 million at a valuation of $6 billion. In September, it raised $150 million at a lower valuation than it had aimed for. The company is still trying to raise money, people familiar with its plans said.
U.S. pension funds and university endowments used to be a large source of venture-capital funds in China, but many U.S.-based investors have pulled back because of escalating trade tensions, said Victor Ai, managing director at China Everbright Ltd., a state-backed investment firm.
Asia-focused venture funds had a record $364.9 billion in assets under management as of March 2019 -- the latest data available -- of which a significant portion is invested in China, according to Preqin. The sum includes about $100 billion in "dry powder," or capital that has yet to be put to work. The total could remain elevated for a while as venture firms become more choosy about what to invest in, and profitable exits from startups become harder.
The U.S.-China trade war, as well as political turmoil in Hong Kong, have damped the near-term listing prospects of some of China's most promising startups.
In early October, Goldman Sachs Group Inc. said it was reconsidering its role in a Hong Kong initial public offering being planned by Megvii Technology Ltd., a Chinese developer of artificial intelligence and facial-recognition software. Megvii was recently blacklisted by the U.S. Commerce Department along with other tech companies that had operations in northwest China's Xinjiang region, where Beijing has detained Muslim minorities. Megvii has said its IPO plans haven't changed.
While the stocks of several high-profile Chinese tech companies that went public in the past two years, including Hong Kong-listed Meituan Dianping and Nasdaq-listed Pinduoduo Inc., have soared in value, the majority of Chinese companies that listed abroad since 2018 haven't done well.
As of end-October, shares of some 51 Chinese companies that went public in the U.S. since 2018 were down an average of 30% from their IPO prices, according to Dealogic.
They include NIO Inc., a Shanghai-based electric-car maker once hailed as China's challenger to Tesla Inc. The New York-listed company has burned through cash after raising $1 billion in an IPO in the fall of 2018, and has sold $850 million in convertible bonds since going public. It said in September it is cutting jobs and recalling vehicles because of malfunctioning batteries. NIO's stock is down about 80%, and its market value is below the total amount of money it has raised.
In Hong Kong, there are more than 30 Chinese companies in the tech and internet sector that have gone public on the city's bourse since 2018. Their share prices are down an average of 12% from their IPO prices.
Some investors and companies are hoping that China's fledgling Nasdaq-style venue for technology listings could become a viable venue for more startups to go public, giving their shareholders a way to exit at a profit. Regulators are working on new rules that could smooth the way for foreign-incorporated companies -- which include most startups that have raised money from investors abroad -- to list at home.

Credit: By Jing Yang
