SEOUL -- Samsung Electronics Co. is developing a voice-activated speaker powered by its digital assistant Bixby, according to people familiar with the matter, joining a proliferating arms race in tabletop devices.
The timing is far from determined, the people said. The English-language version of Bixby has been delayed and they said many of the speaker's features and other specifications are yet to be decided. But the project -- internally code-named Vega -- has been going on for more than a year, several of the people said.
Should a Samsung speaker hit the market, the South Korean tech giant would face the likes of Amazon.com Inc., Alphabet Inc. and Microsoft Corp. in a race to create and install such speakers to eventually run internet-connected homes, cars and offices -- from turning off lights to adjusting the thermostat.
To Silicon Valley, voice-activated speakers are more about big data than big bucks. The ultimate payoff is advancing voice-activated artificial-intelligence technology. The virtual assistants, like Amazon's Alexa, Apple Inc.'s Siri and Bixby, improve with use -- the software learning from mistakes -- industry executives say.
Amazon's Echo has captured more than 70% of the U.S. market for voice-activated speakers, with Alphabet's Google Home next at around 24%, according to eMarketer, a market-research firm. The number of Americans using such speakers at least once a month will reach about 36 million this year, eMarketer said, double last year's figure.
Microsoft has introduced a voice-controlled speaker, Invoke, that can make phone calls, for release in the fall, and Apple is preparing to release its HomePod device in December. Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. also plans to introduce a device powered by voice-recognition technology, that will be targeted at Chinese consumers.
Microsoft's speaker, which uses its digital assistant Cortana, is the product of an alliance with audio pioneer Harman International Industries Inc., newly acquired by Samsung. The alliance predates the March closing of that $8 billion deal, according to people familiar with the matter.
One variable slowing Samsung's progress is the postponed U.S. launch of the English-language version of Bixby, which would operate the speaker much as Alexa operates Amazon's Echo device, according to people familiar with the matter. Bixby's voice features were a key selling point for the world's largest smartphone maker's latest flagship model, the Galaxy S8, introduced April 21.
The company vowed the English-language Bixby would be ready by spring, but now Samsung internally believes those voice features are unlikely before the second half of July, one of the people said. The Galaxy S8 is Samsung's first device to feature Bixby.
A Samsung spokeswoman said the company doesn't comment on rumors and speculation.
Vega is only the latest of Samsung's speaker projects, which go back years, according to people familiar with the matter. The company had once planned to debut one code-named Hive in March 2015 at the Mobile World Congress in Spain, the people said, but it was quietly shelved over software issues including problems with voice recognition.
The Vega project could end the same way, though that is unlikely, the people said.
Bixby voice is available in Samsung's home country, but the English language version has faced hurdles. It is being piloted in an "early access" program with tens of thousands of U.S. consumers, according to people familiar with the matter. The timing of its U.S. launch has been in flux and could still be altered again, the people said.
Samsung views Bixby as a potential game-changer. It dedicated a button on the Galaxy S8's side to the virtual assistant, while extolling its "intelligent interface and contextual awareness." Executives foresee its use in Samsung's broader suite of products, such as home appliances and automobile software.

Credit: By Timothy W. Martin
