If you're wondering what our priorities are at The Wall Street Journal, a visit to our headquarters will take away any doubt: Facing our reception area is a huge collage of Journal front pages -- one for each day that our colleague Evan Gershkovich has been imprisoned unjustly by the cruel regime in Moscow. Above the collage there is one simple message: I stand with Evan.
Turn to the left and down the hallway, you'll see a massive picture of Evan on a screen that previously was used to display key digital reader data to the newsroom below it. On your way down that hallway, you'll pass our legal team that has been working around the clock on Evan's release. Turn to the right and you'll see a small conference room that doubles as the war room for pivotal team meetings focused on Evan's plight.
Switch floors and you'll find signs for him everywhere -- alongside countless colleagues up and down the ranks at the Journal, Dow Jones, News Corp and beyond, each doing their part in fighting for his freedom until he returns home.
If there is one word that defines The Wall Street Journal right now, it is perseverance. Perseverance in our fight for Evan, and perseverance to deliver you, our readers, trusted news and information.
In this annual report to readers, we want to express our gratitude to you for turning to the Journal during these increasingly complex times. You have shown that, despite the ever-evolving economics of our industry, the thirst for trusted, accurate and nonpartisan journalism is greater than ever. We are grateful to see this trend reflected in our own business as demand for the Journal, its sister publications and all of Dow Jones continues to go up. In addition, Dow Jones receives tremendous ongoing support from News Corp, including Executive Chairman Lachlan Murdoch, Chairman Emeritus Rupert Murdoch and Chief Executive Robert Thomson, which, among other factors, has allowed for further expansions through acquisitions.
Led by Editor in Chief Emma Tucker, who celebrates her one-year anniversary this month, the Journal's reporting stands in sharp contrast to what has become a prevailing pattern in the face of shocking events: speculation, cynicism and half-facts, bolstered by incessant repetition on dopamine-geared social media. Instead, the Journal is sharpening its focus and going deeper to serve the ultimate business reader: you.
"In a year in which more than 4 billion people will be heading to polls across the globe -- not least here in the U.S. -- it's more important than ever for the Journal to deliver distinctive, trusted, revelatory reporting that helps to make sense of the world," said Ms. Tucker, whose superb newsroom leadership includes advocating night and day for Evan's release and galvanizing her team for the year ahead. "We will continue with our relentless coverage of the corporate landscape and financial markets with journalism that gives readers the information and insights they need to cut through the clutter and make sound decisions on business and in their daily lives."
As we face two wars, geopolitical tensions, economic uncertainty and the rapid proliferation of generative AI, the Journal will persevere to cover the biggest issues of our time -- including many stories and surprises yet to come our way -- with the trusted and unbiased reporting you all expect from us, both here and abroad. Indeed, the Journal's sweeping coverage of the wars in Ukraine and Israel and Gaza continues unabated, including a gripping story examining how Kyiv's forces have thwarted Russian offensives and a detailed look at Israel's struggles to destroy Hamas's complex network of tunnels. Most recently, the Journal has produced thoughtful coverage about the death of Alexei Navalny and what it means for those who oppose Russia's authoritarian regime.
The Journal's Opinion pages, meanwhile, warned against the dangers of isolationism and advocated for free markets, free speech and free press. "The world is more dangerous than it has been in decades, since at least the 1970s and perhaps the 1930s, and the American political class isn't meeting the challenge," said Opinion Editor Paul Gigot. "Our job is to inform readers about the risks, no matter how unwelcome the message, and offer solutions for restoring U.S. military deterrence and broad-based economic prosperity."
We will also persevere as new technology changes the world. Not only will we cover how this profound moment affects your lives, but the Journal and Dow Jones are also embracing generative AI -- insisting on our intellectual-property rights while simultaneously harnessing the power of this new technology to help you access our news and information via new products in time to come. Just as we are committed to producing high-quality journalism, we will also make certain the Journal is meeting you, our readers, wherever you are today -- on the phone, tablet, desktop, in print -- and wherever you will be tomorrow. As ever, your feedback is essential in this endeavor as we fashion the products of today and in the years ahead.
Perseverance also marks the one story everyone at the Journal and Dow Jones thinks about every single day: the fight to bring Evan back to our newsroom and back to his family, whose unimaginable strength is an inspiration as we together advocate for his release.
It's appalling to think that Evan has been imprisoned for nearly 11 months, locked away for doing journalism that sheds light on one of the world's most-isolated countries. As Evan perseveres through his unjust incarceration, we will persevere to free him and we will continue onward in our mission, gathering, distilling and reporting the news fairly, thoroughly and impartially.
After all, attaining a true understanding of facts takes perseverance. It also requires patience, resources, dedication and sufficient time to verify and triangulate disparate fragments of information. This is essential work. And it can only happen with your support. For that, we are filled with gratitude.
Almar Latour
Publisher
