Folding laundry is simple for people but tough for robots.
No machine can yet match a human's dexterity and problem-solving abilities when attacking a pile of irregular shaped clothes of different fabric types and weight. The difference between picking up a lace nightgown versus unraveling a pair of crumpled jeans knotted with other clothes is a calculation that requires massive computing power and a soft touch.
"We're making progress," said Daniela Rus, director of MIT's Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. She has built a robot arm with spongy skin that looks like an elephant's trunk. It can encircle a variety of items and apply the proper pressure to pick them up.
"A soft appendage can adapt to the surface and grasp better," Ms. Rus said.
Such physical abilities, dovetailed with advances in computing power, are opening the door to a new era in automation. A machine being developed for the military walks like a pack animal and is designed to carry heavy loads in battle. Another guides customers through store aisles to find items on a shopping list.
Machines have still more to learn. When a barista pulls a shot of espresso, for example, the sharp operator can deal with a machine malfunction, a leaky cup or a customer barking orders for more milk. Similarly, an attentive cabdriver can alert customers to a phone or package left behind. Good bartenders know when to tell a joke or lend a sympathetic ear.
It is relatively easy to build a machine that can pick up a screwdriver, said Bianca Hamberg, one of Ms. Rus's robotics' students. "But it's a whole different level to build one that can pick it up in the right orientation and be able to actually use it."
Ms. Rus -- who has built a robot that can tend a garden and another that can make a batch of cookies -- said it would be difficult to predict with any accuracy how long before a robot hand can match a human hand.
"But compared to now, what we had just two years ago was nothing," she said, "so I don't think it's going to take that long."
(See related article: "What Clever Machines Mean For the Global Labor Market" -- WSJE February 26, 2015)
Credit: By Timothy Aeppel
