Instagram might soon ask for permission before using your embarrassing dance-video habit to select the ads you see -- provided you live in Europe.
Under pressure from privacy regulators, Meta Platforms has proposed asking all users in Europe to decide whether they would like to see ads targeted based on how they interact with the company's apps, such as what videos they watch or posts they share.
In a proposal to privacy regulators, the company said it could update its systems to seek consent for such ads as soon as the end of October in a bid to end a yearslong tussle over the legality of those ads in the European Union, people familiar with the proposal said.
The offer to limit so-called behavioral ads to users who opt in goes far beyond what Meta has done so far in response to privacy regulators. Since April, Meta has allowed users in Europe to request an opt-out from ads based on their activity in Meta apps, but only if a user completes a lengthy form on its help pages. That process likely has limited the number of people who have opted out.
Seeking consent, by contrast, would entail asking users to say "yes" or "no" before showing such ads. Under EU law, a user has to be able to access the service even if they say no.
The hit to ad revenue could be significant. If a large number of users decline ads based on their activity on Instagram or Facebook, Meta's systems would end up with fewer signals to infer interests and build audiences for ads that make up the bulk of its revenue. That could make its ads less effective, which could weigh on prices.
Meta doesn't break out its revenue from the EU, but it likely accounts for much of the broader Europe region, which also includes the U.K. and Turkey. The company said the Europe region generated 23% of its $31.5 billion in advertising revenue in the second quarter.
Meta has reported a rebound in its ad revenue this year, aided by its use of artificial intelligence to improve ad targeting. That has helped the company recover from a $10 billion drop in ad revenue from Apple privacy changes for iPhones. Those changes, made in 2021, hindered Meta's ability to use data it had about its users' activity on third-party apps. It isn't clear how those AI fixes will perform without data on usage of Meta's own apps.
Meta said it plans to make the change to consent following discussions and guidance from Ireland's Data Protection Commission, the lead privacy regulator for the company because it has its EU headquarters in Ireland. The company added that advertisers will still be able to run personalized ad campaigns in Europe after the change.
Meta's proposed change to seeking consent for behavioral ads opens a new chapter of a dispute that dates to 2018, when the EU's privacy law, the General Data Protection Act, came into effect. At the time, Meta used its terms of service to justify selecting ads based on users' activity in its apps. The choice was stark:Agree to the terms of service, or stop using the app.
Privacy activist Max Schrems complained, launching a case that eventually wound its way last year to a board of all EU privacy regulators. They decided in December that Meta couldn't use agreement to its terms of service to justify those ads. Ireland's Data Protection Commission in January issued the order to stop doing so, along with a roughly $430 million fine.
Meta appealed that decision but in April also switched its legal justification for behavioral ads to a provision of the EU's privacy law that cites the "legitimate interest" of its business. As part of that change, it created the online form giving users the option to request to opt out of behavioral ads.
The EU's top court then unexpectedly weighed in. In a July decision largely on a different topic, the court said that users' interest in their own privacy overrides the "legitimate interest" argument for a social network like Facebook to show behavioral ads -- unlessit had users' consent.
After that decision, Ireland's privacy regulator told Meta that it wasn't compliant with its January decision and passed along objections from some other European privacy regulators as well. Norway, for instance, demanded last month that Meta stop showing behavioral ads in Europe until it could ask for consent.
Meta in recent days told regulators that it was willing to switch to seeking consent but said the change is a significant hurdle that would require at least three months to implement, the people familiar with the proposal said.
The company also offered the possibility of waiting until early next year to implement it at the same time as changes related to a separate EU regulation aimed at promoting competition, which requires consent for mingling data between a company's core services.
Credit: By Sam Schechner
