TOKYO -- The 1980s movie "Back to the Future Part II" transports viewers to a 2015 where people pay for cab rides with the swipe of a finger.
In the real 2016, fingerprints have entered the mainstream as a way to log on to smart devices, but it's still difficult to pay for rides or at the cash register with just a finger.
To be successful, a payment system would have to match the print against a database that may contain thousands or millions of other prints, and -- to keep impatient customers happy -- do it within seconds.
That's the challenge Yasuhiro Kuda says his Tokyo-based startup, Liquid Inc., has addressed. Backed by the Japanese government and some of the nation's biggest names in finance and technology -- including the venture-capital arms of banking giant Mizuho Financial Group Inc. and cellphone provider NTT DoCoMo Inc. -- Liquid is rolling out a fingerprint-payment system at retailers in Japan and elsewhere in Asia, including Sri Lanka and the Philippines.
"Biometrics is convenient but it's not widely used as much as it should be," said Mr. Kuda, a 31-year-old Okinawa native who used to work at a Japanese brokerage.
Biometrics -- identification through fingerprints, veins, facial features or any other pattern unique to each individual -- has long been considered an ideal form of authentication.
Research firm Tractica predicts the global biometrics market will expand to $14.9 billion by 2024 from $2 billion in 2015.
The difficulty lies in the fuzziness of the information. A computer can quickly confirm whether the digital data on a credit-card magnetic strip or chip matches an entry in a database of card holders. It isn't so easy to match the patterns on a fingertip.
Most biometric systems used by consumers today, including the fingerprint ID used to unlock an Apple Inc. iPhone or iPad, deliver "1:1" identification.
The iPhone knows only one fingerprint -- the owner's -- and checks for a match with the one finger on the touch button.
In another kind of 1:1 identification, a person first presents a physical card or ID number, then offers a fingerprint as confirmation.
This method may not be the most convenient for consumers, but it offers security benefits because a criminal would need both to copy the victim's fingerprint and steal the person's ID, said Marios Savvides, director of Cylab Biometrics Center at Carnegie Mellon University.
Liquid's system is an example of more-difficult "1:N" identification, which requires finding a match between the fingerprint offered and a large database of prints. This is nothing new for police departments, which use 1:N systems to check fingerprints taken at crime scenes. The difference is that Liquid can't wait a day for the crime lab, and it must rule out all the prints in the database except the match.
Thanks to artificial-intelligence techniques including "deep learning" -- in which programs figure out on their own how to improve -- Liquid's system can deliver fast and accurate 1:N authentication, Mr. Kuda said. He said the fingerprint readers can distinguish between prints from a living human and those imprinted in, say, gelatin or clay.
One business testing Liquid's system is Huis Ten Bosch Co., the operator of a theme park in southern Japan. Season-pass holders who let the park take their fingerprints can pay for food and rides inside the park with just a touch.
Though only a few have tried the system, implementation has been "very smooth," a spokeswoman said.
In June, Liquid teamed up with Japanese telecommunications operator KDDI Corp. on a service for travelers visiting Tokyo's Ikebukuro shopping district. They can register their fingerprints and credit cards when they check into their hotel, then shop or even rent a car using just a finger.
The government is backing the service, hoping it can be introduced more widely by the time the city hosts the 2020 Summer Olympics.
"It looks interesting and we have never done it before, so wanted to give it a try," said Chien Yu Lin, a 24-year-old visiting with her parents from Taiwan.
Some experts aren't sure Mr. Kuda's ideas are realistic.
"It is not useful for commercial verification without sacrifices in speed and accuracy," said William Saito, an entrepreneur who has worked on biometric technology and advises the Japanese government on cybersecurity.
Such doubts could lead merchants using Liquid's system to require a second form of identification, such as a card -- undercutting the simplicity of Mr. Kuda's technology.
Gartner analyst Ant Allan said he isn't aware of competitors offering similar services, but added that market interest has yet to develop. For that to happen, he said, Liquid must build trust incrementally.
Other tech companies say they're working on 1:N, but with institutional customers in mind.
---
Rena Nakachi Simkowitz contributed to this article.
Credit: By Takashi Mochizuki
