GILEAD SCIENCES
GILD +8.5%
Gilead Sciences was a bright spot amid Thursday's market doldrums. The biotech company led the S&P 500 after it said its twice-yearly HIV-prevention drug lenacapavir completely stopped new infections in a study of women and adolescent girls. Analysts said the results greatly increase the chances of approval after a second study is completed by early 2025. Gilead is focused on treatments for cancer and HIV, and is not positioning itself as an obesity-drug developer as the craze for Ozempic and other weight-loss drugs continues to grow. Gilead shares jumped 8.5% Thursday, leading the S&P 500.
CARMAX
KMX +0.4%
CarMax isn't driving with a full tank. The used-car retailer on Friday posted better-than-expected first-quarter earnings, but said that macroeconomic pressures like inflation and higher interest rates are still pushing consumers to the sidelines and weighing on CarMax's vehicle sales. Earlier this year, the company said the supply of newer-model used cars is still low as a result of new-car shortages in 2020 and 2021. CarMax shares edged 0.4% higher Friday.
BOEING
BA -1.9%
Boeing's chief executive appeared on Capitol Hill Tuesday to answer for the plane maker's litany of problems. Its struggles range from glitches in its production process in the wake of a Jan. 5 blowout to claims of retaliation against employees who raise red flags. During the Senate hearing, CEO David Calhoun acknowledged whistleblowers sometimes faced retaliation, saying, "Something went wrong." The Boeing board is searching for a new CEO. Boeing shares retreated 1.9% Tuesday.
NVIDIA
NVDA +3.5%
Nvidia is hitting new heights. It reached a valuation above $3.35 trillion Tuesday, briefly pulling ahead of Microsoft and Apple to become the U.S.'s most valuable listed company. Nvidia's market cap hit $3 trillion earlier this month. Enthusiasm for artificial intelligence has powered demand for the company's AI chips. Nvidia shares gained 3.5% Tuesday. A retreat in the shares put Microsoft back at the top by Thursday's close.
ADIDAS
ADDYY -2.3%
Adidas is investigating corruption allegations in China. The German sportswear company said Monday it is probing potential violations after receiving a letter alleging that senior executives in the country received millions of dollars in kickbacks from service providers. The investigation comes as Adidas seeks to revive its fortunes in China -- which has been one of its most important growth markets -- and reinvigorate the brand around the world. American depositary shares of Adidas fell 2.3% Monday.
APPLE
AAPL -1.1%
Apple is ending Apple Pay Later. The iPhone maker's website said Monday that it is "no longer offering new loans" for its buy now, pay later service, just over a year after launching it. The initiative was part of the company's push to use finance to deepen its relationship with consumers. The company said it plans to offer a way for people to apply for BNPL loans from other firms when they check out with its payment system, Apple Pay. Apple shares lost 1.1% Tuesday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
