Shale Is Odd Man Out in Oil Reckoning
The world oil market is starting to resemble the old slapstick gag about the French Foreign Legion. The sergeant needs a volunteer to take a step forward for a dangerous mission. Instead, all of the assembled soldiers, except one, take a step back, volunteering him.
The sucker seems to be U.S.shale. While Russia and many membersofthe Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries may meet next month in Qatar to discuss the idea of an output freeze to support prices, this represents a hollow pledge.
The invited countries represent some three-quarters of global output -- certainly enough to move the needle on supply. But that needle is stuck in the red zone for all but one producer.
Iran, after years of sanctions, is determined to ramp up its output to some four million barrels a day from about 2.9 million in January.
In the face of that commitment, regional rival Saudi Arabia is reluctant to cede market share. And Russia, pumping near post-Soviet records and desperate for income, has taken a similar stance.
With OPEC and its possible partners unwilling to agree to much beyond the status quo, balancing of supply and demand is being done by Western producers with bills to pay and shareholders to please.
Economics might seem to dictate that the first cuts would come from the highest-cost fields such as Canada's oil sands, but that would be wrong. Instead it will occur where lack of investment will show up first: U.S.shale.
A report last week from the U.S. Energy Information Administration highlights why. A surprisingly high 48% of U.S. oil production from the contiguous states came from wells drilled since 2014.
Nearly all are from unconventional formations such asshale. They went from providing 500,000 barrels a day in 2009 to a peak of 4.6 million last May.
Output has been declining since as spending was cut. Based on geology alone, it should have been worse.
Production from ashalewell typically falls by half during the first year in operation and then by another quarter to one-third in the following year. The reason it hasn't is a significant rise in productivity per well -- a modest additional investment squeezed out extra barrels.
That trend is reaching its limits, though.
So are U.S. producers really such patsies? Driven by the imperative of profitability, it is true that they will cede share.
But a large number of uncompleted wells, colloquially referred to as a "fracklog," standsready to come on stream fairly quickly once prices rise by another $20 a barrel or so.
By keeping its financial powder dry, a leaner U.S. shalepatch can storm back soon after prices become more attractive and enjoy the last laugh.
-- Spencer Jakab
Microsoft's
Intriguing
Conversation
In the universe that Microsoft envisions, there is a bot for that.
That is a deviation from the app-centered world of smartphones, where one of the world's most valuable companies is just a bit player. Less than 2% of the smartphones sold last year carried the Windows Phone operating system, according to IDC. That may drop below 1% in the next four years.
Microsoft can't afford to ignore the mobile world. It has taken some significant steps, like making its applications available on iPhone and Android devices and pouring resources into its cloud business. But it still needs to be a relevant platform for developers and it can't do that while relying on apps made for an operating system with a tiny share.
This is why Microsoft is trying to find new ways to keep developers engaged. The HoloLens augmented-reality headset is one. It is now shipping to developers. Microsoft also announced its latest effort on Wednesday dubbed "conversations as a platform," which harnesses artificial intelligence for developers to make "bots" that can perform many of the tasks of mobile apps, often through voice control.
Both are compelling but will likely take a long time to come to fruition. So Microsoft can't turn its back on Windows. Wall Street expects the company's personal-computing segment to drive more than 40% of annual revenue in coming years. The latest Windows 10 release is promising with the installed base up 35% in the last three months. For developers, that type of reception still computes.
-- Dan Gallagher
Chinese Banks Define Success Down
Chinese banks eked out small profit gains in 2015, but investors know better than to celebrate. There are just too many risks looming.
Three of China's biggest banks each beat expectations for fourth-quarter earnings on Wednesday. Still, the results were uninspiring. For all of 2015, net profit rose just 0.7% at Bank of China, 0.5% at Industrial & Commercial Bank of China and 0.1% at China Construction Bank.
It probably isn't a coincidence that the results are strikingly similar. The banks have some control over the amount of provisions they take on expected bad loans. It has been clear for a couple of quarters that they are managing their provisioning, with a target in mind of barely positive earnings growth.
This trick is getting harder, though, as bad loans surge. At the three institutions that reported earnings on Wednesday, nonperforming loans rose by an average 40% in 2015.
In China, banks are required to maintain provisions worth 150% of bad loans, a relatively high ratio by international standards. They now are bumping up against that. At the big three, the provision coverage ratio fell to an average 154% at the end of 2015, from 206% a year earlier.
The bull case for the banks hinges on government support. Many analysts expect Chinese regulators to loosen the provision ratio requirement this year, which would allow the banks to set aside less money for bad loans.
But that won't halt the rise of bad loans, which is likely closer to its start than its finish. So far, bad-loan formation has been concentrated in the private sector. It could soon spread to state-owned enterprises, especially as Beijing pledges to cut excess capacity and kill off "zombie companies."
Chinese banks look cheap, at around 0.7 to 0.8 times book value. But with risks to their loan books rising, the discount seems reasonable.
-- Aaron Back
Overheard
What's in your wallet?
Americans' ability to answer that burning question isn't all that encouraging. It turns out, though, that cluelessness about money varies by geography.
The odds of getting a good answer from Americans is highest in New Hampshire: The residents of the Granite State came out tops in a survey of financial literacy by WalletHub.
The weakest states on that measure were Alaska and Nevada. Washington, D.C., was even worse. Wags might dismiss the residents of those three places as being a bit naive because they have been conditioned to think money comes from oil wells, slot machines or congressional appropriations, respectively. The answer, though, probably has nothing to do with how people make a living.
The odds of incorrect answers to basic financial questions and of financial readiness such as having certain types of accounts or an emergency fund correlated with lower income, younger age and minority status. New Hampshire, which is 94% white and both older and wealthier than most states, had the odds in its favor.
While residents of more financially literate states have earned mild bragging rights, the upshot of the survey is that America remains an unequal place not just by income but how people save and invest it.
