The Federal Trade Commission has issued a long-anticipated update to its guidelines for endorsements, which advise businesses about how to make sure consumers understand when celebrities, influencers or even regular consumers are compensated to promote or review their products.
Some marketers and influencers will now need to go beyond using hashtags such as "#ad" in social media, for example, to ensure that all users will see that a post is sponsored without having to click "more" or read the full text of the post, the FTC said last week as it released the update.
The FTC has long accepted many of marketers' standard disclosure methods as sufficient, but the new guidelines make clear that this is no longer the case by going into greater detail about what they must do to avoid potential penalties, said Jeffrey Greenbaum, a partner in the advertising, marketing and public relations practice of law firm Frankfurt Kurnit Klein & Selz.
Allison Fitzpatrick, a partner at law firm Davis+Gilbert who specializes in social media and influencer marketing, said, "I think the whole influencer endorser landscape or environment [and] every party involved in it is on notice now."
The guidelines also address several issues that have arisen since the last update in 2009, such as the introduction of artificial-intelligence-powered virtual personalities.
The FTC has been relatively quiet on influencer marketing in recent years, but the new guidelines likely foreshadowmore high-profile cases like those filed against retailer Lord & Taylor and tea brand Teami, experts said.
Lord & Taylor settled with the FTC in 2016 after allegedly failing to disclose that it had paid for a magazine article and a series of posts by fashion influencers that were designed to promote its new clothing line.
The FTC sued Teami in 2020 over allegations that it made false claims regarding its products' health benefits and failed to prominently disclose its relationships with influencers and celebrities such as rapper Cardi B. The company later agreed to settle, and the FTC awarded $930,000 to Teami customers.
In January, the FTC raised the maximum civil penalty for each violation of the provisions it enforces to $50,120 from $46,517; related judgments would apply to every offending post. But reputational risk is likely higher for brands, since penalties imposed on well-known companies will attract media coverage and increased scrutiny of future campaigns, Fitzpatrick said.
Influencers have long had a responsibility in the FTC's eyes to disclose any relationships with the brands they mention, but the updated guidelines offer additional detail on a number of specific points.
The FTC also clarified that virtual influencers, such as those powered by generative AI programs, will be held to the same standards as their real-world counterparts, with responsibility for proper disclosures ultimately falling upon the brands that sponsor their posts.
Credit: By Patrick Coffee
