MICROSOFT
MSFT +1.3%
The soap opera that captivated Silicon Valley seems to have reached a conclusion. Sam Altman was back in the chief executive seat of artificial-intelligence startup OpenAI Tuesday night, days after the board abruptly ousted him. Most of the board was replaced, and The Wall Street Journal reported that more changes in the board structure could be coming. Microsoft's massive investment in OpenAI appears once again secure. Nearly all of OpenAI's employees had threatened to quit if Altman wasn't given his job back. Microsoft shares rose 1.3% Wednesday.
BAYER
BAYRY -18%
Bad news for Bayer. The German pharmaceutical and agricultural company's shares sank Monday, as investors responded to a new loss in a weedkiller-related lawsuit and a clinical-trial failure. Bayer faces a payout of $1.56 billion after a Missouri jury found in favor of plaintiffs who blamed Bayer's Roundup for causing their cancers. The verdict was the fourth decision in a row to go against the company during a five-year legal battle over the world's most popular weedkiller. Bayer also said on Nov. 19 that it had stopped a study for a potentially key cardiovascular drug early due to lack of efficacy. American depositary shares of Bayer plummeted 18% Monday.
NVIDIA
NVDA -2.5%
The artificial-intelligence boom again propelled Nvidia's sales to unprecedented levels. In its fiscal third quarter, sales more than tripled to $18.1 billion, and profits rose to $9.2 billion compared with $680 million a year earlier. Sales for the current quarter would be around $20 billion, Nvidia said, but it cautioned that sales to China will "decline significantly" because of new export restrictions. Shares of Nvidia fell 2.5% Wednesday.
CITIGROUP
C -0.2%
Citigroup kicked off Thanksgiving week with a round of layoffs. The bank cut hundreds of mostly senior-level employees, part of a restructuring that will later reach lower-level workers. "[I]t's important that we don't lose sight of the goals we're working to achieve and the progress under way," Chief Executive Jane Fraser wrote in a memo to staff Monday. She said in the memo that the bank plans to finish the organizational changes by the end of next year's first quarter. Fraser took the reins at Citi in 2021. Citigroup shares edged 0.2% lower Monday.
ZOOM VIDEO COMMUNICATIONS
ZM -0.1%
The return-to-office movement isn't slowing Zoom down. The videoconferencing company boosted its outlook after its third-quarter results beat expectations. Zoom posted a quarterly profit of $141.2 million on revenue of $1.137 billion, both ahead of Wall Street estimates. The company said revenue was bolstered by its online business and usage of new offerings like Zoom AI Companion. Zoom has been working to expand beyond videoconferencing. Zoom shares fell 0.1% Tuesday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana and Erik Holm
