Gary Gensler made millions on Wall Street as a Goldman Sachs partner decades ago. Since then, technological advances have democratized financial markets, giving millions of Americans opportunities to invest as only elites could before. Now, as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr. Gensler, citing no evidence that this inclusive technology harms investors, has proposed a sweeping rule restricting the use of technology by financial-service firms. It would stymie innovation through heavy-handed restrictions and micromanagement.
This is only the latest example of Mr. Gensler's grandiose regulatory style. He takes on airy theoretical issues and attacks them with broad prophylactic regulations that are long on speculation and paternalism, short on evidence and rational analysis, and heedless of Congress and the Constitution. He claims these measures will head off speculative evils, but they are more likely to throttle the dynamism of U.S. markets.
The use of technology by financial firms has produced great results: Tens of millions of retail investors now participate in the U.S. stock market at historically low costs. As of 2021, retail investors' share of total equity trading volume approached 25%, up from 20% in 2020 and 10% to 15% in the preceding decade. Technology has played a central role in expanding market access to retail investors.
As a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Mr. Gensler recognized technology's benefits, explaining shortly before becoming SEC chairman that "we can use technology to make finance more inclusive and more accessible to many more millions of people in our country and many more hundreds of millions of people around the globe." But now as a regulator, he would undercut that progress. He recently proposed, via a party-line SEC vote, a rule on "predictive data analytics," or PDA.
Although this name implies narrowly targeting deceptive uses of sophisticated technologies like PDA and artificial intelligence, the rule is a breathtaking power grab. It would create a comprehensive regulatory regime governing any analytical or computational tool whereby information potentially relevant to investments is presented to the public. This runs the gamut of financial technology, from the simplest spreadsheets, algorithms and software to artificial intelligence.
The rule sets up the SEC as the financial industry's technology czar to micromanage the use of technology through prescriptive, burdensome and unworkable requirements. It declares it is a "conflict of interest" for a firm to communicate to customers any information generated using technology that so much as "takes into consideration" any interest of the firm. The idea is to block firms from conveying information tinged by self-interest. It applies to any purely informational interaction with current or prospective customers whenever the information being conveyed is merely consistent with a firm's interests. The rule effectively bars a firm from communicating this information until it first assesses the risk the information might influence a customer to act against his own interests and then "eliminates" that risk.
The SEC has failed to point to any evidence the technology it seeks to restrict is being abused by firms or harming investors. The evils are purely speculative. Yet the rule's inevitable effect would be to stifle innovation and technological deployment. Given the rule's vast scope and the burdens imposed, firms will be forced, to the detriment of investors, to shy away from investing in and using many beneficial technologies. This may be Mr. Gensler's ultimate aim.
His proposal rests on a false premise -- that delivering information to customers should be presumed harmful simply because it is consistent with the firm's interests. What if the information isn't misleading? Or what if it aligns with the firm's interest and customer's interest? Investing isn't a zero-sum game. As existing law recognizes, information that takes into account the interests of a firm can still be in the best interests of a customer.
But this rule adopts an expansive conception of "conflict" that departs radically from decades of settled law and existing conflict rules, which apply only when a firm with an interest contrary to a customer recommends a transaction or provides investment advice to that customer. The rule also stretches Dodd-Frank beyond its breaking point, reading nonexistent authority in vague provisions to provide the SEC with the authority to regulate new and transformative technologies like AI, which Congress never intended to give the agency.
Even if the SEC's concerns had merit, there is a long-established and less restrictive way to address them: disclosure. As long as conflicts are disclosed, investors are free to make decisions based on their determination of their best interest. But here, rather than relying on disclosure, the SEC would insist on "eliminating" the conflict by withholding useful information from customers. The PDA rule is driven by extreme paternalism. The SEC believes it must protect ordinary investors from themselves because they aren't able to use technology responsibly to make their own financial decisions.
The PDA rule also creates glaring constitutional issues by restricting what information firms can communicate to the public without adequate justification. As courts have recognized, there is no "securities law exception" to the First Amendment. Under the U.S. Constitution, unless a communication is deceptive, the mere fact that it imparts to a customer information consistent with a speaker's own interests can't possibly justify these sweeping restraints.
When bureaucrats adopt broad, prescriptive frameworks to manage new, fast-moving technologies, it almost always stifles innovation. The prudent approach is to allow time for the technology to gain traction and for its benefits and risks to take shape before weighing in, and then doing so only as necessary to address a discrete harm. This should apply to future regulation of AI. It is impossible for an agency such as the SEC to gauge the costs and benefits of such a transformative technology outside a specific context in which it is used. Any sensible regulation would wait until some specific, concrete harm arises.
We have faith in investors and their growing power in the U.S. stock market. Mr. Gensler's patronizing and misguided proposal would stifle technological innovation and return investing to the days when it was so difficult and expensive that most Americans simply didn't -- or couldn't -- participate. The SEC should reconsider and reject this proposal.
---
Mr. Barr is a senior adviser to the American Free Enterprise Chamber of Commerce and a distinguished fellow at the Hudson Institute. He served as U.S. Attorney General, 1991-93 and 2019-20. Ms. Comstock is executive director of the American Consumer and Investor Institute. A Republican, she represented Virginia's 10th Congressional District, 2015-19.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Thank Schwab and Bogle" -- WSJ Sept. 18, 2023)
Credit: By William P. Barr and Barbara Comstock
