In recent years, "refreshment" has hovered near the top of many boardroom agendas -- reshaping who sits on a company's board in a bid to keep ideas current, meet emerging challenges and recast director demographics and experience.
Boards have changed -- to a point. Company boards are turning less often to the CEOs of other companies when filling seats. But they also have pulled back from an earlier and rapid run-up in naming women and racial minorities to openings. Almost three-quarters of directors of Fortune 500 boards were male last year, and four out of five were white, according to an analysis by Deloitte. Most have worked as CEOs, or still do today, according to a separate analysis, by recruiting firm Heidrick & Struggles.
That's a shame, say those who advocate for increasing diversity. They argue that boards can add diversity without sacrificing expertise. Doing so, they say, is a win-win for companies. "There are so many qualified candidates that happen to have both the unique experiences boards are looking for, manage incredibly complex and large strategic portfolios plus happen to be diverse in the broadest sense," says Bernadette Aulestia, who serves on the boards of Denny's, Nexstar Media and other companies.
One reason change remains slow: Public company boards average fewer than a dozen seats. S&P 500 boardrooms welcomed fewer than 400 new independent directors this year, out of more than 5,000 seats -- and nearly half of boards took on none, another executive-recruiting firm, Spencer Stuart, found.
"It's glacial," said Melanie Kusin, a vice chair in Korn Ferry's board and CEO services practice, citing low turnover and few openings.
Boards could expand the number of directors instead of counting on retirements and other departures to create openings. But few do: Median board size remains 11 among S&P 500 companies, and nine for companies in the broader Russell 3000 index -- in both cases unchanged from five years ago, according to Equilar, a compensation and corporate-governance data firm.
Two thirds of boards have age limits -- generally 75 or older, according to a 2023 analysis of the S&P 500 by Spencer Stuart. But consultants say those have limited impact, in part because boards often waive or raise them to accommodate incumbents.
With limited opportunities to shift composition even over several years, boards find themselves juggling priorities. Trade tension with China and the pandemic's aftershocks put an emphasis on supply-chain expertise. Tight labor markets raised interest in human-resources executives. More recently, the appetite for artificial intelligence has boosted director candidates with tech experience.
"It's a little bit like a Rubik's Cube -- what have you done that relates exactly to the remit?" says Kusin. Candidates' accomplishments are important, she adds, and their experience impresses most when fresh. "If they've been out of a role for a period of time, they can be less attractive" than a current executive, Kusin says.
Also less attractive lately: director candidates who have served as CEOs.
Most newly appointed big-company directors are still active executives: 62% for Fortune 500 boards last year, on par with 2021 and tied for the highest level since at least 2015, Heidrick & Struggles found. Most of those are or once were CEOs.
But among last year's newly appointed directors, CEO experience is less common, at just 43%, among the lowest figures since at least 2015, Heidrick & Struggles found.
The share of directors with CEO experience declined in 60% of companies and nearly every sector of the S&P 500 from 2019 to 2022, a Wall Street Journal analysis of data from BoardEx found.
That's in part because more employers now let lower-level executives join the boards of other companies as boards simultaneously seek executives with specific experiences and skill sets, says John Wood, a Heidrick & Struggles vice chairman who recruits CEOs and directors.
Where in the past there was concern that such appointments would distract executives from their day jobs, Wood says, now "boards and management [are] saying: Can we give her some board experience? Because she could be in consideration for CEO succession."
That approach helped Helena Foulkes when she joined the board of Home Depot while still an executive vice president at CVS, she recalls. Foulkes later went on to run retailer Hudson's Bay for about two years. After a failed bid for Rhode Island governor, she joined three more boards this year, including Costco Wholesale.
"I really saw it as an opportunity to bring back learnings" to CVS, Foulkes recalls. "I was seeing retail from a completely different sector and how that might be relevant for us."
Also drawing boards' attention away from CEOs: a bigger emphasis on the concrete skills or experience that newly appointed directors can supply.
Securities filings increasingly enumerate directors' skills, in part in response to investor interest, says Kerry Berchem, a partner at law firm Akin Gump who focuses on corporate governance and deal making.
"It used to be: I'm a trucking company so I don't have to worry about cyber," Berchem says. "But that's not the case; everybody has to worry about it now."
In proxy filings last year, companies attributed expertise in ESG (environmental, social and corporate-governance issues) to more than three times as many directors as in 2019, the National Association of Corporate Directors, a professional organization, found. Directors cited as having digital expertise more than doubled.
Despite the increased emphasis, less than half of directors said they had advanced or expert knowledge of ESG topics, and 30% said their boards were well-placed to oversee a cybersecurity crisis, according to surveys this year by WSJ Pro and NACD.
Too narrow a focus on specific areas of expertise is also a risk, and boards should consider recruiting candidates who are strong more generally as well, says Benjamin Colton, global head of asset stewardship at State Street Global Advisors.
"Boards are more effective functioning as a cohesive group assessing and addressing risk in place of leaving specific issues to individuals," he says.
The push to name more women and racial or ethnic minorities to boards continues, with incoming classes of directors generally more diverse than the incumbents they join. The pace of that change appears to be slowing, however.
In the S&P 500, a lack of significant gains this year means a third of directors are women as of April 30 -- well up from about 19% five years ago, but little changed from 2022, Spencer Stuart found.
As Kristen Robinson interviews for board roles, the former chief human resources officer said she tries to get a sense of whether their interest in her HR expertise is real or if they're only looking for gender diversity.
Robinson, who joined the boards of software supplier Verint Systems and imaging startup Planet Labs last year, said she has seen interest in HR executives rise over the past 18 months, but recognizes some of that may reflect the fact that such positions are often held by women.
"That's an easy candidate pool to look at if you're looking for female/gender diversity" and human-resources expertise, she says.
Black directors made up 15% of new S&P 500 board appointees this year, down from 26% a year ago, Spencer Stuart found. Other minority groups held roughly steady, with 11% of incoming directors of Asian descent and 9% of Latino background. This comes after more-pronounced increases for all three groups since about 2020.
All told, about 24% of S&P 500 directors identify as members of underrepresented racial and ethnic groups, including 11% who are Black, 6% who are Asian and 5% who are Latino, according to Spencer Stuart.
At current rates of change, the share of Fortune 500 directors who are Black or Asian will roughly match the U.S. population by about 2030, Deloitte projected. Boards will be about half female by 2040. By contrast, at current rates of change, Deloitte said Latino directors will never catch up to the U.S. population.
Investors should consider whether boards replace older, outgoing directors with younger counterparts, says Doug Chia, president of consulting firm Soundboard Governance and a former Johnson & Johnson corporate secretary.
"That's a sign they really want to bring some fresh perspective," Chia says, "as opposed to replacing a 72-year-old with a 65-year-old."
---
Theo Francis covers executive pay and other corporate news for The Wall Street Journal from Washington, D.C. Email him at theo.francis@wsj.com. Emily Glazer covers corporate leaders and governance for the Journal from New York. Email her at emily.glazer@wsj.com. Kevin McAllister contributed to this article.
Credit: By Theo Francis and Emily Glazer
