When European Union antitrust chief Margrethe Vestager fined Alphabet Inc.'s Google 2.4 billion euros last June for abusing its dominance to clobber rivals, Josh Hawley in Missouri took notice.
Mr. Hawley, the state's attorney general, launched his own antitrust investigation into the same allegations in November and has demanded a copy of all evidence Google has given the EU. Other state attorneys general are talking to Missouri about sharing information, according to people familiar with the discussions. "We are all watching the European proceedings," says Mr. Hawley.
Ms. Vestager, a 49-year old Dane, has become the public face of Europe's effort to rein in technology firms and the de facto global regulator for the U.S.'s tech giants. Her approach to companies such as Google and Apple Inc. is having a ripple effect around the globe, influencing regulatory action not only in the U.S. but in countries including Brazil, India and Russia.
The EU has established a reputation in recent years for being one of the world's toughest enforcers of antitrust law. On the technology front, Brussels and individual European governments have gone after companies in areas such as competition, taxation, privacy and hate speech. European nations are preparing to enforce a strict new data-protection law, and EU regulators are increasingly interested in the potential abuse of data and algorithms.
The U.S., which for years regulated the internet only lightly, is now starting to reconsider its approach. In recent weeks, indignation over Facebook Inc.'s disclosure that a British-owned firm improperly tapped and retained information on millions of Facebook users has led U.S. federal and state authorities to announce investigations of the social-media company and raised the specter of new U.S. legislation. Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg will appear before a House committee next week.
During her nearly four years as the EU's competition commissioner, Ms. Vestager has completed multiple investigations into U.S. tech companies. Many probes began under her predecessor, but it was under her watch that the EU fined Google, ordered Apple to repay 13 billion euros (about $16 billion) in alleged unpaid taxes to Ireland, and this year hit Qualcomm Inc. with a nearly 1 billion euro fine for payments it made to Apple that the EU said were illegal.
That hasn't made her popular in Silicon Valley, where corporate executives complain that she has unfairly singled out big, American technology firms to make examples of them. Some tech-firm officials also grumble that Ms. Vestager appears keenly interested in how her cases play in the press.
Google has appealed the EU's ruling against it, arguing that its logic and conclusions are flawed. In a 2016 interview with an Irish newspaper, Apple Chief Executive Tim Cook called the EU's allegation that the company had paid an ultralow tax rate in Ireland "total political crap," adding "they just picked another number from I don't know where."
Apple and Ireland both appealed the EU's decision, contending Apple paid all the tax it owed and received no special treatment. Qualcomm also has said it would appeal.
Rob Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a Washington-based think tank backed by technology companies including Google, says U.S. tech companies "make big, juicy targets" for Ms. Vestager. "This is a very popular position for her to take in Europe."
Since 2010, when the EU began probing Google's alleged abuse of its dominant search engine and, later, its Android mobile operating system, Brazil, India and Russia all opened their own antitrust investigations into the company. Russia and India have issued fines. (Google settled the Russian case and is considering whether to appeal in India.) Four Brazilian investigations into Google are pending.
"You get to learn from a lot of work that's being done over there," says Eduardo Frade, former general superintendent of Brazil's antitrust regulator, who helped open the country's probes into Google in 2013.
Ms. Vestager has sway beyond Europe's borders in part because of the EU's administrative-law system, which empowers her to issue punishments and order remedies before any judicial review. That gives her more leeway than antitrust enforcers in other countries. In the U.S., antitrust enforcers have to go to court to seek financial penalties for anticompetitive conduct. The U.S. and Canada have closed antitrust investigations against Google without charges.
"Because the [European] system allows that broader discretion, you see more of these cases being tested," says Antonio Capobianco, senior competition expert at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, which hosts an annual global meeting of competition enforcers. "A lot of jurisdictions have tended to look at Europe more than the U.S. as a model."
Ms. Vestager has used that power to try to stretch competition law to cover issues unique to the internet age. In her decisions, she has emphasized the EU legal doctrine that dominant companies have a special responsibility not to abuse their power.
That differs from the approach taken by U.S. antitrust enforcers. They advocate taking action against companies only in cases where consumers are harmed, so as not to stifle innovation, particularly in the digital space. "Where there is no demonstrable harm to competition and consumers, we are reluctant to impose special duties on digital platforms," said Makan Delrahim, the Justice Department's antitrust chief, at a recent speech in Brussels.
In 2015, then U.S. President Barack Obama said in an interview with the website Recode that the EU's investigations into U.S. tech companies such as Google and Facebook were "more commercially driven than anything else." "Their service providers -- who, you know, can't compete with ours -- are essentially trying to set up some roadblocks for our companies to operate effectively there."
Senior EU officials deny that the decisions are designed to target American companies, saying tech companies that want access to Europe's 500 million consumers must play by the bloc's rules. Ms. Vestager has said she can find no evidence of anti-U.S. bias in her investigations.
Since assuming her position in late 2014, Ms. Vestager has defended her competition investigations into large tech companies as a means to ensure fairness for smaller rivals and average citizens. "If people see that the law is actually enforced for everyone, then I, being maybe a small player, have a fair fighting chance," she says.
In April 2015, she intensified a long-running Google probe, which her predecessor had tried to settle, by issuing formal charges. Her office accused Google of abusing the dominance of its search engine to send traffic to its own shopping ads while burying results for rival shopping sites. (News Corp, owner of The Wall Street Journal, is an interested third party in the case and has formally complained to the EU about Google's handling of news articles in search results.)
It was a departure from the U.S. approach to big tech at that time. The Federal Trade Commission in 2013 closed a probe into Google's search practices after the company agreed to voluntary changes.
Days after issuing charges, Ms. Vestager flew to Washington for a gathering of antitrust enforcers hosted by the American Bar Association. She took the stage with other top enforcers in front of several hundred people.
Ms. Vestager presented her argument for taking on global businesses, noting that she is "willing to see them in court when necessary," according to a transcript of the event. She acknowledged differences with the U.S. approach and made the case for international cooperation and intervention against big firms when necessary. "As businesses have grown global, I think it has been a challenge for society, for law enforcement, to follow," she said. "We will use every tool in the toolbox in order to get a fair and level playing field."
Silicon Valley executives began visiting Brussels to gauge Ms. Vestager's approach and attempt to sway cases she was pursuing.
Apple's CEO, Mr. Cook, visited in January 2016, eight months before Ms. Vestager ordered Apple to pay Ireland 13 billion euros in taxes the EU says the company would have owed if not for a favorable deal with Dublin. Apple representatives realized going into that meeting that the EU's tab could be large, says one person familiar with the meeting. The discussion got somewhat heated, this person says, and Mr. Cook interrupted Ms. Vestager several times as he sought to argue that the bulk of the company's profits were generated in -- and therefore should be attributed to -- the U.S., not Ireland.
When it filed its appeal later that year, Apple said: "It's been clear since the start of this case there was a predetermined outcome."
That November, Google CEO Sundar Pichai met with Ms. Vestager. He spent much of the one-hour meeting exchanging pleasantries, seemingly in an effort to build a rapport, says one person familiar with the conversation. Then he pivoted to the Google arguments in the case, this person says. Ms. Vestager strongly implied that her team already aimed to decide against the company, according to this person and another familiar with the meeting.
As proof that Google elbowed aside rival shopping services, Ms. Vestager's team in their decision cited data they said showed rivals' online "visibility" plunged in search results. Last June, days before Ms. Vestager announced the decision against Google, analysis firm Sistrix GmbH, which supplied some data, suggested its information was misinterpreted and said it could find no evidence Google put competitors at a disadvantage.
"In my view, the EU Commission doesn't understand the fundamental contexts of internet search," Sistrix CEO Johannes Beus said in a blog post.
The commission's 215-page finding against Google cited data sources besides Sistrix, including confidential Google data that Brussels reviewed. Google has said its products help consumers and comply with competition laws.
Ms. Vestager, whose five-year mandate ends next year, already has raised her hand to serve a second term, which would be unusual. The move was partly intended to ratchet down media speculation that Ms. Vestager could be a contender to become president of the next European Commission, according to one person familiar with her thinking.
She recently appointed three competition professors to advise her for the next year on digital issues such as the competition implications of artificial intelligence. She has multiple cases pending,including at least two against Google.
---
Eun-Young Jeong in Seoul contributed to this article.
---
Swift Political Rise
For Daughter of
Lutheran Pastors
EU antitrust chief Margrethe Vestager is known in Brussels for communicating priorities in a plain-spoken manner -- a contrast to the regulatory jargon often thrown around by members of the European Commission, the bloc's executive arm. She bakes cinnamon rolls for her team, has sewn her own gala dress and was seen earlier this year knitting on an airport floor. She regularly flies back to Denmark to see her husband, a high-school math teacher, and three daughters.
She grew up in rural Denmark, the eldest of four children of two Lutheran pastors. She has nodded to her religious upbringing when discussing her views on business and competition. "What is at stake is as old as Adam and Eve," she said in a recent speech. "It all comes down to greed."
She studied economics at the University of Copenhagen, where she became politically active. She entered politics at age 29, rose to lead her centrist party and, in 2011, helped form a coalition government. Her early embrace of social media led many Danes to call her "The Queen of Twitter."
In 2014, when EU members named delegates to five-year terms on the European Commission, Denmark's prime minister sent Ms. Vestager. She was appointed competition commissioner. Already on her desk were prominent and politically sensitive cases began by her predecessor, including antitrust investigations into Google Inc. and Russian state-owned natural gas company, PAO Gazprom, and probes into Apple Inc. and Amazon.comInc.'s tax arrangements with European governments.
-- Sam Schechner and Natalia Drozdiak

Credit: By Sam Schechner and Natalia Drozdiak
