[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Tesla appears overvalued when compared with traditional carmakers such as Ford and Toyota. Less appreciated, but perhaps more meaningful, is the huge valuation gap that has opened up relative to its closest electric-vehicle peer.
BYD had a much better third quarter than Tesla, with which it vies to be the world's top EV maker. The Chinese company for the first time produced more EVs, though Tesla delivered more by a whisker. These numbers exclude hybrids, which, unlike Tesla, BYD makes.
The Chinese leader has been growing faster than Tesla for some time. In addition to a fresher product range at lower prices, it has the advantage of being the EV champion in China rather than America. While sales of battery-powered vehicles are rising in the U.S., they account for more than a quarter of the larger Chinese auto market.
Tesla had a bad quarter. Analysts downgraded their estimates as the quarter-end approached, citing production pauses in Shanghai and Fremont, Calif., to accommodate a refresh of the Model 3, but the final tally of 435,059 global deliveries missed FactSet's consensus by almost 6%.
Was the miss just about the technicalities of production and model refreshes, or is Chief Executive Elon Musk slowing output because this year's price cuts haven't stimulated as much additional demand as he hoped? This is the key question ahead of the company's full third-quarter update scheduled for Oct. 18. In its sales report, Tesla said only that it was sticking with its guidance of 1.8 million vehicles in 2023. This implies production of about 450,000 vehicles in the fourth quarter, which would be in line with the quarterly average this year.
BYD's competitive advantage is its in-house battery business, which allows it to produce high-quality EV powertrains at a lower price than competitors. It uses cheaper lithium-iron-phosphate cells rather than the more powerful nickel-rich ones dominant in Western markets, offsetting the performance disadvantage by packing them directly into the vehicle frame.
Unlike Tesla, BYD doesn't seem to be preparing for a driverless future. UBS recently had BYD's Seal model disassembled and found off-the-shelf features for driver assistance. This choice seems emblematic of its wider approach: While Tesla focuses on technology leadership, BYD offers a highly attractive overall package at an affordable price, says Patrick Hummel, the UBS analyst who led the project.
Value for money could become an EV selling point in the coming years as ownership spreads beyond the early adopters who love their Teslas. While the U.S. market is off limits for BYD for geopolitical reasons, the company has just launched in Europe. UBS expects it to rapidly grab market share.
Despite BYD's growth prospects, which are arguably stronger than Tesla's, its shares trade for roughly 19 times its earnings, compared with 59 times for Tesla. At the start of the year, the multiples were similar, but the revival of the U.S. tech trade, and particularly investor appetite for all things artificial intelligence, has left BYD in the dust. It is another reminder that Tesla's $883 billion market value isn't really about EVs at all.
Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
