Shopify Inc. is extending into physical distribution, offering customers access to a network of dedicated U.S. fulfillment centers to store and ship consumer goods for online orders.
The aim is to speed up delivery for retailers racing to keep up with Amazon.com Inc. while keeping a lid on transportation costs by placing inventory across a distributed network within easy reach of major population centers.
Ottawa-based Shopify provides internet shopping platforms and other services that help companies sell items online.
The e-commerce technology company has also branched out into payment technology and hardware for use at retail stores and pop-up locations as more online businesses open bricks-and-mortar locations. Its customers include Unilever PLC, Kylie Cosmetics and footwear maker Allbirds Inc.
Shopify said Wednesday that its new service uses machine learning to forecast demand, allocate inventory and route orders to the closest fulfillment centers.
The company is working with logistics providers and software companies in Nevada, California, Texas, Georgia, New Jersey, Ohio and Pennsylvania.
"Our aim is to make fast and inexpensive shipping the new standard on the internet," said Shopify Chief Product Officer Craig Miller.
Shopify's move into warehousing services puts it in competition with companies such as
Belgian Post Group-owned Radial, which provides technology and e-commerce services for retailers like Dick's Sporting Goods Inc. at 21 fulfillment centers.
The services are part of a growing array of operations that startups and traditional shipping companies have launched to compete with Amazon's expanding distribution system, including a Fulfillment by Amazon business that ties its online marketplace for third-party sellers to its burgeoning network of distribution centers and transportation options.
FedEx Corp. two years ago started a service called FedEx Fulfillment pitched at small and medium-size companies, and delivery giant United Parcel Service Inc. last year rolled out a warehouse platform, Ware2Go, that matches retailers with fulfillment providers.
XPO Logistics Inc. launched a flexible distribution service last year that it expects to generate $1 billion in revenue over the next few years.
Among startups, Flexe Inc., a Seattle-based online marketplace that connects warehouse operators with businesses in need of storage, has built a network of more than 1,000 warehouses across North America and customers that include Walmart Inc.
Shopify reported $320.5 million in first-quarter revenue, up by 50% from the prior year, and $10.3 million in adjusted net profit, compared with $4.2 million for the same period in 2018.
The company had an adjusted operating loss of $1.4 million, or 0.4% of revenue, compared with $200,000, or 0.1% of revenue, in the first quarter last year.

Credit: By Jennifer Smith
