DOG VACAY
Finding a Temporary
Home for Pooches
Dog owners previously had two options when they wanted to go on vacation but couldn't take the pooch along -- send Fluffy to a kennel or ask a friend or family member to dog-sit. A start-up called Dog Vacay provides a third option.
The company hosts a marketplace enabling dog owners to find pet-friendly temporary homes. People looking for a place for their pets can browse hundreds of online profiles to choose the best spot, based on things like location, who the owner is and what kinds of other pets live in the home.
Hosts on Dog Vacay set their own rates, charging anywhere from $15 to $70 per night, Chief Executive Aaron Hirschhorn said. The average price for dog-sitting per night on Dog Vacay is around $20. The company earns revenue by taking a 10% fee of each dog-sitting transaction.
The Los Angeles-based start-up, which launched in March, now counts 4,000 approved hosts in all major cities. The company has just added financing from Silicon Valley venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz, after previously raising cash from First Round Capital, Quest Venture Partners and Baroda Ventures.
Dog Vacay currently has 12 full-time employees and is tripling its revenue each month, Mr. Hirschhorn said, though he declined to provide details.
Jeff Jordan, a general partner at Andreessen Horowitz, sits on the board of Airbnb Inc., a hosting service that offers a home-based alternative to hotels.
Dog Vacay and its competitors, which include dog-boarding services such as Rover.com, are sometimes referred to as "Airbnb for dogs."
-- Matthew Wong
---
ROCKET FUEL
The emergence of real-time auctions that let advertisers bid for space on a Web page, for a particular visitor, is a big opportunity for ad tech start-ups. It is also one that not many companies are equipped to solve, given that billions of decisions have to be made in fractions of a second. Rocket Fuel Inc., which has raised $50 million in funding led by Northgate Capital, thinks it has the technological edge that will set it apart from other contenders. The company helps advertisers optimize their results using artificial intelligence and machine learning, so that ad decisions can be made quickly and automatically. The Redwood City, Calif., company grew its revenue to $45 million last year, from $17 million the previous year, CEO George John said.
---
TRUSTCLOUD
The chief executive and founder of TrustCloud Inc., Xin Chung, believes that the more people borrow and lend, the better they conduct business online. His company has devised something like a credit score for individual buyers and sellers online, based on facts such as the consistency with which people use social networks, how frequently they transact via peer-to-peer marketplaces, and what their "star-ratings" are on sites like eBay. Mr. Chung says a favorable score could mean that sellers prefer them over other potential buyers. "Let's say you need a place to stay in London during the 2012 Summer Olympics, you show your TrustCard, and it gives you an edge," Mr. Chung said. The New York-based company has raised $500,000 in angel funding from multiple individual investors.
---
NEEDLE
Every company wants its biggest fans touting its products to potential customers. Needle Inc., which raised $10.5 million in new funding from Shasta Ventures and Rembrandt Venture Partners, offers a software platform that recruits people who are fans of a product and makes them contractors, paying them $9 to $12 an hour. The contractors are trained in the company's product lines and given access to chat and e-commerce tools, enabling them to help customers find the right kinds of products. So far, the Salt Lake City-based company has about 20 retail customers, including Under Armour, which sells clothing for athletes, and Skullcandy, which sells headsets.
---
Compiled by the staff of VentureWire, online at pevc.dowjones.com
