[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The world's largest contract chip maker thinks a turnaround in the semiconductor market is near. Demand related to artificial intelligence will be a long-term boost -- one that is already bumping up against supply constraints.
The inventory buildup in the semiconductor supply chain has weighed on Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. for the past few quarters. On Thursday, it reported an 11% year-on-year fall in revenue for the quarter ended in September. Net profit fell 25%. But both came out ahead of analysts' forecasts on S&P Global Market Intelligence.
More promisingly, TSMC projects its revenue and profit for the fourth quarter will be above analysts' expectations. The midpoint of the company's forecast implies 4% lower revenue than in the same quarter last year. But that relatively rosy outlook indicates TSMC thinks a market bottom is close. Its shares are up 22% year to date, after falling 27% in 2022.
And TSMC says it has begun to see signs of stabilization in demand for smartphones and personal computers -- although CEO C.C. Wei says it's too early to call it a sharp rebound. TSMC expects its capital expenditures this year to be $32 billion, lower than the $36 billion spent in 2022.
Artificial intelligence is emerging as a significant tailwind. TSMC says chip demand for AI applications remains strong -- though it isn't enough to offset the cyclical swings in chip demand. In July, TSMC revealed AI applications accounted for 6% of revenue, but it expects the segment to grow an average of 50% annually for the next five years.
One potential risk factor is geopolitical. TSMC says any impact on its business from Washington's new restrictions on AI chip sales to China and Chinese firms abroad will be "limited and manageable" in the short term. But as for the long term, it says it is evaluating the situation.
TSMC faces the problem of boosting production to serve rapid AI growth. Achieving that would depend on its equipment suppliers.
TSMC's relatively bullish outlook adds to other signs -- like better outlooks from memory-chip makers -- that things are improving in the industry. More excitingly, TSMC is actively preparing for AI as the next potential growth driver.
Geopolitical potholes aside, that looks like an enviable place to be.
Credit: By Jacky Wong
