While Uber Technologies Inc. wrestles with a string of controversies, the ride-hailing company is in advanced talks to acquire much of the engineering team from a struggling car-parking service, according to people familiar with the matter.
Uber is discussing bringing on part of the engineering team from Luxe Valet Inc. in what is known in Silicon Valley as an "acquihire." The talks had also involved technology that Luxe was designing to enable short-term car rentals, said one of the people.
Luxe, which is based only about a three-minute drive from Uber's headquarters in San Francisco, employs about 60 people, not including its parking valets. Founded in 2013, Luxe was known for its app that let drivers in big cities summon valets who would park the cars for them in underused lots at discount prices.
The startup raised more than $75 million in funding, including from rental-car company Hertz Global Holdings, and expanded into several big cities including New York and Los Angeles.
But it pulled the plug on the app last month and said it would launch a new parking service this summer.
On Wednesday, Uber was interviewing Luxe engineers to determine which it would keep after the acquisition closes, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Chief Executive Curtis Lee and co-founder Craig Martin will continue with what remains of Luxe, said one of the people. Uber isn't likely to take the Luxe name as part of the deal, the people said. Terms of the deal couldn't be learned.
Uber hasn't been particularly acquisitive though it has raised about $15 billion in equity and debt financing. Last year, it bought self-driving-truck company Otto for about $680 million and artificial-intelligence firm Geometric Intelligence for an undisclosed sum.
Luxe is part of a generation of startups that launched several years ago in the wake of Uber's success and improvements in mobile technology. To keep costs low, the startups typically relied on freelancers to perform the tasks, whether it is cleaning houses, running errands or delivering food.
Known as the "Uber for parking," Luxe dispatched attendants who wore bright-blue track jackets and rode around on Razor scooters, picking up cars and fetching them when it was time for the driver to go home. It reached deals with parking lots for discounted rates.
Credit: By Greg Bensinger
