Backers of a proposed new group to take over Chinese-owned video-sharing app TikTok are working to create an ownership structure that would give U.S. interests a majority stake, in an effort to ease the Trump administration's security concerns.
TikTok's Chinese owner agreed to stricter data-security measures to address other concerns raised by U.S. officials. But the ownership issue remained a sticking point with President Trump's administration as the Sunday deadline set by the president looms. Last month, Mr. Trump set a 45-day deadline for TikTok's owner to divest itself of its U.S. operations or he would ban the wildly popular app.
Under the latest plan for TikTok, Oracle Corp. and Walmart Inc. could together own a significant stake, according to people familiar with the situation. That move, if combined with existing U.S. investors, could put majority ownership in U.S. hands, the people said.
Walmart Chief Executive Doug McMillon is expected to get a board seat if the deal goes through, said some of the people familiar with the matter. As part of the current plan, TikTok would file for a U.S. initial public offering in about a year, one of these people said.
Walmart, which previously looked to join with Microsoft Corp. on a TikTok deal, has been looking to ramp up its online presence to generate new revenue streams.
Trump administration officials have pushed for majority U.S. ownership of TikTok, which is owned by Beijing-based ByteDance Ltd. That goal could be met under the proposal for Oracle alone, or together with Walmart, to take significant ownership stakes.
Their participation, together with existing U.S.-based ByteDance investors like Sequoia Capital, General Atlantic and Coatue Management LLC, could push U.S. ownership in the new entity above 50%.
The situation is highly fluid and it is unclear what the final terms of any deal would ultimately be. Chinese authorities would have to approve deal terms, Bytedance noted on Thursday -- so any deal struck by Oracle and ByteDance would face scrutiny from Beijing as well as the White House.
Mr. Trump said at the White House on Thursday night that the administration had conversations earlier Thursday with representatives from Oracle and Walmart.
"I guess Microsoft is still involved," Mr. Trump said, without offering any details. "We'll make a decision."
Microsoft Corp. said on Sunday that its bid for TikTok was rejected by ByteDance, and the company is no longer involved in the talks, said a person familiar with the company's decision making.
ByteDance and Oracle previously announced their partnership, with Oracle providing cloud and data services for a restructured TikTok to be based in the U.S.
In a conference call Wednesday night, ByteDance officials agreed to significant strengthening of the data-security and data-management aspects of the proposal, according to a person familiar with the matter. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin participated in the call, this person said.
The 20-page agreement, highly technical in nature, amounted to a Treasury counterproposal on the security issues, the person said. Those had emerged as the most significant concerns in the TikTok negotiations for some China hawks.
ByteDance also has agreed to allow Oracle to review TikTok's source code and software to ensure there are no backdoors that allow the Chinese government or other entities to access the data, according to other people familiar with the matter.
The administration contends that the data TikTok collects from U.S. consumers could be shared with the Chinese government. TikTok has said it would never hand over such data.
Mr. Trump, a Republican, expressed on Wednesday discomfort with any agreement that leaves ByteDance with majority ownership of the company's U.S. operations. "Conceptually, I can tell you, I don't like that," he said.
Those reservations were echoed Thursday by White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, who cautioned that a transaction that leaves the company Chinese-controlled might not meet the president's standards. "My big concern is if all we're doing is repackaging it and still keeping it as a predominantly Chinese government-run company, that would not set well with the original goals the president outlined," Mr. Meadows said at the White House.
Mr. Meadows said the administration is still reviewing the details of the agreement.
The Wall Street Journal reported Wednesday that Trump administration officials were working toward a structure that would give U.S. investors and companies a majority share of the group that would take over TikTok.
Some of the investors have had preliminary discussions with Instagram co-founder Kevin Systrom about running the new company, according to a person familiar with the matter. Mr. Systrom left Instagram in 2018, six years after selling his app to Facebook Inc. The approach was reported earlier by the New York Times.
ByteDance would face scrutiny from Chinese regulators if its artificial intelligence-driven content-recommendation engine -- the algorithms widely acknowledged to be vital to its success -- is found to fall under the scope of an updated technology export-control list.
China's ministries in charge of commerce and science and technology added such algorithms to an export-control list on Aug. 28. This means the social-media company might have to seek approval from local commerce authorities before exporting its technology overseas.
One factor that might ease Chinese approval is that Mr. Trump dropped late Wednesday the demand for a payment to the U.S. Treasury. The issue wasn't a major factor in an agreement, but the condition was considered a hurdle.
---
John D. McKinnon, Georgia Wells and Miriam Gottfried contributed to this article.

Credit: By Sarah Nassauer, Michael C. Bender and Andrew Restuccia
