If you invested $1,000 in Nvidia stock at the beginning of this year, it would be worth more than $75 million now.
I'm kidding, of course -- but it might feel that way if you don't own Nvidia. Almost 28% of the S&P 500's gains so far in 2024 come from the astounding rise of that one company at the forefront of the boom in artificial intelligence. Nvidia's stock is up 59% in nine weeks -- after gaining 239% last year.
In what we might call the Nvidia market moment, it's easy to feel left behind, which is why it's vital to put things in perspective. These conditions aren't unprecedented, stocks aren't in a bubble, and beating yourself up -- or piling on risk to catch up to a racing market -- never ends well.
This past week, the 10 biggest companies constituted just under one-third of the total market value of the S&P 500. The top three, Microsoft, Apple and Nvidia, account for 17.9% of the total. Nvidia alone is 4.6% of the total value of the index.
This isn't the first time the U.S. stock market has been highly concentrated in a few giants, however.
In the boom years of the 1950s, the 10 biggest companies, including AT&T, DuPont and General Motors, regularly exceeded 30% of the value of all U.S. stocks. In July 1955, GM alone -- up 78% over the previous 12 months -- amounted to 6.8% of the value of the entire U.S. stock market, according to the Center for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago.
As my colleagues Dan Gallagher and Jon Sindreu have recently noted, Nvidia's earnings have risen even more than its share price, and tech stocks -- and U.S. stocks overall -- are nowhere near their crazy valuations back in late 1999 and 2000.
Counting dividends, the S&P is up only 10.8% cumulatively since the end of 2021.
Valuations aren't crazy, but they aren't cheap either. Tesla trades at more than 46 times its net income over the last 12 months. The S&P 500 trades at 24.7 times earnings over the past year, steep by historical standards.
When what you do own feels expensive, chasing what you don't own doesn't feel as risky.
And if, like millions of investors, you hold an S&P 500 index fund, you've almost exactly doubled your money over the past five years.
That can create the feeling of "playing with the house money." Like a sports gambler or casino bettor who's just scored a big win, you may now feel that a risky wager is less painful, since even after a loss you could still have more money than you started with.
Then there's the social pressure. You already have 4.6% of your stock allocation in Nvidia if you own an S&P 500 index fund. But, when it seems everybody but you has made a killing by buying the stock outright, you might feel as if you don't own it at all.
The fear of missing out, FOMO, is an acute form of regret: the awareness that other people are having a rewarding experience that you could have shared.
The longer Nvidia goes up and the higher the price goes, the more your FOMO is likely to intensify. And the more time you spend on social media, the hotter your FOMO will feel.
In much of life, you often can't observe -- now or even later -- what would have happened on the road not taken. Would the steak have tasted better than the salmon you ordered? Would you be happier if you'd dated, or married, that other person you liked?
In the stock market, though, you can immediately see the consequences of the choices you didn't make -- and they can widen over time.
The key is to control your counterfactuals.
A counterfactual is what might have been -- an imaginary alternative to the actual past. You can create either a narrative of how much better off, or how much worse off, you'd be now if you'd made a different decision then.
Miroslav Stoyanov, 33, a software developer in Zurich, tries not to kick himself for having sold Nvidia in November 2022. The stock was just under $167 then.
He'd made a 27% profit in two months.
This past week, Nvidia was above $790.
"When you know you could have made over 10 times more money than you made, it doesn't feel amazing," says Stoyanov. "There are many days like this."
He says he sold Nvidia because he thought it was overvalued. "When I sold it, I was happy, because a plus [sign] is much better than a minus."
Looking at Nvidia now, Stoyanov controls his counterfactuals by reminding himself, "Why do I invest? I invest to make money, and I made money. I didn't lose."
It's also important to track your intuitions.
Sure, you had that hunch you should have bought Nvidia back when ChatGPT popularized artificial intelligence at the end of 2022.
Maybe in late 2021 you were hankering to buy Tesla because Elon Musk was so enthusiastic about AI. Since its peak that November, Tesla's stock has fallen about 50%.
If you're going to kick yourself for not buying Nvidia before it went up, make sure you also pat yourself on the back for not buying other assets that later went down. Tracking your hunches will also help teach you they aren't always worth following.
The poet John Greenleaf Whittier wrote:
"For of all sad words of tongue or pen, The saddest are these: 'It might have been!'"
How sad those words make you feel, though, is partly up to you.
Credit: By Jason Zweig
