Vivek Ramaswamy, the 38-year-old political novice, grabbed the spotlight at Wednesday's prime-time Republican presidential debate, but there was little sign he or any other contender had found a new strategy for overtaking front-runner Donald Trump.
The former president, who skipped the GOP's first debate of the nominating contest in favor of a pretaped interview with Tucker Carlson, was positioned to limit the attention that any of his rivals might draw from the event.
On Thursday evening Trump surrendered in Fulton County, Ga., over charges that he tried to reverse the results of the 2020 presidential election.
Ramaswamy, a wealthy entrepreneur, started the debate as one of the least-known candidates of the eight on stage. But he was a formidable if combative presence throughout the event, interrupting and tussling with far more experienced politicians and exciting the feisty audience with red-meat statements, declaring that "the climate change agenda is a hoax," calling for "war on the federal administrative state" and offering: "Do you want incremental change, or do you want a revolution?"
Ramaswamy also offered a forceful defense of Trump. When he called Trump "the best president of the 21st century," viewers might have asked why the political newcomer was putting himself forward as someone who could do a better job. He offered an answer in an introductory statement, saying it was time to choose a new generation to solve the nation's problems.
"I think Ramaswamy did a good job of elevating himself as an equal to politicians and candidates who have been doing this for a long time," said Nathan Gonzales, editor of the nonpartisan Inside Elections newsletter. "We'll have to see if voters warm up to his message and profile as they hear more from him."
A central question is how he can overtake Trump while also praising the former president's record and criticizing the criminal prosecutions he faces. Ramaswamy reiterated during the debate that he would pardon Trump should he be convicted of criminal offenses.
"This nomination goes through Donald Trump and not around him," said Doug Heye, a former Republican House leadership aide. To win, Heye said, a candidate will have to take on Trump directly.
A history of policy shifts and controversial claims, including a recent statement by Ramaswamy that he doesn't believe the government has told the full truth about the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, didn't come up in the debate but are likely to arise as he draws more attention.
Ramaswamy had been climbing in national polls before the debate, challenging Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis for a claim to the second-place position in the GOP field, albeit a distant one behind Trump. On Wednesday night, he often appeared to overshadow DeSantis, who had a more muted evening focused largely on his record as governor.
DeSantis didn't make any apparent slip-ups during the debate, a steady performance that might reassure any voters and donors having second thoughts about him amid his substantial decline in public opinion polls. But he didn't draw direct attacks or engagement from the other seven candidates on the stage, a suggestion that they no longer saw him as the same threat as early in the campaign season, when DeSantis seemed in the best position to rival Trump.
His supporters said DeSantis had distinguished himself as a strong presence while the other candidates squabbled. "He was the most presidential looking candidate on the stage," said Ken Cuccinelli, a former Virginia attorney general and Trump administration official who founded the super PAC backing DeSantis.
A FiveThirtyEight/Washington Post/Ipsos poll of Republican voters who watched the event found that 29% thought DeSantis performed best in the debate, while 26% chose Ramaswamy and 15% selected Nikki Haley, the former United Nations ambassador and former South Carolina governor.
Ramaswamy, who called himself "a skinny guy with a funny last name" -- nearly identical to the phrase used by Barack Obama in his star-making 2004 Democratic convention speech -- wore a broad smile throughout the evening and appeared to enjoy trading barbs with his rivals. He said they had all been "bought and paid for" and were offering "memorized pre-prepared slogans." He referred to them as "professional politicians, super PAC puppets" -- an apparent dig at DeSantis, who had been embarrassed before the event when a supportive PAC posted a memo online laying out a debate strategy for him.
The insults brought Ramaswamy continual attention onstage -- and left his rivals fed up. "I've had enough already tonight of a guy who sounds like ChatGPT," said Chris Christie, the former New Jersey governor, referring to the artificial intelligence chatbot.
"You have talked down everybody on this stage -- but you know what?" asked Haley. "You want to go and defund Israel . . . You have no foreign policy experience, and it shows."
"Now is not the time for on-the-job training," said former Vice President Mike Pence. "We don't need to bring in a rookie."
Other rivals, including DeSantis and Sen. Tim Scott (R., S.C.) seemed to fade to the background in parts of the evening as Ramaswamy grabbed a more prominent role.
The question for the GOP field is whether Ramaswamy can turn his debate performance into more support, even if overtaking Trump still appears unlikely.
Ramaswamy has about 10% support among GOP voters nationally, the FiveThirtyEight average of polls finds, just behind DeSantis, at 15%, and well behind Trump, who tops 50% support.
But Ramaswamy lags behind in Iowa, where one recent poll found him in fifth place, with 4% support. That survey, by the respected Iowa pollster J. Ann Selzer, also found that more than 40% of likely caucus participants couldn't yet rate Ramaswamy when asked if they had a favorable opinion of him -- an indication that he has room to grow.
Both Heye and Gonzales said that even if the debate reorders the bottom-tier candidates, it likely did nothing to alter Trump's dominance in the primary contest. "It's rearranging the deck chairs on a boat that's not leaving the port," Heye said.
---
John McCormick contributed to this article.
Credit: By Aaron Zitner
