We all know that computers have surpassed the best human players in chess. Garry Kasparov lost to IBM's Deep Blue way back in 1997. But poker was a different story -- until a 20-day stretch in January at the Rivers casino in Pittsburgh, when a tag team of four top poker pros lost a match against Libratus, a computer system developed by computer scientists Tuomas Sandholm and Noam Brown from Carnegie Mellon University. Libratus' victory was decisive, the first big win for computers over elite poker players, but it doesn't mean that artificial intelligence has completely cracked poker -- at least not yet.
The form of poker in the match was heads-up no-limit hold'em, in which two players face off and can bet as much as they want at any time. Some unusual rules were imposed: Each player's chip count was reset to 20,000 before each hand was dealt, rather than rising and falling with each win and loss over the course of play. The event lasted a grueling 120,000 hands, and the pros split a purse of $200,000 in proportion to their individual results. Dong Kim, who lost the fewest chips, was paid $74,500.
In the end, Libratus was ahead by almost 1.8 million chips. Translated to the amounts involved in a high-stakes cash game, this win rate would equal thousands of dollars per hour, or about $10 million total.
Jason Les, who lost about half of all the chips that Libratus won, said at a news conference, "I showed up thinking there was a good chance we would lose, but I thought it would be a lot closer. It's truly a monumental day for AI."
Exactly how monumental will be clearer after Libratus' creators publish a detailed article on the system or make its code public. Its main advances seem to be in playing the final betting rounds better and using the overnight downtime to analyze and learn from the day's hands.
Libratus follows Claudico, another effort by Prof. Sandholm's group, which lost a similar match against Mr. Les, Mr. Kim and two other pros in 2015. There has been other progress lately: Another program, the University of Alberta's DeepStack, won a shorter match against a group of humans last year. There is even an annual bot-versus-bot computer poker tournament, held at an academic conference on AI challenges involving "imperfect information."
Poker is especially interesting for AI precisely because it isn't a perfect-information game. Unlike chess, in which both players see every piece, in poker, each player has private knowledge: his own cards. A computer player must consider not just the cards on the table and the cards that might yet be dealt but also all the possible cards its opponent could have. (In this way, poker has advantages as a model of real-world human activities, like business negotiations and strategy.)
In no-limit hold'em, the public information is the stream of decisions that players make on whether to check, fold, call or raise -- and the amount of money they bet. Chess has more possible complete games than the number of particles in the universe; heads-up no-limit is thought to be many, many times more complex than chess. Nonetheless, Libratus managed to soundly beat four top players.
Poker pro and mathematician Matt Matros, who has won more than $2.5 million in tournaments over his career, notes that two-player poker is qualitatively different from the multiplayer game normally played in casinos. Once there are three or more players in a hand, "the other players might play strategies that collude against the computer, even if they're doing it unconsciously."
To conquer these games, Libratus' successor may have to develop deeper models of how the players think and how they react to one another, based on the data that is available from their betting decisions. Mr. Matros thinks that AI will eventually triumph in multiplayer poker too.
Humbling as all this may be, the new programs won't ruin poker. It will remain as exciting for humans as it's always been. As with chess, we can improve our own play by watching the computers.
Credit: By Christopher Chabris
