HONG KONG -- As the U.S. seeks to contain China's progress in artificial intelligence through sanctions, OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman is choosing engagement.
Dialing in from overseas to a packed conference in Beijing on Saturday to widespread cheers in the audience, Altman emphasized the importance of collaboration between American and Chinese researchers to mitigate the risks of AI systems, against a backdrop of escalating competition between Washington and Beijing to lead in the technology.
"China has some of the best AI talent in the world," Altman said. "So I really hope Chinese AI researchers will make great contributions here."
OpenAI doesn't make available its services, including ChatGPT, in China.
Altman and Geoff Hinton, a so-called godfather of AI who quit Google to warn of the potential dangers of AI, were among more than a dozen American and British AI executives and senior researchers from companies including chip maker Nvidia and generative AI leaders Midjourney and Anthropic who spoke at the conference.
Chinese speakers at the conference came from top universities and companies including U.S.-blacklisted telecom company Huawei Technologies, search giant Baidu and speech-recognition firm iFlytek, which the U.S. sanctioned in 2019 saying it aided the Chinese government in the surveillance of ethnic Uyghurs and other Muslim minorities in Xinjiang.
"This event is extremely rare in U.S.-China AI conversations," said Jenny Xiao, a partner at venture-capital firm Leonis Capital who researches AI and China. "It's important to bring together leading voices in the U.S. and China to avoid issues such as AI arms racing, competition between labs and to help establish international standards," she added.
The U.S. imposed sanctions last October on China to prevent it from accessing the most popular cutting-edge chips needed for AI development. In Washington, anxieties of China challenging U.S. dominance have loomed large in regulatory discussions.
By some metrics, China now produces more high-quality research papers in the field than the U.S. but still lags behind in "paradigm-shifting breakthroughs," according to an analysis from the Brookings Institution. In generative AI, the latest wave of top-tier AI systems, China remains one to two years behind U.S. development and reliant on U.S. innovations, China tech watchers and industry leaders have said.
The Chinese government has made developing AI a priority in recent policy statements, while also pushing ahead with regulation to make sure it conforms to China's heavily censored internet.
The competition between Washington and Beijing belies deep cross-border connections among researchers: The U.S. and China remain each other's No. 1 collaborators in AI research, according to a tracker from the Center for Security and Emerging Technology, a Washington-based think tank.
During a congressional testimony in May, Altman warned that a peril of AI regulation is that "you slow down American industry in such a way that China or somebody else makes faster progress."
At the same time, he added that it was important to continue engaging in global conversations. "This technology will impact Americans and all of us wherever it's developed," he said.
The annual China conference, hosted since 2019 by the Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, a government-sponsored research nonprofit sometimes loosely referred to as the OpenAI equivalent of China, has become one of the country's most prominent forums for bringing together Chinese and Western researchers.
The conference is geared toward a technical audience. This year's proceedings covered a breadth of topics ranging from the latest large language models and next-generation chip design to applications of AI in life sciences and self-driving cars.
Altman delivered the opening keynote for a session dedicated to AI safety and alignment, a hotly contested area of research that aims to mitigate the harmful impacts of AI on society. Hinton delivered the closing talk for the same session later Saturday, also dialing in. He presented his research that had made him more concerned about the risks of AI and appealed to young Chinese researchers in the audience to help work on solving these problems.
During the question-and-answer session after Altman's prepared remarks, Zhang Hongjiang, the chairman of BAAI, pressed him on whether OpenAI would ever open-source its research again. OpenAI, which used to publish its code to foster more research building off its work, has increasingly closed off visibility into its technical systems, citing safety concerns.
"Open-source could benefit AI safety," Zhang said to laughter in the audience, adding that BAAI open-sources its models to increase transparency and give people a sense of control into AI development.
"Over time you should expect us to open-source more models in the future," Altman said, but added that it would be important to strike a balance to avoid abuses of the technology.
Altman has been on a global tour to meet with world leaders, students and developers, including in India, Israel and across Europe. He has emphasized cautious regulation as European regulators consider the AI Act, viewed as one of the most ambitious plans globally to create guardrails that would address the technology's impact on human rights, health and safety, and on tech giants' monopolistic behavior.
Chinese regulators also have pressed forward on enacting strict rules for AI development that share significant overlap with the European Union act but impose additional censorship measures that ban generating false or politically sensitive speech.
Chinese tech giants and startups have rushed to create their ChatGPT equivalents and other generative AI technologies. Authorities in China have detained some individuals in recent weeks for allegedly using generative AI tools to produce fake news or defraud individuals.
Credit: By Karen Hao
