We all know who they are. The colleague who takes credit for others' contributions. The boss who seems to enjoy embarrassing subordinates. The know-it-all who won't shut up in meetings.
Identifying the jerk at work is easy.Unless, that is, the jerk is you. In that case, there's a good chance you'll never know it.
The reason for our blindness is clear: People hate giving negative feedback. So when people do things that offend, irritate or make others uncomfortable, nobody tells them.
To understand how much anxiety people feel about giving negative feedback, consider one study we ran in which we had two people negotiate with each other. We then instructed the winner of the negotiation to give feedback to the loser on what they could have done differently. Instead of providing constructive feedback (for instance, "You came in with a really low offer, it made me think you would settle"), most winners gave overly positive, noncritical feedback that was basically useless ("Your negotiation skills were so great -- you really killed it!").
Yet even with this sugarcoating of the facts, advice givers still found the exercise extremely stressful: They delivered positive feedback through tense smiles, with hearts pounding. Apparently, the mere prospect of giving negative feedback made people apprehensive, even though the advice they actually gave was milquetoast.
(Then again, advice givers have plenty of reason to be wary. Even the most carefully worded negative feedback can result in unpleasant consequences for the deliverer -- like anger, dismissing or devaluing the advice, and criticizing the advice giver in return.)
This absence of productive feedback obviously creates a big problem when it comes to people knowing if they are a jerk.
For a striking illustration of this ignorance, consider the popular Reddit thread "Am I the Asshole?", in which users write in with a description of a personal experience, and other users comment on whether the person was the offending party. Our analysis identified some 40,000 cases of workplace jerkishness ranging in subject matter from the ethical status of an office crush to whether someone is in the wrong for "ruining the company's group photo" (how, we'll leave to your imagination).
The volume of posts suggests people aren't getting enough real feedback about whether they are the jerk at work. Why would people take to Reddit for ethical insight if it was readily available from friends and colleagues?
Yet as uncertain as these would-be jerks are, the people rendering verdicts are far less equivocal: Of all the posts we analyzed, only 15% failed to receive a consensus verdict.
In other words, what may feel like an ambiguous moral conundrum from your perspective is likely as clear as day to the outside observer. The people around you know if you're a jerk or not. They're just not telling you.
So, that leads to the most-important question: How can I know if I'm the office jerk? Fortunately, social science has identified a number of ways to spur communication between advice givers and receivers (for those brave enough to hold up that mirror):
-- Realize that jerk-at-work behavior can come in all shapes and sizes.
When people call to mind the types of behaviors that could lead them to be perceived as a jerk at work, they focus on those that are widely acknowledged "bad actions" -- lying and stealing, for example. If you aren't engaging in those kinds of behaviors, it's easy to write off the idea that you may be a jerk.
We examined the content of jerk-at-work posts in the aforementioned Reddit thread, using artificial intelligence to categorize the situations to see which behaviors are the most likely to get you labeled the jerk.
The clear winners (well, losers) were behaviors considered to be overreactions and judgmental. For example, one poster was universally maligned for "calling out an annoying and weird colleague in an all-staff email." In other words, an outsize display of emotion, or a lack of tolerance for others' potential lapses, puts you at high risk of being seen as a jerk at work.In many cases, we are jerks not because we did something mean, but because we were too judgmental about other people's behaviors.
That awkward joke you made on Zoom the other day? Unlikely anybody remembers it. But the judgey comment you made about someone else's awkward joke? That indeed, might land you in jerk-at-work territory.
-- Don't wait for people to deliver the bad news.
At best, you'll learn that you're the jerk at work through the absence of positive feedback (think recommendation requests left unanswered and recruiters who can't gain traction on what you're like to work with) rather than through the presence of negative feedback. Instead, the key is to actively solicit advice in a way that reduces anxiety on the part of the advice giver by signaling your willingness to receive feedback and channel it constructively.
-- Tailor feedback requests to your specific behaviors, not to what people think of you in general.
In our feedback study with negotiators, one reason winners layered on the compliments was because the losers asked for very general feedback ("How did I do?"). People typically feel uncomfortable passing judgment about the overall person, which is what general feedback feels like.
But get more specific, and the reluctance fades. In our study, those who asked for specific feedback (for instance, "When I opened with the offer of $10,000, did you think that was too low? Why?") got specific, accurate and useful answers.
Keep in mind, though, that when you ask for specific feedback, it's best to do it right away. Memories are fallible; you want to get people's thoughts right after the behavior in question, not during your quarterly review.
-- Ask for feedback about "ideal behavior" rather than about your own behavior.
You can grease the feedback wheels by framing your questions around what the ideal version of the specific behavior should be, rather than what they think of your behavior.
This method, developed by relationship scientists, does wonders for handling sticky communication issues. When talking about what's wrong may be awkward and uncomfortable, talking about what's right may provide a confrontation-free alternative.
This strategy is especially useful when a boss is soliciting advice from someone lower in position -- people who would naturally be wary of telling the truth if the truth is negative. For example, if you're the boss and ask someone whom you manage, "I took three days to get back to you. Was that too long?" you may get a tense, "Your timing was great!" response in return. Having them tell you what the ideal turnaround time is, and doing the math yourself, feels much less confrontational.
A bonus of this approach is that by asking about ideal behaviors, you will learn a lot about workplace norms. Some of us become accidental jerks at work when we violate norms, which are often "company based" -- things that vary a lot from company to company. In our analysis of the Reddit data, around 1 in 6 work-related posts involved perceived violations of a social norm. These behaviors tended to elicit the most disagreement among evaluators, suggesting that we might be in the dark when it comes to knowing what, at this particular company, is the right way to behave.
-- Show that you get the message -- and are working to change. And no, that doesn't just mean a heartfelt apology.
Jerk-at-work behaviors that are left unaddressed can spiral into dysfunction as the lack of communication between parties leads to bitterness and resentment. Yet there are ways you can interrupt this cycle.
The first is simple: Show you're listening. People who demonstrate they have taken a message on board are viewed more sympathetically. But it isn't enough to decrease people's negative emotions toward you; you need to also increase their positive ones. Your first step should be to "play back" the message to the provider, to show that you understand it ("So what I hear you saying is that you want more of a chance to have your voice heard in meetings").
The second (and arguably more powerful) step is to show that you are making a real effort to alter your behavior. Psychologists call this "moral change" -- a genuine, motivated shift in behaviors in response to negative feedback. For example, if a co-worker has asked you to be better about making work deadlines, don't be afraid to acknowledge their feedback the next time around: "I tweaked my workflow to get this in on time. Hope it helped!"
Demonstrating moral change is particularly important because it helps reduce the chances that your jerk-at-work behavior makes people see you as something far worse: a hypocrite. For as bad as your jerkish behavior may have been, offering an apology and then turning around and committing the same infraction is sure to land you on the list of Jerks-with-a-capital-J.
-- Don't spend too much time worrying about being a jerk.
It's true that the inherent awkwardness of providing negative feedback means we will never know with certainty whether we have done something jerkish in other people's eyes.
Yet there is one point of solace: Our analysis of the Reddit data shows that people are far more likely to be acquitted than condemned when asking if they were a jerk. The things we spend our time worrying about may be not that big of a deal in others' eyes.
So yes, put your behavior under the microscope now and then. Ask for feedback, the right way. But if you're worried about being the jerk at work, it probably means you aren't.
---
Daniel Yudkin is a postdoctoral researcher in the department of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania and a visiting scholar at the Wharton School. Tessa West is a professor of psychology at New York University and the author of "Jerks at Work: Toxic Coworkers and What to Do About Them." They can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
---
The Do's and Don'ts of Getting Feedback
When people try to figure out how their behavior stacks up at work. their questions often make matters worse. Here are some strategies for diplomatically discovering how you are perceived by colleagues-- and how to make things better.
-- Daniel Yudkin and Tessa West
Critiquing the client call
Don't say: How did I do today during that client call?
Do say: During that client call, did I give the client a chance to voice their concerns throughout the call? If not, at what points during the call did you think I could have stepped back and let them share thoughts?
Stolen credit
Don't say: Last month during that team meeting, did you feel like I stole your credit?
Do say: In that meeting we just had, do you think it was made clear that those ideas were yours? If not, at what point in the conversation did you feel things got off track?
Giving deadlines
Don't say: Did I give you enough time to make the changes to that document I assigned you?
Do say: When it comes to making changes to documents like the one I just assigned you, what's the ideal amount of time you will need to get the work done?
The playback
Don't say: So what I hear you saying is that you think I'm smothering you at work
Do say: So what I hear you saying is that we need to set some clear guidelines around check-in times for projects, and emails after hours.
The acknowledged effort to change
Don't say: So what you're saying is I should give everyone a chance to speak up before I jump in. I'll consider it.
Do say: In this meeting, I gave everyone on the team a chance to share their perspectives before I jumped in with mine. I hope it helped people feel more comfortable speaking up!
Credit: By Daniel Yudkin and Tessa West
