When I was a teenager, I spent a year meeting weekly with a psychiatrist. In the end, talking about myself bored even me. But the value of the sessions was real. They gave me, at a turbulent time in my life, a chance to speak honestly and deeply with another human being without the hand-wringing of my family or the burden of guilt. For many, psychiatrists and other mental-health counselors have replaced the clergy as healers of the soul. Today, science too often and too easily seems to preclude the hunger for God. But at least modern therapists share something important -- their humanity -- with their patients. Both are creatures of flesh and blood.
But the world is changing. Robots with clinical psychology expertise may still sound like a joke, but artificial-intelligence alternatives to human therapists no longer belong to "The Twilight Zone." Quite the opposite. AI is already used to scan medical records, social-media posts, and similar data for mental-illness indicators and potential therapies. For the moment, medical experts are duly cautious. In the words of John Torous, director of the digital psychiatry division at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, AI-driven chatbot therapy may sound exciting, but "we are not yet seeing evidence matching marketing." The modern, and especially American, addiction to technology as the answer to every problem may be excessive, but it would not have surprised Augusto Del Noce. And therein lies a cautionary tale.
A leading Italian philosopher and cultural critic, Del Noce died in 1989. Unknown to most English speakers until recently -- the first English translation of his seminal text, "The Problem of Atheism," was published this month -- he predicted the Soviet Union's collapse and the sexual revolution decades in advance with stunning accuracy. He foresaw the failure of Marxism in the East. He also described its ironic triumph in the West in the form of a soft totalitarianism -- i.e., a consumer-friendly technocracy of experts.
Del Noce was formed by the struggles of the early and mid-20th century. A committed Christian, he flirted with communism as a counterweight to his country's fascism before World War II. But that changed after 1945.
Del Noce saw three reasons for Marxism's early appeal. It had powerful tools of social and economic analysis. It had a comprehensive anthropology -- a vision of who and what a human being is -- which claimed the mantle of science. And it had a religion-like, evangelical zeal that inspired the masses. As a result, it undermined biblical faith with a new, this-worldly, messianic gospel. In the Marxist canon there was good (the working class) vs. evil (capitalists), a path of redemption (revolution), the hope of heaven (a utopian future), and the certainty of final triumph (the direction of history).
In effect, as Del Noce argued throughout his career, Marxism was and is a new form of an old heresy, gnosticism. It's a cult of sacred knowledge, the possession of which claims to unlock our understanding and allow us to control the world. But the cult inevitably leads to nihilism, because Marxist theory is fundamentally atheist, which destroys its religion-like authority when the promised heaven on earth declines to appear. Marxism succeeds in crippling the supernatural imagination. But it has nothing of any higher purpose to put in its place beyond relentless political struggle against the power structures of a corrupt present. Marxist theory may have failed, but its afterlife of bitter activism drags on in our current grievance movements.
Yet Del Noce's real genius was his prophetic insight into the rise of Western irreligion. He saw that Marxism "won" the war of ideas, even as it collapsed as a theory, by establishing the economic dimension of man as humanity's defining reality. For Del Noce, the West "defeated" Marxism not by reaffirming biblical morality or Christian anthropology but by quietly shedding both. Western countries won by outproducing Marxist systems on their own terms, with material results -- superior science, superior technology, more and better consumer goods. The dark side of technology, Del Noce argued, is a passion for "total revolution" -- permanent revolution against the past doing business as innovation. The byproducts of its success have been religious agnosticism, sexual liberation and radical secularism. By the time of his death, Del Noce viewed much of Western society, despite its Christian residue, as the most thoroughly atheist in history, a feat achieved not by persecuting God, but by ignoring and rendering him irrelevant.
Del Noce was never a Luddite. He respected the good in technology. But he also knew that gnosticism comes in all shapes and sizes, that when we dispense with the God of Abraham, we put other gods in his place, that humans have a bottomless appetite for building heaven on earth, and that we therefore have the unhappy habit of turning our ideas and our tools into objects of obsession and then worship. He knew that idolatry kills.
---
Mr. Maier is a senior research associate at Notre Dame's Center for Citizenship and Constitutional Government and a senior fellow in Catholic studies at the Ethics and Public Policy Center.
Credit: By Francis X. Maier
