[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Global liquor giant Diageo is reeling from the sudden death of its longtime chief executive in June followed by a profit warning last week that tanked the stock.
But its real problem is more fundamental: the slow pace of sales in North America after an initial, post-Covid surge.
Diageo, which makes Johnnie Walker Scotch whisky, Tanqueray gin and Guinness beer, suffered a 12% stock decline on Nov. 10, its worst in decades. A profit warning that day revised guidance given just weeks earlier, largely because of a sharp decline in Latin America and Caribbean sales.
The company said it expects organic sales -- which strip out currency and merger impacts -- in the region to decline by more than 20% from a year earlier in the first half of fiscal 2024, which ends in June. As a result, it said it expects global organic-sales growth to slow in the latter half of the current calendar year compared with earlier guidance for "gradual improvement."
Analysts were perplexed as to what had changed so quickly. The company's earlier guidance was issued on Aug. 1 and reiterated as late as Sept. 28. Bernstein analysts wrote in a note that management "seemed almost shellshocked" on a conference call and "struggled to give convincing answers."
At a scheduled investor day on Wednesday, Diageo executives, including CEO Debra Crew, gave further details as to what happened. Their explanation went something like this: Higher interest rates and other macroeconomic shocks to the region hit demand for high-end liquors like whiskey in markets like Mexico and Brazil.
Diageo sells to distributors in the region and has limited visibility into end-sales to retailers, who seem to have taken on excess inventory. As a result, October sales, which are key to stocking up inventory for the holiday season, fell substantially short. The company offered assurances that the issue was a one-off and that other regions were healthy. Diageo's London-traded shares fell 1.8% on Wednesday and another 1.9% on Thursday, bringing their decline so far this year to 23.5%.
One analyst at the event pointed out in a question-and-answer session that Latin America accounts for 11% of sales. The bigger issue, he suggested, is sales in North America, Diageo's largest market at 39% of sales last fiscal year, are flat or falling. "So actually what's happening here is the U.S. hasn't recovered as quickly as you hoped, to provide a safety net for all the other regions," he said.
Diageo's organic sales in North America soared 14% in fiscal 2022, which ended in June of that year, on reopenings and the resumption of pre-Covid activities. But they were flat in fiscal 2023, which implied a decline of about 2.5% on-year in the second half, according to Visible Alpha. That partly reflects a category-wide slowdown after the reopening surge, but Diageo executives on Wednesday acknowledged the company lost market share. A slide shown at the event suggested the alcohol market in the U.S. is growing by 3% to 4%.
The company on Wednesday outlined plans to reclaim share in the U.S., ranging from investing in store displays and new flavors for brands like Crown Royal whisky, to using artificial intelligence to better pinpoint ad spending by ZIP Code.
What all of these have in common is that they will cost money, which relates to the second troubling thing about last Friday's shock announcement: lower guidance on medium-term profit growth.
Diageo earlier said it expects organic sales growth of 5% to 7% over the medium term, and underlying profit growth at a faster clip of 6% to 9%. Last Friday, it reiterated the sales target but said profit would merely increase in line with that. In other words, don't expect margin expansion.
Increased investment in marketing and innovation might be the right move for Diageo as it looks for a reset. But recently burned analysts -- and investors -- will need to see results from that investment before giving management any credit for it.
Credit: By Aaron Back
