Disappointing quarterly results from big technology companies pushed stock indexes lower Thursday, sending the S&P 500 to its first monthly loss since April.
The S&P 500 fell 1.9% Thursday, snapping a 29-day streak without a daily loss of 1% or more, the longest such run in three years. The broad stock index shed 1% in October.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite had its worst day in nearly two months, dropping 2.8% Thursday to end October 0.5% lower. The Dow Jones Industrial Average declined 0.9%, or 378 points. The blue chip index finished the month down 1.3%.
The selloff continued early Friday with Japan's benchmark Nikkei 225 Stock Average down about 2% at midday. SoftBank was down more than 5%.
The mammoth technology companies that have come to dominate the market and driven indexes to record after record this year have met a tougher crowd this earning season. Investors' displeasure with their quarterly reports has had outsize influence on stock indexes.
Though Microsoft and Facebook owner Meta Platforms reported better-than-expected results after trading hours on Wednesday, investors found fault on Thursday.
Microsoft forecast slower growth in its cloud business and fell 6%. Meta said it expects "significant" growth in capital expenditures next year and sank 4.1%.
Apple and Amazon.com gave their results after Thursday's closing bell. In after-hours trading, Amazon gained back some of Thursday's 6.5% loss. Apple extended its 2% decline.
Chip makers continued a recent struggle. Nvidia, the must-own stock of the artificial intelligence boom, fell 4.8%. The PHLX Semiconductor index declined 4%.
Investors are seeing the downside of an equities market built around a few giant stocks, said Lara Rhame, chief U.S. economist at Philadelphia asset manager FS Investments. They still shouldn't equate declining stock indexes with economic weakness.
"Concentration will give us that volatility and when it swings into a painful direction, there's a natural instinct to worry there's a crack in the economy," she said. "The recent data show us that's misguided."
It wasn't all bad. Quarterly results propelled a lot of companies to great days.
International Paper jumped 13%, the latest in a string of blockbuster earnings gains for cardboard-box makers. Oil producer ConocoPhillips added 6.4% after topping Wall Street's profit expectations. Travel site Booking Holdings and Norwegian Cruise Line climbed 6.3% and 4.8%, respectively, after their earnings reports suggested healthy consumers.
Weekly employment data Thursday showed fewer jobless claims than economists expected. The Labor Department is set to release October payroll data Friday, though economists and analysts warn that the numbers might be messy given the effects of hurricanes Helene and Milton and the machinists' strike at Boeing.
Another strong report on Friday could extend a sharp selloff in bonds that began after the release of the September payroll data. That report significantly eased recession fears and convinced traders the Federal Reserve might lower rates slower than expected. The central bank cut its benchmark borrowing cost by a half percentage point in mid September.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note ended Thursday at 4.282%, according to Tradeweb, up from 3.798% at the end of September. Yields rise as prices fall.
Traders are counting on the Fed trimming rates by an additional quarter of a percentage point at the central bank's meeting next week.
Other frothy corners of the market came down on Thursday.
Earnings sank shares of trading platforms Robinhood Markets and Coinbase Global, the cryptocurrency exchange, which lost 17% and 15%, respectively.
Super Micro Computer shares followed up Wednesday's 33% plunge with a 12% decline, extending losses since the server maker disclosed that Ernst & Young had resigned as its auditor, saying it could no longer rely on management's representations.
Trump Media & Technology Group, which operates former President Donald Trump's social-media platform and tends to move with expectations of a second Trump presidency, lost 12%.
Elsewhere, yields on U.K. government bonds shot higher for the second consecutive session, as investors mulled the new Labor government's budget proposal calling for increased taxes and borrowing. The pound lost ground against the dollar. "Plainly investors are nervous about the fiscal outlook in the U.K.," said Jonas Goltermann, deputy chief markets economist at Capital Economics.
European stock indexes also declined Thursday to end the month lower. London's FTSE 100 index fell 0.6% Friday and the Stoxx Europe 600 ended down 1.2%.
Generate image description

Credit: By Ryan Dezember and Caitlin McCabe
