All you need to know about multibillionaire Carl Icahn is how he describes himself on his Twitter page: "Some people get rich studying artificial intelligence. Me, I make my money studying natural stupidity."
W.C. Fields was more concise: "Never give a sucker an even break."
Mr. Icahn is 77 years old and has an estimated net worth of $20 billion, and he still loves to prey upon the stupid. Last week, Mr. Icahn was studying the natural stupidity at Apple and eBay. Those companies have been nothing but revolutionary over the past decade. They're not really all that stupid. It's just that Mr. Icahn is smarter, you see.
He wants Apple to give more of its $150 billion cash hoard to shareholders like him in the form of stock repurchase plans and higher dividends. He also wants eBay to split off PayPal as a separate company because he thinks this reorganization would result in shareholders like him getting more money.
Mr. Icahn often unveils his moves, or discusses them, on Twitter, which can sometimes drive up stock prices. You've got to admire that he is transparent, if not insulting, about his "natural stupidity" strategy.
He has purchased billions worth of Apple and eBay stock. But he's not making a bet on these companies; he's making a bet he can get these companies to do what he says.
He is smarter than the people who run them, you see, even though he has never produced much more than harassment and misery for most of his life.
In the 1980s, when Apple was bringing the world personal computers, Mr. Icahn was stripping assets away from TWA and loading the now-deceased airline up with debt.
In the 1990s, when Apple was pioneering software and opening the Apple Store, Mr. Icahn was busy with things like trying to break up U.S. Steel and RJR Nabisco.
In the 2000s, when eBay was developing online auctions and payment systems, and Apple was churning out iPods, iPads and iPhones, Mr. Icahn was doing things like feeding off the corpse of Blockbuster video.
Mr. Icahn was more accurately heralded as a corporate raider in the 1980s. Through the miracle of public relations, he is now called a shareholder activist. He says he produces shareholder value. And market pundits often cheer him on.
In the case of Apple, Mr. Icahn is attracted to the amazing cash position of one of history's most successful innovators. Like a housefly to a honey pot. Not everyone thinks giving the money to him and other investors is the greatest idea. Perhaps Apple could use these billions to revolutionize something else.
"I have no respect for Carl Icahn," said stock analyst Ronnie Moas in an interview. "He needs to start using his power in a different way."
Mr. Moas, founder of Miami-based Standpoint Research, says one reason Apple has so much cash is that it underpays its labor in Asia to build its products. He recently made news for "blacklisting" Apple in his research report--making the controversial suggestion that more of Apple's cash go to the workers who make its products.
Apple has already announced a three-year plan to return $100 million to shareholders through stock buybacks and dividends. If Apple coughed up, say, $10 billion to pay workers, who knows, it might even be able to afford to create jobs in the U.S.
Nobody would even notice the money was missing.
Except Mr. Icahn. He thinks he deserves it. He's smarter.
Credit: By Al Lewis
