A close viewer of the Democratic primary debates might come away with an informed understanding of the presidential candidates' positions on certain policy areas such as immigration and health care.
Ahead of Tuesday night's debate in Westerville, Ohio, The Wall Street Journal analyzed the transcripts of all the previous debates to determine which topics candidates spent the most time discussing.
Former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro touched off a party-wide argument about whether to decriminalize crossing the U.S. border without proper authorization in the first debate.
Julian Castro: "Let's be very clear. The reason that they are separating these little children from their families is that they are using section 1325 of that Act, which criminalizes coming across the border, to incarcerate the parents and then separate them. Some of us on this stage have called to end that section, to terminate it." (June 26, 2019, debate)
Everyone in the 2020 Democratic field has taken sides on Sen. Bernie Sanders's Medicare for All plan. Sen. Elizabeth Warren has said she's "with Bernie" on expanding government-run health insurance, while former Vice President Joe Biden and South Bend, Ind., Mayor Pete Buttigieg have argued in favor of letting Americans keep their private insurance plans.
Pete Buttigieg: "I propose Medicare for all who want it. We take a version of Medicare, we make it available for the American people, and if we are right, as progressives, that that public alternative is better, then the American people will figure that out for themselves." (Sept. 12, 2019, debate)
The Democratic field has coalesced around the idea that too many people are serving too-lengthy sentences for nonviolent crimes. Mr. Biden has taken heat for a 1994 crime bill that critics say contributed to high levels of mass incarceration among communities of color.
Joe Biden: "Right now, we are in a situation where when someone is convicted of -- of a drug crime, they end up going to jail and to prison. They should be going to rehabilitation; they shouldn't be going to prison." (July 31, 2019, debate)
---
Methodology: The Journal analyzed the transcripts of the past three debates using a machine-learning model to surface distinct but unlabeled topics. Excluding references to President Trump, this article looks at the top three topics.

Credit: By Mark Secada and Emily Stephenson
