Stocks opened the week lower, hinting at why some investors believe the "everything rally" of late 2023 will be hard-pressed to continue.
All three major indexes are in the red for 2024 after Tuesday's session. The S&P 500 slipped by 0.4%, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq dropped 0.2%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 0.6%, or 232 points.
Losses Tuesday spanned international oil companies, pharmaceutical giants and streaming companies, but no firm in the Dow lost bigger than Boeing. The manufacturing giant's shares skidded 7.9% after a long-awaited resumption of deliveries of 737 MAX jets to China faced fresh delays. Hammered by investors after the Alaska Airlines incident, Boeing stock has fallen 23% this year.
Chinese stocks fell sharply early Wednesday after Beijing released data that showed the Chinese economy's growth rate at one of the lowest levels in decades last year. At midday Wednesday in Asia, mainland China's CSI 100 was down 0.7% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was off 2.8%.
Investor optimism over the apparent end of Federal Reserve rate hikes has given way to more circumspection, grinding the end-of-year bond rally to a halt. Benchmark 10-year Treasury yields, which rise as prices fall, edged upward to 4.064%.
As the momentum behind stocks has petered out, firms heading into earnings season may now have to prove their worth to investors through stronger profits.
"I want to see companies actually make the money," said Peter van Dooijeweert, head of defensive and tactical alpha at Man Solutions.
On Tuesday, Goldman Sachs said it made more than $2 billion in profit in the fourth quarter, bolstered by a strong performance in its asset- and wealth-management business. "This was a year of execution for Goldman Sachs," Chief Executive David Solomon said in a call with analysts.
Investors, however, mostly shrugged. Goldman shares wavered throughout the afternoon before edging upward, closing 0.7% higher. Morgan Stanley, meanwhile, skidded by 4.2% after it reported a slowdown in earnings from last year.
Through the first few days of fourth-quarter reports, van Dooijeweert said, "We're not really getting a lot of juice from earnings."
Elsewhere, shares in Spirit Airlines tumbled 47% after a federal judge blocked JetBlue's acquisition of the company. Shares in JetBlue rose 4.9%.
Tuesday's losses may have stung major indexes even more were it not for the artificial-intelligence trade. Shares in chip maker Nvidia rose 3.1%, while Advanced Micro Devices climbed 8.3% Tesla ticked 0.5% higher after Chief Executive Elon Musk said he wants greater control of the electric-vehicle maker as it pushes further into artificial intelligence and robotics.
Earnings season will continue Wednesday with reports from Charles Schwab, U.S. Bancorp and Citizens Financial Group as well as aluminum producer Alcoa.
Benchmark U.S. crude traded 0.4% lower at $72.40 a barrel.
Natural-gas deliveries scheduled for February slid more than 12%, a sign that traders believe blustery weather across much of the country could soon relent.
The Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.2%.
Credit: By David Uberti
