The federal government spent $22 billion in recent years on technology from the top 100 national-security startups, a paltry portion of overall contract spending and less than half what venture capitalists invested in those companies.
The gap underscores the discrepancy between the surge of venture-capital funding for defense technology and the U.S. government's spending on substantial contracts to startups. The new numbers come from a report released Thursday by Silicon Valley Defense Group, a nonprofit started a decade ago with the aim of bringing more startup innovation to the Defense Department.
According to the report, the top 100 venture capital-backed national-security startups raised a combined $53 billion in private funding since their inception, $11 billion of which came in the past 12 months.
Those same startups collectively earned $22 billion in revenue from federal awards, $6 billion of which came from the Defense Department. The organization ranked the startups based on head-count growth, total capital raised and other factors. Traditional defense contractors receive hundreds of billions in awards every year.
The lagging investment by the federal government in startup technologies threatens to curtail the venture-capital boom in defense tech at a crucial time for U.S. competitiveness around warfare as the geopolitical landscape grows more unstable.
Defense Department officials said they want to move more swiftly and be less risk-averse when adopting commercial technologies, and that their entrenched bureaucracy can get in the way. Lawmakers have pushed the department to embrace innovation.
Silicon Valley Defense Group calculated the 100 startups' government revenue from their inception through mid-June, and the figure covers only awards that are unclassified. The average age of the startups on the list is seven years. The report acknowledges that government- award data suffers from "absolute opaqueness."
A spokesman for the Office of the Secretary of Defense said the gulf between private capital funding and Defense Department spending isn't as wide as the report suggests because it doesn't factor in awards that are classified. He said the department is spending tens of billions of dollars to adopt new technologies at a faster clip.
Most of the defense-tech startups in the report make technology they also sell to commercial customers, and nongovernment revenue isn't factored into the report.
Self-driving trucking startup Kodiak Robotics, named in the report's top 100 companies, in 2022 received a two-year, $50 million contract to work on self-driving ground vehicles for the Army. The project has gone well, Chief Executive Don Burnette said, but there isn't a guarantee when Kodiak will get another contract, how much it would be for or when they would get paid, because Congress has the final say on budgets.
The report says the data raise questions about what sort of returns venture capitalists can expect from their investments, and whether the U.S. government is playing "innovation theater."
"Startups are either purposely being kept out, or the DOD has just not figured out how to take advantage of them," said Tara Murphy Dougherty, chief executive of defense-software company Govini. Venture-backed companies consistently received around 1% of total Defense Department award spending annually going back through 2018, despite throngs of new companies joining the defense-tech field, according to Govini data.
The groundswell of techno-patriotism, supercharged by the prospect that artificial intelligence will change the way wars are fought, has led to a venture-capital spending spree in defense of about $130 billion from 2021 through mid-June this year, according to data firm PitchBook.
Government agencies have reason to be cautious about embracing startups. Most fail. Most haven't proved they can manufacture the large quantities the military would require. Some of them build tech that is completely impractical for warfighters or isn't durable enough for a battlefield.
Jacqueline Tame, executive director of Silicon Valley Defense Group, said she is discouraged by the government's incremental, small-dollar investments in new technologies despite Defense Department policies and strategies to give priority to the adoption of emerging tech. "Our call to action is literally, 'Put your money where your mouth is,' " Tame said.
A spokeswoman for the Defense Innovation Unit, a Silicon Valley branch of the Defense Department focused on adopting new technologies for the Pentagon, said the unit awarded more than $7 billion in contracts to startups since 2016. "That said, far more needs to be done" by the Defense Department, she said.
Some venture-backed companies have notched successes, supplying the government with autonomous aircraft, drone-defense systems, artificial intelligence and space-launch technology.
The biggest winner is Elon Musk's SpaceX, which has cornered the rocket-launch business and is a major vendor to U.S. intelligence and military agencies. The report shows SpaceX has received 81% of the total government funding awarded to venture-backed companies and 65% of the total Defense Department awards.
Generate image description

Credit: By Heather Somerville
