Facebook parent company Meta Platforms Inc. has created a tool to predict the structure of hundreds of millions of proteins using artificial intelligence. Researchers say it promises to deepen scientists' understanding of biology, and perhaps speed the discovery of new drugs.
Meta's research arm, Meta AI, used the new AI-based computer program known as ESMFold to create a public database of 617 million predicted proteins. Proteins are the building blocks of life and of many medicines, required for the function of tissues, organs and cells.
Drugs based on proteins are used to treat heart disease, certain cancers and HIV, among other illnesses, and many pharmaceutical companies have begun to pursue new drugs with artificial intelligence. Using AI to predict protein structures is expected to not only boost the effectiveness of existing drugs and drug candidates, but also help discover molecules that could treat diseases whose cures have remained elusive.
With ESMFold, Meta is squaring off against another protein-prediction computer model known as AlphaFold from DeepMind Technologies, a subsidiary of Google parent Alphabet Inc. AlphaFold said last year that its database has 214 million predicted proteins that could help accelerate drug discovery.
Meta says ESMFold is 60 times faster than AlphaFold, but less accurate. The ESMFold database is larger because it made predictions from genetic sequences that hadn't been studied previously.
Predicting a protein's structure can help scientists understand its biological function, according to Alexander Rives, co-author of a study published Thursday in the journal Science and a research scientist at Meta AI. Meta had previously released the paper describing ESMFold in November 2022 on a preprint server.
"Often proteins which share similar structures have similar biological functions," said Dr. Rives. "And if you can have a really high resolution structure, then you can begin to think about what is the actual biochemical function of these proteins."
About a third of the proteins predicted by ESMFold can be done so with high confidence, according to Meta.
The quest to predict protein structure, and then function, has been under way for the past decade. Because proteins constantly fold and refold themselves before forming their final structure, determining protein structures has been difficult and expensive for scientists. Rather than using microscopes that can image protein structures at the atomic level, the new AI models are learning to predict protein shapes in hours or days instead of months and years.
Credit: By Eric Niiler
