Stanley Kubrick: The Exhibition
Contemporary Jewish Museum
Through Oct. 30
San Francisco -- As auteurs go, Stanley Kubrick stands apart. His oeuvre, despite its breadth of genres, is comparatively small (just 13 features over 46 years), and his style, though inimitable, defies easy categorization. Yet few filmmakers -- perhaps just Alfred Hitchcock and Orson Welles -- are as venerated and obsessed over as he is, even 17 years after his death at age 70.
For the past 12 years, this enthusiasm for all things Kubrick has manifested itself in an exhibit sanctioned by Kubrick's heirs and first displayed at the Deutsches Filmmuseum in Frankfurt, Germany. Since then, the show has traveled widely throughout Europe and made stops as far afield as Sao Paulo, Seoul and Melbourne, Australia. But it has alighted in the U.S. only twice: for an extended visit to Los Angeles in 2012 and 2013 and now to San Francisco, installed at the Contemporary Jewish Museum, a former power substation repurposed and expanded by the architect Daniel Libeskind, just a stone's throw from the vastly expanded, recently reopened SFMOMA.
Blandly titled "Stanley Kubrick: The Exhibition," the show gathers over 1,000 objects relating to all aspects of Kubrick's professional life -- starting with his early days as a photographer for Look magazine in the mid-1940s, acknowledging his little-remembered short films of the early 1950s, exploring his first features and work with Kirk Douglas ("Paths of Glory" and "Spartacus"), and then examining in almost overwhelming detail the films of the 1960s and '70s that secured his reputation: "Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb," "2001: A Space Odyssey," "A Clockwork Orange" and "Barry Lyndon," which together earned 19 Oscar nominations. (Kubrick himself won just a single Academy Award, for special visual effects relating to "2001." And, yes, it's displayed here.)
A native New Yorker who relocated to England in 1961, Kubrick saved many precious things (annotated scripts; letters; productions stills, sketches and schedules; even certain props and costumes), but he also willfully destroyed memorabilia. So though the so-called Starchild from "2001" is on view -- as are Dave Bowman's spacesuit and helmet, worn by Keir Dullea in the movie -- the original spacecraft models are no more. Meticulous reproductions fill that niche. Similarly, miniatures of the war room from "Strangelove" and the topiary maze from "The Shining," as well as two erotic mannequins from "A Clockwork Orange," are reconstructions.
Those opting for the "highlights" tour of this exhibit, which really requires at least two long visits to achieve anything approaching immersion, will focus on the visually arresting pieces, like those items from "2001," a case of papier mache carnival masks from "Eyes Wide Shut," a suite of costumes from "Barry Lyndon" (four of the five made from actual 18th-century fabric), and the resplendent Roman battle dress worn by Laurence Olivier's Crassus in "Spartacus." You can also see one of the typewriters from "The Shining" on which Jack Nicholson's character obsessively wrote "All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy," along with an ax he used to terrify his wife.
Less hurried visitors will find that their measured pace yields subtler rewards. A vitrine of "Strangelove" props, for example, contains a small red book with the title "Holy Bible & Russian Phrases." And letters associated with Kubrick's screen version of Vladimir Nabokov's novel "Lolita" make for fascinating reading -- including one that suggests that the Russian-born writer and the American-born filmmaker enjoyed a mutually respectful working relationship.
Among the least expected materials are relics of Kubrick's abandoned ventures -- like the small library assembled for a long-gestating Napoleon biopic and early illustrations for "A.I. Artificial Intelligence," which Kubrick conceived but Steven Spielberg ultimately wrote and directed. Mr. Spielberg also figures, peripherally, in the section devoted to "Aryan Papers," whose impact is magnified by this venue's mission as a Jewish institution. Based on Louis Begley's novel "Wartime Lies," the project was aborted in the wake of Mr. Spielberg's "Schindler's List."
"Kubrick: The Exhibition" is arranged in more or less chronological order, with the most important movies occupying discrete areas of the sometimes densely arranged galleries. To enhance the experience, the museum has included film clips, and in various spots the music, sound effects and dialogue bleed together, creating a disquieting layered-echo effect. Yet rather than distract or annoy, this merging reminds us that these disparate pictures achieved their continuing resonance through the vision and perseverance of one man.
---
Mr. Mermelstein writes for the Journal on film and classical music.
Credit: By David Mermelstein
