WASHINGTON -- As Russian troops surged toward Ukraine's border last fall, a small Western intelligence unit swung into action, tracking signs Moscow was preparing to invade. It drew up escape routes for its people and wrote twice-daily intelligence reports.
On Feb. 16, 2022, the unit drafted and sent to its leaders an assessment that would be eerily prescient: Russia, it said, would likely invade Ukraine on Feb. 23, U.S. East Coast time.
The intelligence shop had just eight analysts and used only publicly available information, not spy satellites and secret agents. It belonged to multinational chemicals company Dow Inc., not to any government.
"I'm leading an intelligence center that accurately predicted the invasion of Ukraine without any access to sensitive sources," said John Robert, Dow's director of global intelligence and protection, whose unit helps the company manage business risk and employee safety.
Supercharged by the Ukraine war, the rise of open-source intelligence, or OSINT, which comprises everything from commercial satellite imagery to social-media posts and purchasable databases, poses revolutionary challenges for the Central Intelligence Agency and its sister spy agencies, according to former senior officials.
Dow is just one of a fast-growing number of companies, nonprofit groups and countries transforming publicly available data into intelligence for strategic and economic advantage. China has the largest, most focused effort, while U.S. spy agencies, with deeply ingrained habits of operating in the shadows, have been slow to adapt to a world in which much of what is important isn't secret, according to dozens of officials and many studies.
The CIA is simultaneously dealing with a closely related challenge: It is pivoting from two decades focused on terrorism toward spying on a new primary intelligence target, China. But some officials say the technological tsunami facing U.S. intelligence agencies poses a more fundamental challenge than merely swapping priorities.
"The agency is used to running this way and that, depending on what the demand of the day is," said Paul Kolbe, a former CIA officer who directs the Intelligence Project at Harvard Kennedy School's Belfer Center. But the growing dominance of open-source data represents a uniquely difficult test, particularly for the CIA, he said.
There will always be some tasks only secretive agencies with classified data and covert human sources can do, current and former officials say. The CIA obtained elements of Russian President Vladimir Putin's war plan for invading Ukraine, and warned U.S. allies in Kyiv. At the end of July, it tracked and killed al Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri.
But by some estimates, more than 80% of what a U.S. president or military commander needs to know comes from OSINT, and not from foreign agents, spy satellites or expensive eavesdropping platforms.
That means, officials said, that the CIA and other agencies need to give priority to vetting and sifting through troves of OSINT that ranges from YouTube videos to publicly posted genetic databases, or risk missing the next threat or looming global crisis. And they need to do so faster than U.S. rivals, principally China.
U.S. intelligence agencies could miss signs of the next global pandemic that are hiding in plain sight. China could leap ahead on technologies such as quantum computing and artificial intelligence while using public data to identify U.S. intelligence officers. And the $90 billion U.S. intelligence community could see its role diminished.
Nonprofit C4ADS used shipping databases, satellite imagery, property records and other public data to trace the source of Russian GPS "spoofing" that disguised Russian ships' locations to a defense facility near one of Mr. Putin's dachas, according to a November presentation at the Harvard Intelligence Project. Bellingcat, the investigative website, used phone and travel data to identify three operatives from Moscow's FSB intelligence service it said attempted to kill Russian opposition politician Alexei Navalny.
"I don't worry about the [intelligence community] going away. I worry about it mattering," said Robert Cardillo, who served in several senior U.S. intelligence roles. Government policy makers, he said, could rely less on traditional intelligence briefings and more on open-source products.
Senior U.S. intelligence officials say they are making significant changes. CIA Director William Burns gave priority to accelerated outreach to the private sector and academia, after an internal review he had ordered found the agency wasn't capitalizing on such partnerships.
---
Byron Tau contributed to this article.
Credit: By Warren P. Strobel
