A roundup of discussion at The Wall Street Journal's D11: All Things Digital conference:
Facebook Home App
Has a 'Long Road' Ahead
Facebook Inc.'s operating chief, Sheryl Sandberg, acknowledged recent missteps with Facebook Home, the company's new mobile application for phones powered by Google Inc.'s Android software. Ms. Sandberg said some users have become frustrated with the organization of the app.
But she said the users who are sticking with it were spending 25% more time on Facebook and sending 10% more messages. Ms. Sandberg said she is encouraged by the company's momentum on mobile and its larger vision for a mobile experience centered on people. "Facebook Home is version one of a very large transformation," she said. "We think it's going to be a long road."
-- Evelyn M. Rusli
Twitter CEO Wriggles
Out of Question About IPO
The most inventive aspect of Twitter Inc. may be the way its CEO wriggles out of questions about when the company may launch an initial public offering.
Chief Executive Dick Costolo gets asked the question so often, including on stage Wednesday, that he has to come up with new metaphors to bat away the No. 1 question from reporters.
People close to the company say Twitter may go public next year. Mr. Costolo's stock answer is he doesn't spend his time thinking about or working on an IPO.
At the conference, Mr. Costolo said being asked all the time about an IPO makes him feel like he is a football wide receiver running down the field to try to catch a pass, and people are yelling at him from the sidelines asking him, "What are you doing after the game?"
-- Shira Ovide
Max Levchin Unveils
New Mobile App Glow
Startup veteran Max Levchin is bringing Big Data to the womb.
Mr. Levchin, a co-founder of online-payments service PayPal, unveiled Glow, a mobile app for couples looking to conceive that tracks women's fertility cycles.
The app, which uses machine-learning to identify trends among its female users, prods women to regularly input several data points, such as the time of the menstrual cycle, emotional discomfort and weight. There is also a daily checklist of best practices to help boost the chances of pregnancy. Mr. Levchin said he was fascinated by the idea of using data to help people conceive within 10 months.
Mr. Levchin said the two main hurdles to conception are data and cost. He hopes the app will empower couples with the data they need to get pregnant, so they can avoid seeing a specialist.
-- Evelyn M. Rusli
