The world's largest contract chip maker reassured investors that the artificial-intelligence boom is real after reporting a record quarterly profit.
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Chief Executive C.C. Wei said Thursday that revenue from AI-related servers and processors was expected to triple this year and would account for about 15% of the company's total revenue.
"One of my key customers said the demand right now is insane," Wei said. "It is just the beginning."
Companies are investing tens of billions of dollars in AI-related chips and infrastructure in the expectation that the technology will transform industry and daily life, but some investors have expressed doubts about whether the frenzy is sustainable.
Wei said TSMC was working with most of the leading AI companies and believed the boom would continue for many years.
Net profit in the July-September quarter rose 54% to the equivalent of $10.1 billion, TSMC said, while revenue rose 39% to $23.6 billion.
Aside from AI, growth in the semiconductor industry is slower because demand for consumer products such as smartphones has flattened and many manufacturers are working down stockpiles of chips they built up during the pandemic.
Equipment supplier ASML warned this week that the recovery in some parts of the industry may stretch into next year, causing ASML shares to fall more than 20% over two days and hitting other chip stocks as well. TSMC executives said they expected demand to solidify for other types of chips, such as those used in smartphones and personal computers, as AI technologies are integrated into those devices.
TSMC focuses exclusively on the foundry business -- making chips designed by clients that lack their own factories such as Nvidia, Apple and Qualcomm.
The Taiwanese company's dominance in cutting-edge chips has become more pronounced in the past year because its main rivals in the foundry business, Samsung and Intel, have struggled to advance their chip-making technology.
That gives TSMC more negotiating leverage with clients but has raised concerns among some analysts about potential antitrust issues.
Asked by an analyst Thursday whether TSMC enjoys market dominance, Wei rebuffed the suggestion. He argued that when other sectors such as chip packaging -- a key bottleneck for AI-related advanced chips -- are taken into account, TSMC's market share is significant but not monopolistic.
TSMC expects capital expenditure of just more than $30 billion this year, much of it for factories abroad including a planned set of three facilities in Arizona that will ultimately cost some $65 billion.
On Thursday, TSMC said its first Arizona plant has begun trial production with a promising yield rate and is expected to enter volume production in 2025. The second plant is slated to begin mass production in 2028, with the third to start by the end of the decade.
Generate image description

Credit: By Yang Jie and Sherry Qin
