Etsy Inc., the online marketplace where people can buy and sell everything from terrarium necklaces to 3D-printed Pokemon, thrives on handmade crafts.
However, the Brooklyn-based company's artisanal spirit also extends to crafting data analytics that help shoppers navigate more than 30 million unique items to find that special something -- like a pair of dog pajamas.
"Because of the uniqueness, we have to do a lot more work to figure out what you're looking for," says John Allspaw, Etsy's senior vice president for infrastructure and operations. "Building personalization and recommendations is a much harder problem because we have to look for deeper signals."
Etsy, which went public in April, relies heavily on machine learning and Big Data processing to analyze more than 500 of those signals, including how users navigate a Web page and how long they linger on a particular product. Mr. Allspaw considers these distinctly human signals as ones that will feed the machine learning algorithms and help Etsy personalize shoppers' experiences as they move throughout the site.
"We want to look at how people are searching and then automatically adjust the search results," he said.
The ability to store, sort and analyze massive amounts of information is a growing need for companies that see data and analytics as a key to business growth and better customer experience. Increasingly, true differentiation requires companies to parse that data in real time to facilitate on-the-spot decision making.
Mr. Allspaw's job involves making sure Etsy's infrastructure and software tools are up to the task. The company operates an open source machine learning framework called Conjecture, and runs Hadoop in-house. Apache Kafka, another open source tool, helps Etsy manage its data pipeline, monitor real-time data feeds and load information to Hadoop's storage system. It is a messaging system seen as faster and more efficient than several alternatives that help route and translate data between a number of senders and receivers. Large scale data mining, analytics and behavioral analysis are done using Hadoop and Scalding, a tool written in the Scala programming language. Built on top of the app development platform known as Cascading, Scalding helps developers more easily write programs for MapReduce, Hadoop's main processing engine.
Using those tools, Etsy processes the signals that buyers give as they move about the site to provide more personalized search results and recommendations in real time. Mr. Allspaw hopes better identifying and measuring those signals will improve Etsy's ability to discern individual tastes and make complex predictions about user behavior.
Etsy also can find commonalities in product features, such as whether an item is jewelry or if the background of the picture is green or blue. Even if two people search for and "favorite" vastly different items, a few points of overlap could help Etsy cater its search and recommendations.
Say one person searches for ties, while another looks for necklaces. Using machine learning algorithms to find common characteristics between individuals and their networks of fellow shoppers, "we can make some reasonably good predictions that you might like the same ties that someone in her cohort would like," Mr. Allspaw said.
Etsy is collaborating with prototype groups to refine and scale. "There is generating real-time recommendations for buyers," he said, "and then there is generating real-time recommendations for buyers that are actually good."
Credit: By Steven Norton
