Michael Niedermayer used to fly drones for the U.S. Army and the Central Intelligence Agency, gathering real-time intelligence in Iraq. Now he pilots delivery robots for a Bay Area startup that wants to disrupt burrito delivery.
Postmates, which in mid-August received a permit to operate its Serve delivery robot in San Francisco and is testing it for food delivery in Los Angeles, employs a growing team of "pilots" to remotely oversee, and at times steer, the four-wheeled food ferries.
"We will probably see a drastic increase in our workforce over the next five years," says Postmates Chief Executive Bastian Lehmann.
Disrupting "last-mile" delivery -- historically the domain of box trucks, bike couriers and personal vehicles -- "felt like a great fit for my military background," says Mr. Niedermayer.
Across industries, engineers are building atop work done by designers of military drones. Whether it's delivery drones, security robots or remotely piloted cars and trucks, the machines that were supposed to revolutionize everything by operating autonomously turn out to require, at the least, humans minding them from afar.
Until the techno-utopian dream of full automation comes into effect -- and there's no guarantee that will happen -- there will be plenty of jobs for humans. Whether the humans in charge are in the same city or thousands of miles away, the proliferation of not-yet-autonomous technologies is driving a tiny but growing workforce.
Mimi Kongnarinh started on the night shift at Cobalt Robotics, patrolling the offices of tech and manufacturing companies. Her work would be familiar to any night watchperson from the last century -- chatting up employees, introducing herself to fresh faces and keeping a wary eye out for anything out of the ordinary.
What made her job unusual is that she would patrol multiple offices simultaneously, and that for most of her eight- to 12-hour shift, she never left her desk in San Mateo, Calif. By remotely monitoring her largely autonomous robot charges, she was able to add a human touch when necessary -- such as politely asking unfamiliar employees to badge in on the robot's scanner -- while also keeping down her employer's labor costs.
"We get a live feed of every event that happens at every site we patrol," says Ms. Kongnarinh, who now works day shifts. "We can see if it's a person, motion, anything like that, and we can jump in when we have to."
Nearly all companies using "autonomous" robots have to depend on what the head of Postmates' technology skunkworks, Ali Kashani, calls the 1-to-N ratio -- N being the number of robots a single human can handle.
For a company like San Francisco-based Simbe Robotics -- which makes robots that wheel around grocery stores, taking inventory -- the N can be fairly high because their robots are almost entirely autonomous. When the robots are introduced in a store, says Lauren Milliken, a field deployment engineer at the company, they must be steered by a human to build a map. Humans have to take over when, for instance, someone harasses a robot, she adds.
For Flytrex, a drone delivery company operating in Iceland and participating in a Federal Aviation Administration trial in North Carolina, the ratio is one to one.
While humans might be more capable than artificial intelligence at this stage, remote-controlled robots can, if handled incorrectly, kill people.
"Remote control of cars is the dumbest and the most insane idea I have ever heard," says Mary Cummings, a professor of electrical and computer engineering and the director of the Humans and Autonomy Lab at Duke University. "I'll be the first person they should call as an expert witness when a death inevitably occurs," she adds.
Companies working with remote-controlled robots know there are risks and try to mitigate them. Some choose only to operate slow-moving machines in simple environments. More advanced systems require "human supervisory control," where the robot or vehicle's onboard AI does the basic piloting but the human gives the machine navigational instructions.
For every company working on self-driving cars, almost every state mandates they must either have a safety driver present in the vehicle or be able to control it from afar. Guidelines from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration suggest the same.
Most companies in the space have opted for something short of true teleoperation, which is dependent on an absolutely reliable and fast wireless connection as well as the skill of the human remote operator. Alphabet Inc. subsidiary Waymo's remote-operation system and another being tested by Nissan rely on humans to either confirm the vehicle's choices or help it navigate around obstacles.
Remote-operation software developer Phantom Auto Inc., based in Mountain View, Calif., designs human-supervisory control systems for self-driving vehicles, but the software lets humans assume full remote control. Since autonomous vehicles are still limited in their capabilities, factors like inclement weather or unmapped areas could require operators to step in.
Such scenarios worry Prof. Cummings. "If there's any teleoperation [of a car] going on in a hundred-mile radius, I want to know about it because I want to get off the road," she says.
Shai Magzimof, Phantom Auto's CEO, says that even when a remote driver is "directly" piloting a vehicle, it still has safety components engaged. To date, there have been no accidents involving Phantom's systems, he adds.
Phantom Auto is betting remote operation might become an important means of employment for people who used to drive for a living. Josh Resnick, a former Israeli army drone operator, trains Phantom Auto's remote operators. Training new drivers typically requires one to three weeks, he says, and the only qualification is a driver's license and a clean driving record.
There might eventually be other requirements. When Postmates managers interview potential delivery-robot pilots like Diana Villalobos, they ask whether they played videogames in their youth.
"When I was a kid, my parents always said, 'Stop playing videogames!' But it came in handy," she says.

Credit: By Christopher Mims
