A longer road leads to GOP-style JD Vance welfarism for the working class than you might imagine. Ronald Reagan bestowed protectionism widely and indiscriminately to get manufacturing workers through the 1982 recession, although his "voluntary" restraints on Japanese auto imports are best remembered now.
The same mindset was ideologized for the era in the populism of House Democratic Leader Dick Gephardt of Missouri, who brought distrust of immigration as well as imports into the mix. Later, a visitor to a 1996 Democratic Socialist convention in San Francisco heard chants of "Go, Pat, go" from the left in support of a Pat Buchanan philosophy now revived with an Ivy League pedigree by Mr. Vance.
When FDR launched his farm programs in 1933, agriculture employment was already well into its in machine-age decline. Factory workers have long been next in line, with the same bit of museum-style preservationism tossed in.
By the 1980s, swollen farm bills were being enacted with bipartisan enthusiasm every couple of years, few questioning a shibboleth about saving the "family farm." The law of dispersed cost and concentrated benefits worked its magic, yet nobody really benefited except farm lobbyists. The deadweight loss through inefficient production decisions hurt farmers and consumers alike. Expect the same from Mr. Vance's right-wing intervention allegedly designed to leave the world sweeter for factory employment.
His bruited $20 minimum wage is a device to make sure that jobs aren't available for people whose productivity can't justify $20 an hour. His tariff and industrial policies will only institutionalize a K Street lobbying army to corral or compete away most of the benefits.
He and his backers put a tautological spin on a study showing that high wages drive investment in productivity-enhancing technology to support high wages. Of course they do, when they don't cause a business to shut down altogether. But why should government be better at balancing opportunities for high-skilled workers vs. opportunities for low-skilled workers than the market would be?
And how much is the Vance phenomenon just a product of a one-time, never-to-be-repeated upset when a 100 million Chinese peasants entered the global division of labor almost overnight?
Technology also played a role, with automated, containerized shipping that allowed low-value goods to be distributed at low cost to consumers around the world.
The impact on U.S. manufacturing towns is debated because technology was simultaneously upending domestic factory routines. In any case, the Crest won't be placed back into the toothpaste tube. As with so much of irate populism, our leaders discover an incentive to pose and emote over what's already in the past and can't be undone. Joe McCarthy discovered the red menace only after the Truman loyalty oaths, after the atomic secrets theft, after China was "lost," after the Alger Hiss case, after the House Un-American Activities investigations.
McCarthy discovered nothing except that public concern about Soviet infiltration had sunk so deep he could exploit it without saying anything honest or coherent.
In "Hillbilly Elegy," Mr. Vance portrays his victim class largely as self-victimizing, dragged down by self-defeating behavior. Hoping the coat-hanger or plush-toy factory will come back is a poor substitute for adapting to the world as you find it -- leaving home, seeking opportunity, attending to one's human capital, avoiding bad habits.
Even a town isn't forever if its economic base disappears, although better tax and regulatory policy can always improve opportunities for all. Yet the world is also looking up for people able to do smart things with their hands given the arrival of artificial intelligence and an aging workforce.
Mr. Vance, as an Iraq veteran, might be forgiven for sharing the instant intuition of so many small-town Americans that overseas wars aren't our business or our problem.
An old quote comes to mind: You may not be interested in war, but war is interested you. LBJ was far less in love with the cause of South Vietnam than many elites are now with Ukraine, and LBJ sent 530,000 troops to South Vietnam at the war's peak. If Vancism doesn't end in the same way, it'll be because the U.S. effectively enabled Ukraine, Taiwan and other allied frontline states to defend themselves.
An effusion simultaneously and mysteriously hit all the cable-news shows on Tuesday morning: Such policy talk is irrelevant anyway. The 2024 election will be a gestalt test. Which candidate "feels" like the "better" option?
This is probably true of many elections, but particularly today's truncated, oddly distorted contest. It may also be a mistake by Kamala Harris supporters who most loudly promote a decision-by-vibe.
An American voter thinks: Things will come up and somebody has to handle them. The singular vacuum in the Harris strategy has been in conjuring a picture in the voter's mind of Ms. Harris handling things.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
