After 15 years of relatively flat power demand, projections of electricity use are surging. Companies are extending aging fossil-fuel plants to accommodate the expected hike in demand, which is undermining U.S. goals to cut carbon emissions.
Most power companies raised their demand forecast in 2023, and some have indicated higher revisions are expected.
Artificial-intelligence data centers, manufacturing, and broader electrification are the primary drivers behind this projected increase, with data centers accounting for 30% of the expected growth, according to a Goldman Sachs report in April.
Energy companies have been caught off guard by the demand from the sudden rise of AI, said Michelle Solomon, a senior policy analyst at Energy Innovation. "Utilities around the country are kind of going into panic mode," she said.
Coal power has declined over the past 20 years as it has struggled to compete with cheaper natural gas and renewable projects. Natural gas, which has been replacing coal capacity, has been slated to steadily retire to meet climate goals.
Climbing electricity demand, however, is granting coal and natural gas a new lease on life.
"The existing fleet [of fossil-fuel generators] needs to stick around longer and run harder," said Patrick Finn, analyst at energy-consulting firm Wood Mackenzie.
Aging fossil fuel is being propped up because renewables aren't coming online fast enough to field demand. While more than 95% of proposed power projects in the pipeline are renewable resources, the time it takes for a project to get from proposal to construction has more than doubled since the early 2000s, according to a Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory study.
Growing demand is also causing companies to propose new fossil-fuel resources. As of May, there were 133 natural-gas-fired power plants under development, according to S&P Global Commodity insights.
However, analysts say there is a limit to extending coal and gas power. "There's a limit to how much [fossil-fuel extension] can happen," said Robert Fofrich, a postdoctoral fellow at the University of California, Los Angeles. "At some point, your car is going to start breaking down, and you're going to be investing more money than that car is worth."
Generate image description

Credit: By Ashley Cai
