[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Chinese EV maker XPeng had a surprisingly profitable start to the year. It helps to have a sugar daddy in the car business.
XPeng's first-quarter results were transformed by Volkswagen, which took a roughly 5% stake in the company last July and has since signed a number of collaboration agreements.
The Chinese company's American depositary receipts rose 5.9% in trading in New York on Tuesday amid volatility that was likely exaggerated by a selloff in Chinese EV stocks on Monday following poor results from hybrid specialist Li Auto.
XPeng's gross margin -- what it makes before overhead expenses -- was 12.9% in the three months through March, up from 1.7% in the same period last year. The margin it made on selling vehicles improved, but it was a jump in highly profitable service revenues that made the bigger difference.
In a reversal of the historic relationship between Chinese and German carmakers, Volkswagen is paying XPeng for the latest technology to help it get back on top of the Chinese market it used to dominate. These services payments will increase this quarter as the scope of their work together widens, XPeng said.
Finding high-margin recurring services revenue is a business model a lot of car companies aspire to these days, as EV price wars make it harder to turn a profit on vehicle sales alone. Tesla has talked about licensing its driver-automation software to other automakers, but hasn't come up with a deal.
XPeng has a driver-automation package in China similar to Tesla's. And like Tesla, the Chinese company is focusing on achieving vehicle autonomy using artificial intelligence without maps, as opposed to the more common industry approach of elaborate coding combined with maps. It held an AI day on Monday to showcase its technology -- something Tesla investors have been crying out for since Chief Executive Elon Musk tweeted last month about going "balls to the walls for autonomy."
Where XPeng isn't like Tesla is in valuation. The Chinese company's $6.9 billion market value works out at about one times expected sales, compared with five times for Tesla.
Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
