BB&T
SunTrust Deal Gets
Regulators' Backing
Financial regulators approved the merger of regional lenders BB&T Corp. and SunTrust Banks Inc., the largest bank deal since the financial crisis.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. both said Tuesday they approved of the deal.
BB&T and SunTrust -- based in Winston-Salem, N.C., and Atlanta respectively -- unveiled plans earlier this year to combine in an attempt to better invest in technology. The combined company will be called Truist Financial Corp. and be based in Charlotte, N.C.
While the Fed approved the deal, it issued a consent order against SunTrust and said the company "made misleading or inaccurate statements" to business customers regarding add-on products from 2013 through 2017. The regulator said the company has ended these practices and repaid customers about $8.8 million in fees. The FDIC approved the combination, but its approval is dependent on the combined bank divesting 30 branches and $2.4 billion in deposits, it said.
BB&T Chief Executive Kelly King will be Truist's CEO. SunTrust CEO William Rogers will take over as chief executive in 2021. Until then, Mr. Rogers will be president and operating chief.
-- Allison Prang
---
APPROACH RESOURCES
Texas Energy Firm
Files for Bankruptcy
Approach Resources Inc. filed for bankruptcy, the latest in a string of chapter 11 filings by financially distressed oil-and-gas drilling companies.
Fort Worth, Texas-based Approach said it would explore a restructuring of its balance sheet, a going-concern sale of its business and other alternatives while under chapter 11 protection. The company has drilling operations in West Texas, having acquired oil and gas properties in the Permian Basin since 2004.
Approach reported revenue of about $14.7 million and a loss of approximately $13.6 million for the second quarter.
The company reported total debt obligations of $407.2 million, according to papers filed in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Houston.
Approach's business, like many other U.S. oil and gas producers, has been affected "by the prolonged and continuing period of commodity price decline and subsequent volatility," President and CEO Sergei Krylov said in a declaration filed in court.
Mr. Krylov said the company has attempted to weather industry headwinds through layoffs, cost cutting and "substantial reductions" in its drilling program.
-- Jonathan Randles
---
URBAN COMPASS
Artificial-Intelligence
Company Is Acquired
Urban Compass Inc., a SoftBank-backed real-estate brokerage company, said it had acquired an artificial-intelligence startup to help improve the buying and selling process for its agents and their clients.
The company, known as Compass, said it purchased New York-based Detectica Inc. last month for an undisclosed sum. It is the first AI-related acquisition for Compass, which touts the online tools it has developed to help agents produce pitching materials and communicate with clients about listings.
Detectica has developed machine-learning tools for Compass that produce listing recommendations for home seekers, based partly on other listings they bookmarked; that speed up the listing-creation process for agents by automatically populating new listings with known property information; and that detect anomalies and likely mistakes in real-estate data for property taxes, previous sale prices, bedroom and bathroom counts and more.
Since July, however, Detectica has been working exclusively with Compass, whose business model functions much like legacy firms, with commission rates for agents.
-- Jared Council
