U.K. antitrust officials said they were probing whether Alphabet-owned Google's investment in artificial-intelligence startup Anthropic poses a threat to competition, a setback for the search-engine giant after British regulators cleared a similar partnership between Amazon.com and Anthropic.
The Competition and Markets Authority launched an initial review of Google's investment in Anthropic in July. Officials have now opened a merger inquiry, with a decision due by Dec. 19 on whether or not a more in-depth investigation is warranted.
Tech giants have been splurging on AI startups since OpenAI's release of ChatGPT in late 2022 ushered in a spending bonanza. Google agreed to raise its investment in Anthropic to up to $2 billion late last year as the company sought to strengthen its foothold in the AI race to better compete with rivals like Microsoft, OpenAI and Amazon. Amazon poured $4 billion into Anthropic. The startup, founded by several former OpenAI employees, has been locked in a battle with the ChatGPT maker to secure big-ticket investments from companies willing to provide the training resources needed for its large language models.
The launch of a merger inquiry into Google and Anthropic comes nearly a month after British antitrust enforcers cleared Amazon's bigger investment in the same startup, saying that partnership didn't qualify for an in-depth investigation. The CMA also cleared Microsoft's hiring of former employees from Inflection AI and its partnership with the startup.
"Google is committed to building the most open and innovative AI ecosystem in the world," a Google spokesman said. An Anthropic representative said the startup would cooperate with the CMA.
"We are an independent company and none of our strategic partnerships or investor relationships diminish the independence of our corporate governance or our freedom to partner with others," Anthropic said.
According to Google, it doesn't have veto rights over Anthropic's strategic commercial decisions because it doesn't have board seats or voting rights at the startup.
The probe marks a setback for U.S. big-tech companies as it shows their ties to AI startups are still under the microscope on both sides of the Atlantic after the Federal Trade Commission launched an inquiry into generative AI partnerships earlier this year. That inquiry includes Google owner Alphabet, Amazon, Anthropic, Microsoft and OpenAI. The FTC issued orders to the five companies to provide information on their investments into AI startups.
News Corp, owner of Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal, has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI.
Credit: By Mauro Orru and Ian Walker
