The Pentagon is backing a robot-building contest that it hopes will bolster ties to companies outside its usual supplier base. But when 25 two-legged automatons face off in the finals later this year, the hottest company in the business won't be there.
That's because Google Inc. bought Tokyo-based robot builder Schaft Inc. in late 2013, just weeks before Schaft triumphed in a trial run, and then withdrew the company from the contest.
The absence of Schaft points up a challenge for the Defense Department as it seeks to attract more commercial companies to provide advanced technology that can be turned into the next generation of military systems.
Google is making some of the biggest bets in robotics, but it wants little to do with the Pentagon's push. Google's robotics team has no interest in working on military applications or receiving Pentagon funding, and is reducing its involvement in defense projects as much as possible, said a person familiar with the company's thinking.
Google hasn't publicly commented on the matter.
Google's withdrawal from the contest also has upset some in the close-knit robotics community, who maintain it is indicative of broader secrecy by the company in its robotics efforts. Critics contend that not sharing information will slow down the advancement of machines that at present have the cognitive skills of a toddler.
"I'm disappointed that we don't get to compare our results against them," said Russ Tedrake, an associate professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which is part of a team competing in the Pentagon contest. "That would have been healthy for the robotics community to see."
Google's robotics push dates to 2013 when Chief Executive Larry Page moved Android operating system co-founder Andy Rubin to lead its effort. Google executives envision a world in which robots could do things like take care of the elderly and load self-driving cars with groceries and household supplies. Mr. Rubin left Google last October, but the company's expansion in robotics continues.
In 2013, Google announced acquisitions of at least seven robotics companies, including Schaft and Boston Dynamics Inc., the maker of the Atlas robots being used by some teams in the Pentagon contest.
Google still bids on federal contracts and supplies some equipment to the military. But it has been sensitive about how its technology is ultimately used. After it bought artificial intelligence specialist DeepMind Technologies Inc. last year, the company said it set up an ethics committee to ensure the technology isn't abused.
The competition is the latest in a series aimed at tapping technology from outside the traditional defense community, including work that is now used on the self-driving cars being developed by Google and others.
The robot contest is being run by the Pentagon's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. With an annual budget of almost $3 billion, Darpa is at the leading edge of military technology.
The 25 robots from industry and big research universities will compete for a $2 million first prize in the race on June 5-6 in Pomona, Calif. Teams gathered on Thursday in Charleston, S.C., for another trial run in a competition designed to see how well contestants can program robots to navigate a course designed to mimic a disaster area. Tasks include driving a car through debris, scaling ladders and turning off valves. Robots will have to react to situations without help from human controllers.
The Pentagon competition includes only one big defense contractor, Lockheed Martin Corp., whose entrant is named "Rocky." Todd Danko, a Lockheed robotics scientist, said the company expects the contest to yield work that can be applied to other areas of autonomy, notably unmanned systems working in space and underwater.
The Schaft-designed robot beat all-comers in the December 2013 trial over an easier course, with its shorter 5-foot 5-inch stature making it sturdier on its feet than the Atlas. The Schaft robot raised its arms aloft in celebration after climbing a ladder to complete part of the trial.
Though Google announced its acquisition a week earlier, Schaft had already committed to the trial and was allowed to take part, people familiar with the company said. Google didn't formally announce Schaft's withdrawal. Darpa revealed the move last June.
The Atlas robots stand 6 feet tall and weigh more than 300 pounds, with two arms, two legs, and an internal battery pack to work without external cables. Darpa paid Boston Dynamics for the upgrades. The company returned the revamped robots to the teams in late January.
Darpa maintains Schaft's absence won't harm the contest in June. "Schaft's choice to focus on commercializing its robot may lend a little extra urgency to the competition because the teams in the finals now see a market incentive in addition to the Darpa prize money," said Gill Pratt, the agency's program director for the robotics contest.
Some robotics researchers said Schaft's withdrawal wasn't a concern. And some industry executives were sympathetic.
"I think it's too bad they pulled out [but] I understand it," said Colin Angle, Chief Executive of iRobot Corp., the maker of the Roomba vacuum that also produces bomb-disposal robots for the military. IRobot also intends to steer clear of anything that might be turned into a weapon.
Others are concerned that Schaft's latest capabilities will be kept private, limiting what the broader robotics community can learn from the competition.
"It's better for the robotics field if advances are in the public domain and people can build on them," said Peter Stone, a robotics researcher at the University of Texas at Austin.
Credit: By Doug Cameron and Alistair Barr
