[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
In an age of cutting-edge artificial intelligence chips, magnetic hard drives don't exactly fire up the imagination. But old tech sometimes finds new ways to stick around.
About 85% of data in modern data centers still resides on hard disk drives, according to a report last year by TD Cowen. Some have expected solid-state drives, or SSD, to erode that share over time, due to the latter's superior speed while consuming less power. But hard drives still retain a big cost advantage: Cowen analyst Krish Sankar estimates HDDs are more than twice as cheap as SSDs even when factoring in the latter's energy-use advantage.
Hard drives still need to up their game to stay in play. That is where Heat-Assist Magnetic Recording, or HAMR, comes in. This is where the disk is heated to super-high temperatures for short periods of time, which allows the data written on the disk to be more densely packed. Hence, a HDD array storing 22 terabytes of data today could store more than twice that amount using HAMR technology "without a meaningful increase in bill of materials," Sankar wrote.
HAMR has been a big reason why Wall Street has been warming up to Seagate. Morgan Stanley upgraded the stock on Tuesday to a "buy" rating -- sending the shares up more than 7% Tuesday.
"HAMR-driven gross margin expansion and potential for Gen AI related storage demand implies an underappreciated earnings power story," Morgan analyst Erik Woodring wrote in his report to clients. And he isn't the first; the percentage of analysts with "buy" ratings on Seagate has jumped to 46% compared with 33% three months ago, according to FactSet.
The timing may be good: Seagate expects another quarter of revenue declines in the March period, according to the midpoint of the company's forecast. But analysts expect revenue growth to turn positive from there, steadily rising over at least the next six quarters, according to current consensus forecasts on FactSet.
Seagate's stock is up less than 11% this year, trailing the broader chip sector and well below the 30% run for rival Western Digital in that time. Hopefully, the hard drive maker keeps the heat on.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
