Strong growth in computer games and remote computing services, driven by people stuck at home during the coronavirus pandemic, lifted earnings for chip maker Nvidia Corp.
First-quarter revenue rose 39% from a year earlier to $3.08 billion, the Santa Clara, Calif.-based company said Thursday. Earnings per share totaled $1.47, more than double last year's figure.
The company said its data-center sales rose 80% to a record $1.14 billion. Revenue at its games segment increased 27% to $1.34 billion.
"As the virus spread globally, much of the world started working and learning from home and gameplay surged," Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress told analysts. Nvidia had seen a 50% increase in hours played on its gaming platform, as well as booming sales of laptops and gaming consoles using Nvidia chips, she said.
Nvidia's results provide an indication of how some corners of the tech industry might be more resilient than others to the impact of the prolonged effects of the pandemic.
The results reported by most major U.S. tech companies in recent weeks covered the first three months of the year, and reflect only a few weeks of quarantine measures in March. Nvidia's latest earnings cover the February-through-April period, offering a broader look at the pandemic's impact. The company's rollout of new products has continued apace despite the global health crisis. Earlier this month, Chief Executive Jensen Huang revealed an advanced graphics-processing chip design and a new type of chip aimed at accelerating artificial-intelligence calculations in data centers.
Nvidia issued guidance for the current quarter, which ends in July, of about $3.65 billion in sales, above analysts' $3.25 billion average forecast in a FactSet survey.
The company said its forecast reflects Nvidia's purchase of Mellanox Technologies Ltd. for about $7 billion.
The results beat Wall Street projections of $2.98 billion in sales and earnings per share of $1.39. Nvidia's shares were lower in after-hours trading Thursday afternoon but trimmed losses from the regular session.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
