Nvidia Corp. posted record quarterly sales across its business and projected a further increase in the current period as it moves on from its failed takeover bid for semiconductor-design specialist Arm Ltd.
The graphics-chip maker on Wednesday said it generated $7.64 billion in sales in the most recent quarter, up 53% from the year-ago period. It reported $3 billion in net income, more than double the prior year's figure, and beat Wall Street expectations both on profit and sales.
Semiconductor companies are seeing strong demand as more goods and services become reliant on chips. The ravenous appetite has triggered a global chip shortage that some executives have estimated could last into 2024 and has had a mixed effect on the industry. It has dented chip sales as customers such as car and computer makers have had to delay selling their wares while they await missing parts, but it also has driven up prices for some semiconductors.
Based in Santa Clara, Calif., Nvidia, the U.S.'s largest chip company by market value, said it expects revenue for the current quarter to be $8.1 billion, ahead of estimates from analysts surveyed by FactSet. Data center and videogaming sales are expected to be principal drivers of the increase, Nvidia Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress said Wednesday on a call with analysts.
Nvidia shares closed up slightly Wednesday at $265.11 and retreated less than 1% after the company posted results.
The company has enjoyed a strong period of revenue growth during the pandemic as videogaming increased and more businesses started using digital services that run on data centers.
Revenue advanced 37% from a year earlier for Nvidia's critical videogames business and advanced 71% for it data centers activities. Car revenue, though, retreated 14% from the year prior, with supply chain constraints continuing to weigh on car production and as auto makers phase out some older equipment that uses Nvidia chips.
The chip company earlier on Wednesday said it has struck a partnership with car maker Jaguar Land Rover to work together on software-heavy cars. New vehicles featuring automated driving systems and other services using artificial intelligence out of the partnership should start appearing in 2025, Nvidia Chief Executive Officer Jensen Huang said.
Generate image description

Credit: By Meghan Bobrowsky
