SEOUL -- President Biden began his three-day trip to South Korea with a visit to a Samsung Electronics Co. semiconductor plant, underscoring the technology ties between the countries as the U.S. seeks to strengthen supply chains and reboot its own manufacturing amid competition with China.
"These little chips -- only a few nanometers thick -- are the key to propelling us into the next era of technological development," Mr. Biden said. "Our two nations work together to make the best, most advanced technology in the world."
Mr. Biden made the case that the U.S. should deepen its business ties with allies such as South Korea to counter "countries that don't share our values." Though the president didn't mention China by name, U.S. officials said one of the goals of the trip is to strengthen alliances in the region to counter Beijing's influence.
The president toured the facility with South Korean President Yoon Suk-yeol. It was Mr. Biden's first in-person meeting with the newly elected leader.
The Pyeongtaek plant houses some of Samsung's most advanced production lines for memory chips and contract chip making, and is the largest semiconductor manufacturing site in the world. Last year, Samsung announced plans to build a $17 billion advanced chip-making factory in Taylor, Texas, adding to its footprint in central Texas where it has long operated a plant in Austin.
South Korea, alongside Japan and Taiwan, is key to U.S. efforts to counter China's rising technology prowess and maintain an advantage in critical technologies of the future, including semiconductors and batteries. The Asian allies are also essential to building a more resilient supply chain that has been racked by shortages during the pandemic.
Samsung and Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. are the only two contract chip makers capable of producing the industry's most cutting-edge semiconductors with the smallest transistors, such as high-end processors, needed to fuel next-generation devices and technologies such as artificial intelligence, 5G and high-performance computing.
South Korea is home to the world's two largest memory chip makers, Samsung and SK Hynix Inc., and accounts for more than 40% of the global memory-chip manufacturing capacity, according to the Semiconductor Industry Association. More than three-fourths of U.S. semiconductor imports came from Asia last year, according to the U.S. Census Bureau's trade data.
On Saturday, Mr. Biden is set to attend a state dinner hosted by Mr. Yoon that is expected to include the chiefs of South Korea's four large business groups, which all operate in industries critical to the U.S. economy, from chips to electric vehicles, telecommunications and batteries.
Following his visit to South Korea, Mr. Biden will travel to Tokyo, where he will hold a meeting with the leaders of Japan, Australia and India, who along with the U.S. make up the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, or the Quad.
South Korea and Japan hold a shared interest with the U.S. in cooperating on supply chains and in ensuring that sensitive technologies don't get into the "wrong hands" such as China's surveillance state, said Matthew Goodman, senior vice president for economics at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Credit: By Jiyoung Sohn and Andrew Restuccia
