Foreign investors are using new methods to conduct due diligence on Chinese companies, from machine-learning software to getting friendly with the ex-wives of directors, as some stocks are poised to join global benchmarks next year.
Fund managers are eager to know more about companies listed in Shanghai and Shenzhen after index provider MSCI Inc. said in June that it would add some of China's domestic stocks to its global market measures in 2018. The companies they are investigating include some from mainland China that are already listed in Hong Kong.
Investors are turning to the several firms that have sprung up in recent years, specializing in research into Chinese companies via a combination of new technology and on-the-ground investigations.
"If the company's doing one thing strange in its financials, generally it's doing a number of strange things," said Gillem Tulloch, founder of Hong Kong-based GMT Research, which sells reports to mutual funds and hedge funds but doesn't take short positions.
The firm recently used satellite imagery from Google Earth to view a large sample of projects owned by Hong Kong-listed China Evergrande Group, the country's largest listed property developer by sales. GMT alleges that the images show that progress of construction work had stalled at several of Evergrande's developments. It included its findings in a report that said the company could in practice be insolvent. GMT said its analysts also visited about 40 of Evergrande's properties to verify its findings.
Evergrande didn't respond to requests for comment. The company's shares have almost tripled this year after it carried out a series of share buybacks.
Nonetheless, even if investors find something they suspect is wrong with a company, it can be hard for them to act, due to restrictions on short selling in China's stock markets. In Hong Kong, meanwhile, the city's market regulators have been pushing back against critical research reports on companies. A short seller borrows shares and sells them, hoping to buy the stock back later at a lower price and return them, pocketing the difference as profit.
Some companies in China are getting wise to on-the-ground visits. Sean Chen, Hong Kong-based director of strategy at Blackpeak Group, a research and risk-advisory firm, said that while investigating one company listed on the mainland on behalf of an investor, his team found one of its electrical component factories in Guangdong empty.
"When we asked the security guards of the neighboring factory, they told us that a few days prior to our own visit, the company had offered to pay 100 yuan ($14.80) to local villagers to come to the factory, wear hard hats and pretend to be workers to impress some [other] foreigner investors who were visiting," Mr. Chen said.
Some research firms deploy the latest machine-learning tools to comb through company financial data for warning signs. Typically, this involves writing computer code that hunts for traits common to fraudulent firms and then looks for other companies that match.
One company using such methods, Shenzhen-based blueflag.io, says it is seeing interest from some global fund managers who occasionally want to check on individual companies where they suspect fraud.
"What they want to own are the new-economy stocks; that's where you have the higher fraud risk," said Fredrik Oqvist, the company's founder.
Some research methods veer into the personal, as investors try to untangle the sometimes complex web of a company's "related party transactions," deals between spouses, family members and other close associates that may not always represent the best interests of minority shareholders.
One portfolio manager, who asked not to be identified, said she had in the past tried to learn details about the ex-wives of directors or where their children go to school, as a way to unearth information on the company.
Making negative research on companies public in Hong Kong can be tricky. The city's market-misconduct panel last year banned short seller Andrew Left of Citron Research from trading securities in the city for five years for publishing a research report about Evergrande in June 2012. The case is pending appeal.
If a firm issues a report questioning the accounting practices of a listed company, its management can ask the Hong Kong's Securities and Futures Commission to begin an inquiry, which may escalate into an investigation. Disclosing that a company is under investigation is a criminal offense in Hong Kong, carrying penalties of up to two years' imprisonment and a maximum fine of 1 million Hong Kong dollars (US$128,086).
The aggressive stance from Hong Kong's regulator has produced a chilling effect and has minimized the amount of critical research produced, said Timothy Loh, a Hong Kong lawyer who defended Mr. Left in his case with the SFC last year.
An SFC spokesman defended the commission's actions. "Responsible research, including research issued by credit-rating agencies and research houses, can all contribute to the overall market quality and price-discovery process and has no intention to suppress legitimate commentaries on listed companies, whether positive or negative," he said.

Credit: By Gregor Stuart Hunter
