As private-credit firms increasingly turn to artificial intelligence for a competitive edge, the new technology is raising concerns among investment professionals about bias in data sets as well as job security.
Factors leading firms to look for any leg up they can find in generative AI systems include intensifying competition among asset managers in the nonbank lending market. For some, AI derived from large language models and machine-learning technologies helps their dealmakers vet potential deals and develop investment strategies. "Our fund manager is our [AI] platform," said Reggie Mills, the London-based head of the financial institutions group at asset manager Liquidity Group, underscoring the extent to which some private-lending firms rely on such technology.
Generative AI systems can create content based on patterns and structures discerned in data used to "train" the systems. A survey about a year ago polled nearly 75 chief financial officers at large organizations and found that 22% were actively investigating uses for generative AI within finance and a further 4% were pursuing pilots of the technology, according to industry consulting firm McKinsey.
At a September conference in Paris, Blackstone leader Steve Schwarzman warned private-equity industry leaders of the risk in taking a "head in the sand" attitude toward AI. Roughly six months later, an S&P Global Market Intelligence analysis of private-equity earnings calls on first-quarter results showed a doubling in the number of discussions about AI compared with last year's first quarter. This month, Goldman Sachs is deploying a generative AI system to be used for code development across the Wall Street powerhouse.
Credit-focused Liquidity began using AI tools in 2017. Liquidity typically backs private equity-sponsored technology companies by writing checks totaling roughly $35 million, on average, according to the firm.
Liquidity has around 165 employees, almost half of them data scientists. The firm's proprietary AI systems have been developed using data from sources that include public regulatory filings, news accounts and documents provided by borrowers. The systems also collect data from accounting, billing and bank records to develop analytics used to inform decision-making.
Increasing the speed and efficiency of documentation and analysis are the most common benefits from using generative AI cited by many financial institutions. London-based asset manager Schroders Capital, with $94 billion in private markets funds, said Wednesday that it has created a proprietary system for use in dealmaking called Generative AI Investment Analyst.
Schroders Capital, the investment arm of publicly traded Schroders, uses the technology to speed up the analysis of large volumes of data and accelerate due diligence processes to generate a significant portion of draft investment summaries. But the firm said it subjects the technology to "continual and extensive human oversight and control," with an eye to improving its performance and extending it into other areas of its private-markets operations.
"Ultimately, the investment decision is going to be driven by us, not by the tool itself," said Steven Yang, the firm's head of global venture investments. "It's almost like a co-pilot. It's to help you be more productive."
Last year, retail banking giant JPMorgan Chase created an AI-based model to sift through over 20 years of Federal Reserve speeches and find potential trading signals. In November, executives from Goldman, which recently raised a $20 billion private-lending fund, said during an industry conference that the bank had a dozen AI projects under way.
At Liquidity, the firm boosts its efficiency using AI systems to help draw up term sheets outlining key elements of potential private-credit deals within roughly three days instead of the typical six to eight weeks it can take without using the new technology, said Ron Daniel, the co-founder and chief executive of Liquidity Group.
The asset manager does diligence on nearly 7,000 companies a year with only seven analysts, he said, affirming that such high volume is made possible because of the AI systems. Large deals can take nine months to a year to close. Liquidity's platform can significantly shorten that time span, Daniel said.
But as AI technology becomes increasingly used to perform routine tasks, concerns could mount over the inadvertent inclusion of bias in data sets used in developing AI models and their influence on the results the systems produce, said Ryan Bulkoski, a partner at Heidrick & Struggles, an executive search and management consulting company.
"The risk associated with gen AI lies in data quality, which may contain biases or inaccuracies, potentially skewing underwriting decisions for private-credit lenders," said Valentin Braun, a director of the integrated risk solutions business at Moody's. "Ensuring high-quality, unbiased data is crucial."
Bias concerns in AI have also arisen at Atalaya Capital Management, an investment firm that uses generative AI in its decision-making processes. The technology reveals its limits when deal contexts change.
"If we're going into a new asset class or a new geography, it's not going to know that," said Andy Halleran, the head of data science at Atalaya, which manages roughly $10 billion. "It's only going to know what it's seen before."
Atalaya is recording conversations with senior investment team members about how they source, prepare and execute deals. It then plans to feed the transcribed discussions into an AI system that can convert the comments into more digestible content, such as summaries, that can be shared with other team members.
Because of the need to adjust for bias, much of the work done by Atalaya's development team ends up focusing on the data inputs rather than the modeling elements. Halleran said that the idea is to ensure that the AI model builds on the right data and allows for reasonable extrapolations, for instance by summer interns.
Credit: By Isaac Taylor
