Interpublic Group is in talks to sell prominent digital marketing agency R/GA to India's Tata Consultancy Services, according to people familiar with the matter, part of a broader push by consulting firms to grow on Madison Avenue.
R/GA has worked with some of the top brands, including Verizon Communications, Google's Android, Samsung and Coca-Cola. It is best known for its work for Nike, which included helping to develop Nike +, a platform that assisted runners in tracking and recording their runs.
TCS joins other consulting firms such as Accenture and Deloitte that have moved deeper into the marketing business by building up and acquiring formidable practices that offer brands digital transformation, experiential marketing, creative services, and web and mobile development skills.
Terms of the deal couldn't be determined, but some of the people with knowledge of the deal said R/GA could fetch roughly $300 million. The deal could fall apart and the two sides haven't agreed on valuation, some of the people said.
Interpublic and TCS are also discussing a larger strategic partnership that could involve working together on shared clients in the AI or data space, according to some of the people.
A spokesman for Interpublic said the company doesn't comment on rumors or speculation. Representatives for TCS declined to comment.
Tata has been expanding its digital marketing division TCS Interactive in the U.S., aiming to capture more business from chief marketing officers. It appointed ad veteran Andrew Essex, founding chief executive of the award-winning ad agency Droga5, as senior managing partner of TCS almost a year ago.
Deloitte LLP acquired creative agency Heat in 2016 and Accenture acquired Droga5, one of Madison Avenue's hottest creative firms, in 2019, a deal that signaled that the consulting firm was serious about building out its ad and marketing practice.
R/GA was founded in 1977 by Bob Greenberg, a widely respected ad man who made headlines by promoting a different type of agency model that offered clients services well beyond ad creation, including product design, digital production and experiential marketing. The agency became part of Interpublic in 2001 when Interpublic acquired R/GA's parent company True North Communications.
More recently, R/GA has been hampered by executive turnover, client losses and a pullback in ad spending by tech clients, which also has crimped the broader agency business.
It had revenue of about $200 million last year, down roughly 20% from a year earlier, according to people familiar with its performance.
Consulting companies have spent years working with chief executive officers and chief information officers on tasks ranging from developing high-end business strategies to implementing new technology. More recently, they have been targeting chief marketing officers as the marketing segment of the C-suite becomes more responsible for the overall customer experience.
The proposed deal is the latest move by New York ad giant Interpublic to streamline its business as Madison Avenue races to reinvent itself amid the rise of artificial intelligence.
The world's fourth-largest ad holding company by revenue, Interpublic has been trying to reinvigorate its business. It has jettisoned underperforming assets and is trying to become less dependent on creative services that often have lower profit margins.
Credit: By Suzanne Vranica
