[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Wall Street loves it when Meta Platforms fires people. Maybe a bit too much.
The parent of Facebook said Tuesday it is planning to lay off a further 10,000 employees this year. That would amount to about 13% of the remaining workforce after last year's announced job cuts of 11,000, confirming a Wall Street Journal report from last week.
In a memo to employees, Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said the reductions would start rolling out through the company's recruiting team this week, then through its technology and business groups over the next couple of months. He said Meta would close about 5,000 open roles not yet filled.
The move is part of the social network's "Year of Efficiency" -- a term Mr. Zuckerberg deployed seven times in his 2,100-word post. And it will certainly make an impact. A surge in hiring brought down Meta's annual revenue per employee by 18% last year to about $1.35 million -- its lowest level since 2014. The announced cuts would bring that number to a record high of $1.85 million, based on Wall Street's current projected revenue for Meta for this year. That revenue forecast assumes some recovery in the online advertising market, which is no sure thing.
But even zero-revenue growth this year would -- with the head-count shrinkage -- put revenue per employee about 16% higher than what it has averaged over the past five years. That has investors cheering. Meta's stock jumped more than 7% Tuesday, adding to gains that juiced the share price by 78% since the first layoffs were announced in early November of last year. That is nearly eight times the Nasdaq Composite's gain over that time.
Meta now trades at a nearly 10% premium to Google parent Alphabet Inc. as a multiple of forward earnings, after spending most of the past year at a discount to its larger rival, according to FactSet.
The hopes driving such gains might prove premature. Even with the severity of the latest cuts, Meta reduced its full-year expense range for 2023 by 3%, according to a filing Tuesday. And Mr. Zuckerberg himself acknowledged he doesn't expect a major improvement to business conditions, stating in his memo that "I think we should prepare ourselves for the possibility that this new economic reality will continue for many years."
Meta's plan as outlined by Mr. Zuckerberg suggests plenty of internal turmoil ahead this year. He said the company will be asking "many managers to become individual contributors," effectively amounting to demotions.
He signaled a move to get more employees to return to the office -- a major change from just a year ago, when Meta was spreading employees and top officers across the globe in what looked like an internal hard sell of its dreams for building the "metaverse."
The metaverse is still a dream, and Mr. Zuckerberg didn't signal any intention of backpedaling on that vision, noting Tuesday that the concept "remains central to defining the future of social connection."
Facebook's hard pivot in that direction in late 2021 inflated the company's costs and sent investors fleeing. But the company now known as Meta faces a world of slower growth, expensive artificial-intelligence technology plus the need to maintain investments in the safety and security of its Facebook and Instagram platforms that drive nearly all revenue.
Analysts expect Meta's operating margins to average 27% over the next three years compared with an average of 34% over the last three.
Mr. Zuckerberg may have fewer friends these days, but his bills keep on growing.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
