FIVE BELOW
FIVE +10%
Two discount retailers announced strong quarterly results and executive shake-ups. The discount retailer Dollar Tree on Wednesday said that it raised its annual sales guidance following a strong quarter. It also said Chief Financial Officer Jeff Davis has agreed to resign, one month after its CEO stepped down. Dollar Tree shares rose 1.9% Wednesday. Meanwhile, discount retailer Five Below raised its annual guidance, after a strong Black Friday helped fuel a jump in quarterly sales. The company also named Forever 21 Chief Executive Winnie Park as its next leader, following a six-month-long search. Five Below shares surged 10% Thursday.
SALESFORCE
CRM +11%
The business-software provider raised its annual revenue outlook and posted third-quarter sales that outpaced expectations -- driven in part by its AI agent system, Agentforce. It was introduced on the Salesforce platform in September and gives customers access to AI "agents" that can automate certain functions. Salesforce expects $37.8 billion to $38 billion in revenue this year, adding $100 million to the low-end of its previous guidance. Salesforce shares jumped 11% Wednesday.
AMERICAN AIRLINES
AAL +16%
American Airlines picked Citigroup as its exclusive credit-card provider in a deal that it said will help boost payments to the airline by 10% a year. The agreement comes after months of intense negotiations, and investors hope the deal will help American catch up with its more-profitable competitors. The new 10-year deal means the end of American's agreement with Barclays. The company also gave a stronger-than-expected financial outlook. American Airlines shares jumped 16% Thursday.
AMERICAN EAGLE OUTFITTERS
AEO -14%
The company on Wednesday forecast a larger-than-expected drop in holiday-quarter sales and trimmed its annual outlook. American Eagle said it expects same-store sales to rise 3% for the year, down from its earlier forecast of 4%. It expects total revenue to be up 1%, versus a prior view of as much as 3%. Meanwhile, American Eagle posted higher sales in the third quarter, but profit fell as the company incurred restructuring charges. American Eagle shares plummeted 14% Thursday.
SUPER MICRO COMPUTER
SMCI +29%
The embattled AI server maker said a final review found no evidence of fraud or misconduct by its management or board relating to accounting issues that have weighed on the company and its stock. The company also said the review hadn't supported claims made by former auditor Ernst & Young. Super Micro said that it would appoint a new chief financial officer, as recommended by a special committee. Super Micro shares popped 29% Monday.
INTEL
INTC -6.1%
Intel on Monday said Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger had retired, ending a nearly four-year run that saw the company fall behind rivals in building semiconductors to power the artificial-intelligence boom. Intel named two interim co-CEOs: Chief Financial Officer David Zinsner and Michelle Johnston Holthaus, general manager of Intel's client computing group. The board has formed a search committee. Intel shares fell 6.1% Tuesday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
