Oracle Corp. won the bidding for the U.S. operations of the video-sharing app TikTok, a person familiar with the matter said, beating out Microsoft Corp. in a deal to salvage a social-media sensation that has been caught in the middle of a geopolitical standoff.
Software maker Oracle is set to be announced as TikTok's "trusted tech partner" in the U.S., and the deal is likely not to be structured as an outright sale, the person said.
The next step is for the White House and the Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S. to approve the deal, the person said, adding that the participants believe it satisfies the concerns around data security that have been previously raised by the U.S. government.
The move by Beijing-based ByteDance comes days after the Chinese government threw negotiations into doubt when it issued new export restrictions late last month on the kind of artificial intelligence technology TikTok uses. The algorithms, which determine the videos served to users and are seen as TikTok's secret sauce, were considered part of the deal negotiations up until the Chinese policy change raised questions among the parties involved in negotiations over how to value the social-media business.
Two people familiar with the Oracle deal said it was more appropriate to call it a partnership, rather than an acquisition, suggesting that there was not an exchange of significant assets. At least some of ByteDance's existing investors, including U.S. investment firms Sequoia Capital and General Atlantic, will get stakes in the venture as part of the deal, said people familiar with the matter.
The possibility that a deal might not involve an outright sale was previously reported by The Wall Street Journal.
President Trump has said repeatedly that he would shut down TikTok in the U.S. if it isn't sold to a U.S. company by Sept. 15. In an Aug. 6 executive order, the White House gave ByteDance a 45-day deadline before it would ban the app, which the Trump administration says poses an economic and national-security threat to U.S. interests, if it isn't sold to a U.S. buyer. That gives the parties until Sept. 20 to seal a deal.
Microsoft, which had teamed up with Walmart Inc., said earlier Sunday it was notified earlier in the day of the decision by TikTok parent ByteDance Ltd.
"We are confident our proposal would have been good for TikTok's users, while protecting national security interests," Microsoft said in a statement.
In a statement Sunday, Walmart suggested it is considering joining the Oracle group.
Oracle's interest in TikTok is primarily driven by kick-starting its fledgling cloud computing business, which remains far behind market leaders Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft, people familiar with the matter said.
Microsoft's plans were more ambitious than Oracle, said one person. Owning TikTok would give Microsoft more presence among everyday consumers, an area it had mostly abandoned to chase after corporate users with the exception of its Xbox videogaming business.
TikTok has soared to around 100 million monthly users in the U.S., from about 11 million in early 2018, and they are considered among the most lucrative in the app's global user base of about 689 million, though the app still loses money.
Oracle wasn't as obvious a winner in the race for TikTok as Microsoft. While both tech companies have sizable cloud-computing operations and technical capabilities, Oracle is mainly focused on serving business clients and has virtually no experience running a major consumer-facing business.
President Trump in August voiced support for a potential Oracle bid. "Well, I think Oracle is a great company and I think its owner is a tremendous guy, a tremendous person. I think that Oracle would be certainly somebody that could handle it," the president said when asked about its potential interest.
Oracle co-founder Larry Ellison earlier this year threw a fundraiser at his house for the president. Chief Executive Safra Catz also worked on the executive committee for the Trump transition team in 2016.
The Trump administration has pushed for a sale for months, expressing concern that TikTok could pass on data it collects to China's authoritarian government. TikTok has said it hasn't been asked to share data with Beijing and wouldn't do so if asked.

Credit: By Georgia Wells and Aaron Tilley
