MILWAUKEE -- The large field of GOP presidential hopefuls gave Donald Trump what he wanted in their first debate: two hours of infighting and bickering and only brief criticism of the absent front-runner.
Wednesday's two-hour debate was the first opportunity for those challenging Trump to make an impression on the nation and, more specifically, Republican primary voters. With Trump, who holds a huge polling lead, skipping the debate for an alternative interview with host Tucker Carlson on X, his GOP rivals had to decide how to treat what moderator Bret Baier of Fox described as the "elephant not in the room" -- whether to embrace him or hammer him.
In the interview, Trump largely ignored his challengers, focusing his criticism on President Biden and his record as if he were already engaged in the general election.
At the debate, Trump was barely mentioned in the first hour. And when he finally came up, his hold over his opponents was clear: Asked if they would support Trump even if he is convicted in any of the four criminal probes he faces, only two debaters, former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and former Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson, signaled that they wouldn't.
When Christie said Trump's alleged behavior couldn't be overlooked, the crowd jumped in with lengthy booing.
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis initially dodged a question about whether former Vice President Mike Pence did the right thing by resisting Trump's pressure to hold up the certification of the 2020 election as rioters stormed the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021.
"We need to end the weaponization of these federal agencies," DeSantis said, alluding to the federal probes of Trump and echoing the former president's contention that they are politically motivated.
Trump faces two federal indictments -- in Florida for allegedly mishandling presidential documents and in Washington for seeking to overturn Biden's 2020 victory as well as cases in Georgia and Manhattan. He has denied wrongdoing.
DeSantis later added, "Mike did his duty" but asked: "Is this what we're going to be focusing on?"
Former United Nations ambassador and former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley took a more forceful tack. "We have to face the fact that Trump is the most disliked politician in America," she said. "We can't win a general election that way."
Vivek Ramaswamy, the wealthy biotech company founder who is rising in polls, heralded Trump as "the best president of the 21st century" and positioned himself as Trump's heir as a truth-speaking nonpolitician. Throughout the event, he was the former president's most vocal defender, and attracted criticism from many of the others. He often gave as good as he got, sparring at various times with Christie, Pence and Haley.
"For a long time we have professional politicians in the Republican Party who have been running from something," he said. "Now is our moment to start running to something."
Ramaswamy took early hits over his lack of experience. Christie called him an "amateur" and mocked him for describing himself the same way as Barack Obama did back when he was a newcomer. Christie added that the smooth-talking 38-year-old sounded like artificial intelligence platform ChatGPT.
"I am the only person on this stage who isn't bought and paid for," Ramaswamy hit back. Toward the end of the debate, he made the case for a new generation of leaders.
Ramaswamy was also the only candidate who enthusiastically supported the end of U.S. funding for Ukraine in its war with Russia, saying the funds should be redirected to strengthening the southern U.S. border and that backing Kyiv is pushing Russia into China's camp. That brought rebuttals from others who vocally supported the U.S. effort as a bulwark against Russian President Vladimir Putin's dictatorial expansionism, most notably Haley, who said: "You have no foreign policy experience and it shows."
DeSantis, Trump's closest opponent, had the most on the line Wednesday and he largely stayed on message, getting across his talking points about reversing a nation in decline. But he sought to have it both ways on Trump, avoiding direct criticism of the former president. "Republicans," he said, "we've got to look forward."
His campaign has stalled in recent months as it has dealt with layoffs, organizational changes and muddled messages that have shaken the confidence of some donors and supporters. DeSantis likely won points from conservative viewers for rejecting the debate hosts' call to raise their hands on whether human behavior is causing climate change. "We're not schoolchildren, let's have the debate," DeSantis said to applause.
DeSantis did criticize Trump at times -- though not by name -- including over his handling of Covid-19. He accused him of letting Anthony Fauci, the government's longtime top infectious-disease expert, lead the way on lockdowns. Trump has accused DeSantis of hypocrisy given he followed that advice, at least initially, before bucking the trend and seeing a rapid increase in his national profile.
"I will never let the deep-state bureaucracy lock you down," DeSantis said, adding to applause that he would have called in Fauci and said, "Anthony, you are fired."
Pence forcefully injected himself in the conversation, stressing he followed his constitutional duty on Jan. 6, 2021. The audience didn't always embrace it, but Pence was consistent in his message, which invoked Ronald Reagan and pre-Trump conservative values.
He defended some Trump administration achievements, particularly on the border, but separated himself repeatedly from his former boss, including on Ukraine.
He repeated his campaign refrain that Trump asked him to ignore Pence's oath to uphold the Constitution when the then-president pressured Pence to hold up the certification of Biden's 2020 victory.
"Joe Biden has weakened this country at home and abroad," Pence said, setting up an attack on Ramaswamy, a frequent foe during the debate. "Now is not the time for on-the-job training. We don't need to bring in a rookie."
Sen. Tim Scott of South Carolina, who has been in third place in some national and early-state surveys, avoided jumping into most of the fights. He chose mostly to stick to his usual campaign themes about his inspiring life story and his record in the Senate.
Trump's debate snub reflected what he said was a huge lead over the field. But he tried to grab attention with the interview with Carlson, musing about how unusual it is that an indicted politician would appear to gain support rather than losing it after becoming the target of so many investigations.
"I'm so high in the polls. People see it's a fraud," Trump said.
GOP strategist Alex Conant summed up the night. "It was like a normal GOP debate in a world where Trump doesn't exist. Except he does exist, and he's winning by a lot."
---
Annie Linskey contributed to this article.
Credit: By Alex Leary and John McCormick
