A clutch of American venture-capital firms are being investigated by a congressional committee over their funding of Chinese tech companies -- part of a push in Washington to scrutinize and potentially ban such deals.
The House's select committee on the China threat this week notified GGV Capital, GSR Ventures, Walden International and Qualcomm Ventures -- the investment arm of chip company Qualcomm -- that the panel is examining many of their investments in Chinese companies involved in semiconductors, artificial intelligence and quantum computing.
Those Chinese companies, the committee said, threaten U.S. national security and have been involved in human-rights violations. By extension, the American firms' investments "directly contribute" to those human-rights abuses, China's military modernization and its effort to supplant U.S. technological leadership, according to letters sent to the venture firms and reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.
GSR said the partners who worked on the deals in question are no longer at the firm. GGV declined to comment, while the other two firms didn't immediately respond to requests for comment.
Set up this year and formally known as the Select Committee on the Chinese Communist Party, the committee is increasingly targeting the role of American businesses in abetting Beijing's superpower ambitions. Its work is emblematic of a shift in thinking in the White House and on Capitol Hill that once supported U.S. business ties with China but now see some investmentas counter to American interests.
Especially problematic are investments that may help China develop technology that could end up being used against the U.S. in a potential military conflict or assist Beijing in building its surveillance state.
"We shouldn't be funding our own destruction," the panel's chairman, Republican Rep. Mike Gallagher of Wisconsin, said.
The committee's top Democrat, Rep. Raja Krishnamoorthi of Illinois, said that American money and expertise shouldn't be used to enable China's "advancements in the technologies that could undermine our national security or American values."
While the committee doesn't have lawmaking authority, it does have subpoena powers. Gallagher said the goal of the investigation is to compile a record that would help Congress pass a strong bill to restrict problematic investment in China.
The Senate is discussing an amendment filed by Sens. Bob Casey (D., Pa.) and John Cornyn (R., Texas) to a must-pass defense-policy bill that would require U.S. investors to file notice of their investments in certain companies in China and other adversary nations. The White House is also working on an executive order on screening outbound investment in certain sectors.
Both the proposed Senate amendment and the executive order have been subject to lobbying from the business community, according to people involved in the process. As a result, the amendment lacks an earlier version's mechanism to review or block such investments.
The select committee, in its letters, gave the venture firms, all of them based in California, until July 26 to respond.
The letters called out GGV and Qualcomm Ventures for having invested in Megvii Technology and SenseTime, respectively. Those artificial-intelligence companies, which provide facial-recognition technology, are among 28 Chinese entities the Trump administration placed on an export blacklist in 2019, citing their roles in assisting Beijing's repression of Muslim minorities in the Xinjiang region.
Credit: By Kate O'Keeffe and Berber Jin
