Nvidia's valuation surpassed $3 trillion on Wednesday, with the maker of prized artificial-intelligence chips becoming the third company ever to reach the milestone.
The achievement extends the rise for Nvidia's stock price, which has more than doubled so far this year after more than tripling in 2023. The company added its latest trillion dollars in valuation in about three months. Nvidia and its fellow technology giants pushed major stock indexes to records as investors stuck with a favorite trade.
The S&P 500 and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite closed at records, their 25th and 13th closing records of 2024. The Dow Jones Industrial Average, which includes Apple and Microsoft but not Nvidia, also rose for the day.
The steep and unprecedented rise is powered by the role Nvidia's chips play in powering artificial intelligence, which is threatening to disrupt virtually every major industry. Chief Executive Officer Jensen Huang recently declared the beginning of a new industrial revolution where Nvidia was helping turn $1 trillion of data centers into "AI factories."
Shares of Nvidia rose 5.2% to close at $1,224.40, valuing the company at around $3 trillion. That total puts Nvidia in the same rarefied air as Apple and behind only Microsoft. Apple became the first $3 trillion company last year. Microsoft passed Apple earlier this year and became the second member of the club.
Nvidia's chips, worth tens of thousands of dollars each, have become a scarce, treasured commodity like Silicon Valley has seldom seen. The company is estimated to have more than 80% of the AI chip market.
In March, Nvidia detailed its next generation of AI chips, the successors to the wildly successful H100.
The new chips, code-named Blackwell, are much faster and larger than their predecessors. The company recently said shipments would start in the second quarter ahead of them being in operation in the fourth quarter. Those chips would bring in "a lot" of revenue this year, Huang said on the company earning conference call.
"We don't see anyone challenging Nvidia's margin in a major way for the next two years given prospects for the Blackwell" and the company's following chip, Vera Rubin, wrote Melius Research analyst Ben Reitzes in a note to clients.
Nvidia crossed the $1 trillion mark last summer and moved above $2 trillion in February.
The company plans to split its stock 10-for-1, effective June 7. The split won't affect its total valuation. The company is increasing its dividend to 10 cents a share from 4 cents, based on the current share count. The dividend will be a penny a share after the split.
Apple helped power major indexes lately. Shares of the iPhone maker gained 0.8%, their eighth straight day of gains, to close with a market value higher than $3 trillion for the first time since January.
Some investors pointed to a decline in government bond yields as a reason for technology stocks' outperformance. Tech stocks tend to command lofty valuations based on expectations that their business will grow far into the future. What those expected cash flows are worth today can shift rapidly with changes in interest rates.
"You see the Nasdaq up more, led by tech," said Jimmy Lee, chief executive of Wealth Consulting Group. "The S&P is up more than the Dow. I think it's just because yields have come down a little bit."
The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note fell for a fifth consecutive trading day to 4.289%, its lowest settle since March.
Others saw the day's gains for tech shares as a case of investors continuing to bet on a successful trade.
"I think it's really just more of a momentum play at this point," said Steve Courtney, portfolio manager at PGIM Quantitative Solutions. "Especially after Nvidia's earnings, the pathway forward is pretty clear in terms of their acceleration here."
Nvidia shares soared after the company reported another standout quarter.
Earnings reports drove big moves in individual stocks Wednesday.
Shares of Hewlett Packard Enterprise climbed 11% after the server and cloud-software company beat analysts' expectations and lifted its full-year guidance. CrowdStrike shares rallied 12% after the cybersecurity company reported a jump in quarterly revenue and raised its guidance.
Brown-Forman shares dropped 5.9% after the maker of Jack Daniel's posted a bigger-than-expected drop in quarterly sales. Dollar Tree shares fell 4.9% after news that the discount retailer is exploring a potential sale or spinoff of Family Dollar.
Next up, investors are looking ahead to the monthly jobs report on Friday. The data could provide clues about the strength of the economy and the chances that the Federal Reserve will begin to cut interest rates soon.
In commodities, the price of benchmark Brent oil increased 1.1% to $78.41 a barrel. The price of gold gained $28.60, or 1.2%, to $2,354.10 a troy ounce. Silver for June delivery gained 1.6% to $29.948 a troy ounce. Copper rose 1.6% to $4.6195 a pound.
Bitcoin rose $829.81, or 1.2%, to $7,1314.05. The cryptocurrency is 68 year to date
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.8% and the FTSE 100 rose 0.2%. At midday Thursday, Japan's Nikkei 225 Stock Average was up 0.9%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 0.8% and South Korea's Kospi was up 1%. S&P 500 futures were up 0.1%.
Generate image description

Credit: By Asa Fitch and Karen Langley
