NVIDIA
NVDA -6.4%
Nvidia's latest quarter wasn't as supercharged as investors hoped. The chip maker put up another round of strong results on Wednesday, saying its better-than-expected sales and earnings more than doubled in the company's most recent quarter. But the magnitude of those wins was smaller than what Nvidia has been delivering over the past year, amid booming demand for artificial-intelligence capabilities from the world's largest tech giants. The company also said that gross profit margins narrowed in the quarter compared with the period that ended in April, partly due to production issues with Nvidia's next-generation Blackwell chips that required a design tweak. Nvidia shares lost 6.4% Thursday.
PARAMOUNT GLOBAL
PARA -7.1%
Edgar Bronfman Jr. walked away from Paramount Global, clearing the way for its sale to David Ellison's Skydance Media. The 69-year-old and his investor group on Monday withdrew from bidding for National Amusements, the company through which Shari Redstone's family controls the media giant. The Wall Street Journal previously reported that he offered $4.3 billion for it. He later sweetened the offer, submitting a bid of $6 billion. Paramount shares fell 7.1% Tuesday.
DOLLAR GENERAL
DG -32%
Dollar General's quarterly earnings came up short. The country's largest dollar-store operator missed its sales expectations and slashed its annual outlook. Dollar General said its full-year sales would grow at most by 5.3%, down from previous sales guidance of up to 6.7% growth. The company cited economic strain on its customers along with inventory damages and theft as reasons for its stunted growth. Dollar General shares plunged 32% Thursday, its largest percentage decrease on record.
PDD HOLDINGS
PDD -29%
The parent company of e-commerce platform Temu issued a gloomy outlook Monday. PDD Holdings said sales growth at the Chinese company missed estimates, as the country's consumers diverted spending to experiences instead of goods. The company's management also warned of challenges ahead amid rising competition. PDD faces regulatory and compliance uncertainty similar to recent scrutiny of fashion retailer Shein. American depositary shares of PDD crashed 29% Monday.
SUPER MICRO COMPUTER
SMCI -19%
The artificial-intelligence server maker delayed its annual filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday, after Hindenburg Research said Tuesday it was shorting Super Micro's shares. In the famed short-selling firm's scathing report, Hindenburg claimed to have found "glaring accounting red flags, evidence of undisclosed related party transactions, sanctions and export-control failures, and customer issues." Super Micro Computer shares sank 19% Wednesday.
GAP
GAP +1.6%
Gap posted a big jump in earnings and higher revenue in its latest quarter, with its results landing earlier than expected on Thursday. They were expected to come in after the market closed, but appeared to have been released and then rescinded before the opening bell. The official report was then released about two hours later. The company has brought in new leaders to help turn around its performance. Gap shares ended 1.6% higher Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
