The great white-collar job market chill is now targeting one group of applicants with particular force: college-educated workers, especially new grads starting out in the job market.
The white-collar labor market is entering a more uncertain phase after cooling for more than a year. Job insecurity is climbing and fewer professionals feel emboldened to change their employment. The lack of turnover is stalling hiring even more as companies rethink their talent needs after pandemic hiring sprees.
Hiring for roles that usually require a bachelor's degree has dropped below 2019 rates in recent months, new data from payroll provider ADP show. The drop has been steeper for 20-somethings, who are running into a bottleneck of entry-level openings as more established professionals stay put in the jobs they have, according to payroll information on more than 16 million people across 31,000 U.S. employers.
For 21-year-old Peter Stuart, that has meant months of fruitless job applications -- and often settling for a lot less.
"I have just been getting ghosted basically by everything I apply for," says Stuart, who graduated in December from Loyola University Chicago with an English degree and still hasn't found a professional job.
He applied for at least 70 positions over the winter, mostly in advertising, public relations and copywriting. When none panned out, he took a substitute-teaching position for the rest of the school year. Back in the job market this summer, he spread his search to lower-wage work, including retail sales and hospitality. He recently took a $17-an-hour job as a cook with additional shifts as a dishwasher in a Chicago cafe so he could pay his bills.
"Neither of those jobs has been in the career path I'm looking at," says Stuart, who continues to seek job-hunting advice from others, including on how to fine-tune his resume in the hopes it will get more traction with the online hiring algorithms employers use to screen candidates.
By historic standards, the job market for college-educated workers remains relatively strong, and unemployment is still low. Yet it feels a long way from just two summers ago, when employers were competing so fiercely for software developers, marketers and other white-collar professionals that some were hiring and hoarding talent before having work for them to do. Cash-rich and confident that a pandemic-fueled boom would continue, corporate leaders worried more at the time about labor shortages.
"These companies just got way, way too bloated," says Aaron Levie, chief executive of cloud company Box Inc. "Most anybody who was a CEO four years ago, and still is, will not let that happen again." Layoffs hit the tech sector in the fall of 2022 and then spread to other industries. Today, many companies are choosier than they have been in years about who they hire.
Many employers corrected for the over-hiring by laying off thousands, and big-name companies including Citi and Google cut layers of jobs with the aim of reducing middle management. Meanwhile, more companies have shifted investment to generative artificial intelligence, a technology that many fear could shrink the need for traditionally high-demand workers, such as coders, data analysts and bookkeepers.
Others have gotten pickier in their hiring. At Exact Sciences, a diagnostics company that makes the colon-cancer test Cologuard, CEO Kevin Conroy instituted a process this year that requires him and other senior leaders to approve every request to hire or promote someone into a supervisory position. The Madison, Wis., company expanded so quickly in recent years that it created too many layers of managers, he says, with some only having one or two direct reports.
Now, Conroy and his senior team look over all requests to add a people-manager role throughout the 6,600-employee company. They deny those they deem not critical.
"When people know that the leadership team is reviewing this," Conroy said, "it's amazing how many fewer of these requests you get."
Hiring of 20-somethings has lagged behind the rest of the white-collar workforce -- but for a May surge during graduation season. In a spring survey of 226 employers by the National Association of Colleges and Employers, companies said they planned to hire 6% fewer new graduates than they did last year.
One reason is that many are trying to crack the professional job market just as the rest of the workforce is coming down from a postpandemic job-hopping spree. Millions of people switched to better-paying jobs as companies bid up for workers. Now that the job market has tightened and once-abundant offers with lofty pay have dwindled, more people are holding on to the jobs they have, says Nela Richardson, ADP's chief economist.
"When I talk to executives at companies, the conversation of the last year has pivoted a lot," she says. "Instead of, 'How do we get the best talent?' It's, 'How do we engage workers?'" In other words, she adds: "'How do we do things other than give big bonuses to help people stay motivated?'"
Zachary Ebaugh, 23, landed a job last year just before graduating from the University of Central Florida as a computer-science major. He had applied for more than 460 openings. His effort yielded a single interview and offer, which led to a system-engineer job in the aerospace industry.
Many of his peers had a tougher time finding work, he says, and his experience prompted him to create a software tool to help job seekers boost their success by using AI in filling out applications.
"It's not so hard to send out maybe 100 or 200 job applications," says Ebaugh, who lives in Orlando. "But when you start getting to, like, 500, 800, 1,000 and you've been doing it for six-plus months, it can take a toll on you. They feel defeated at the end of the day."
Over the second quarter, confidence about employment prospects among job seekers with bachelor's degrees fell more steeply than among any other group of workers, apart from those with no formal education credentials at all, according to survey research by jobs website ZipRecruiter. More job seekers overall expect the number of available jobs to fall, not rise, through the end of the year.
That would make it even tougher for job seekers like DeAnna Judd. The 45-year-old was laid off from her corporate human-resources role a year ago and thought she'd have found another one by now. "Not cocky, just what I'm used to," says Judd. Even in 2011, when the unemployment rate hovered around 9%, she found a new job within six months of being laid off.
Now, after sending out more than 2,000 applications for other HR postings, she still hasn't had luck. With her savings running low this spring, she decided to shift her search to executive assistant roles paying much less than the nearly $200,000 she earned a year in HR. She took one as an administrative assistant for a landscaping firm near her Chicago-area home, and she sells custom-designed T-shirts, hoodies and accessories with sayings, such as "Karma Will Fix It," online for extra income.
Though she's still looking for HR positions, she's less confident she'll find one.
"There's a brokenness to the system," she says of the inability to get a response on applications or know whether an advertised position is truly open. "It's so sad."
---
Chip Cutter contributed to this article.
Generate image description

Credit: By Vanessa Fuhrmans and Ray A. Smith
