It's been two years since Elon Musk changed the name of his company. Like Apple Inc.'s decision a decade ago to hit delete on "Computer" (nodding to its focus on mobile devices), he dumped the "Motors" from Tesla Inc. to send the message that his was more than just a car company.
The move has flopped. Yes, Tesla now offers batteries and solar panels for homes, but all investors care about are its sleek electric cars.
For proof, refer to the intense focus paid to Mr. Musk's "production hell" of trying to ramp up assembly of the least expensive Tesla car yet, the Model 3. His repeated retellings of his factory-floor sleepovers and how he parachuted in to solve production problems made it hard for Tesla to calm worries about its ability to build enough cars at the right price.
Mr. Musk might want to turn to a different page in Apple's playbook, the one that outlines that the real money isn't in building beautiful, well-designed things, but finding another company to put together your must-have products.
Apple has long contracted with Foxconn Technology Group to make its iPhones, protecting itself from the expensive, cyclical world of manufacturing. The iPhone isn't soaring as high lately, but it has been a cash cow since 2007 and remains the envy of consumer-product makers around the world. Foxconn is a big reason why.
Last spring, I flew to Tesla's California factory in Fremont and asked Mr. Musk whether a better solution to his production puzzle might be to hire out the job to an experienced auto-production shop. He scoffed: "If we don't solve the production we're going to die. I need to create a case example of what can be done."
Once upon a time, Apple felt the same way. Co-founder Steve Jobs built a state-of-the-art computer factory, also in Fremont. Mr. Jobs was fascinated by the exploits of Henry Ford and Japan's Sony Corp., but his efforts to replicate them failed and the plant closed.
To Mr. Musk, car production is a math equation that should be solved. By adding automation and continually improving processes, efficiency will rise and costs will plummet, all while keeping Tesla's fate in its own hands.
That's been costly, though, with Tesla burning through a bundle of cash over the past 15 years. Earlier this month, the company said it will lay off about 7% of its workforce, sending its stock falling on fears the company has become bloated. The 16% decline in its share price since then pulled its market capitalization below General Motors Co.
Tesla started its life reliant on contract manufacturing, hiring the U.K.'s Lotus to build its Roadster more than a decade ago. As Mr. Musk took increasing control of the company, he acquired an abandoned car factory and set out to create a manufacturing system that was faster and more efficient than his entrenched rivals.
The old-school companies, he complains, run their assembly lines slower than "grandma with a walker." And yet, despite all the sleepovers and rescue missions, grandma is still outrunning Mr. Musk.
What does he do better than grandma? Dream up the kinds of products that keep gearheads awake at night. The Model 3 sedan, aimed at the mass market, has been a hit, nearly outselling the Ford Fusion and Chevrolet Malibu last year despite costing much more. As we wait on other products Mr. Musk has promised -- the Model Y SUV, an electric pickup truck, a battery-powered semi -- it's fair to wonder if his time in the factory is holding Tesla back.
Automotive experts say there is no shame asking for help. BMW AG, Daimler AG's Mercedes and even Toyota pay a separate company to assemble certain products to alleviate capacity constraints. Many of those experts say contract manufacturing will play a more prominent role as vehicles increasingly resemble smartphones on wheels.
Phil Martens, Ford Motor Co.'s former product chief and a retired CEO of a top automotive supplier, said tomorrow's car will be valued mostly for its software, artificial intelligence and ease of use. He noted Waymo, the Alphabet Inc. unit developing autonomous cars, already taps various traditional auto companies, including Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV. Waymo is expected to continue doing that so it can focus on improving the way drivers interact with technology.
Jaguar Land Rover PLC has a foot in both worlds, having agreed to produce SUVs for Waymo while also using Canadian company Magna International Inc. to build its futuristic electric i-Pace SUV. Turning to a third party allowed the company to cut thousands of jobs earlier this year and free up resources to develop more electric vehicles.
Alisyn Malek, co-founder of autonomous-vehicle startup May Mobility Inc., is using contract manufacturers to produce a low-speed driverless car, allowing her young company to avoid tying up capital in a factory.
"Every auto maker right now is in the battle for their soul," the former GM executive told me. Car companies are "asking 'Do we get to have a relationship with the end user or are we just going to be the next Foxconn.'"

Credit: By John D. Stoll
