Apple Inc. said it would build a campus and engineering hub in North Carolina as part of a series of investments planned in the U.S. over the next five years.
The technology giant said the move would create at least 3,000 jobs in machine learning, artificial intelligence, software engineering and other fields in the Raleigh-Durham metropolitan area.
Those new jobs were part of a pledge to add 20,000 jobs in the U.S. by 2026, up from the roughly 95,000 people employed currently. Apple said in January 2018 it had 84,000 people in its U.S. workforce.
The Cupertino, Calif., company had been in talks in 2018 to locate a facility in North Carolina. Later that year it announced a plan to locate a campus in Austin, Texas. Employees are expected to begin moving to the Austin site next year, Apple said.
Apple would join other technology companies such as International Business Machines Corp.'s Red Hat, Cisco Systems Inc. and Epic Games Inc. in having major technical hubs in the Raleigh area. North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper said the Raleigh facility would be Apple's first entirely new campus and engineering hub in more than 20 years.
Gov. Cooper said he spoke Saturday with Apple Chief Executive Tim Cook, who was appreciative that the legislature hadn't embraced measures targeting transgender people and had rolled back House Bill 2, a 2016 law that required transgender people to use the public-facility bathroom associated with the sex listed on their birth certificate. "They want to be a committed partner with our state for the long term," said Mr. Cooper.
Apple is eligible for an incentive package worth up to $845.8 million over 39 years, thanks to a North Carolina Department of Commerce program targeting tech companies that pledge to invest at least $1 billion in the state and create 3,000 jobs. The state legislature authorized these technology incentives as part of its unsuccessful plan to lure Amazon's HQ2 in 2018.
The move also reflects a yearslong push among West Coast tech giants to locate facilities and seek talent in other parts of the country. Amazon.com Inc. is building its second headquarters facility in northern Virginia and has been expanding employment in cities such as New York and Phoenix. Tesla Inc. is building an automobile factory in Austin, where companies including Facebook Inc. and Google have located campuses.
---
Valerie Bauerlein contributed to this article.
Credit: By Dave Sebastian
