Treasury officials issued rules requiring all foreign investors in certain deals involving critical U.S. technology to submit to national security reviews or face fines as high as the value of their proposed transactions.
The new regulations, which implement a recently passed law to tighten foreign-investment reviews, are more expansive than some had advocatedand are likely to bring an unprecedented number of transactions under the purview of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S., known as Cfius.
The Treasury-led interagency committee will now require foreign investors to alert it to all deals giving them access to critical technology across 27 industries -- including semiconductors, telecommunications and defense -- that the committee believes could threaten U.S. national security and technological superiority, according to Cfius officials.
Previously, Cfius focused more narrowly on deals where foreigners took controlling stakes in U.S. businesses, and filing for reviews was optional.
Investors had incentives to file and seek Cfius approval because, if they didn't, the committee might choose to review their deal anyway and recommend the president block or unwind it.
In recent years, however, lawmakers and officials came to believe that many deals involving important U.S. technology were flying under the committee's radar. They have been particularly concerned about a spate of Chinese technology deals in Silicon Valley. The new, temporary rules take effect in a month and will be superseded by permanent regulations some 15 months later.
A February 2017 report by the Defense Department's Defense Innovation Unit, which was influential in the crafting of the Cfius measure, mapped out various ways Chinese investors participate in U.S. technology deals in the valley, including through investments made by Chinese venture-capital and private-equity firms and by Chinese tech giants Baidu Inc., Tencent Holdings Ltd., Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and JD.com Inc.
"This significantly changes the importance of Cfius for foreign investors because it is now a mandatory process for a broad swath of technological acquisitions," said Nova Daly, an adviser at law firm Wiley Rein LLP and a former Treasury official who once ran the Cfius process.
The rules mean foreign investors who made early-stage investments in areas such as artificial intelligence and autonomous driving in Silicon Valley without having to file for reviews could be required to do so for future deals, said Ivan Schlager, who runs the national security practice at law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP.

Credit: By Kate O'Keeffe
