U.S. stocks and bonds were little changed Wednesday following the release of minutes from the Federal Reserve's June meeting that showed officials readying plans to start gradually shrinking the Fed's balance sheet in coming months.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 1.10 points, or less than 0.1%, to 21478.17. The S&P 500 rose 0.15% and the Nasdaq Composite added 0.7%. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note ended at 2.334%, little changed from where it was before the Fed minutes release and below Monday's 2.352% closing level. Yields fall as prices rise.
In Europe, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.2% to 382.99.
Investors have focused on global central-bank signals in recent trading sessions, as some officials signal they might be ready to ease off on massive stimulus programs.
Wednesday's minutes showed that the Fed is divided on when to start shrinking its $4.5 trillion portfolio of assets. Some officials preferred to announce the beginning of the process within the next few months, while others urged more patience.
Technology firms gained Wednesday after coming under pressure in recent weeks. Many investors are worried that its outperformance has left it susceptible to a selloff. The S&P 500's tech sector has been the index's best performer this year and was up 1.1% Wednesday.
Semiconductor stocks led the sector higher after chip maker Nvidia announced an artificial-intelligence technology partnership with Chinese internet giant Baidu. Nvidia added 2.7%, while Advanced Micro Devices rose 8.5% and Micron Technology gained 4.7%. On Monday, the Semiconductor Industry Association said chip sales grew 22.6% in May compared with the same month a year prior, the largest such increase since September 2010.
With investors piling into and out of some of the biggest U.S. tech stocks recently, they will likely continue favoring companies with good cash flow, said Laurie Kamhi, managing director and partner of LCK Wealth Management at HighTower.
"There's going to be a huge disparity in the winners and losers," she said.
Analysts expect tech companies will help lead earnings growth in the S&P 500 for the second quarter, according to FactSet. Reporting season picks up in the coming weeks.
Falling oil prices weighed on energy stocks. U.S. crude-oil prices ended an eight-session winning streak, the longest rally since 2010, settling down $1.94 a barrel, or 4.1%, at $45.13. The S&P 500 energy sector was the index's worst performer, down 1.3% in late trading. Oil entered into a bear market June 20 amid oversupply concerns, before prices rallied at the end of the month.
Business surveys in the eurozone released Wednesday showed the bloc's economic recovery likely accelerated in the second quarter of 2017, adding to expectations for the European Central Bank to wind down its massive bond-purchase program.
Benoit Coeure, an ECB executive board member, said Wednesday the central bank hadn't yet discussed making changes to its policy.
But many investors continue to bet on tighter policy ahead.
"We've seen decent improvement across the bloc," said Alan Wilson, investment manager at State StreetGlobal Advisors. "The ECB are tiptoeing toward the edge of their position," he added, saying he expects sovereign-bond yields to continue to edge higher across Europe and the U.S. as central bankers align their policies with a brightening global economy.
Earlier, Asian markets mostly climbed following a bruising Tuesday session. Japan's Nikkei Stock Average ended up 0.2%, while South Korea's Kospi rose 0.3% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index rose 0.5%.

Credit: By Riva Gold and Amrith Ramkumar
