[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Whether or not Nintendo eventually scores with its new Switch console, it already has racked up big points for Nvidia.
Whether the chip maker can keep that high score is the $38 billion question these days. That is how much Nvidia's market value has surged in the past year. Some of this can be credited to the chip maker's efforts to diversify into hot areas such as cars, data centers and artificial intelligence. But a lot is owed to its gaming business, which accounts for the bulk of revenue and posted a 44% jump in sales for the fiscal year ended Jan. 29.
Some of that came from the Nintendo Switch, which uses a customized version of Nvidia's Tegra chip as its main processor. The Switch hit stores on Friday but has been in production for the past several months. Nvidia doesn't break out specifics, but CEO Jen-Hsun Huang said in the company's fiscal third-quarter call in November that the Switch contributed "a fair amount" to the 64% year-over-year growth in gaming revenue the company reported for the period. Nintendo said in October that it planned to ship about 2 million Switch units for the initial launch this month.
Nintendo has lost considerable share of the console market as its Wii-U failed to live up to the success of its predecessor. The company expects to sell about 6.8 million units of its home and hand-held game consoles for the fiscal year ending later this month. That is down 33% from last year and a fraction of the 57 million units it sold at its peak in 2009. The Switch has garnered largely positive reviews for its launch, but carries a high price for a machine with few game titles so far and no online service yet.
In fairness, Nvidia's fate hardly rests on the Switch. Most of its gaming business still stems from its graphics processors used in the type of high-performance PCs preferred by gamers. The company also has shown early success in diversifying into other markets. Revenue from sales to the data center and auto segments jumped 145% and 52%, respectively, in the latest fiscal year. Still, the gaming market accounted for nearly 60% of Nvidia's total revenue in that fiscal year.
And at its current price, Nvidia can't really afford any slips. Last year's run-up has put the stock at about 36 times forward earnings, which is two-thirds above its five-year average and far ahead of most peers on the PHLX Semiconductor Index.
Leveling up from here will be a much greater challenge for Nvidia, especially if the Switch fails to turn on.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
