Microsoft reported growth in its cloud-computing business last quarter, but a disappointing revenue outlook sparked investor concern about the near-term payoff for the software company's massive investment in artificial intelligence.
Revenue for the tech giant's Azure cloud business -- a core of its AI offering -- rose 33% in the quarter through September, beating analysts' expectations. For the current quarter, the company expects slightly less expansion, projecting Azure growth of between 31% and 32%.
Excitement about the potential for generative AI that can create computer code and summarize complex information has helped fuel a run-up in the shares of Microsoft and other tech companies since 2023.
While Microsoft shares initially rose on the results in after-hours trading Wednesday, they fell around 3.7% below the day's close.
The Redmond, Wash., company's overall revenue rose 16% to $65.6 billion as its net income climbed 11% to $24.7 billion. Analysts were expecting revenue of $64.57 billion and net income of $23.15 billion.
The company expects revenue for the current quarter, which runs through December, to be between $68.1 billion and $69.1 billion. Analysts surveyed by FactSet were expecting revenue of $69.89 billion for this quarter.
Microsoft's chief financial officer, Amy Hood, attributed that slowdown in part to the need for the company to build up more cloud computing capacity to meet AI demand.
Alphabet shares also rose Wednesday after the Google parent announced strong results on Tuesday in its cloud-computing division, another beneficiary of the AI boom.
Microsoft, and the tech industry more broadly, remains in the midst of a major spending spree on its AI, building data centers to power it around the world.
Chief Executive Satya Nadella has bet Microsoft's future on AI. The company has invested around $14 billion into ChatGPT maker OpenAI and is pouring cash into the expensive chips and data centers needed for the technology.
The company has said it plans to match its spending growth to perceived demand. It has slashed costs in other areas, such as hardware, to avoid taking a large hit on profit margins.
The company spent $14.9 billion on capital expenditures last quarter, largely for data- center buildouts. That was a 50% jump from the same quarter a year ago. Including finance leases, its total capital expenditures were $20 billion, up from $11.2 billion.
Twelve percentage points of Azure's growth came from AI last quarter, compared with 11 percentage points in the previous quarter.
Microsoft said it has changed the way it is categorizing its Azure business by moving some of its enterprise software businesses into its Microsoft 365 Commercial segment.
Most of Microsoft's AI revenue has come through its cloud services.
Microsoft's revenue from its AI is small -- though the company projects it is becoming more material.
"AI-driven transformation is changing work," Nadella said in the earnings call.
Generate image description

Credit: By Tom Dotan
