[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
For those wondering why Amazon.com would have the temerity to challenge both Spotify and Apple in the streaming-music game, it is likely the company has another target in mind: Google.
Amazon lifted the wraps Wednesday on its latest streaming-music service -- a significant expansion of what it first launched two years ago. Like many of the company's other offerings, Amazon Music Unlimited seems designed primarily to grow and serve its base of Prime customers who already fork over monthly fees for free shipping and other benefits. Prime users will get Amazon Music at lower prices than they would pay Spotify or Apple for comparable subscriptions.
That could give the company some traction against those two major streaming competitors. They have amassed more than 57 million paying subscribers between them to date. Amazon's pricing also contained an interesting new twist; users of its Echo voice-activated speaker can get access to the service for just $3.99 a month. That is about 60% below the starting prices for most streaming-music plans, including those currently offered by Google.
It is an interesting move coming just a week after Google unveiled the first product that could give the Echo a challenge. Like the Echo, the Google Home is ostensibly a speaker that also serves as a voice-controlled home portal to the company's huge network. It is a market Google is serious about, evidenced by the fact that it priced Home at a 28% discount to the Echo. Google also is offering six months free of its premium YouTube Red service with the device.
The internet landscape has shifted in such a way that an online retailer and a web search provider that made their fortunes in vastly different businesses now find themselves competing more frequently to keep their growth prospects bright.
Consider that Amazon and Google have both invested billions of dollars over the years to build up state-of-the-art, global networks powered by artificial intelligence. Right now, these networks primarily power their core businesses. But they also form the foundation for making each company's services indispensable to both businesses and consumers.
Amazon has been winning that race to date. When Amazon reports its third-quarter results later this month, analysts expect to see about $3.2 billion in revenue for its AWS cloud-services business, up 53% year over year. Google is believed to be running a distant third in this area behind Amazon and Microsoft. Goldman Sachs estimates the Google Cloud Platform generated $700 million in revenue for the past four quarters.
In the home, Amazon has a two-year head-start with the Echo. The company doesn't release sales figures, but estimates from analysts range from four million to 12 million units sold to date. Whatever the number, it has been enough to disrupt established speaker brands such as Sonos, as well as enough to lure Google into the space.
Amazon's early position is strong, but not unassailable. Google, meanwhile, has powerful reasons to not want to be left behind in such key future markets, and it has deep pockets to fund its catch-up efforts. That will keep the pressure on Amazon. It can't afford to let the music stop.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
