The next battle in the pizza techology wars has dawned as Pizza Hut Asia announced Tuesday that it will test an order-taking robot that uses artificial intelligence to interact with customers. Rival Domino's Pizza Inc. said in March that it is testing an autonomous vehicle for delivering pies to customers in Australia.
With Pizza Hut Asia, MasterCard announced that it is has embedded its MasterPass mobile wallet into the robot, dubbed Pepper, that the pizza chain plans to test in an undetermined number of restaurants in Japan.
The move is part of MasterCard's effort to integrate its digital wallet and other payment technology into numerous Internet-connected devices. The company early this year worked with Samsung Electronics Co. to launch a connected refrigerator that includes an app from MasterCard to reorder groceries as they run low. Last year, MasterCard worked with Whirlpool to build washers and dryers for Laundromats and dormitories that can be controlled by mobile app and paid for with MasterCard's Qkr mobile payments system.
Pizza Hut Asia, owned by Yum Brands, plans to test the robot Pepper in stores by the end of the year. MasterCard and Pizza Hut Asia haven't yet decided how many stores will participate, a MasterCard spokeswoman said. As customers approach and speak to Pepper, the robot can read facial expressions and understand natural language. The robot was developed by SoftBank Robotics Corp. in Tokyo. SoftBank didn't respond to an email request for an interview.
Domino's announced early this year that it is testing an autonomous vehicle, called Domino's Robotic Unit, to deliver pizza in Australia. DRU interacts with customers through lights on a display and navigates around obstacles on footpaths and roads. The pizza companies have long battled on the technology front, including promoting smart watches, connected cars and retinal scanning for order and delivery.
Internet connected machines, including wearable devices and robots, can help companies personalize service in retail stores and other venues by accessing data about customers and applying algorithms to make tailored offers on the spot, said Betty DeVita, chief commercial officer of MasterCard Labs, in an interview. By experimenting with robots, MasterCard hopes to learn how customers react to the technology and whether they begin to conduct financial transactions with the machines, Ms. DeVita said.
"Our interest is in exploring and understanding how a humanoid robot can deliver better in-store transactions and payment experiences," she said.
The number of Internet of Things devices is expected to jump to 21 billion by 2020, from about 6.4 billion today, according to Gartner. But there are few standards for security and interoperability for the devices, leading some observers to worry about vulnerability to hackers. Ms. DeVita sees potential in Pepper and other connected hardware as vehicles for commerce. Pepper, for example, can use facial recognition systems to judge a customer's mood and perhaps offer add-on products, trying to capitalize on how the customer is feeling. MasterCard plans to study the Pizza Hut transactions to see if there is an increase in order size for customers who interact with the robot, she said.
Credit: By Kim S. Nash
