When Michael W. Ferro Jr. picked up the phone on April 12, his already stormy 10-week tenure as chairman of Tribune Publishing Co. was about to get even more tumultuous.
On the line was Robert Dickey, Gannett Co.'s chief executive. Mr. Ferro figured he was calling about a dinner they had scheduled for the following week, or about a new digital-ad-sales initiative involving the companies.
Mr. Dickey started referring to his "offer," but Mr. Ferro had no idea what he was talking about.
Gradually, it dawned on him that USA Today owner Gannett was making an unsolicited bid to acquire Tribune, owner of the Los Angeles Times and Chicago Tribune.
"I told him to send something in writing, and I'd take it to my board. I didn't think it was a big deal," Mr. Ferro said in an interview.
When Mr. Ferro got off the call, he spotted Gannett's letter in his email inbox, proposing a $12.25-a-share deal valued at about $400 million.
The Gannett "bear hug" has added to a trial by fire for Mr. Ferro and the management team he installed when he took effective control of Tribune in early February with a $44 million investment, assuming the title of nonexecutive chairman.
After his initial exchange with Mr. Dickey, Mr. Ferro asked for more time to enlist bankers and prepare for a earnings report on May 4, but Gannett felt he was stalling.
"We are looking for them to sit down and have a very serious discussion with us, but that has not happened," Mr. Dickey said in an interview.
On Tuesday, Tribune Chief Executive Justin Dearborn accused Gannett of "playing games" and called its approach "aggressive and hostile," in a letter made public in a regulatory filing.
"I don't know why they are in such a hurry," Mr. Ferro said. He said he remains open to a deal.
Over the past year, Tribune has fielded offers to sell the Los Angeles Times on its own, but Mr. Ferro said the company wouldn't consider the possibility of selling any of its 11 newspapers individually.
"The L.A. Times is about 50% of the company. Without it, Tribune would be in terrible shape," he said.
Mr. Ferro, 49 years old, was the chairman of the parent company of the Chicago Sun-Times when, he says, he was approached earlier this year by Tribune's then-CEO Jack Griffin about making an investment.
On Feb. 4, Mr. Ferro took a 16.6% stake in Tribune in a private placement at $8.54 a share, making him the largest shareholder. Gannett's offer represents a 43% premium to that price, so Mr. Ferro would stand to make a sizable profit if a deal were to go through.
When Mr. Ferro arrived, Tribune's share price had fallen more than 60% since its 2014 spinoff from the television properties that now make up Tribune Media Co.
He provided a much-needed cash infusion for Tribune to explore acquisitions but said he also was brought in for his digital expertise, given his background as a tech entrepreneur. He set out to modernize newsroom publishing tools and use artificial intelligence to get the right stories and ads in front of the right people. He said he also is eager to invest in journalism.
In late February, Mr. Ferro overhauled Tribune's top management, replacing Mr. Griffin with longtime associate Mr. Dearborn. He then added three people to the board and has proposed a restructuring that, if approved, would give him and his associates control of five of the eight seats.
He was acutely aware that Tribune needed more scale to survive in an environment that is brutal for print publishers. Southern California's Freedom Communications Inc., the owner of the Orange County Register that was being sold in a public bankruptcy auction, looked like a good bet.
Tribune made a $56 million all-cash bid and announced a deal to acquire the company on March 17. But the Justice Department quickly filed a civil lawsuit to block the deal on antitrust grounds, arguing that if combined the companies would account for 98% of newspaper sales in Orange County. As a result, Freedom Communications was acquired by Digital First Media.
Mr. Dearborn said he had been in touch with many top shareholders who believe Gannett is lowballing Tribune, especially those who bought into the stock at a far higher price. One significant shareholder called the Gannett offer "extremely opportunistic," and said the deal would have to be sweetened to make it worthwhile.
"Most of these folks have a $20-plus cost basis [for their shares], and they don't think the industry has deteriorated 60%, even if our stock price has," Mr. Dearborn said.
A Gannett spokesman said Mr. Ferro's discounted share purchase in February appeared to elicit no objection from other shareholders.
Credit: By Lukas I. Alpert
