SHANGHAI -- Alphabet Inc.'s Google unit is investing $550 million in Chinese online retailer JD.com Inc., a move that will deepen its ties with China and ramp up its rivalry with Amazon.com Inc.
The deal, which according to a JD spokesman gives Google a 1% stake, will help both companies expand their retailing presence. Under the partnership, JD will start selling products on Google Shopping, reaching consumers in the U.S. and Europe as it seeks to diversify beyond China's highly competitive e-commerce market.
Google Shopping shows retailers' ads for goods above the blue links in Google's search results for many types of products, like apparel and appliances.
The search giant is building alliances as it races Amazon to develop new ways for people to shop, from voice-enabled smart speakers to faster and more convenient home grocery delivery. Google last year teamed up with Walmart Inc. to let users order a selection of the retailer's products on Google's virtual assistant and speakers, a challenge to Amazon's Alexa service. Earlier this month, Google joined with Carrefour SA, Europe's largest retailer, to offer same-day delivery of perishable groceries to people's homes in France.
The deal announced Monday also could help Google boost advertising revenue, which has been threatened by Amazon recently as businesses increasingly shift ads to the internet shopping site.
The JD investment comes as Google seeks to strengthen its connections in China. Its search engine has been blocked in the country since 2010, when the company refused to censor content. However, it still maintains a sizable presence in the country, with three offices locally employing more than 600 staff, mostly engaged in ad sales and engineering.
Over the past two years, the Mountain View, Calif.-based company has sought to improve relations and expand its presence in China. Senior executives including Chief Executive Sundar Pichai have made two trips in the last seven months, meeting lawmakers and industry academics in two high-profile conferences organized by the Chinese.
In December, Google launched an artificial intelligence lab in Beijing to tap the growing market for AI talent. Most recently, it introduced the Files Go app in China, a digital file storage application for emerging-market consumers.
Beijing-based JD, which counts Walmart and Tencent Holdings Ltd. among its shareholders, has struggled to compete with Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. in China's online shopping market.
JD commanded about 25% of China's business-to-consumer internet retail market in the first quarter of 2018, behind Alibaba's Tmall platform, which held a 60% share, according to industry researcher Analysys. A year earlier, JD's market share was almost 27%, Analysys data shows.
Under the deal announced Monday, Google bought about 27 million newly issued shares of Nasdaq-listed JD at $40.58 apiece.
---
Douglas MacMillan in San Francisco contributed to this article.

Credit: By Liza Lin
