Corrections & Amplifications
Storyscapes is the name of a new section of works included in the Tribeca Film Festival. The works were incorrectly called Streetscapes in some references in the Urban Gardner column Thursday. Additionally, Bombay Sapphire was a collaborator on the Storyscapes exhibition. It was incorrectly referred to as the lead sponsor in the column.
(WSJ April 19, 2013)
Subscribe to WSJ:
Imagine you're suffering from insomnia (I don't need to imagine, as it happens all the time), but instead of tossing and turning and thinking about everything from your summer plans to your unpaid bills to the moment of your death, you get up and do something about it.
I don't mean you go to the medicine cabinet and take an Ambien. Or to the kitchen to make yourself a glass of warm milk. Instead, even while all exhausted and suffering from bed head, you log onto a website, reflect on the peculiar torture of sleeplessness and then have your musings added to those of your fellow insomniacs in an interactive fresco that gets screened at the Tribeca Film Festival.
That might constitute some people's worst nightmare -- I'm not talking so much about the public exposure when you look like a beaten animal, as about raising yourself from bed to contribute to a documentary in the middle of the night when all you want to do is sleep. But for members of a brave new crowd-sourcing, kickstarting, transmedia (I learned the latter term only Tuesday evening, but I'm planning to use it all the time) generation, uploading one's pain to a virtual confession booth is apparently considered a productive use of time.
"A Journal of Insomnia," the artwork in question -- though we could certainly debate whether it's actually art -- is one of five such projects making its debut Thursday evening in a new juried section of the Tribeca Film Festival called "Storyscapes." What the entries have in common is that they're interactive. Rather than leaving filmmaking to the likes of Fellini, Scorsese or Tarantino, each of us can now be a mini-Truffaut, adding our two cents to the existential conversation via these projects. There, the contributions will be organized -- I believe the current term of art is "curated," though collated sometimes seems a more appropriate term -- and transformed into something that will hopefully delight and improve, or at least move, us.
Other installations include one for which "Star Wars" fans have been encouraged to take one of the 480 scenes from "Empire Strikes Back Uncut" and reimagine it, the results having been stitched together into what creators Casey Pugh and Aaron Meyers describe as a "massive quilt" playing on a loop.
On a more serious note, "Sandy Storyline" uses audio, photography, text and video to let people contribute their accounts of the storm or its aftermath to "an ever-expanding documentary."
Another entry is "This Exquisite Forest." It may be the one I understand the least, which is saying something because they all remain somewhat obscure to me. This one allows visitors to create short animations that those who visit later can build upon.
My personal favorite may be "Robots in Residence," because it involves cute little robots. One of them was on display when I visited the Streetscapes space, which was still very much under construction Tuesday evening, at the seventh-floor Bombay Sapphire House of Imagination on 121 Varick St. Bombay is a lead sponsor of the exhibition.
Brent Hoff, a filmmaker who was sitting at the "Robots in Residence" residence -- at the time of my visit, still only a table on which sat what appeared to be a corrugated box of the sort one might use to send a friend a fruitcake through the U.S. Mail, though this one had a lens, wheels and buttons -- explained that this was to be "the first documentary directed entirely by robots."
Humans are involved, however, in that they need to shepherd the bots about, and confess their thoughts and feelings to them every so often. "People say anything to artificial intelligence," he added.
I'll have to take his word for it, my own relationships with artificial intelligence thus far being rather limited. Though, come to think of it, were the definition expanded to devices such as automated telephone receptionists, upon which I've been know to release a flood of invective, he may have a point.
Apparently, the way this project works is that visitors to the film festival will be able to borrow a robot -- you'll have to leave ID and sign a release form -- and then "walk the streets of Manhattan, talking to your new companion one-on-one," according to a pamphlet that accompanies the exhibition. "Return the robot,'" the brochure goes on, "and join us on Sunday, April 21 for a short film cut from the robots' gathered footage."
According to Mr. Hoff, one of those taking a robot for a stroll will be a ballerina at Lincoln Center, on Thursday night. "When she comes off-stage she's going to do an interview," he said. With herself? With the robot? I guess we'll just have to wait and see.
Things seemed to be further along next door, at "A Journal of Insomnia," where a large black cube was in the final stages of construction. Projected on its skin were people's live insomnia-related tweets. "You get like five tweets a second" mentioning sleeplessness in the Twitterverse, according to Philippe Lambert, the project's sound designer.
Ducking inside the cramped cube, which offers a reasonable facsimile of the claustrophobia of insomnia, you're asked to contribute answers, in the form of text and drawings, to sleep-deprivation questions that are simultaneously projected onto the outside of the cube for all to see.
"Transmedia is anything that's not a linear film," explained Ingrid Kopp, the director of digital initiatives at the Tribeca Film Institute and one of the curators behind "Storyscapes." "It can take any form. People talk about it as the future of storytelling. It's the now of storytelling. We wanted a critical discourse around it. I wanted to show the range of what this work can be."
But is it art? And does that matter? It seems to me that much of what film festivals are about, or at least used to be, is the celebration of the "auteur." Few job descriptions evoke command and control more firmly than that of the movie director.
Yet the "Streetscapes" exhibits, in some ways, promote the opposite. Organizing all that input -- the texts, sounds and artistic contributions -- might be different than herding cats, though how I'm not quite sure.
"That tension between authorship and lack of control is what's so exciting," Ms. Kopp claimed.
Perhaps she's right. There's something visceral and deeply moving about listening to and watching Sandy survivors tell their stories. (Visitors to "Sandy Storyline" will be able to add their own.) But how much of what makes it compelling is the result of the artistic choices of producers Rachel Falcone, Laura Gottesdiener and Michael Premo, and how much of it is random? And does it make any difference?
The good news is that there are drink vouchers (two to a person), and there's a Bombay Sapphire bar where you can retreat to address these challenging questions in style. Three bars, in fact.
And in at least one small nod to nostalgia and the timeless pleasures of being a passive moviegoer -- rather than being asked to draw, text, tweet or commune with a robot -- popcorn will be served.
---
ralph.gardner@wsj.com
Credit: By Ralph Gardner Jr.
