AI-puter (noun): A computer designed to execute AI tasks better than older, non-AI computers. Example sentence: "I'll be at the coffee shop, working on my AI-puter."
OK, fine, nobody's really going to use my new term, but plenty of big names will try to sell you one. And Microsoft is leading the charge -- with a new Windows platform optimized for artificial intelligence announced Monday.
I tried these new Copilot+ PCs. They've got improved performance, battery life and enhanced AI features. Finally! Microsoft is promising some real competition to Apple's M-powered MacBooks.
"Apple's done a fantastic job of really innovating on the Mac," Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella told me in an exclusive video interview. "We're going to outperform them. We finally feel we have a very competitive product."
Microsoft made two important moves to do it. It optimized Windows for Qualcomm's latest chips, which are more like the ones in your smartphone than the Intel chips in most Windows PC. They claim to have it all: all-day battery life, cooler temperatures, blazing performance. And a new chip component amps up AI features right on your laptop -- no need to send everything to the cloud.
Microsoft has a new $999 Surface Laptop and Surface Pro based on the platform. Other Windows PC makers, including Dell, Lenovo, HP and Asus, have refreshed laptops, too. You can get them all starting on June 18.
I've been skeptical about this whole AI PC thing. You know what runs just fine on my laptop? ChatGPT and other generative-AI tools. Yet after checking out the improved Surface devices and spending time with Nadella, I'm in. Just get the basics right this time, Microsoft!
The hardware
When I asked Nadella what makes an AI PC an AI PC, it got real nerdy, real fast -- NPUs, system architecture, edge computing and a lot more. Here's what set these machines apart -- no computer-science degree needed:
-- Arm chips. Your current Windows laptop likely has an Intel or AMD chip, which is based on decades-old x86 architecture. This first crop of Copilot+ PCs with Qualcomm Snapdragon X series chips are based on the more efficient Arm architecture.
Apple moved all its Macs to its own Arm chips a few years ago. Almost everything we hated about laptops? Gone. The machines run quiet and cool, and their batteries last a long time.
Now, Nadella has the same in his new Surface Laptop. He told me he hasn't heard his Surface Laptop's fan go on, and he's been blown away by the all-day battery life.
The company claims the new Surfaces are 58% faster than the M3-powered MacBook Air, too. (Apple just released its next-generation chip, the M4, with the iPad Pro.)
Stop me if you've heard all this before. Microsoft has tried Arm chips several times, but Nadella says it's "finally there." Popular apps like Chrome, WhatsApp, Spotify and others now run natively on the systems, and the latest Windows can run older apps faster, too.
There will be Copilot+ PCs powered by Intel and AMD chips, too, but they won't arrive until later.
-- NPUs. Computers generally have a central processing unit, the CPU, and a graphics processing unit, the GPU. Now, let's welcome the neural processing unit. (Yep, NPU.) You can think of it as the AI accelerator. It's optimized for handling complex AI tasks right on the computer.
-- Edge computing. With ChatGPT, Microsoft Copilot and all the other generative AI tools, the processing happens in the cloud -- aka at some data center. Now, with an NPU, some AI processing can happen right in your lap. This is called the "edge." Processing on your computer can be faster and more secure.
Copilot+ PCs have more than 40 on-device AI models, including eight small language models for generative AI. To access large language models like ChatGPT or Microsoft's own Copilot, which provide more versatile and wide-ranging responses, you still need to connect to the internet. In the coming weeks, Copilot will integrate OpenAI's latest GPT-4o model, Nadella said.
The software
Microsoft put all that together to provide new AI tricks to Windows 11. Everything is processed by that NPU. No cloud necessary.
-- Recall. You know the situation: You see an image or take a note and then completely forget where it was. With Recall, Windows constantly captures what's on your screen. Then it uses an on-device generative-AI model to process and search it all. The demo laptop had a slideshow with pictures of marine life, so I typed "PowerPoint with fish." The word "fish" wasn't even in the presentation, and yet Recall opened it immediately.
Uh, screenshots of everything I do? What could possibly go wrong? Nadella assured me none ever leave the computer. You can also restrict Recall from taking screenshots of certain apps or websites -- or turn it off entirely.
-- Live Captions. Similar to other AI gadgets and smartphones, there is on-laptop live translation that can turn 44 languages into English. Since it's built into Windows, it can work with any video call or app you're using. You can even use it for in-person conversations. I tried it out with Spanish and Russian speakers. I was impressed with the speed, but it made some slip-ups. Also, the interface doesn't distinguish between speakers.
-- Cocreator. As a longtime MS Paint stick-figure and box-house artist, I was delighted by this new tool. I typed in a prompt: "A Windows XP wallpaper with a mountain and sky." Then, as I started drawing, an AI image appeared in a new canvas alongside mine. When I changed a color in my sketch, it changed a color in the generated image. Microsoft says it still sends the prompt to the cloud to ensure content safety.
The future
Those tools are just a start. Developers can make their own on-device AI software that takes advantage of the NPU.
For the first time in a long time, Microsoft seems to have a winning computer strategy: modern, cutting-edge chips and unique software features. Yet there was one obvious question to ask Nadella: If AI is creating this more natural, humanlike way of interacting, why are we talking about traditional computers?
"I fully expect the Copilot to be everywhere," he said, adding that as Microsoft develops its AI agent that can speak and see, it will be in smart speakers, smartphones and even VR headsets. "It's going to be ambient."
So that's the future: AI-puters here, there and everywhere.
Credit: By Joanna Stern
