PENNSYLVANIA
Six Feared Dead
After House Fire
Six members of a family -- including three children -- are feared dead, an official said Thursday, from a fire at a house in suburban Philadelphia that went down in flames as two police officers who responded to the scene were shot and injured.
Delaware County District Attorney Jack Stollsteimer said a human torso and a rifle were recovered from the home in East Lansdowne, but he cautioned the probe is in its early stages.
Stollsteimer said the shooter may have been inside the house when it was destroyed by fire Wednesday afternoon. He said the family residing there has the surname of Le but otherwise didn't release names.
The fire did so much damage it may not be possible to ever determine how it started or who did the shooting, Stollsteimer said.
Officers responded to the house in East Lansdowne around 3:45 p.m. after a 911 call reporting that an 11-year-old girl had been shot. They immediately came under fire. Officers from Upper Darby saved their lives by dragging them out of danger, Stollsteimer said.
Lansdowne Officer David Schiazza, 54, was injured in the leg and was expected to be released Thursday. East Lansdowne Officer John Meehan, 44, required lengthy surgery to his arm and could be released by Friday, Stollsteimer said.
-- Associated Press
---
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
FCC Prohibits AI
Voices in Robocalls
The Federal Communications Commission has outlawed unsolicited robocalls with voices generated by artificial intelligence amid growing concerns the technology can be used to deceive or mislead people.
In a unanimous decision released Thursday, the FCC said AI-generated voices in unsolicited robocalls are prohibited under the 1991 Telephone Consumer Protection Act, which restricts marketing calls that use artificial and prerecorded voice messages.
Callers who use AI technology must get prior consent from the people they are calling, the FCC said.
The move comes as the agency investigates a Texas-based company for using AI-generated robocalls in New Hampshire last month mimicking President Biden's voice. The calls discouraged people from voting in the state's first-in-the-nation primary, officials said. The FCC said Thursday its enforcement bureau has issued a cease-and-desist letter to the company.
The FCC can now fine companies that use AI voices in unwanted calls and block service providers that carry them, the agency said. The regulation, which is effective immediately, also empowers state attorneys general to go after violators, the agency said. The FCC can assess fines of up to $23,000 per call on those who break the law.
-- Ginger Adams Otis
---
MARYLAND
Abuse Alleged in
Juvenile Detention
Since Maryland lawmakers eliminated the statute of limitations for child sexual abuse lawsuits last year, the number of victims suing the state's juvenile justice agency has grown to 200.
The latest lawsuit, filed Thursday on behalf of 63 plaintiffs, alleges rampant abuse at 15 juvenile detention facilities. Some of them have since closed while others remain in operation.
The pending cases could encounter significant delays because the Child Victims Act is facing a widely anticipated constitutional challenge that must first be resolved.
The complaint filed Thursday chronicles what the plaintiffs' attorneys call a systemic problem that permeates Maryland's network of juvenile detention facilities. The allegations span several decades from 1969 to 2017.
The state's Department of Juvenile Services has long faced criticism for inadequate conditions inside its facilities.
Eric Solomon, a spokesperson for the department, said the agency hadn't yet been served with the most recent lawsuit.
Many plaintiffs said their abusers offered them extra food, phone calls, time outside and other rewards. Others said they received threats of violence, solitary confinement, longer sentences and transfer to harsher facilities.
-- Associated Press
