Facebook Inc.'s business model isn't a secret.
The buzzier the posts, the more eyeballs -- and more data on the users behind them. Eyeballs and data are the opiate of advertisers. The formula earned the company $5.2 billion in the second quarter alone. It is also the heart of Facebook's dilemma.
Provocative speech, the kind that nestles up to any line Facebook draws, is like catnip to users. Facebook's long-term profitability depends on policing it without abusing users' trust.
"You know, one person's opinion, one person's free expression can be another person's hate," Facebook's Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg told me recently in a 40-minute Zoom call. She said she believes the company's standards are tough, but will never be tough enough for some people.
How does the company show it respects the blurry line between free speech and hate speech without making portions of Facebook's three billion users feel like their views are taboo or making another swath of users feel like it doesn't care about the pain that some posts cause them?
This is a challenge faced across social media. A speech by founder Mark Zuckerberg this past October at Georgetown's Institute of Politics and Public Service made clear Facebook errs on the side of free expression. "Giving more people a voice gives power to the powerless, and it pushes society to get better over time," he said.
Many say that's too hands-off, and the cautious approach tends to foster the spread of misinformation.
Ms. Sandberg counters that Facebook on its own now finds 95% of the hate speech that is taken down, compared with 24% a couple years ago. Millions of pieces of content are removed by artificial-intelligence tools.
Last month, a civil-rights audit conducted by an independent attorney but commissioned by Facebook criticized the company for being "too reactive and piecemeal" in responses to hate speech, and for presiding over a "seesaw of progress and setbacks." Ms. Sandberg chaired the task force that conducted the audit.
A major complaint in the report: Facebook's handling of President Trump's posts about protesters and voting that have been characterized as racist or misleading. Ms. Sandberg said the company does not profit from or incentivize provocative content, but it is deliberately slow to hit the delete button.
"We get accused from conservatives of being anti-conservative," Ms. Sandberg said. "They look at us and they see, you know, liberal Silicon Valley company." What's the answer? "We're going to be very clear about what our rules are . . . and working to apply them as even-handed as possible."
If Mr. Trump violates the company's list of community standards (including hate speech and misinformation), his posts come down. But penalizing a person as polarizing as Mr. Trump isn't easy.
The next big test will be the 2020 election. Ms. Sandberg said Facebook is committed to being "much more proactive around pushing out accurate information in this election." She said that Facebook blocked bad actors in "hundreds of elections around the world" in 2018.
Facebook has been criticized for allegedly allowing the spread of false stories during recent U.K. elections, however.
"It's our job to show up at work every day, trying to stop anything bad," Ms. Sandberg said. But of course, "the bad guys will always try to get ahead."
Facebook's task is to continue working to convince it is, in fact, the good guy.

Credit: By John D. Stoll
