Intel's sales and profits fell in its latest quarter as weak personal-computer sales damped the market for its chips, and gains from surging interest in artificial intelligence remained elusive.
The company's $14.2 billion in third-quarter sales was 8% below the year-earlier period but above Wall Street forecasts in a survey of analysts by FactSet. Net income of $310 million was sharply lower but also above expectations.
Intel Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger had earlier suggested that the quarter was going well, noting in late August that sales were running above the midpoint of management's guidance range of between $12.9 billion and $13.9 billion.
Intel also said it was expecting sales of around $14.6 billion to $15.6 billion for its current quarter, ahead of Wall Street forecasts.
Intel is the dominant supplier of the central processing units that go into personal computers, as well as chips that power servers in data centers.
It has some of its most advanced manufacturing facilities in Israel, where a conflict is raging with Hamas in the Gaza Strip.
Gelsinger said the company's operations continued to run and a major expansion in the country was progressing.
Competitors have started to eat into the company's market share in recent years, however, and Intel hasn't enjoyed the kind of sales surge that AI chip maker Nvidia got when demand for tools such as OpenAI's ChatGPT took off in recent quarters.
PC sales have slid after a pandemic-era surge, though Intel and other chip makers say there are signs that the market is bottoming out. PC shipments fell 7.6% year over year in the third quarter, according to International Data Corporation, which is expecting a return to growth next year.
Intel said sales in the division that houses its PC chips fell 3% in the third quarter to $7.9 billion.
Intel and other chip makers are hoping consumers will flock to future PCs with chips designed for artificial-intelligence calculations.
Intel is expected to release chips with improved AI features in the coming months, and Gelsinger has called the technology an "inflection point" for PCs.
Intel also is vying for a slice of the demand for AI computation in data centers, where Nvidia is the dominant player.
Spending on Nvidia's chips, which have been essential in building popular AI systems, has taken up a larger portion of customers' budgets in recent quarters, putting pressure on Intel.
Intel has its own AI chip offerings, but they have yet to make a major dent in the market. Sales in the company's data center and AI division fell 10% in the third quarter to $3.8 billion.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
