HONG KONG -- The U.S. and China are locked in a battle for technological supremacy. One Silicon Valley company is arming both sides.
In the U.S., Santa Clara, Calif.-based Nvidia Corp., which makes advanced computer chips key to artificial intelligence, sells to Uber Technologies Inc. for self-driving cars and to Microsoft Corp. for cloud-computing services.
Nvidia gets even more revenue from China. Chinese tech giants including Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Baidu Inc. use its products. So do companies developing facial-recognition and other domestic police and surveillance technologies, along with a university lab that worked with Chinese military researchers.
With a new Cold War brewing between the U.S. and China, Nvidia's bid to play both sides is beginning to look like a high-wire act. Other U.S. chip makers, including Intel Corp. and Qualcomm Inc., do big business in China, with both its tech leaders and artificial-intelligence startups. But Nvidia's dominance of the market for the highest-end artificial-intelligence chips make it the most striking example of how Silicon Valley is contributing to China's technological rise.
Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross and some lawmakers have expressed concern about how American technology is being used in China, which aims to supplant the U.S. as world's leading AI power.
Sen. Marco Rubio (R., Fla.) and 16 other members of Congress sent a letter in late August to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin urging sanctions on two Nvidia customers the company refers to as partners. The two companies, Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology Co. and Zhejiang Dahua Technology Co., make surveillance cameras used in the Muslim region of Xinjiang, where authorities have been accused of human-rights abuses against the indigenous Uighur population.
Another Nvidia partner, AI startup SenseTime Inc., operates in a public-security joint venture with the Xinjiang-based technology firm Leon Technology Co.
At a company event in Beijing in 2016, Nvidia touted Hikvision's use of its products to build artificial-intelligence capabilities into its cameras. On its Chinese website, Nvidia showcases how a Shanghai-based police research institute used Nvidia GPUs to shorten the time needed to sift through surveillance data from months to days.
Mr. Rubio said it is "deeply concerning that American chip-producing companies could be assisting in the building of China's high-tech police state."
An Nvidia spokesman said the work by the police institute was based on widely available image data. Nvidia declined to comment on Mr. Rubio's statement, but said it can't track every use of its chips and relies on the U.S. government for guidance on "entities around that should be subject to embargoes and sanctions, and we fully comply with those requirements."
In a move to safeguard the U.S. chip industry from China, the Justice Department recently unsealed charges against a Chinese state-owned firm and its Taiwan partner for allegedly stealing trade secrets from Micron Technology Inc., the U.S.'s largest memory-chip maker.
Nvidia's challenges are broader than just China. Between the start of October and Friday, its shares declined 43%, part of a broader tech-stock selloff in part fueled by the trade tensions. The pressure mounted last week after the company reported earnings that fell short of analyst expectations, after a drop in demand from cryptocurrency miners.
There is little evidence Nvidia saw the looming trade conflict or the concern over China's surveillance practices coming. Unlike many of its Silicon Valley peers, it doesn't spend heavily lobbying lawmakers in Washington. It wasn't until March of this year that the company first hired an executive to handle its government affairs in Asia -- Ge Jun, a longtime Apple Inc. and Intel official.
Nvidia executives are watching the trade fight with growing unease over whether it will curb its access to Chinese customers, according to a person familiar with the matter. Almost 20% of Nvidia's $9.7 billion in revenue last year came from China. Many of its chips are used there for assembly into other products, and it has invested heavily to tap China's burgeoning AI industries.
The company also is concerned that deteriorating relations between the world's two biggest economies are causing Beijing to double down on efforts to reduce reliance on U.S. suppliers of key hardware such as chips by nurturing homegrown competitors, eating into Nvidia's long-term business.
"China's ecosystem and economy depends on our technology," said Nvidia Chief Executive Jensen Huang, at a Silicon Valley event in March. "It's actually vitally important that the world continues to have a collaborative trading and open business relationship."
For now, Nvidia's chips remain indispensable to emerging Chinese tech companies such as SenseTime, one of the world's most valuable AI startups. SenseTime says it uses 14,000 Nvidia chips in servers across China, Japan and Singapore to enable facial-recognition software used by Chinese banks, smartphone companies, retail chains and police. While SenseTime also uses Qualcomm processors, SenseTime executives say the company couldn't have grown as quickly without Nvidia chips.
The U.S. exported $58.4 billion worth of semiconductors last year, and China was the No. 2 buyer behind Mexico, according to the U.S. International Trade Administration. Beijing has refrained from placing tariffs on semiconductors, indicating their critical importance to China, which has called for greater international cooperation on AI development.
"The entire semiconductor industry is in the same position, and we are all doing what we can to help our customers mitigate any negative impacts of the tariffs," said the Nvidia spokesman. Nvidia is helping some Chinese customers affected by U.S. tariffs on technology components shift their manufacturing to other regions, such as Taiwan or Mexico, he said.
Nvidia's most important products, its GPUs, are all manufactured in Taiwan, the spokesman said.
Nvidia was co-founded in 1993 by Mr. Huang, who was born in Taiwan and raised in Oregon. At first, the company developed gaming chips, and, later, graphics processing units, called GPUs, to produce the high-end graphics found in first-person shooter and other popular games. Gaming remains the company's biggest market.
In the past decade, AI developers began using the company's GPUs for other purposes. The chips have proved very efficient for sorting enormous amounts of data run through computers to enable them to make decisions, or "think" in ways similar to humans.
Nvidia GPUs boast thousands of simple computing units called cores that allow its chips to perform computations in parallel. (Most rivals' processors contain a smaller number of more complicated computing cores.) This makes them far faster at processing raw data. Nvidia has built layers of software, called CUDA, that allow AI scientists to write programs to get the best performance from the chips, with direct support from Nvidia engineers. Nvidia has a GPU sales team in China of about 100 people, who are responsible for training vendors and certifying engineers.
Nvidia accounts for at least 95% of the market for AI training of machines, according to Karl Freund, a senior analyst at technology-analysis firm Moor Insights & Strategy. As it did in the U.S., Nvidia built strong relationships in China with users by hosting programming competitions and Street Fighter game nights at universities. In 2011, Nvidia persuaded China's higher-education authorities to include CUDA programming into the curriculum. Now, many major colleges in China teach CUDA.
In 2010, China unveiled the world's fastest supercomputer, called Tianhe-1A. It contained 7,168 Nvidia GPUs. Nvidia said it would take more than 50,000 conventional processors and twice the floor space to match the speed.
"The performance and efficiency of Tianhe-1A was simply not possible without GPUs," Liu Guangming, who led the Chinese project, said at the time. Later that year, Mr. Liu gave Nvidia's Mr. Huang a tour of China's National Supercomputing Center in the northeastern city of Tianjin.
Eager to reclaim the fastest-computer crown for the U.S., officials at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee, affiliated with the Energy Department, turned to Nvidia as they upgraded their existing Jaguar supercomputer.
"We reached out to Jensen [Huang], and Jensen, to his credit, jumped on a plane," said Thomas Zacharia, the national lab's director. Nvidia's GPUs helped overcome speed and power-consumption barriers that were holding back Mr. Zacharia's team. The result was Titan, which overtook Tianhe-1A as the world's fastest computer in 2012, with 18,000 GPUs crammed inside.
In 2015, Nvidia's role in China's supercomputer project ended when the Commerce Department barred U.S. chip makers from selling to several Chinese supercomputer labs, including the Tianjin lab, saying the machines were being used in "nuclear explosive activities."
Eventually, Chinese engineers switched to less efficient domestic chips, packing many more of them into its machine to sneak back ahead of Oak Ridge's Nvidia-powered version.
Nvidia believed the Chinese supercomputer would be used for "open science research," including studies on solar panels, the spokesman said.
In June, the Oak Ridge lab again reclaimed its crown, setting new speed records with a supercomputer that contains more than 27,000 Nvidia GPUs.
Other sensitive Chinese projects also relied on Nvidia technology. The High Performance Data Mining Lab, a research unit of the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, created algorithms for satellite-communications technologies using Nvidia's Tesla chips and its CUDA system. The lab ran the algorithms in collaboration with a military research institute in Beijing, according to two 2012 case studies on Nvidia website and a research paper published by the Chinese university.
Nvidia said it doesn't "have any reason to believe that those studies involved anything other than technology that's generally known and widely applicable." The Chinese lab didn't respond to requests for comment.
Nvidia GPUs enable facial-recognition systems at the core of China's national-surveillance network. Officials at SenseTime said the company uses Nvidia chips to help build software, hardware and other services it sells to financial firms and Chinese police.
SenseTime co-founder Lin Dahua said Nvidia's chips "are the fundamental support for most of our research."
Chinese companies remain a long way behind U.S. companies in chip technology. Last year Beijing called for researchers to revolutionize chip technologies, and one of its goals was to build components 20 times faster than Nvidia's Tesla M40 chip. China is channeling tens of billions of dollars to up-and-coming chip makers. Alibaba, Baidu, Huawei Technologies Co. and an numerous startups are developing AI chips.
For now, Beijing is emphasizing cooperation more than competition. President Xi Jinping, in a letter read to a global AI conference in Shanghai in September, said China is willing to collaborate with other countries in AI development and security and share achievements.
One example is TuSimple, a startup founded in 2015 that is developing a fleet of self-driving trucks. TuSimple, a private company with offices in the U.S. and China, is one of more than 370 autonomous-driving companies with whom Nvidia says it has formed partnerships, including Baidu, Uber and Volkswagen AG.
A TuSimple truck uses an arsenal of cameras, radar and laser-light sensing devices connected to four Nvidia GPUs inside a computer. The system "sees" its surroundings and makes split-second decisions based on algorithms written using Nvidia's CUDA, said Hou Xiaodi, TuSimple's co-founder and CTO.
The only company in TuSimple's supply chain that can't be replaced, he said, is Nvidia.

Credit: By Dan Strumpf and Wenxin Fan
