Google is making more of its own semiconductors, preparing a new chip that can handle everything from YouTube advertising to big data analysis as the company tries to combat rising artificial-intelligence costs.
The new chip, called Axion, is a type of chip commonly used in big data centers. It adds to Google's efforts stretching back more than a decade to develop new computing resources, beginning with specialized chips used for AI work. Google has leaned into that strategy since the late 2022 release of ChatGPT kicked off an arms race that has threatened its dominant position as a gateway to the internet.
The chip efforts promise to reduce Google's reliance on outside vendors and bring it into competition with longtime partners such as Intel and Nvidia, analysts said. Google officials said they didn't view it as a competition.
"I see this as a basis for growing the size of the pie," said Amin Vahdat, the Google vice president who is overseeing the company's in-house chip operations.
Google's larger competitors in the cloud, Amazon.com and Microsoft, have also poured money into making their own chips as the AI boom has intensified demand for computing resources.
Google owed much of its early success to an investment in the chips necessary to fuel the company's web search algorithm. That often meant piecing together cheap, commercially available hardware in novel ways.
The boom in AI and its need for vastly more computing resources has pushed Google further in the direction of custom solutions. It has credited specialized AI chips it built, known as tensor processing units, or TPUs, with helping save money on services that make heavy use of AI.
Google has worked closely with semiconductor company Broadcom since 2016 to produce bespoke hardware.
Broadcom's custom-chip division had a surge in business after Google rapidly increased production of TPUs recently, Chief Executive Hock Tan said during a March internal presentation. The increase, he said, was partly in response to Microsoft incorporating AI features into its Bing search engine, going directly after Google's core business.
"They bought a ton," Tan said, according to a recording viewed by The Wall Street Journal. "They sure did."
The Broadcom division's operating profit of more than $1 billion in a single recent quarter came mostly from Google's business, Tan said. Broadcom didn't respond to a request for comment.
Google Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat told investors in January to expect notably larger spending on technical infrastructure such as AI chips this year. Parent company Alphabet's fourth-quarter capital expenditures rose by almost half to $11 billion from a year earlier.
Known as central processing units, or CPUs, Axion chips are suitable for a range of tasks including powering Google's search engine. They can play an important supporting role in AI by helping to process large amounts of data and handling the deployment of the services to billions of users, Google officials said.
Axion is based on circuitry from the British chip-design firm Arm, making Google the third big tech company after Amazon and Microsoft to use that framework for a data center CPU. The shift has supplanted an old status quo where big operators of server farms bought their CPUs almost exclusively from Intel and Advanced Micro Devices.
Those established chip makers are adapting to the changing landscape too, offering CPUs with built-in features for AI computation and separate chips that focus squarely on AI. Intel launched on Tuesday a third generation of its Gaudi AI chips that will start shipping out to customers this year.
Google has resisted selling chips directly to customers to install in their own data centers. The move would push the company more directly into competition with Intel and Nvidia, the biggest winner of the AI boom so far with more than 80% of the market for chips used to develop and serve the technology.
"Becoming a great hardware company is very different from becoming a great cloud company or a great organizer of the world's information," Google's Vahdat said.
Google has chosen instead to rent custom chips to cloud customers. It said the Axion chips will become accessible to external customers later this year, and the latest generation of its TPUs was now widely available.
In November, Google said it successfully connected more than 50,000 TPUs to build AI systems, what it called the largest effort of its kind. Google created Gemini using TPUs and will exclusively use the chips for processing user queries.
The company's growing cloud business has required balancing the competing demands of internal teams and demand from AI startups, a situation made more difficult by widespread supply constraints.
Some teams inside Google have been told they won't get any additional computing resources this year, partly because of growing demand for AI services, people familiar with the matter said.
Vahdat said Google prioritizes the fastest-growing products and services when deciding which areas should get more computing resources.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa and Asa Fitch
