Zipcar had a new co-creator for its latest advertising campaign: artificial intelligence.
The rental-car firm enlisted the help of generative AI -- a type of artificial intelligence that can create various types of content including text, images and audio -- to come up with a couple of headlines for outdoor ads that showcase the various reasons why people choose to rent Zipcars.
Ad firm Supernatural, which helped make some of the Zipcar ads, asked its AI tool to suggest occasions that would lead users to rent a Zipcar. A line that the tool generated, "Zip if bamboo too big for bus," was ultimately tweaked by a Zipcar copywriter to refer to a different oversize plant: "Zip if monster Monstera."
That's just one of many examples of the impact generative AI is already having on marketing. The growing popularity of OpenAI's ChatGPT and image-generating apps like Midjourney and DALL-E 2 has created a new sense of urgency among marketing professionals to embrace the technology.
Part of the appeal is artistic. Paul Caiozzo, Supernatural's co-founder, says generative AI will help "drive creativity because the possibilities are endless." Then there's the money side. AI can significantly reduce the time and cost of creating ad copy and images. And on top of all that, there's pressure not to be left behind as competitors adopt the technology.
Prominent names like Coca-Cola, travel-booking site Kayak, banking giant HSBC and fundraising platform GoFundMe are among those that have used generative-AI tools to enhance their marketing efforts. These tools are being integrated into many parts of the marketing ecosystem, aiding in tasks like generating ad slogans, crafting news releases, producing billboard images and helping to brainstorm new names for products and services, ad executives say.
All of this is causing some concerns in the industry. One is the possibility of intellectual-property disputes as AI draws on existing material to craft new content. There's also the potential for the technology to reduce the need for certain types of ad talent such as copywriters and graphic designers.And there's the fear that digital-ad giants like Google and Facebook will gain an even stronger foothold in the business by using AI tools to help create ads for marketers, further encroaching on advertising agencies' business. But such concerns aren't stopping AI's surge.
Fernando Machado, chief marketing officer of NotCo, a maker of plant-based foods, says a recent ad campaign depicting aging cows, pigs and chickens -- all of which were AI-generated -- cost "peanuts to do."
Machado embraced AI for the ad campaign because artificial intelligence is a key component of NotCo's business: The company uses AI to come up with animal-free milk and burgers by tapping into its databases of thousands of plants and plant-based ingredients.
But the cost savings were enormous. "Typically, I would spend $50,000 to $100,000 to create an image for an ad campaign, but in this case, it was like between $5,000 to $10,000," Machado says. He adds that AI should be seen as a tool to enhance human creativity, rather than a replacement.
Ad agency AKQA Bloom, a division of AKQA that made the NotCo campaign, says it relied on AI tools such as Midjourney, DALL-E 2 and Stable Diffusion to help it craft the images, which are meant to raise awareness among consumers that farm animals often have their lives cut short due to human consumption. The AI-generated images required minor human retouching, AKQA founder and Chief Executive Ajaz Ahmed says.
AKQA is embedding AI across its work and operations because it enables faster processes, superior outcomes and more cost-effective solutions, Ahmed says.
"AI is going to be a godsend for agencies," says Greg Paull, co-founder of R3, a consulting firm that helps match advertisers with agencies.
Known, a marketing firm, recently used its ChatGPT-powered tool -- nicknamed "The Big Lebotski" -- to come up with optimal keywords on which to bid on Google's search-ad platform, to lure subscribers to streaming service AMC+.
The AI-driven search campaign drove almost double the amount of new subscribers to the service, compared with the prior search campaign for AMC, the agency says, and the cost to acquire the subscribers was almost 50% lower than the prior campaign.
"This isn't a replacement for human labor because it's less expensive. This is better than human labor," says Known CEO Kern Schireson.
Several ad firms, including Publicis Groupe, are turning to AI to handle internal tasks and streamline workflows, partly to save money. Publicis is prototyping a tool that uses ChatGPT to help the agency with the arduous and time-consuming task of filling out so-called request-for-proposals from brands that are seeking to hire a new agency.For example, RFPsoften ask questions about an agency's experience or its perspective on the industry the potential client operatesin -- questions for which an AI tool could at least provide the first draft of a response.
It can sometimes take up to a month to address questions in RFPs, says Matt Marcus, chief experience officer for Publicis Groupe North America. Using AI, that work can be done within a week or less, he says.
Publicis and some other ad agencies also are using the technology to produce so-called spec work for advertisers, which agencies create to win new assignments.
Publicis used generative-AI technology for a successful new-business pitch to a packaged-goods company late last year. The pitch involved animated characters generated by DALL-E popping up on a screen when a QR code on one of the company's products was scanned. The characters, powered by ChatGPT, were interactive.
Publicis says AI technology also allowed it to create the spec campaign within a short time and at a cost of roughly $6,000. Without AI, the agency would have had to write code and scripts for each character, which would have taken roughly three weeks and cost more than $60,000 to produce, Publicis says.
Agencies have long complained about the money they waste on creating spec work for potential clients. Pitching for new business "is very expensive," R3's Paull says. "It's that ongoing cost of business that weighs on the agencies' margins."
Despite the benefits of generative-AI technology, some ad-agency executives have expressed concern about the potential risks of using it, mainly the uncertainty of how intellectual-property rules apply to these new tools.
TBWA, a creative agency owned by ad giant Omnicom Group that works on behalf of companies such as Apple, PepsiCo and Nissan, warned its staffers earlier this year not to use AI tools such as ChatGPT, Midjourney and DALL-E 2 for any client work, fearing the tech could lead to "reputational risks and legal claims against" the agency and its clients, according to an email seen by The Wall Street Journal.
"To simply encourage our teams to experiment without guardrails is more than foolhardy, it's irresponsible," TBWA Chief Executive Troy Ruhanen said in a statement.
Brad Lightcap, the chief operating officer of OpenAI, says images generated by DALL-E "are entirely new works," adding that an artist influenced by other people's work still produces something fundamentally new.
One question is whether ad agencies can afford to wait for the intellectual-property issue to be clarified. Some ad experts warn that ad agencies should move quickly to embrace generative AI, as the technology threatens to disrupt the business of advertising.
"If ad platforms like Google, Meta and Amazon all offer their own gen-AI ad-creation services, some agency demand may be at risk," says Mark Shmulik, an analyst at Bernstein. Meta said during an April earnings call that it is building new tools that will make it easier for companies to develop advertising.
R/GA, an ad firm, is wasting no time adopting generative AI. Tiffany Rolfe, R/GA's global chief creative officer, emphasizes the importance of being at the forefront of the change. "Somebody's going to be there, and we want it to be us."
---
Suzanne Vranica is a Wall Street Journal news editor in New York. She can be reached at suzanne.vranica@wsj.com.
Credit: By Suzanne Vranica
