Wall Street's reaction to Elon Musk's robotaxi reveal? Disappointment.
Shares in Tesla fell 8.8% on Friday following an event that was heavier on showbiz and lighter on business than investors had hoped after months of buildup. The stock drop -- the worst among those in the S&P 500 index -- erased about $67 billion of market value from Tesla, or more than the total worth of either General Motors or Ford Motor.
Thursday's highly anticipated event was expected to lay out Tesla's transformation into a robotics and artificial-intelligence powerhouse. Many investors were disappointed by a lack of details about how the EV pioneer planned to achieve such a feat.
At the tightly choreographed product launch, Tesla revealed a two-seat vehicle, which Musk called the Cybercab. The Tesla chief executive officer arrived at the presentation in the driverless car, which didn't have a steering wheel or pedals. The car drove itself, with Musk in the passenger seat, through a dark lot at Warner Bros. studios.
Musk surprised attendees with the reveal of a Robovan, an autonomous shuttle that can transport up to 20 people at a time. Optimus robots mingled with guests, and the CEO talked about plans for a new battery-charging technology that would use an inductive method, under which a car would only have to drive over a pad to recharge.
Following a strategic pivot toward robotics and autonomy this year, Musk had billed the event as Tesla's most significant since the launch of its benchmark-setting Model 3 in 2017.
"Investors we spoke to at the event thought the event was light of real numbers and timelines," said Tom Narayan, an analyst at Royal Bank of Canada. "These typically come at Tesla events. This one seemed focused on branding and marketing Tesla's vision."
Some attendees of the event were disappointed that Tesla didn't provide a demonstration of improvements to the Cybercab's self-driving technology, which would enable it to navigate public roads safely.
"We generally came away underwhelmed by the lack of details disclosed and short length of the Cybercab demo ride," wrote Deutsche Bank analysts who attended the event in a Friday note to investors.
There was also no mention of the ride-hailing app that Tesla previewed to investors in the spring and scant details on the business model behind Musk's vision for fully autonomous robotaxis, such as revenue projections or market size.
Tesla's underwhelming event helped to boost the shares of ride-booking leaders Uber Technologies and Lyft. Those stocks each rose about 10% Friday.
For investors, a move into robotaxis offers one way to justify Tesla's market value, which stood at $763 billion before the event, or almost three times higher than Toyota, the world's bestselling carmaker.
In the roughly half-hour presentation, Musk painted a picture of a green, sunny future in which autonomous vehicles eliminate parking lots and rush-hour traffic. Among the few concrete details were that Tesla's Cybercab would enter production by 2027 and sell for less than $30,000, a cost that would make it the cheapest model in its lineup.
To achieve those goals, Tesla will have to master two formidable technical challenges: cutting the production cost of electric vehicles, and making them drive themselves without human intervention to a safety level capable of satisfying risk-averse regulators. Musk didn't give his guests at the robotaxi event evidence of progress on either score.
Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
