Chemist and entrepreneur Jackie von Salm recently walked inside a receptor in the brain to inspect a new drug compound. As she looked at the brightly colored, cascading ribbons around her, she noted something: Part of the atomic structure, a series of thick, orange rods and hexagons, jutted toward her in an odd way, suggesting that the compound, a derivative of the psychedelic DMT, might be effective at treating addiction without having hallucinogenic effects.
"This is weird," says Dr. von Salm, the co-founder and chief scientific officer of Psilera Inc., a Tampa, Fla.-based company working to turn psychedelics into treatments for addiction, neurodegenerative diseases and mood disorders. "But it might be really unique and special."
The odd positioning of the compound might be the right shape to latch onto serotonin receptors in the brain that are involved with hallucination and addiction. That insight was possible thanks to a technology more closely associated with gamers than scientists: Virtual reality.
Dr. von Salm is one of a growing number of drug-discovery researchers who are using VR to see, in new ways, the molecules they have long studied on computer screens. Their goal is to investigate subtle changes in the distance, shape and chemical properties of atomic structures that could give them clues about how well a drug might work and speed up the drug-discovery process.
Dr. von Salm was wearing a VR headset that uses 3-D molecular modeling software made by Nanome, a San Diego-based startup. The software incorporates experimental and theoretical data about molecular structures.
In VR, drug molecules and proteins, color-coded by the scientists, loom large. Using hand controllers, scientists can grab the structures to rotate them, make them bigger or smaller and get a closer look at their positioning.
For decades, scientists have been using software, computer systems with projector screens and computer monitors that may require the use of 3-D glasses to help visualize molecular structures. These methods can be complex, tedious or prohibitively expensive, some scientists say. They lack the immersive and intuitive quality of VR, which can also help scientists collaborate.
Some scientists expect that VR will become a widespread tool, helping to shorten the yearslong drug design and discovery process and potentially get drugs to market faster.
"It allows us to democratize the process of structural biology and drug design, which certainly will speed up the ability to get lead molecules that we can test," says Glen Spraggon, director of structural biology at the Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, part of the innovation arm of Swiss drug company Novartis International AG.
Drug discovery is less like finding a key to fit a lock -- a familiar but misleading analogy -- and more like finding a dance partner who can match your moves, as scientists at U.K.-based biotech company C4X Discovery Holdings PLC put it.
Drug compounds are geometrically complex, with dozens or hundreds of atoms. To treat illness, many drug compounds must fit into pockets of target protein receptors that can have tens of thousands of atoms and their own unique geometry.
If they are not nestled in the right way, the drug won't work or might hit the wrong target and cause side effects. On top of that, drug molecules and proteins aren't rigid; they change shape over time.
C4X is designing small molecules to find drugs for treating cancer and autoimmune diseases. The company is developing its own VR platform, 4Sight, to help make drug-molecule visualization faster and easier.
Recently, Nick Ray, C4X's vice president of medicinal chemistry, used a version of the 4Sight technology to see a simulation of the thousands of different shapes that could be made by a set of the company's small molecules. In an instant, he says, it was obvious that many of the shapes of these molecules were rodlike, which meant that they might be more likely to bind with the protein target he was researching and treat disease. The insight led him to give priority to studying that set of molecules instead of the ones that were curly shaped.
Since 2018, cancer researchers at the University of California San Francisco have been using VR to better understand the genetic mutations in cancer cells that might make a patient resistant to treatment. For example, in VR, it was clear that the reason a drug didn't bind properly to its protein target in the cancer cell was because of the movement of a portion of the protein called the P-loop. The movement was caused by a mutation in the target.
On a computer monitor, it was difficult to see the tiny change in the movement. "When there are changes like that, the VR is critical," says Beth Apsel Winger, a hematologist and oncologist at the school's department of pediatrics.
Today, there are limits to how much content can be viewed in VR because of the massive file sizes of drug molecules and proteins, as well as simulations of their movement, which can strain processing power. Advances in hardware, software and computing power over the next decade could provide a solution.
VR has been a part of Novartis's drug-discovery process for five years. The company's scientists have made progress using the technology to find a small molecule to fill a pocket in the main protease of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19. The protease is a protein that the virus needs to assemble itself within a cell. Novartis is testing an inhibitor, or enzyme, that could block the main protease across many coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2, to halt the replication of the virus in people, Dr. Spraggon says. This is a step before clinical trials.
Adding sound and artificial intelligence to VR could expand the technology's value.
Markus Buehler, a materials scientist and engineering professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is combining VR with sound waves to detect subtle changes in molecular motions that would otherwise be difficult to observe on computers.
Dr. Buehler's team is developing a system that could allow a user wearing a VR headset to walk through 3-D models of coronaviruses, while hearing various sounds to represent the vibrational frequencies of different parts of the viruses. "You begin to hear specific regions of resonances that are really interesting," he says.
Their work recently led to a discovery. Coronaviruses can be more lethal or infectious depending on the vibrations within the spike proteins that are found on the surface of the virus, he says. The scientists hope to use this information to determine who might get sicker, which variants are more deadly and how to mitigate the effects of the virus.
Nanome, which was founded by experts in nanoengineering, electrical engineering, human-computer interaction and VR, is working to develop an AI assistant that can guide users through their VR experience.
For now, Dr. von Salm says she is pleased to stand in a virtual room and visualize her compounds without having to rely so much on imagination or computer renderings.
"Even for the best people who have a really amazing imagination, you'd put them in this room, and they'd be in awe," she says.
Nanome CEO Steve McCloskey inspects the structure of a mutated cancer protein using the company's VR software.
Psilera co-founder Jackie von Salm uses Nanome's software to research drug compounds. In VR, she noticed that part of the atomic structure of a derivative of the psychedelic DMT jutted toward her oddly, suggesting the compound might help treat addiction without hallucinogenic effects.
Credit: By Sara Castellanos
