It started as a match made in heaven. Hollywood and Silicon Valley: a perfect pairing of good looks and big brains, content and platforms, stars and nerds. The marriage was brokered by a giant with a foot in both worlds, Steve Jobs, who with iTunes gave the music industry a solution to its mishandling of piracy. No one seemed to mind that it was a shotgun wedding.
Now the relationship is on the rocks, a victim of seemingly irreconcilable differences. The biggest technology companies -- Apple, Facebook, Amazon and Google -- are enjoying unprecedented success, while most major film studios can't seem to catch a break.
Celebrity divorces can be entertaining material for gossip sites, but a split between two of America's most dynamic industries could have serious consequences. These economic engines need each other to exist. As Sony founder Akio Morita once quipped when explaining why his company had bought Columbia Pictures in 1989: "Hardware needs software." A media player or distribution platform is worth nothing without content to watch or games to play.
Hollywood always had a youthful image, but it isn't keeping pace with a new generation of easily distracted, mobile-first consumers. Getting the under-25 audience to abstain from social media for two hours and sit in a dark auditorium is increasingly difficult. The television business, too, was built for a bygone era, a quainter time when tens of millions of Americans gathered around the set to watch the same program. Now it's any screen, anytime, anywhere.
Silicon Valley's business model is far more agile. In the 18 months Hollywood takes to make and release a film, the tech industry could recalibrate its entire future. These companies thrive on creative destruction, which is why they are constantly designing fresh platforms. An app can go from zero users to hundreds of millions in a few years.
Hollywood rightly feels under attack. The studios and media companies carry on their century-old task of telling stories that move viewers -- only now they sell their creations to competitors in Northern California. There's no way Hollywood can win under the current rules.
Big-screen ticket sales are still a $38 billion a year industry, but the trends are worrisome. With so many other options competing for time and attention, it now takes massively expensive blockbusters to pull in a strong box office. Even then, one action-packed film's $250 million budget could have been used in San Francisco to incubate a dozen startups.
The TV industry isn't doing much better. Netflix and Amazon are buying bespoke content from Hollywood, decimating viewing patterns and pressuring studios to shorten movie-release windows. Meanwhile, content is atomizing. On-demand viewing at home is driven by thousands of microniches. Young mobile audiences are perfectly happy watching low-budget, peer-made content on sites such as YouTube.
How does Hollywood change the ending to this very scary script? Studios have to play to their core strength of telling compelling stories. Yet they should also start to reimagine themselves as data-driven software companies. Movies and TV shows are simply entertaining forms of software.
Silicon Valley often has been free to write the new viewing rules simply because Hollywood has been a no-show. To get ahead of the next big change, Tinseltown needs to get its geek on by investing in big data, artificial intelligence, social media, psychometrics and whatever else will help its content reach an optimal audience.
In the best-case scenario, Hollywood would develop the ability to keep up with the constant paradigm shifts generated by Silicon Valley. Which isn't to say it will be easy, since the two industries have very different notions of what constitutes success: profits for Hollywood, market share for Silicon Valley.
For their part, the Northern Californians would be smart to resolve lingering issues that have generated mistrust. Silicon Valley could do more to fight movie piracy -- maybe by developing an asset-management system based on blockchain, the technology behind the digital currency Bitcoin. That would win friends anew in Hollywood.
Simply improving communication between the two industries -- through the executive summits and technology conferences put on by Paramount's New Media head, Tom Hayes, for example -- would go a long way as well. If mutual distrust can be overcome, there's room for greater collaboration on everything from chat bots to better cameras. This could hasten the arrival of new consumer experiences that benefit both sides.
The potential is there. Imagine if the world's two most famous economic superheroes joined forces to reinvent the future. Sounds like an epic movie.
---
Mr. Malone is a writer in Silicon Valley.
Credit: By Michael S. Malone
