Say this much for Lina Khan: Losing doesn't get her down. After a federal judge rejected the Federal Trade Commission's bid to block Microsoft's acquisition of Activision Blizzard, the Chair has turned to targeting OpenAI's ChatGPT for allegedly spewing misinformation.
The FTC this week sent OpenAI a 20-page letter with 49 queries and 17 document demands that relate to everything from its privacy policies to training. Its sweeping demand is a fishing expedition, though the analogy may be unfair to fishermen who unlike Ms. Khan know something about what they're trying to catch.
Ms. Khan is investigating OpenAI to justify a technology land grab for her agency. Congress hasn't authorized the FTC to regulate artificial intelligence or large language models like ChatGPT, which use algorithms to recognize, summarize, translate and generate text in human-like fashion. The models are trained on masses of information scraped from the Internet.
Yet they share the all too human tendency to fabricate information, or "hallucinate" in tech jargon. ChatGPT warns it can "produce inaccurate information," and users are responsible for verifying that the text the bot spits out is accurate. Sometimes people don't.
A New York lawyer this spring was caught using ChatGPT to conduct legal research for a lawsuit against an airline. The giveaway? His brief included fictitious judicial decisions, quotes and citations. Professors report finding hallucinations in student papers.
ChatGPT isn't perfect, though no technology is. Its latest model is more accurate than the initial version that OpenAI released last November. Meta, Microsoft and Google have developed their own large language models that are spurring competition and innovation.
Professions like medicine and law are discussing how to use the chatbots, and Congress is debating how to regulate artificial intelligence more broadly. Yet as is her wont, Ms. Khan is pre-empting Congress.
The FTC wants to know OpenAI's processes for correcting a "propensity to 'hallucinate'" and "the extent to which Your Large Language Model Products have the capacity to generate statements about real individuals that are false, misleading, or disparaging" as well as "for determining whether any given specific individual constitutes a 'public figure.'" Does this standard also apply to what the New York Times or ProPublica write about certain people?
The FTC's letter also asks OpenAI to explain its policy for handling complaints about specific instances in which its model has "actually or allegedly generated false, misleading or disparaging statements about individuals" and "any of the harms discussed as 'safety challenges.'"
The FTC's queries suggest it may be looking to make OpenAI liable for false statements. Social-media platforms enjoy liability protection under Section 230 for content generated by users. But if someone broadcasts a defamatory ChatGPT statement, who should be held liable? That's a question for Congress.
Ms. Khan said during a House hearing on Thursday that her agency lacks "sufficient funding." Yet the FTC seems to have more than enough money to file baseless lawsuits and regulate outside its lane.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Just the Facts for the FTC" -- WSJ July 21, 2023)
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Newspaperman's Trick for AI" -- WSJ July 24, 2023)
