Microsoft Corp. and Sony Corp. are teaming up to work on cloud and game-streaming technologies, an unusual partnership between two longtime videogame rivals as they face new threats from some of tech's biggest names.
Through the partnership, announced Thursday, Sony is considering using Microsoft's Azure cloud service for streaming its game content. It also calls for potential collaboration between the two involving Microsoft's artificial intelligence and Sony's image-sensor chips.
The pact comes as Sony and Microsoft face brewing competition from Amazon.com Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google, two cloud-technology titans with designs on grabbing a share of the $130 billion-and-growing videogame industry.
A strong cloud solution is particularly important for game makers as the industry moves from cartridges and discs to downloads and, ultimately, streaming content over the internet.
Microsoft recently introduced a new Xbox One S console without a slot for receiving discs.
Amazon owns videogame-development studios and a package of tools that it calls Lumberyard for others to make games on its leading Amazon Web Services platform.
Google in March made its biggest foray into the industry by introducing what has long been considered the Holy Grail of gaming: a streaming internet service called Stadia where anyone, anywhere can start playing high-end games, with no pricey hardware required. In its service, a person watching video of a game on YouTube could click a button and instantly start playing.
While several videogame companies let gamers stream some games -- particularly older titles that aren't technologically demanding -- none has been able to deliver the most complex games in real time to scores of people simultaneously without some slowdown, or lag. That is an absolute no for gamers.
Microsoft, whose Azure is the No. 2 cloud platform, recently said the future of gaming is a world where people can play games on any device of their choosing. It plans to publicly test its own game-streaming initiative later this year.
Microsoft and Sony have dabbled together in gaming before, though nothing as critical as exploring how to work together in an instrumental emerging technology like the cloud.
Sony added Microsoft's "Minecraft" game to several of its PlayStation consoles, while its own PlayStation Network online gaming service supports Microsoft's PlayFab for enabling players to make in-game purchases.

Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman and Patrick Thomas
