LAS VEGAS -- Artificial intelligence is becoming more commonplace among manufacturing companies, as illustrated by the range of AI-enabled devices on display at this week's CES technology show.
"We see 2020 as the year that AI goes mainstream in business," said Bob Lord, senior vice president of International Business Machines Corp.'s cognitive applications and developer ecosystems division. "We fundamentally believe AI is about augmenting intelligence and making human decision-making more efficient and effective."
Companies as diverse as LG Electronics Inc. and boat maker Brunswick Corp. have products in development that use algorithms to figure out everything from how best to clean clothes to how to let boat captains steer their vessels with hand gestures.
"You have to be very efficient at interacting with your customers via software. It's no longer web and mobile. It's sense and remote control in the real world," said Frank E. Gillett, vice president and principal analyst at Forrester Research Inc. "And AI is just the latest aspect of software that companies need to master in order to make sense of the growing volume of data," he added.
Bosch
Engineering company Robert Bosch GmbH showed its Virtual Visor, which is designed to replace the traditional car visor that keeps the sun out of the driver's face.
"AI is a big enabler for this product," said Jason Zink, a technical expert in Bosch's car multimedia division.
The product is a transparent screen placed where a typical car visor would be. It has a digital camera and uses a set of AI algorithms to determine where a driver is sitting and where the features on their face are. It then shades a portion of the visor to block sun glare from hitting the driver's eyes. Bosch is in discussion with car makers, though it gave no launch date.
LG Electronics
A new washing machine from LG Electronics uses AI to precisely clean clothes. The AI DD washer has internal sensors that detect the volume and weight of a load as well as the fabric of the clothes. An AI system then compares those details against 20,000 data points to determine the cycle settings that will best clean the laundry.
The AI, for example, can detect a load of T-shirts and pants and then set the type of wash, the temperature and the time for the best results.
Deere
Deere & Co.'s See & Spray agricultural machine is pulled behind a tractor and uses computer vision and machine learning to determine which plants are healthy crops and which are weeds. The system allows farmers to apply herbicides only to the unwanted plants. The device could save a farmer up to $30 per acre, according to the company.
The unit, which has been in development, is being tested in the field. "We've got AI in production, on machines, today and there is more coming," said John Stone, senior vice president for the Intelligent Solutions Group at Deere.
Brunswick
Recreational boat maker and marine-engine company Brunswick is showcasing a concept helm that allows a boat to be controlled by voice or hand gestures. The company's boating brands include Boston Whaler and Sea Ray.
"We see the role of AI in assisting the experienced captain and being able to make the novice more and more like an experienced boater," said the company's chief executive, David Foulkes.
The voice system uses technology from Sonos Inc. called Snips. Brunswick knew that it needed to train the system to recognize a lot of nautical terms and that the system would have to run on a small computing device that wouldn't take up too much room on a boat. Snips provides the type of AI framework that Brunswick needed, plus it runs on small, lightweight hardware.
The hand-gesture system, which would work through an onboard camera, is something the company expects will take longer to bring to market. The technology is very new and few software vendors are working on it. Brunswick "is building it from the ground up," said Troy Kollmann, director of the company's research lab.
Mercedes-Benz
Daimler AG subsidiary Mercedes-Benz is developing an AI system for its Sprinter vans that can alert workers about which packages belong on a vehicle and where to place them, among other things. It is expected to be available within a year.
The technology is called Coros, which stands for "cargo recognition and organization system." It is intended to help transportation and shipping companies with "last-mile" logistics, said Nick Tempelhoff, a director at Mercedes-Benz Research & Development North America, which is creating the technology. The cargo sections of the vans are equipped with cameras that can read bar codes from several feet away, using machine-learning algorithms to predict what that bar code is if it is obstructed or damaged.
When an employee at an appliance-parts distributor, for instance, is loading the cargo section of a van, interior lights will turn red if the package doesn't belong in that vehicle. If the package does belong, a blue strip of light will appear on the shelf section where it should be placed. That same light appears when the delivery driver is retrieving a package to drop off. This happens even if a package moves around during transport, as object-recognition technology can keep track of its location.
The company said the system helps optimize package loading, allows for greater inventory-tracking transparency and reduces training expenditures.
Bobcat
Industrial-equipment maker Bobcat is developing features that make its vehicles safer and more efficient.
The company, part of Doosan Bobcat Inc., is working on one feature called "obstacle avoidance" for its compact construction vehicles, which can be used for loading pallets, digging and more. The feature, which relies on augmented reality technology, allows equipment users to create virtual borders where they don't want the vehicle to encroach.
The company is also developing semiautonomous loaders that can travel independently between workers, say, in a warehouse. Both systems are expected to be available this year.

Credit: By John McCormick and Jared Council
