Stocks pulled back, a second straight daily retreat since investors excited by the potential for lower interest rates pushed up indexes to records.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average led the way lower, declining 0.4%, or 162 points. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite each fell 0.3%.
All three indexes remain up on the year, already exceeding many Wall Street forecasts for full-year gains.
"I suspect that many investors over the next couple of days are going to be asking themselves the question, 'Do we need to get more bullish in our assumptions or do we need to take a couple of chips off the table?'" said Steve Chiavarone, head of the multiasset group at money manager Federated Hermes.
The firm called for the S&P 500 this year to hit 5200 points, which it breached for the first time last week. Yet it is difficult to be a seller when the Federal Reserve is signaling rate cuts this year and the economy is growing, Chiavarone said.
A narrow majority of Federal Reserve officials last week reaffirmed projections to cut interest rates three times this year despite inflation that has proved sticky in recent months.
"The risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals are moving into better balance," Fed governor Lisa Cook, a voting member of the policymaking Federal Open Market Committee, said Monday during a lecture at Harvard University.
Treasury yields ticked higher, ending a four-day slide. The yield on benchmark 10-year notes ended at 4.252%, up from 4.217% on Friday.
John Bailer, deputy head of equity income at Newton Investment Management, said there are signs that stocks besides big technology firms are joining the rally. He has added energy and finance shares and expects the next round of corporate results will determine the market's direction more than central bankers.
The current round of quarterly earnings is winding down. Spice maker McCormick and day-trader favorite GameStop are scheduled to report earnings Tuesday. Results from cruise operator Carnival and payroll firm Paychex are due Wednesday, while pharmacy giant Walgreens Boots Alliance is set for Thursday.
Equity and bond markets are closed Friday for Good Friday.
In individual stocks, Super Micro Computer remained the hottest stock in the S&P 500, rising 7.2% to bring its year-to-date gain to 267%.
Micron Technology gained 6.3% to a record $117.13. It was the seventh straight daily gain for the memory-chip company, which last week gave a rosier outlook than analysts had expected, due to artificial-intelligence server demand rippling through the market for data storage.
Videogame maker Take-Two Interactive Software led the S&P 500 lower, falling 4.1% following a trade publication's report that the latest installment of its blockbuster "Grand Theft Auto" series may be delayed.
United Airlines lost 3.4% after the Federal Aviation Administration said it would increase oversight of the carrier following a string of safety issues. United faces potential restrictions on new routes and the use of new planes, The Wall Street Journal reported.
In commodity markets, cocoa futures continued to surge into uncharted territory. Chocolate's key ingredient rose 7.9% on Monday to settle at $9,649 a metric ton in New York. At $710 a metric ton, the daily gain was the largest ever. Shares of Hershey and snack maker Mondelez International shed 2.9% and 2.1%, respectively.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 ticked up less than 0.1% to a record. Germany's DAX ended up 0.3%, also marking a high. London's FTSE fell 0.2%.
At midday Tuesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 Stock Average was down 0.1%, but Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 0.7% and South Korea's Kospi was up 1.3%. S&P 500 futures were up 0.1%.
Credit: By Ryan Dezember
