[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
When life gives you lemons, Silicon Valley may not have the best recipe to make lemonade.
Shares of New York-based insurer Lemonade are trading around $14 after it reported a second-quarter net loss of $67 million earlier this month. Two years ago, they were briefly above $180. The company went public at $29 in 2020.
Lemonade was founded by technology entrepreneurs Dan Schreiber and Shai Wininger as part of a new crop of "insurtech" startups seeking to upend traditional insurance through automation, data and artificial intelligence. It uses a smartphone app to replace agents, a chatbot to get rid of paperwork and AI algorithms to pay claims swiftly. Unclaimed premiums are channeled to charities selected by customers.
This sounds like the perfect nonalcoholic cocktail to attract Gen Z. Lemonade's idea is to start with renters' insurance and cross-sell other product lines -- homeowners, car, pets and term life -- to its young customers as they get older and wealthier. This is meant to circumvent a big insurtech hurdle: Tech-style focus on growth attracts the least-desirable policyholders and, without the benefit of size, there isn't enough data to price risks accurately.
Lemonade's financial metrics are moving in the right direction, and it remains more loved by the market than peers Root and Hippo. Those two focus on cars and homeowners, respectively, where cutthroat players such as Geico, Progressive and Allstate dominate. By contrast, renters' insurance is a small market with infrequent claims.
In the second quarter, Lemonade's loss ratio -- claims relative to premiums -- dropped to a creditable 47% in the renters segment. However, direct-to-consumer companies spend heavily on tech and, once these costs are added, a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests the business still loses money. Also, it is hard to know how Lemonade's ratio compares with peers: The market isn't large enough for big insurers to report comparable numbers.
Meanwhile, the company's loss ratio on homeowners' insurance, excluding natural catastrophes, was 69%, far above the 47% reported by Allstate. Lemonade didn't publish a loss ratio for autos, but Jefferies analyst Yaron Kinar thinks it is a deeply money-losing 137%.
This suggests Lemonade has no clear edge over peers in pricing insurance, and that its margins could get worse as it expands into more competitive lines. Even if it stuck to renters, a $5 billion niche market would hardly justify an enterprise value of almost twice expected sales. Many insurers trade below one times sales.
The overall impression is that Lemonade's executives are gambling in their quest to improve results. As cases like WeWork have shown, mixing Silicon Valley creativity with the kind of business your grandfather knew can mean investors end up sucking on a lemon.
Credit: By Jon Sindreu
