America feels like an alcoholic household -- crazy with grievance, accusation, irrational rage, screaming in the middle of the night. The children lie in the dark, wide-eyed, listening. In the morning, the family comes downstairs trying to pretend that everything is normal. There's a lot of pretending: The southern border isn't wide open; unpunished crime is social justice; the president of Harvard deserves her job.
Things aren't normal. Everyone knows it. The country doesn't quite recognize itself. America has gone astray in a strange new landscape. It's a different America all right.
In an alcoholic household, the one you thought you could trust becomes a stranger -- suddenly dangerous. Trust is the first casualty. A baffled country can neither grasp nor admit what it has become.
The left denounces the evil of what it claims the country has always been: racist, oppressive, toxically male, transphobic. The right rages against the evil of what the country has become: perverse, perverted, Marxist, sniveling, woke. Each side does its part to make the country infinitely worse than it needs to be.
What's going on? For one thing, Americans have grown addicted to their loathings. There's a touch of sadomasochism in all this. Hate can be oddly stimulating for the hater and the hated. The bystander, too. Politics and culture wars are almost as satisfying as shooting wars. Human nature craves a certain amount of mayhem and carnage.
On the other hand, the Joe Biden vs. Donald Trump rematch seems especially stupid. It's the wrong war in the wrong place at the wrong time. Politics doesn't have to be this dumb. At the end of 2023, the country bounces along like Custer on the way to the Little Big Horn: So far, so good. The regimental band plays "Garryowen."
Republicans persist in the charade of their debates, though Mr. Trump doesn't show up. Why should he? Instead he itinerates from one MAGA rally to another, his rhetoric growing more baroque and feral. His enemies are "vermin," he says, using Joseph Goebbels's term for Jews. He promises, if elected, to unleash on his enemies -- meaning about half the country -- the shock and awe of his wrath.
The Democrats, increasingly divided, sleepwalk toward their own disaster. They pretend, but don't believe, that their 81-year-old president and his vice president -- a pressing existential problem in her own right -- have performed so brilliantly during their first engagement that they should be booked for another four years.
This isn't quite American democracy but the 21st century's travesty of it. All three branches of the federal government have one way or another become disreputable. The president's approval rating is down in the 30s. Congress is almost picturesque in its dysfunction. More than three dozen members of the House have decided not to run for re-election. Not worth it. Less than half of Americans, polls say, trust the Supreme Court.
Is such incoherence inevitable? Is it a byproduct of the immense changes that have swept away the previous America? We live in the aftermath of the old country, wondering what happened to it and waiting nervously for the new America to emerge. With luck, such moments call forth great leaders -- Abraham Lincoln, Franklin D. Roosevelt. Is some such figure waiting in the wings? Maybe a country is entitled to only so much luck. A period of great change also brings out charlatans and warlords and false messiahs. Politics becomes a little medieval.
The secret of leadership -- and of demagoguery -- is to draw the public imagination into its projections. In the 21st century's universe of screens, the effect is hypertrophied: Fantasy replaces reality. Technology empowers hallucination. It turns politics into a Marx Brothers nightmare: clowns tossing sticks of dynamite around. Mr. Trump is good at this. He is Dr. Seuss's Cat in the Hat. The surreal novelty of the moment calls forth a tumble of images -- like a rapid scroll down TikTok.
It's no way to run a republic for grown-ups. In innocent, primitive days of yore, the political circus was entertaining. Maybe that's what got us into trouble. Lately, the audience has lost the faculty of laughter.
The deepest fear is that the show has barely started. Wait until artificial intelligence has its bar mitzvah in a year or two. "Today I am a man," it will say before really going to work upon the ignorant world. It will be as if the evolution of Homo sapiens had done an about-face, yielding to the gleaming new species that is being conjured up out of the rare earths. It will be as if human beings, having already reverted, in politics, to the great-ape stage, were destined to retreat still farther, dissolving at last into an ocean of primordial brainlessness.
Are things that bad? Drunks can get sober. Countries can change. But not without brains and faith, not without abandoning the compulsion to lie and the weird self-righteousness that addiction begets. The failures have been complex -- spiritual, social and otherwise. Maybe nothing can be done.
Are we talking about America as a dysfunctional household? Or as a lost civilization? Both. The former, if it can't change, becomes the latter.
---
Mr. Morrow is a senior fellow at the Ethics and Public Policy Center and author of "The Noise of Typewriters: Remembering Journalism."
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: The Adults in the Government" -- WSJ Dec. 28, 2023)
Credit: By Lance Morrow
