Advertising giants Omnicom Group Inc. and Publicis Groupe SA announced Sunday they had agreed to merge, in a $35 billion cross-border link-up that shows how Big Data is making Madison Avenue look more like Wall Street.
The combination of U.S.'s Omnicom and France's Publicis is aimed at restoring the balance of power between advertising agencies and such Silicon Valley digital firms as Google Inc. and Facebook Inc. At the same time, the advertising companies hope that by joining forces, they will be better equipped for an industry increasingly dominated by data-driven analysis and automated trading.
About 22% of global ad spending now is digital, according to eMarketer, a share projected to grow to 27% by 2017. Besides Google and Facebook, firms such as Salesforce.com and Adobe Systems Inc. are moving more deeply into the industry, posing new competition for ad companies.
"All of these tech players didn't exist, didn't compete, even on the fringes of our business, even five years ago," Omnicom's chief executive, John Wren, said in an interview. The merger, he said, will "create a lot of opportunities for us, some defensive and some offensive."
Mr. Wren and Publicis Chief Executive Maurice Levy are to be co-CEOs for 30 months, after which Mr. Levy, who initiated the talks, is slated to become nonexecutive chairman and Mr. Wren to continue as CEO, the companies said.
To be called PublicisOmnicom Group, the new company would have combined revenue of $22.7 billion, based on 2012 figures for each, overtaking WPP Group PLC's GBP 10.37 billion ($15.95 billion) revenue posted last year.
The hope is to close the deal in the fourth quarter of 2013 or first quarter of 2014, though it could face antitrust scrutiny.
The combination would bring some of Madison Avenue's best-known advertising agencies under one roof.
Omnicom, whose agencies include BBDO, TBWA Worldwide and media buyer OMD, works for marketers such as McDonald's Corp. and PepsiCo Inc. Publicis owns Leo Burnett and Saatchi & Saatchi as well as media-buying firm Starcom Mediavest and digital agencies such as Razorfish. Its clients include L'Oreal SA, Procter & Gamble Co. and Renault SA.
Of the growing portion of global ad spending that is digital, the money flows disproportionately to Google, which not only sells online search ads but runs an automated marketplace for buying online ads, and to Facebook, which has a massive audience and plenty of data about its users.
With revenue three times that of WPP last year, Google is a formidable competitor for ad agencies, particularly in an industry where data collection has assumed greater importance.
Advertisers use data to better target their ads at certain demographic groups, taking into account people's Internet surfing behavior or their purchasing habits. To do this efficiently requires access to vast amounts of data, where Google has a head start.
"It's trillions of pieces of data that we have to crunch down in order to go down to very small segments of the population to deliver some single messages to. . . for that we need scale," Mr. Levy said in an interview.
In a statement announcing the deal, the Publicis CEO noted that "the communication and marketing landscape has undergone dramatic changes in recent years, including the exponential development of new media giants, the explosion of Big Data, blurring of the roles of all players and profound changes in consumer behavior."
He said that Publicis and Omnicom hope the combination will benefit clients "by bringing together the most comprehensive offering of analog and digital services."
David Bank, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets, said, "The bigger an ad agency is, the more likely they are to have more access to consumer data and data around the pricing of online ad impressions," which helps them get the best price for their clients when they are buying from "digital behemoths like Google and Facebook."
Meanwhile, an increasing portion of ads is being bought and sold on automated exchanges, known as "programmatic buying," rather than through Madison Avenue media-buying firms that rely on tight-knit relationships between media sales executives and ad buyers.
The market for automated buying is relatively small, but fast growing. According to eMarketer, U.S. advertisers will spend $3.4 billion on real-time bidding in 2013, mostly in online display ads. But Mr. Wren told analysts earlier this month that, eventually, "a lot of traditional media will get purchased this way."
While ad firms have set up their own automated trading desks, they face lots of competition. Some marketers, such as Kellogg, use independent providers instead of agency-owned trading desks.
Alternatively, marketers can go straight to Google, which owns DoubleClick Bid Manager -- previously called Invite Media -- a system that allows advertisers to buy ad space across the web.
To compete, ad companies have invested heavily in building systems that play in this arena and data that help improve their buying. Maintaining and updating these systems can be expensive.
"With an integrated data and automated buying operation, the combined scale of Publicis and Omnicom would be better-positioned to compete against traditional agency competitors as well as nontraditional competitors like Google," said Rajeev Goel, chief executive officer at PubMatic Inc., a tech company that helps website owners manage and sell ad space on their websites.
Data analysis is even playing a role in shaping of ads themselves. Last year, Samsung mined Twitter for critical comments about the launch of Apple Inc.'s new iPhone and used them to shape its ads.
All the major ad-agency holding companies in recent years have been snapping up data scientists and engineers.
"There has been a huge shift in the way we do business," said Jonathan Nelson, chief executive of Omnicom's digital business, in a recent interview. "We are borrowing black-box trading techniques out of Wall Street; we are looking at genetic algorithms; we are looking at artificial intelligence; we are looking at predictive models; we are looking for anything that might give marketers an edge."
In January, for instance, Omnicom hired Amit Bhattacharyya as a data scientist at its data and analytics company, Annalect. His background includes helping build a particle detector on a NASA-funded experiment during his graduate studies and working as a quantitative analyst on Wall Street.
"When I was young, I thought I'd be an astronaut or a physics professor," Mr. Bhattacharyya said. He was drawn to advertising by the bigger role played by data.
The Annalect unit has about 200 data scientists and programmers on staff, Omnicom says. Publicis also has hired many of these types of expersts.
The deal comes as marketers, looking to cut costs wherever they can, increasingly squeeze down their costs for ad services, in some cases including by delaying payments to agencies. The merger gives the ad company more power to fight back.
"This consolidation could be favorable for profit margins at the holding companies because it reduces the competition when services are priced for clients," said Brian Wieser, of Pivotal Research Group.
The combined company would dominate the ad-buying world, spending roughly $100 billion a year, about 20% of the global media business, according to analysts.
A potential hurdle in addition to the antitrust one is account conflicts. Omnicom counts Pepsi as one of its biggest clients, while Publicis does work for Coca-Cola Co. Ad companies can serve rivals so long as the businesses are housed at different firms or agencies under a holding company, but some clients don't want to be in the same ad holding company as a rival.
On a conference call with reporters, Mr. Wren acknowledged possible account conflicts. "Do I expect to have difficulties? Yes. Do I expect to have resolutions? Absolutely," he said.
Credit: By Suzanne Vranica and Ruth Bender
