[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Perhaps no tech company, not even Microsoft or Alphabet's Google, is better poised than Nvidia to reap significant near-term benefits from the race to build up generative artificial-intelligence capabilities. Here is the problem: Everyone knows it.
Nvidia's share price has more than doubled over the past six months. That makes it the best performing stock in the entire S&P 500 in that time. The chip maker's market value has surpassed that of Tesla and Meta Platforms and is close to eclipsing Berkshire Hathaway.
The bulk of Nvidia's gains have come in the past three months, as the public launch of the AI-powered chatbot called ChatGPT in November sparked new enthusiasm for so-called generative AI, and how it could revolutionize services like internet search. The technology requires intense computing power in data centers, where Nvidia built up a large and growing business for its graphics processors and software for AI applications. The company made a slew of announcements Tuesday as part of its annual GTC developers conference that focused mostly on the generative AI opportunities.
Matt Ramsay of TD Cowen characterized the event as showing "the runaway leader in AI broadening aperture further," while Mark Lipacis of Jefferies said the developments further Nvidia's position as "the de-facto standard for AI and generative AI applications," in a note to clients. Nvidia held an analyst meeting after Tuesday's closing bell, where Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress said the company is seeing "more and more demand" from its major cloud customers.
That helped push the stock up 1% Wednesday on a weak day for stocks. Nvidia's shares fetch just under 60 times forward earnings -- a level the volatile stock has seen only once before in the past decade. That has created a quandary for analysts who are enthusiastic about Nvidia's prospects but know all too well the cyclical nature of the semiconductor market -- and Nvidia. According to FactSet data, Nvidia's stock price jumped above 50 times forward earnings three times since late 2017, only to come crashing down on periods of gaming weakness, shifts in data-center spending and swings in demand from cryptocurrency miners.
Will this time be any different? Nvidia's business related to generative AI depends almost entirely on capital expenditures by the largest tech giants -- Microsoft and Google, in particular. Both rolled out aggressive plans over the past month to incorporate generative AI into services like search and office software; Google's Bard chatbot launched to the public on Tuesday. Tim Arcuri of UBS projected in a note last week that generative AI could add demand generally for $10 billion to $15 billion of graphics chips, or GPUs, over the next year or two. Analysts expect Nvidia's annual revenue to top $46 billion in three years, which implies an annual growth rate averaging 20%.
But Nvidia may face competition from Advanced Micro Devices, which is rolling out GPU chips for data centers. Still, Nvidia is seen as too good to pass up. Joseph Moore of Morgan Stanley upgraded the stock to a buy last week, even while noting the valuation "has moved to the stratosphere." Mr. Moore noted "the development of generational AI is too much of a megatrend to get distracted by tactical concerns." Nvidia's stock may be hard to bet on at these levels, but betting against it seems unwise as well.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
