The S&P 500 ticked lower for the week, weighed down by losses in tech heavyweights Apple and Nvidia.
Apple shares ended the week down 6% after China ordered central-government officials to stop using iPhones. Shares of Nvidia, the graphics-chip maker at the heart of the AI boom, dropped 6.1% for the week. Its stock remains up more than 200% this year.
Both tech stocks have a major influence on the broad U.S. stock index. At the end of August, Apple and Nvidia were responsible for almost 30% of the S&P 500's 2023 total return, including dividends, according to Howard Silverblatt, senior index analyst at S&P Dow Jones Indices.
The S&P 500 fell 1.3% for the week while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite declined 1.9%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average, which includes Apple but not Nvidia, slipped 0.7%.
Investors said they were questioning the rally in tech shares that has lifted the market higher this year. The technology sector pulled back 2.3% for the week, trimming its year-to-date gains to 41%.
"You're finally starting to see a more intelligent look at artificial intelligence," said Dan Genter, chief executive and chief investment officer at Genter Capital Management.
While companies including Microsoft and Nvidia are likely to benefit in the near-term from advances in AI, he said, "there's a lot of other companies that the true benefit to earnings is very suspect."
The technology sector is trading at 25.6 times its projected earnings over the next 12 months, up from 20 at the start of the year and higher than a 10-year average of 18.5, according to FactSet. Many investors think that is looking expensive enough that it could limit future gains. "Tech's coming under a lot of scrutiny given the valuations," said Stephanie Lang, chief investment officer at wealth-management firm Homrich Berg.
Shares of financial, healthcare and industrial companies also declined in weekly trading. Energy and utilities were the only two of the S&P 500's 11 sectors to rise for the week.
Major indexes rose Friday, snapping a three-day losing streak for the S&P 500 and a four-session streak for the Nasdaq Composite. The S&P 500 added 0.1%, and the Nasdaq rose 0.1%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 0.2%, or about 76 points.
Among individual stocks, Kroger shares gained 3.1% Friday after a settlement to resolve opioid-related claims against the supermarket chain. The company's earnings beat forecasts while sales fell short of analysts' expectations.
Blockshares fell 5.3%, bringing their losses for the week to 8.8%, after payments platform Square suffered outages Thursday and Friday.
Investors are looking ahead to the next release of the consumer-price index on Wednesday. The data could help them gauge the Federal Reserve's next steps in its campaign to tame inflation. Data this past week raised concerns that the economy may be running too hot for Fed officials to stop raising interest rates.
The services sector of the economy expanded for an eighth consecutive month in August, an index from the Institute for Supply Management showed Wednesday. Initial jobless claims, a proxy for layoffs, fell to the lowest level since early February, the Labor Department said Thursday.
Yields on U.S. government bonds ticked up for the week. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note rose to 4.257%, from 4.173% one week earlier. For the day it slipped from 4.260% Thursday.
Brent crude, the global benchmark, gained 2.4% for the week to $90.65 per barrel. That helped energy stocks advance 1.4% for the week. Exxon Mobil shares rose 1.8% in weekly trading, while shares of Valero Energy jumped 6.3%.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.2% Friday but declined 0.8% for the week. In Asia, the Shanghai Composite slipped 0.2%, contributing to a 0.5% weekly decline, while the Nikkei 225 fell 1.2% for the day and 0.3% in weekly trading.
Credit: By Karen Langley
