Twitter Inc. posted solid user and revenue growth for its latest quarter, signs that investments to improve civility on its social network and show users more relevant content are working.
But the adjustments are coming at a cost: Hiring more workers in areas like technical support and sales and spending on content are eating into Twitter's profit.
Profit in the second quarter ballooned to $1.12 billion, its largest ever, in connection with a more than $1 billion one-time benefit from a deferred tax asset, though excluding special items it fell 36% from a year ago to $37 million, or 5 cents a share.
Still, Twitter now has been profitable for seven consecutive quarters, a contrast to years of sustained losses that the company had reported after going public in 2013.
Twitter's revenue rose 18% to $841 million, helped by stronger advertising sales in the U.S., its largest market. The result exceeded analysts' projections of $829 million, according to FactSet.
"They've been working for two years on the product, investing to make it easier to use, and we've seen those investments pay off," RW Baird analyst Colin Sebastian said. "They've been accelerating usage and engagement, and that's driving revenue growth."
Twitter also has been benefiting from a healthy advertising market, much like peers such as Snap Inc., Facebook Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google, Mr. Sebastian said. Twitter's results come after the three posted strong quarterly results this week.
"Part of this is Twitter's proactive efforts to improve its product. The other is the health of the overall advertising industry," Mr. Sebastian said.
Twitter's revenue growth for the current quarter is expected to slow from the first half of the year. Twitter said this was due to shutting down some ad formats to focus on other priorities.
"Making these decisions impacts revenue in the near-term, but it ensures we are focused on the right things long term -- delivering higher performing, better formats for our customers," said Ned Segal, chief financial officer.
Meanwhile, the number of people who use Twitter daily increased by 5 million from the first quarter to a record 139 million.
Shares in the company gained nearly 9% Friday to $41.52. Twitter's shares have gained more than 44% this year, according to FactSet data, compared with a 21% gain in the S&P 500.
Twitter pushed forward to rid its platform of toxic, abusive and harassing behavior during the quarter, as the proactive removal of posts resulted in an 18% drop in reports of spam or other suspicious behavior, co-founder and Chief Executive Jack Dorsey said. It also changed the rules for its platform to make them easier to understand and released a new version of its website.
On a call with analysts, Mr. Dorsey said the health of the platform is a priority and will remain so "for quite some time." It is "a long-term growth factor for us, and we have been doubling our efforts to make sure that we can address all the issues that we're seeing on the service," he said.
That mandate includes monitoring conversations around the 2020 U.S. presidential election. Mr. Dorsey said such events can help drive engagement but require efforts to prevent the spread of false and misleading information.
"First and foremost, it's identifying forms of manipulation used to amplify misleading information. It's increasing transparency around ad purchases and targeting," he said, adding that Twitter continues to challenge suspicious logins and account creation.
Twitter is working to make it easier for new users to find content that matches their interests, leaning heavily on machine-learning technology.
These efforts, Twitter said, have required it to increase employment. It said it has managed to better attract and retain key talent, ending the June quarter with about 4,300 workers, up from 4,100 at the end of March. The company expects operating expenses to rise 20% this year, largely from workforce additions.
Twitter's cost of revenue also increased in the quarter, to $278 million, from $230 million a year ago, due to higher spending related to content deals. Twitter in recent years has formed partnerships with media outlets, sports leagues and television networks to stream and showcase their content on its platform to increase engagement and conversations.
For the third quarter, Twitter expects to log revenue between $815 million and $875 million, compared with analyst expectations of $872 million.
---
Sarah E. Needleman contributed to this article.

Credit: By Georgia Wells
