The hot new trade on Wall Street has nothing to do with crypto, electric vehicles or artificial intelligence. It's Argentina -- the country infamous among investors for serial debt defaults.
Hedge funds and other money managers have piled into Argentine markets this year, betting President Javier Milei can overhaul a long-suffering economy. The trade has paid off handsomely, with Buenos Aires stocks on pace to finish 2024 as the world's best performers and government bond prices soaring. An exchange-traded fund tracking the MSCI Argentina index is up more than 60%.
Milei won the presidency by vowing drastic spending cuts, often waving a chain saw to reinforce the point. The libertarian political outsider, who has been praised by President-elect Donald Trump, took office last December.
He has followed through by stopping public works, cutting fund transfers to provinces and reducing utility subsidies. Milei has also moved to shrink the gap between official and black-market currency rates.
Milei's shock therapy has caused widespread pain, worsening an already high poverty rate. But inflation has slowed dramatically, and, for the first time in more than a decade, Argentina swung to a quarterly fiscal surplus. Recent data showed the economy exiting recession, growing at a 3.9% rate as of September compared with the previous quarter.
That has changed investor attitudes toward the country, long plagued by runaway prices and government overspending. Argentina has defaulted on sovereign debt nine times since independence in 1816, most recently in 2020.
"The nature of this U-turn has been breathtaking," said Genna Lozovsky, chief investment officer at Sandglass Capital Advisors, a London-based hedge-fund firm. "If the fiscal anchor that Milei has so firmly planted in the ground stays in place, if this disinflation trend continues and if the economy continues to hum along," bondholders should expect substantial gains, he said.
Argentina's bonds have already rallied dramatically. One gauge of the nation's hard-currency debt, the ICE BofA US Dollar Argentina Sovereign Index, has generated a total return of about 90% this year.
Meanwhile, the S&P Merval Index has risen more than 160% this year through Monday. Even in U.S.-dollar terms, it is up more than 100%.
Investment firms focused on emerging markets and distressed debt have been notable beneficiaries.
"Argentina was one of our biggest winners this year," said Aaron Stern, chief investment officer of Converium Capital, a multistrategy hedge-fund firm in Montreal that oversees $500 million. "Generally I don't like saying, 'This time is different,' but I think the backdrop globally and domestically is more favorable than it's been in recent history for Argentina," he said.
Stern said Converium began buying Argentine sovereign bonds in 2021. It saw little downside -- prices had been beaten down after a 2020 restructuring, and the government wasn't on the hook for near-term repayments -- while meaningful gains were possible if the situation improved.
Argentine debt has helped power Shiprock -- a distressed-and-special-situations hedge-fund firm that oversees nearly $800 million -- to a 34% gain through November of this year, according to a person familiar with the firm's performance. That includes bets on sovereign, corporate and provincial debt, the person said.
Government interventions in currency markets have made it hard for Argentina to rebuild its foreign-exchange reserves. A multibillion-dollar hard-currency shortfall raises some investor concern about the country's ability to meet obligations to bondholders.
Alessandra Alecci, a debt-fund manager who focuses on emerging markets for Carmignac, said the French asset manager still has concerns about the reserve shortfall. But for now, she said, "it's been very difficult to have strong doubts" that Milei's economic overhaul will continue to work.
To bolster the country's financial standing, Milei has sought a new loan from the International Monetary Fund, allowing his government to lift currency controls strangling business in the country.
Some investors are hopeful Milei's budding relationships with Trump and Tesla's Elon Musk will help Argentina secure a deal from the Washington-based IMF. An IMF spokeswoman said this month that negotiations are under way.
Carmignac holds Argentine sovereign debt, as well as roughly $200 million of Argentine stocks. Its portfolio managers say they feel optimistic about Argentina's trajectory. Xavier Hovasse, head of emerging equities, said, Milei "knows exactly what he wants to do."
Generate image description

By Caitlin McCabe
