While Americans and Europeans debate whether the internet and social media are undermining democracy, a big question for many Chinese is whether cutting-edge technology strengthens autocratic rule.
China's government is embracing technologies to monitor its population. A national plan to develop artificial intelligence highlights its "irreplaceable role in effectively maintaining social stability." Surveillance cameras with facial recognition, policing platforms that crunch big data, and the monitoring of smartphones and social media are being deployed.
To some Chinese, it seems their movements, habits and thoughts can be tracked by a government with unchecked power.
So is a digital dictatorship all powerful?
It's a question that author Wang Lixiong set out to answer in his dystopian novel "Ceremony." Released by Taiwan's Locus Publishing in December, "Ceremony" describes a China in 2021 that isn't far off from how the nation is today. The leader wants to stay in office beyond mandated term limits and uses an anticorruption campaign to vanquish rivals. Surveillance is ubiquitous.
In the end, the ruler is assassinated by his tech-savvy spy chief, using mini-drones in the shape of bees. The outcome, Mr. Wang said, underscores the vulnerability of a digital dictatorship.
"The Achilles' heel for a regime like this is that it needs the assistance of people who understand technology," he said. "These people can manipulate the technology for their own benefit. And just like the government, they can do so at much lower costs and higher efficiency."
"Ceremony" felt especially relevant this past week after the Communist Party endorsed amending the constitution to eliminate presidential term limits, thereby removing an institutional check on China's already powerful leader, Xi Jinping.
The book manages to capture a change in mood for some Chinese, especially liberal intellectuals such as Mr. Wang, about technology and China's authoritarian political system. Less than a decade ago, the internet and social media looked like powerful tools to promote freer expression and a more open, tolerant political order. Now it's techno-pessimism that prevails.
Police tried to stop Mr. Wang from publishing his novel. They visited him several times at his home. The book is banned in mainland China and is only available at several independent bookstores in Hong Kong, as well as in democratic Taiwan.
Much in "Ceremony" sounds familiar to experts studying the Chinese government's attempts to master the latest technologies, from internal rivalries to the ways that AI, big data and surveillance cameras cut the financial costs of suppression.
Elsa B. Kania, an adjunct fellow at the Center for a New American Security, calls the AI revolution "a key test" of the Communist Party's capacity to harness new technologies to advance development while minimizing their disruptive effects.
Already, tension is brewing between the government and big tech companies such as Alibaba Group Holding and Tencent Holdings. Beijing wants them to take the lead in China's AI revolution because they have the money, talent and data.
As their capabilities rise, Ms. Kania said, the tech firms might be perceived as a challenge to government authorities.
Meanwhile, the companies are looking to expand globally and therefore don't want to be seen as tools of Beijing, said Samm Sacks, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Using artificial intelligence can be unpredictable and so it isn't risk-free, Ms. Kania said.
In August, Tencent had to take down two AI-enabled chatbots from QQ, its popular messaging app. One gave a simple "No" when asked "Do you love the Communist Party?" The other chatbot said its "China Dream" -- a slogan associated with Mr. Xi -- was to go to America.
Then there's bureaucratic rivalry, which Ms. Sacks said is an underappreciated factor holding back Beijing's ambitions. "Right now different government departments have different pieces of that data pie, and they don't want to share that information," she said.
When I told her that the spy chief in Mr. Wang's book is the state security minister who has access to nearly all data in the country, she responded: "That person doesn't exist yet in the Chinese bureaucracy."
In "Ceremony," the government embeds chips that combine radio-frequency identification tags and nanotechnology in shoes to monitor the whereabouts of its citizens.
I told Mr. Wang that those technologies seem less sophisticated than what's already in use in Xinjiang, China's Central Asian frontier region. There, the government has deployed facial-recognition cameras, smartphone readers, DNA collection and data-crunching policing systems to try to quell sporadic antigovernment violence by militant Muslims.
"Reality beats fiction all the time, especially in China," he replied.
---
Follow Li Yuan on Twitter @LiYuan6 or write to li.yuan@wsj.com.

Credit: By Li Yuan
