TYSON FOODS
TSN -16%
Tyson's latest results roasted its stock price. The largest U.S. meat supplier swung to a quarterly loss and cut its fiscal 2023 sales outlook amid high costs and deteriorating consumer demand. Tyson is dealing with declining chicken prices, a shortage of cattle and poor consumer demand for pork. Meatpackers like Tyson have also been paying more for animal feed and plant-worker wages over the past year, cutting into profits. The company posted a loss of $97 million in its latest period, its first quarterly loss since the fall of 2009. Tyson shares slid 16% Monday.
ICAHN ENTERPRISES
IEP -15%
A battle between activists now involves federal prosecutors. An inquiry into billionaire activist investor Carl Icahn's company followed a short seller's report that said the firm inflated its assets' values, Icahn Enterprises disclosed Wednesday. Activist short selling firm Hindenburg Research had alleged that Icahn Enterprises trades at a premium, because of inflated valuations. The next day, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York asked Icahn Enterprises for information about governance, dividends and other topics, the firm said in a securities filing. Icahn Enterprises shares sank 15% Wednesday.
WALT DISNEY CO.
DIS -8.7%
Disney's latest streaming losses spooked investors. The entertainment giant on Wednesday reported that income from its traditional television business declined sharply and its streaming segment is still far from profitability. Disney lost about 300,000 subscribers in the U.S. and Canada. Its global subscriber count fell due to cancellations in India, where Disney lost the rights to stream a cricket league. Disney shares fell 8.7% Thursday.
ALPHABET
GOOG +4%
Google is bringing new AI features to its search engine. During its annual I/O developer conference, the Alphabet unit introduced a set of features -- called Search Generative Experience -- that use AI programs to provide lengthier summaries in response to a range of queries. Google did not roll out the product immediately, instead opening a wait list under a new program called Search Labs. The announcement comes as Google battles concerns that services such as ChatGPT developed by Microsoft-backed OpenAI could chip into its dominance in search and online advertising. Alphabet shares rose 4% Wednesday.
AIRBNB
ABNB -11%
Airbnb sees slower growth ahead. The short-term rental company on Tuesday reported higher revenue and profit in the first quarter, but said that customers reserved fewer-than-expected stays. It gave a mixed outlook for the second quarter. Airbnb said it expected average daily rates to fall slightly and that growth in nights booked would be slower than revenue growth. A factor expected to weigh on its average daily rate is the company's bid to win over more cost-conscious customers, as Airbnb aims to make prices more transparent and market cheaper listings. Airbnb shares dropped 11% Wednesday.
PELOTON INTERACTIVE
PTON -8.9%
Peloton is backpedaling millions of its exercise bikes. The at-home exercise company on Thursday announced a recall of 2.2 million stationary exercise bikes due to potentially faulty seat posts that may break during use, causing some users to get injured. The Consumer Product Safety Commission said people should immediately stop using the affected bikes, which have the model number PL01. The recall affects nearly 2.2 million bikes sold in the U.S. for about $1,400 from January 2018 to May 2023 through Peloton, Dick's Sporting Goods and Amazon. Peloton shares fell 8.9% Thursday.
PACWEST BANCORP
PACW -23%
Turmoil continues for some regional banks. PacWest shares slid 23% Thursday, dragging down other midsize banks, after it disclosed another round of deposit outflows. The bank said in a securities filing that it lost 9.5% of its total deposits the week before -- which had started with First Republic's failure -- sparking fresh investor concern. PacWest said the majority of its deposit outflows occurred on May 4 and 5, after news reports said the bank was exploring a potential sale. Bank shareholders have been on edge since March, when regional banks started to collapse.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
