Microsoft Corp. will provide free online classes and job-hunting resources to 25 million people by the end of the year as the global economy reels from the pandemic.
The training, available to workers around the world, is designed to teach digital skills Microsoft says people need to enter 10 occupations, such as help-desk technician, digital marketer and data analyst. Microsoft, in concert with data from its LinkedIn business, chose the 10 jobs because demand for them is growing and they pay well relative to other roles and most of the jobs have the potential to provide opportunities for those with or without a college degree, the company said.
The effort is a response to two long-term trends, said Brad Smith, Microsoft's president: Automation and artificial intelligence are changing the skills required for nearly every occupation, so workers without digital skills will fall further behind.
Skills training in recent years has moved increasingly online, as providers of online classes, such as LinkedIn Learning, Udacity, Coursera and others, have emerged. They offer accessibility and often lower cost to individuals and employers than traditional education options. But employers in many cases remain resistant to accepting online credentials in place of work experience or degrees from accredited academic programs.
When Microsoft executives were planning the initiative early in the year, they saw the effort as a response to a widening skill gap and the evolution of new technologies.
"Everything we envisioned when 2020 began has accelerated more quickly than we imagined. That leaves a short-term challenge of truly daunting proportions," said Mr. Smith. Even when Covid-19 is in the rearview mirror, he added, equipping individuals with work skills "will remain an extremely important priority for companies like us and for the economy as a whole."
The announcement comes as many corporations step up investments in job training for their employees and in their communities. Earlier in June, Bank of America said job training and career reskilling would be one of four focus areas for $1 billion in funding for economic-opportunity initiatives over the next four years. Also in June, the Walmart Foundation donated $6 million to Jobs for the Future, a nonprofit dedicated to identifying and scaling successful workforce-development programs.

Credit: By Lauren Weber
