Last year, Scotts Miracle-Gro Co. noticed a higher-than-expected number of customers were canceling its lawn-fertilizer service.
Befuddled, the lawn-and-garden company sent out surveys to its customers, asking them to rate their satisfaction and provide feedback. Normally, Scotts would have tabulated the ratings and ignored most of the qualitative answers. Instead, it crammed thousands of surveys into Web-based software called Luminoso and made a surprising discovery: People were canceling because they wanted better customer service.
Though many people didn't explicitly mention "customer service," the software was able to associate seemingly unrelated phrases like "listen" or "not responsive."
"It digs a little deeper into what consumers are actually saying," said David Erdman, a senior analyst at Scotts Miracle-Gro, who ran the program. According to Mr. Erdman, the company is now re-evaluating its customer-service programs and planning to expand its use of Luminoso so that all divisions have access to it.
Luminoso Technologies Inc., a five-year-old startup spun out of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab, is part of a larger effort to use artificial intelligence to dig deeper into the minds of consumers by analyzing focus groups and surveys, online forums and social media. Luminoso's software draws from a large database of common knowledge and relationships (such as, "the sun is hot") to understand how words and phrases relate to each other.
Another startup, Kanjoya Inc., says its "emotional intelligence" software is able to identify 100-plus emotions, including depression and excitement.
Recently, the San Francisco company helped a large brand determine whether it should use a new tagline. The tagline performed well in focus groups, but the company decided to run it through Kanjoya's software before launch.
Based on several years of mapping out emotions and studying demographics, the software said the tagline might upset some groups in the Midwest because certain words in the tagline carried religious overtones. The results encouraged the company to suspend the launch.
"It's like having a person with very high emotional intelligence, in marketing, in sales and customer service," said Armen Berjikly, founder and CEO of Kanjoya.
CogniCor Technologies SL, a Barcelona-based company that was spun out of the Barcelona Institute of Artificial Intelligence, tries to make sense of consumer complaints, especially for companies with a large volume of customers like telecom companies and airlines. The text-analytics software tries to identify customer sentiment and the context of each complaint and then automates responses.
Oren Etzioni, the head of the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, a center founded by Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen, said brands are starting to embrace the possibilities of artificial intelligence.
These textual-analysis apps, built on years of research, are far from perfect, however. Luminoso, for example, struggles with sarcastic statements. And when Mr. Etzioni ran a test asking Luminoso to tell him about Apple Inc., he said the software performed better than most applications but still confused some attributes of the company with the fruit.
Michele Goetz, a Forrester analyst, said the technology will need to mature more before brands are convinced of its value. Companies are looking for software that will be able to analyze and act in real time, without any handholding, immediately affecting marketing campaigns and purchasing decisions. "When they can act on behalf of marketers during engagement, this will be the tipping point for growth and value," she said.
In the near term, the field could help companies process large stacks of data rapidly without spending as much money to hire consultants or analysts. There is also hope that all the chatter on Twitter and in company call logs may contain profound insights that has been slipping through the cracks.
"We're not playing superficial games with language -- we're starting to understand it," said Mr. Etzioni, who last year sold his company, Decide Inc., a predictive analytics app for retailers, to eBay Inc. for an undisclosed amount.
Catherine Havasi, the chief executive and co-founder of Cambridge, Mass.-based Luminoso, said she noticed a tidal shift about six months ago, around the same time that large tech giants like Google Inc. and Facebook Inc. began snapping up artificial-intelligence experts and companies.
"Very early on, we learned not to use any words related to artificial intelligence because people would get scared and run away," Ms. Havasi said. Luminoso now has close to 60 clients.
Its software, which runs in a Web browser, first extracts data -- commonly from Microsoft Excel spreadsheets or social media -- and then processes words and phrases to understand their contextual meaning. The program features a dashboard that shows a word-cloud visualization of the textual data.
Concepts appear bigger based on their frequency and are grouped according to the strength of their relationship.
For example, from hundreds of reviews of the Amazon Kindle, the computer will decipher that a "carousel" isn't an amusement-park carousel, but rather a digital carousel to display content. It will then be able to determine the reaction of customers to the carousel and how the carousel relates to the product's parts, such as a screen display.
A client running the program can isolate certain keywords or themes and change the way data is represented.
"You can attack anything as a data-driven decision," said Ms. Havasi.
Credit: By Evelyn M. Rusli
