TikTok's Chinese owner said it is seeking approval from Beijing for a White House-endorsed plan to turn the short-video app into a U.S.-based company, officially placing the fate of the year's hottest social-media asset in the hands of Chinese authorities.
ByteDance Ltd. said Thursday it had submitted its plan, which involves joining with Oracle Corp. and Walmart Inc., to commerce ministry authorities in the Chinese capital, per recently expanded export restrictions, and is awaiting a decision.
China's ministries in charge of commerce, and science and technology introduced surprise changes to the country's list of restricted exports in August, adding data-processing technologies such as content-recommendation algorithms in a move widely seen as an effort to frustrate a campaign by President Trump to force a sale of TikTok on national-security grounds.
Technologies on the list can't be exported without approval from local Chinese officials. TikTok, and several of ByteDance's social-media apps in China are well known for their use of algorithms and artificial intelligence to tailor and push content to its users, helping them build a sizable following.
Gao Feng, a spokesman for China's Commerce Ministry, said Thursday in a weekly briefing that Beijing's commerce bureau had received Bytedance's application for technology export. Mr. Gao said the bureau would handle it according to regulations.
ByteDance representatives didn't immediately respond to a request for comment for more details. The Beijing-based technology company has said in the past that it would have to go through standard regulatory approvals in China and the U.S.
In the U.S., TikTok is seeking to prevent a Trump administration ban on downloads and updates of its app that is set to go into effect Sunday night. TikTok on Wednesday asked a federal judge in Washington, D.C., to stop the Trump administration from imposing the download ban, saying the order violates constitutional provisions for free speech and due process.
At a hearing on Thursday, Judge Carl Nichols gave the Trump administration until Friday afternoon to either postpone the download ban for TikTok or defend the proposed ban in court.
Judge Nichols said that if the federal government doesn't announce a decision to voluntarily postpone the download ban by 2:30 p.m. on Friday, he would hold a hearing on Sunday morning to determine whether to temporarily halt the ban.
Last Sunday, a group of U.S. users of another Chinese-owned internet service, WeChat, won a preliminary injunction from a federal judge blocking a similar planned download ban by the Trump administration on downloads of that app.
The submission for Chinese-government approval adds to ambiguity surrounding the TikTok deal, in which ByteDance, Oracle and Walmart are set to turn the viral short-video app into a new company called TikTok Global. The companies involved have issued clashing accounts of how the deal would be structured. Meanwhile, Mr. Trump has wavered in his support after saying he had approved the deal in concept.
China's state media have added to the confusion by slamming the deal as "dirty and unfair" after the editor of an influential Communist Party tabloid offered cautious praise for it.
China's government hasn't commented on the deal since Mr. Trump first said he had blessed it. Under the preliminary agreement, TikTok's algorithm wouldn't change hands, the company has said.
---
Grace Zhu and Katy Stech Ferek contributed to this article.

Credit: By Liza Lin
