Banks, insurers and other financial companies say efforts to expand their use of artificial intelligence are being hampered by a scarcity of data and talent, according to a report from the University of Cambridge and the World Economic Forum.
Uncertainty over data-privacy regulations is adding to their woes, the report said.
The findings, released this month, are based on a survey last year of roughly 150 companies world-wide, spread across various financial-services sectors, including deposits and lending, investment management, payments, market infrastructure and professional services, capital markets, insurance and financial technology.
Most companies surveyed said they have implemented some form of AI, and 77% said they expect smart software to become a key business component within the next two years, the report said.
Among other areas, the financial-services firms that responded to the survey said they expect to increase the use of AI in risk management, fraud detection and surveillance, customer communications and efforts to develop new revenue-generating services.
"In the past six months we've seen a steady increase in demand from customers across the board for AI-enhanced robotic process automation tools, and particularly within the banking and financial services sector," said Ken Mertzel, senior director of industry marketing for banking and insurance at Automation Anywhere Inc., a San Jose-based company that automates business processes.
Despite this momentum, more than 80% of survey respondents cited access to data and a shortage of AI-savvy tech workers as significant obstacles. AI systems typically perform well if they are fed huge amounts of data they can learn from.
Synchrony Financial, a credit-card business that General Electric Co. spun off in 2015, uses AI-enabled applications to speed up credit-card authentication, identify and prevent fraud, power virtual agents and personalize marketing offers, said Carol Juel, the company's chief information officer.
The company develops these and other smart tools in house by leveraging troves of customer data such as banking and purchasing history, utility information and social media habits. "AI is a competitive advantage for us," Ms. Juel said. "We're really clear on what we want to solve for and how we can put our data to use."
To deal with the talent shortage, the company is ramping up training its employees in AI and other capabilities, she said.
U.S. companies in all industries last month posted 115,100 job ads for software engineers, a category that includes AI developers, according to IT industry trade group CompTIA. The number of job posts rose by 16,400 from December, the group said.
Another looming threat comes from large tech firms, with giant data sets and deep talent pools, which are eyeing the financial-services sector as an untapped market for growth. Nearly half of the survey respondents cited big tech companies leveraging AI as emerging competitors in the financial-services market.
Apple Inc. last year launched its own credit card, while Amazon.com Inc. is talking with banks about offering checking accounts.
Juniper Research estimates that Google Pay, a unit of Alphabet Inc., will reach 100 million users world-wide by the end of the year.

Credit: By Angus Loten
