The company behind the viral chatbot ChatGPT launched a new version of its artificial-intelligence technology on Tuesday, saying it was more powerful and predictable than previous versions and capable of analyzing images and handling much larger blocks of text.
The announcement from OpenAI, a startup backed by billions of dollars from Microsoft Corp., is the latest in a string of generative AI announcements as companies try to get ahead in the race to build and use the buzzy new technology.
Many regulators, scholars and activists have urged tech companies to exercise more caution in developing the tools which haven't yet been fully tested. Generative AI technology -- special because it can generate original images, text and other content from basic language prompts -- sometimes produces responses that seem unhinged and contain made-up facts or racist and sexist statements.
In a blog post on Tuesday, OpenAI introduced a more powerful version of the technology behind ChatGPT called GPT-4. The updated chatbot is "more creative and collaborative" than previous versions when it comes to tasks like composing songs or writing screenplays, the blog said.
The company is rolling out the technology starting Tuesday through data-sharing partnerships, which companies including Morgan Stanley and Duolingo Inc. are paying to access. It will also be offered to ChatGPT Plus subscribers, who pay $20 a month for faster and more available service. It' isn't yet available to those who use the free service.
In an online presentation Tuesday, OpenAI demonstrated how the tool could be used to do things like explain obscure tax codes or summarize articles into sentences with every letter beginning with Q.
OpenAI said it can now better analyze images for information. For example, users can use it to scan a picture of ingredients and then get suggestions of potential dishes and recipes that could be made from the ingredients. The ability to analyze images hasn't yet been widely rolled out, a spokeswoman said.
GPT-4 makes fewer mistakes than its predecessor, GPT 3.5 but still works best when used in tandem with people who can check its work, said OpenAI President and co-founder Greg Brockman at the presentation.
"It's not perfect but neither are you, and together it's this amplifying tool that lets you just reach new heights," he said.
When OpenAI used the latest version of the technology on standardized exams, including the LSAT and Uniform Bar Exam, it did much better than most people and better than the previous version. It still struggled with English language and literature tests, according to company data.
Microsoft has integrated AI into its Bing search engine and this week is scheduled to outline how it is going to bring it to its most-popular software including Word, Excel and PowerPoint.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman
