Andy Kessler caricatures as Marxist the idea of a "guaranteed income" that Karl Marx himself opposed and Richard Nixon and Milton Friedman championed in the form of a "negative income tax" that was rejected by a Democratic-controlled Congress in 1969 ("A Universally Bad Idea," Inside View, Oct. 22).
The negative income tax was intended as a direct cash-grant substitute for the existing welfare system whose administrative cost Ronald Reagan used to rail against. It preserved the incentive to work by deducting from the benefit received only an increasing fraction of any (increase in) income earned below a targeted total earned income, a mechanism already applied to income supplements in the U.S. and Canada.
Marx objected to the 19th-century Speenhamland revision to the Elizabethan Poor Laws -- which was a top-up grant regardless of income -- because it would incentivize employers to lower wages, and Marxists are big believers in labor (versus leisure or capital) as the source of economic value.
Interest in a guaranteed income arose in the 1960s wave of "cybernetics" (man-plus-machine automation) and the debate over whether the modern economy was evolving from labor to leisure and away from full employment. It has re-emerged in this era of artificial intelligence and robotics in the grander-sounding "universal basic income" (UBI) which risks metastasizing into every conceived scheme of government-provided jobs and income which Andy Kessler is right to mock.
Robert Blohm
Toronto
---
It isn't surprising that the concept of UBI is being preached from Silicon Valley pulpits. Having constructed an economy that renders nearly 20% of California's population actually poor and another 20% "near poor," Democratic politicians and tech titans see the writing on the wall. Toss a few breadcrumbs before the barbarians reach the gate. It is the same reason Medicare for All is suddenly not just a far-left fantasy but an urgent California necessity.
UBI is billed as a program to aid workers displaced by automation. It's real purpose is to disguise the ever-expanding portion of the population that is poor and likely to stay that way. Automation didn't cause the middle class to flee California, turn public schools into social-justice encampments instead of institutions of learning or necessitate the importation of an undereducated, economically disadvantaged servant class. Democrats and tech leaders did that all on their own. UBI would insure that they could continue to do more of the same.
Ronda Ross
Austin, Texas
---
Basic income is bad, but not for the reasons Mr. Kessler suggests. It erodes the personal self-esteem of individuals who don't have purpose. Increasing economic inequality and the potential of a significant increase in the underemployed workforce (currently running near 33%) are the real risks.
It is unclear that the "invisible hand" is well balanced for a postindustrial society. Developing an economic model that provides for a viable workforce into the accelerating changes of the foreseeable future is the key to growth, stability and sustainability.
Jim Isaak
Bedford, N.H.
---
The truly insidious nature of UBI is its basic assumption that you are entitled to a definitive share of the prosperity of a country simply by living there -- no contribution nor special need required. That is far worse than Marxism, where the doctrine of "from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" at least assumes that oppressed workers would, you know, work.
John Knoerle,
Chicago
---
At some time in our future, we're likely going to be faced with automation, AI and new technologies destroying employment for huge numbers of individuals. What then? Why not try an UBI program on a small scale to see if it's even feasible? Even conservative intellectual Charles Murray has embraced the concept of UBI. And Mr. Kessler never tells us what his Plan B would be in case all our jobs go away.
Dave Rossow
Boylston, Mass.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Test UBI in a State Without Risking the Whole Country" -- WSJ Nov. 3, 2018)
