The mystical and probably mythical Elon Musk-Mark Zuckerberg cage fight, which could perhaps be held in Rome's Colosseum, is beyond stupid and would probably be nothing more than a rich slap contest. But it got me thinking about competition and why it so often happens in pairs, from Cain vs. Abel to ChatGPT vs. Bard and now Twitter vs. Threads.
Charles Darwin scrambled to get his book on natural selection, "On the Origin of Species," in print in 1859 because naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace was also writing on the subject. In 1908-09, Robert Peary and Frederick Cook raced well-funded expeditions to the North Pole. Both claimed victory -- Cook by a year -- though Congress honored Peary's claim.
Thomas Edison, the Wizard of Menlo Park, tried thousands of materials for incandescent lamps until the carbon-based filament worked, which he patented in November 1879. Maybe he got the idea because English inventor Joseph Swan had already demonstrated a working carbon filament that February. Edison built direct-current electricity generators, even wiring up J.P. Morgan's home. Eccentric Serbian Nikola Tesla (and George Westinghouse) eventually beat Edison with an alternating-current generator whose output could travel long distances.
New Yorkers loved to ask, "Does Macy's tell Gimbels?" about cross-street retail rivals. There was nothing better in my time at Morgan Stanley than beating Goldman Sachs to lead a hot company's initial public offering. Heck, The Wall Street Journal and New York Times have been competing for more than a century.
Inventions happen at the same time because unlike hard goods, knowledge about what is state of the art travels fast. Ideas are fluid, more so in today's digital world. As Victor Hugo put it, the most powerful thing in the world is an idea whose time has come. Competition pushes, creating races until winners emerge. Forget the "aha" moment or a lightbulb turning on, the hard work that follows is what matters. The default mode in physics is entropy or gradual decline. Similarly, progress is lazy. It takes competing humans to drag things over the finish line.
In 1952 Linus Pauling proposed that DNA had a three-chain helical structure. Racing to prove him wrong, James Watson and Francis Crick showed the double helix structure the next year. In 1958 Bob Noyce and Jack Kilby almost simultaneously invented the integrated circuit. They raced knowing about each other's efforts.
Craig Venter's Celera Genomics was in a race with the government-funded Human Genome Project to map the DNA of humans. In April 2000, Mr. Venter announced, "We've finished the sequencing phase," coming in first. The push helped.
Bill Gates and Steve Jobs squabbled constantly over who could design a better computer and operating system, delighting customers with new features. Marc Andreessen's Netscape and Mr. Gates's Microsoft fought the browser wars, often in court, but kept making their products better. Larry Page and Sergey Brin launched Google Search in 1998, with many competitors, mainly Yahoo! Eventually, Microsoft's Bing took over as No. 2 and keeps pushing Google to improve, now with AI tools.
Oh, and while Mr. Gates won the personal-computer race, Jobs won the bigger race for smartphones, though his company has Samsung, which uses Google's Android operating system, as a vigilant competitor. Google also pays Apple for placement as the default search engine on iPhones, so Google wins no matter whose phones sell more. It used to be Nintendo vs. Sega in videogame consoles, now it's Sony vs. Microsoft.
But why so many pairs of competitors? Mostly because we only remember the winners and runners-up. Remember the Google+ social network? Even Google wants to forget it.
Here's a weird one: Elon Musk's X.com and PayPal from Peter Thiel's Confinity were both scrambling to create payment processing by email. Their offices were in Suite A and Suite B at 394 University Ave in Palo Alto, Calif. The companies eventually merged.
Jennifer Doudna's work at the University of California, Berkeley, on Crispr gene-editing was pushed by Feng Zhang's simultaneous work at Harvard. Walter Isaacson's terrific book "The Code Breaker" reads almost like a 100-yard dash.
Let's face it, we all love a good race: Red Bull's Max Verstappen and Mercedes' Lewis Hamilton in Formula One. Jonas Vingegaard and Tadej Pogacar and their teams in the Tour de France.
It's the same with new technology. Stasis equals death. Alexa battles Siri. Facebook Reels drafts TikTok. OpenAI brought out its generative AI tool ChatGPT before it was ready for prime time because Google was close to launching Bard. Meta's LLaMA is behind but gaining. A high-stakes race for sentient computing and artificial general intelligence is on. I'm skeptical we'll fully get there, but we'll all enjoy and benefit from the many cage matches along the way.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
