[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Big Tech can generate big numbers, but it was fast growth in the cloud business that helped ignite a buying frenzy Friday that drove up market values by nearly $139 billion in 30 minutes.
The stunning growth of the cloud businesses at Amazon.com, Microsoft and Google-parent Alphabet were a relatively small part of the strong quarterly results the three companies reported Thursday. But fast growth in cloud revenue, along with relatively stable service prices that helped profit margins during the quarter, gave investors reasons to bet the three giants could maintain their growth trajectories.
Shares of the three companies kept rising Friday, with their combined $132 billion market-value gain topping the value of more than 90% of the other companies in the S&P 500, including nearly every other company selling cloud-based software services.
The latest gains raise the bar for future performance. But investors are confident growth can continue because cloud services still make up a rather small portion of corporate technology spending, which leaves a lot up for grabs. That's encouraging for Microsoft and Google, which are racing to catch up to leader Amazon. But Amazon still has a large lead: AWS revenue jumped 42% year over year in the third quarter to nearly $4.6 billion.
Microsoft's comparable Azure service generated a 90% revenue gain. That brought Azure's total revenue to about $1.5 billion in revenue for the quarter, estimates J.P. Morgan Chase. Google's "other" segment, which includes its cloud platform as well as its expanding device business, saw revenue jump 40% year over year to $3.4 billion. Alphabet CFO Ruth Porat said the cloud made up the largest portion of that gain.
Investors should expect the strong gains to continue, along with the bills that come with it. The three companies combined had $10.6 billion in capital expenditures and new capital lease obligations in the third quarter. That's up 34% year over year, the highest combined increase by the three in nearly three years.
A considerable sum even for deep-pocketed tech giants, but that spending helps Amazon, Microsoft and Google fuel the expansion of their large global networks along with the addition of new capabilities, such as artificial intelligence. It also helps deepen the competitive moat around their businesses that makes it difficult for others to dislodge them.
Being the smart money may not be cheap, but it appears to be worth the cost.

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
