Pope Francis was asked earlier this year what he thinks about hell. "It's difficult to imagine it," he replied. "What I would say is not a dogma of faith, but my personal thought: I like to think hell is empty. I hope it is."
It was a pastoral pleasantry, kindly meant but theologically sloppy. It raised interesting questions: Has the traditional hell -- fire and brimstone through all eternity -- gone out of business, either because, as the pope hopes, there are no longer enough customers, or because hell has become an atavism: medieval, lurid, and not credible to the 21st-century mind? Is the eternal fire a metaphor? If so, what does it mean? Is hell a physical place or a state of mind? Is there such a thing as eternal life -- and if God's verdict goes against you, does that mean a life of everlasting torment? Is it possible to believe in hell if you don't believe in God, or is hell the terrible solitude of living without God?
Pope Francis himself has defined hell as "eternal solitude." By contrast, Jean-Paul Sartre, the pontiff of existentialism, wrote that "hell is other people." Which is it?
Evelyn Waugh proposed a darkly witty version of hell in his novel "A Handful of Dust." It ends with the hero, an English gentleman lost in the Amazonian rain forest, held prisoner by an illiterate mixed-race Guianan who happens to own a complete set of Dickens and forces his captive to read it aloud, over and over again, without hope of release.
Hell expanded centuries ago from theology into literature. Great writers have had a crack at it. Dante set the standard. Milton's "Paradise Lost" is magnificent, although, as Samuel Johnson remarked, "no one wished it longer." Milton's fallen Lucifer sounds unexpectedly modern when he cries, "Which way I fly is hell; myself am hell." Is it the case that we make our own hell?
I experienced a shock of recognition when I first read James Joyce's "Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man": The Jesuit retreat master's hair-raising sermon therein resembled, almost word for word, one I'd heard during a retreat at the Jesuits' Gonzaga College High School in Washington around 1957. If hell is the unspeakable, those priests managed to give it elaborate articulation: the stench of rotting corpses, the boiling blood and brains of sinners. And "remember, boys, the fire of hell gives off no light."
Joyce's novel was published in 1916, the year of the Great War's Battle of the Somme, a slaughter that killed some 300,000 soldiers and wounded hundreds of thousands more. Around this time notions about hell began to migrate from eternity into history and, simultaneously, from meaning into meaninglessness. The old story of hell had been filled with meaning -- which emerged from a detailed theological formality, a system of sin and condign punishment worked out almost as precisely as Newton's laws of motion. World War I's trenches reduced war to meaningless horror. The 20th century proceeded along those lines, through a sequence of world-historical hells: the genocidal Ukrainian famine inflicted by Stalin in the early 1930s; Hitler's Final Solution, which killed six million Jews in Auschwitz, Treblinka and other death camps; the urbicidal bombings of World War II; the Cambodians' hellish mass murder under Pol Pot. On and on.
Hell presents itself in the 21st century, in the events of Oct. 7 in southern Israel and in Israel's subsequent leveling of Gaza. Many feel premonitions of a more general hell on Earth, in climate change, as if the weather were groping toward fulfillment of the Robert Frost poem: "Some say the world will end in fire / Some say in ice." Is it sinful to use plastic bags? To fly in a private jet? Will people who do those things be sent to hell?
In our time, the sense of sin -- sin being the reason hell is necessary -- has been diminished by the notion that human behavior and even an individual's fate are predetermined, written in the genes. This is Calvinism without Calvinism's saving paradox -- that you must act as if. But if a man's behavior is out of his hands, he won't be capable of sinning. Wouldn't it be an injustice to sentence him to eternal damnation?
The man's life would resemble nothing so much as the driverless car Elon Musk and the tech priesthood have labored to perfect. If a person isn't in command of the accelerator, brakes and steering wheel, how can he be punished if his car's computers fail and it runs over somebody? That line of reasoning makes hell seem less plausible, less just, merely contingent.
What will artificial intelligence make of the notion of hell? Will the robots laugh?
Plenty of people, of course, still believe in such a place -- literally or metaphorically or in some vague, ingenious fusion of the two: an intuition that, despite its reductive crudity, harbors a basic truth about human nature and its sense of justice.
---
Mr. Morrow is a senior fellow at the Ethics and Public Policy Center and author of "The Noise of Typewriters: Remembering Journalism."
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Even in Hell on Earth, We Have One Another" -- WSJ March 11, 2024)
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Saints and the Bible Tell the Truth About Hell" -- WSJ March 13, 2024)
Credit: By Lance Morrow
