Amazon.com Inc. hopes that the virtual assistant that has made its Echo smart speakers a hit will also attract more users to its mobile music app.
The online retailer said it would launch Alexa on its Amazon Music streaming apps on Tuesday, as it seeks to differentiate itself from rivals that have bigger shares of the competitive market. An on-screen button will let Amazon Music users access the various Alexa "play" commands that work on Echo.
Amazon envisions these capabilities as being useful for consumers on the move; for instance, they can request "pop music for a cardio workout" during a run or "the new Taylor Swift song" while driving. Apple Inc. offers some similar functions for Apple Music, via the iPhone's Siri voice assistant.
Earlier this year, Alexa surpassed mobile as the No. 1 way Amazon Music users listen. Since starting its Prime Music streaming service in 2014, Amazon has tried to cater to a more mainstream audience than its competitors. Nonetheless, it remains No. 3 in the subscription-music market, behind Spotify and Apple Music, according to people in the music industry.
Amazon has been pouring more resources into Alexa to maintain its edge, as competition heats up among artificial-intelligence assistants from Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Apple, according to people familiar with the company's thinking.
Google's and Apple's assistants have more data to learn from, thanks to their mobile phone businesses and usage on those devices. Amazon has sold an estimated 15 million Echo speakers, according to Consumer Intelligence Research Partners.
Alexa already joined Amazon's main shopping app earlier this year. Consumers appear to have been slow to adopt that function, in part because it isn't obvious to the average user that Alexa is integrated, according to people familiar with the matter.
Steve Boom, Amazon's vice president for music, says he hopes music will be a natural fit for the voice assistant. "We should let people know about it, but we shouldn't have to train them," he says.
Members of Amazon's $99-a-year Prime program can subscribe to Amazon Music Unlimited, launched last October, for $7.99 a month, though they already get access for no additional charge to the company's more limited Prime Music service. Amazon Music Unlimited as a stand-alone service costs $9.99 a month, on par with Apple Music and Spotify's premium tier.
---
Laura Stevens contributed to this article.

Credit: By Anne Steele
