Stocks advanced as the latest reading of U.S. inflation was hotter than economists expected but cooler than many investors feared.
The S&P 500 added 1.1% to 5175.27, marking its 17th record of 2024. Companies from chipmakers and software providers to big-box retailers and pharmaceutical giants helped pull all three major indexes higher. The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed 0.6%, or 236 points, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite rose 1.5%.
The gains came despite a Labor Department report showing consumer prices rose 3.2% in February from a year earlier, another installment in a string of recent data suggesting inflation remains stubbornly high. Even so, many investors continue to believe the Federal Reserve remains on track to cut interest rates later this year, reducing borrowing costs for businesses and, potentially, boosting stocks.
Traders are now assigning a roughly 60% chance that the central bank begins cutting rates in June, according to futures markets.
"The Fed has already quashed the market's expectation of a March rate cut anyway," said Charlie Ashley, a portfolio manager at Catalyst Funds, referencing next week's policy meeting. "The only way this [reading] was going to be important is if it was scorching hot."
Treasury yields rose, erasing last week's declines, after the government's latest issuance of debt inspired lackluster interest from investors. The benchmark 10-year Treasury yield, which rises when prices fall, edged higher to 4.154%.
In the stock market, six members of the Magnificent Seven logged gains, with Nvidia's 7.2% advance leading the pack of tech stalwarts. Demand for artificial intelligence helped Oracle's earnings trump expectations, leading to a share-price pop of 12%.
Shares in Archer Daniels Midland rose 3.9% after the grain merchant said an internal accounting investigation didn't affect its overall earnings. The manufacturing conglomerate 3M rose 5% after it appointed William Brown, former leader of L3Harris Technologies, as its next chief executive.
Southwest Airlines said it was re-evaluating its financial guidance, citing in part delayed aircraft deliveries from Boeing. Southwest's stock slid 15%, the steepest decline in the S&P 500, while American Airlines and United Airlines also fell.
Boeing shares faded 4.3%. Spirit AeroSystems, maker of the fuselage involved in the Alaska Airlines blowout, also slipped.
Later this week, Dollar Tree and Dollar General will report earnings that could provide snapshots of how low-income Americans have weathered price pressures in recent months. The Labor Department on Thursday will publish February's producer- price index, an inflation gauge for companies that manufacture goods.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 1%. At midday Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.4%. S&P 500 futures were down 0.1%.
---
Sam Goldfarb and Joe Wallace contributed to this article.
Credit: By David Uberti
