U.S. retailers large and small are pressing ahead with testing the use of artificial intelligence to track what products shoppers pick up and to automatically bill their accounts when they walk out the door, eliminating the need for checkout lines.
The concept got a push from Amazon Go stores, which Amazon.com Inc. launched in early 2018; there are now 15 stores, with two opening last week, in New York and San Francisco. Amazon Go relies on hundreds of cameras and sensors in each store to identify products that customers take off the shelves. Shoppers typically scan a code to enter the stores.
Recent AI adopters include Sam's Club Inc., the warehouse retailer owned by Walmart Inc., and Giant Eagle Inc., a regional chain of grocery and convenience stores. Giant Eagle said last month it would test a technology similar to Amazon Go's at a convenience store in Pittsburgh, where it is based. Several companies that sell cashierless technology -- including Standard Cognition Inc. and Vcognition Technologies Inc., which does business as Zippin -- said they are working with U.S. clients but declined to give details.
Sam's Club plans to offer AI-powered cashierless shopping later this month at a 32,000-square-foot store in Dallas, a quarter of the size of its average store.
Currently, customers shop at the store by scanning barcodes on the products, an older cashierless-checkout technology. Once the AI system is in place, customers will use their smartphone cameras to scan the product itself. The cloud-based system, which uses computer vision and machine learning, recognizes products by matching them to a database of stored images. This is different from Amazon Go, where cameras installed in the stores do the work of scanning the products.
Customers at the Sam's Club store can't pay using cash at the register, as they can in certain Amazon Go stores.
A global survey of about 400 retailers conducted in June by research and advisory firm International Data Corp. found that 28% are testing or piloting cashierless systems, said Leslie Hand, vice president of IDC's Retail Insights division. Ms. Hand said she knows of nearly 100 companies world-wide that are trying out the systems, adding she can't discuss the details because of nondisclosure agreements.
"It's awoken that fire for retailers to understand that really this is the future of retail and they need to invest in it," Ms. Hand said.
Cashierless technology is being tested by U.K.-based Tesco PLC and France-based Carrefour SA. Tesco has said its method costs a tenth of systems used by its competitors, partly because it uses only cameras, not sensors.
Not every type of store is suited for cashierless technology. Walmart tried out a cashierless system based on scanning barcodes for about six months in more than 100 stores but discontinued it in April 2018. The technology proved impractical for pricing produce and other items that had to be taken to a cashier to be weighed, causing delays, a spokesman said.
Theft is also a concern. Manual scanning operates on an honor system and some customers don't scan every item, often requiring stores to validate purchases, said Richard Crone, chief executive of Crone Consulting LLC, an advisory firm focused on retail, convenience and restaurant businesses. In the Sam's Club trial, an employee checks customer purchases as shoppers exit, though the clerk samples just one product per customer to see if it's listed on the electronic receipt.
Still, the potential benefits include speed and convenience, and even small companies are testing the waters.

Credit: By John Murawski
