It's alarming to find books like "1984" and "The Handmaid's Tale" appearing on best-seller lists -- the result of panicked herd-reading after the presidential election. But vogues for dystopian literature are usually a sign of national health.
If this sounds counterintuitive, consider the apocalypse boom of the late '50s and early '60s, which brought us "Alas, Babylon," "On the Beach" and "A Canticle for Leibowitz." These were responses to anxieties about nuclear weapons and the Cold War, but they were also the fruits of widespread prosperity. Likewise, as the middle class expands in China, dystopian fantasies are dominating its best-seller lists. The more people have, the more frightened they are of losing it all.
And so America's swelling ranks of declinist fantasias are less about any real-world problems than about a general fear of disruption. In Emily St. John Mandel's "Station Eleven," a troupe of actors roams through Midwestern towns that have been all but wiped out by a swine-flu epidemic. In Edan Lepucki's "California," some unnamed climate catastrophe has dispersed the population into gated communities, cult compounds and wilderness hideaways. It's much the same in the Los Angeles of Michael Tolkin's "NK3," though here it's a North Korean bio-weapon gone awry that has robbed much of the population of their memories and turned them into survivalists. These novels are what happens when a comfortable culture has a midlife crisis.
Omar El Akkad's "American War" (Knopf, 333 pages, $26.95) mines the dystopian trend for somewhat different purposes, crafting a vision of approaching ruin that doubles as a sharp critique of current American foreign policy. It imagines a second American Civil War between North and South from the years 2074 to 2095. The contemporary doomsday staples are present and accounted for. Following an environmental collapse that leaves swaths of the country underwater, the U.S. government imposes a ban on fossil fuels, prompting the Southern states to secede. Despite the Union's decisive military advantage, the South is able to prolong the fighting through guerrilla tactics, particularly suicide bombings.
Mr. El Akkad depicts the war by splicing futuristic "historical" documents into an account of the life of Sarat Chestnut, a native Louisianan who becomes central to the insurrection. Sarat grows up in a refugee camp in Mississippi and as a teenager is recruited to the rebel cause by a sinister true believer who specializes in radicalizing vulnerable youths. Brash and fearless, Sarat matures into the sort of character you might have had if Scarlett O'Hara were a terrorist mastermind: "For Sarat Chestnut, the calculus was simple: the enemy had violated her people, and for that she would violate the enemy. There could be no other way, she knew it. Blood can never be unspilled."
"American War" is not a subtle book, and Mr. El Akkad is using the future to make a blunt point about the present. By substituting defiant Southerners for Muslim fundamentalists, he seeks to make the victims of the "War on Terror" more recognizable and the blowback more coherent. The parallels are explicit. The North uses "Birds," or drone attacks, to eliminate Southern targets, causing immense collateral damage. Southern prisoners are tortured and held indefinitely on an island known as Sugarloaf. "I always said the camps at Sugarloaf were the best recruiters the South ever had," recalls a war diarist.
Yet the parallels only stretch so far. Somehow neither race nor religion figures into this civil war, which makes the implied connections between Confederate rebels and jihadist insurgents superficial at best. And some of the speculative embellishments, like the tangents about the South's major ally, a newly established Middle Eastern caliphate called the Bouazizi Empire, serve only to pad out the conceit. Even so, "American War" is a provocative thought experiment and a rewarding conversation piece. I found one detail especially unsettling. We learn in an aside that on the day of the armistice, a Southern diehard unleashed a biological agent that went on to kill over 100 million people. As the novel moves toward this decisive event, it reinforces a chilling warning about asymmetric warfare against a desperate, committed people: Peace, when it comes, might be more terrible than the fighting.
Epidemics and environmental catastrophe are also part of the unspecified future of Zachary Mason's "Void Star" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 385 pages, $27). Society has collapsed, and the population is divided between refugees who reside in sprawling slums (called favelas) and elites who extend their lives with expensive longevity treatments and command armies of gangsters.
As Mr. Mason moves us among San Francisco, Greece, Thailand and Japan, he depicts a world of technological explosion, overrun by drones and artificial intelligence. The main characters are Kern, a "favelino street fighter" who steals a phone containing valuable data, and Irina, who has a special grasp of AIs -- her job is to diagnose their malfunctions -- because she possesses a cranial implant that allows her to upload and save memories the way a computer does.
Bringing them together are the machinations of a zillionaire software baron named Cromwell, who is on a mad quest to harness the AIs' immortality and omniscience. As Mr. Mason spins out an elaborate and highly confusing techno-thriller, he explores a future in which humanity has increasingly subordinated itself to machines it doesn't understand. Even to Irina, the scrolling code of the AIs' "thoughts" is essentially inscrutable: "The glyphs are intricate, radiant with significance that she can't quite articulate. Like rain, she thinks, on a clear day, seen over miles of ocean. Like ideograms distended in a black hole's gravity."
Mr. Mason, whose previous novel was the ingenious Homeric pastiche "The Lost Books of the Odyssey" (2007), writes with a mathematical precision that often crystallizes into lines of clean, poetic beauty: "The breeze catches the awning above him, its shadow undulating over the Cartesian grid of the black basalt tiles." But the whole feels recondite and detached, as if it were intended to evoke the "opaque complexity" of artificial minds. As the story merges the physical world with virtual realms it becomes difficult to grasp just what is going on. One puzzled character sums it all up: "There's a pattern but I can't quite see it."
The stories in the remarkable collection "The Accusation" (Grove Press, 247 pages, $25) were smuggled from North Korea in 2013, making this the first dissident work ever published by a writer still living in North Korea. The author, who takes the pseudonym Bandi ("Firefly" in Korean), wrote most of them in the early 1990s, during the famine-ridden final years of Kim Il Sung's dictatorship. In an unfussy translation by Deborah Smith, their power is in the plain-spoken, almost artless way they convey daily life under an ever-watchful, whimsically cruel regime.
Arbitrary punishment is a constant. In "City of Specters," a propaganda supervisor is banished from the capital because her baby develops a fear of Karl Marx's portrait. In "So Near, Yet So Far" a mine worker is denied a travel permit to see his dying mother and must grin and bear it: "He knew even crying could be construed as an act of rebellion, for which, in this country, there was only one outcome -- a swift and ruthless death. And so it was the law of the land to smile even when you were racked with pain."
Bandi dubs this kind of enforced public performance "stage truth." In an unforgettable story about a deadly train-station stampede caused by Kim Il Sung's entourage, "Pandemonium," an old woman marvels at the nonstop acting. Where else, she wonders, are cries of suffering "wrenched from the mouths of its people and distorted into laughter?" This courageous book offers an important reminder that not all dystopias are invented.
Credit: By Sam Sacks
