As hundreds emerged from a prison near Damascus dubbed the "human slaughterhouse," Rim Turkmani waited anxiously, hoping a cousin detained eight years ago would be among the prisoners who emerged haggard but joyful.
"We've heard nothing about him since, except that he is held at Saydnaya prison," she said of her cousin Abdullah, just 18 when he was imprisoned for participating in the uprising against then-President Bashar al-Assad.
Assad's downfall has provided hope for the families of tens of thousands of Syrians who disappeared into the labyrinth of the security apparatus. Hundreds of men were freed from the notorious Saydnaya prison, north of the capital, after Syrians stormed it hours before Assad fled the country early Sunday.
Footage from inside the prison showed armed men shooting through locks and gaunt detainees emerging. "Ten years in prison!" cried one man in a video provided by the Association of Detainees and Missing in Saydnaya Prison. Another video showed a wall of screens that enabled guards to watch over the prisoners in their cells.
Some relatives were convinced that more prisoners remained trapped in hidden subterranean cells. The Syrian Civil Defense, an independent rescue organization also known as the White Helmets, deployed wall-breaching specialists, iron-door-opening crews and trained dog units to search. The group also enlisted guides familiar with the layout of the prison, while the rebel military command called on soldiers who worked at the prison to come forward with passcodes to unlock the doors of underground cells.
"We opened several areas inside the prison including the kitchen and the bakery, but we haven't found anything yet," said Raed al-Saleh, head of the White Helmets.
The desperate hunt risks damaging evidence of regime crimes and undermining the quest for justice. As many as 13,000 people were executed in Saydnaya prison during the first six years of the uprising against Assad, which broke out in 2011, according to Amnesty International. Many others were killed there after being tortured and deprived of food, water and medicine.
A report by the Syrian Network for Human Rights published this year found that more than 96,000 people remained forcibly disappeared by the regime since 2011. Other parties to the conflict have also forcibly disappeared opponents: Islamic State, nearly 9,000; the U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces, which control the country's northeast, nearly 3,000; and Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, which spearheaded the rebel offensive and is poised to wield significant power in the new Syria, more than 2,000. It is designated a terrorist group by the U.S.
Enforced disappearances peaked in 2012 as Assad sought to crush the revolt, which erupted after teenagers who had scrawled antiregime slogans on a wall emerged from prison with signs of torture.
While the volume of arrests decreased over time, a United Nations report found that mistreatment continued, with detainees electrocuted, beaten with pipes and subjected to sexual violence. Prisoners had their feet whipped and their teeth and nails pulled out.
Rebel forces broke open other prisons as they marched on Damascus.
"My father dared to demand freedom for Syria and has been detained for 12 years with no word about his fate," Syrian activist Wafa al-Ali said after rebels seized the city of Hama last week. "Seeing detainees released from Hama prison breaks my heart and sparks dangerous hope."
Among those released was one man who had been detained 43 years ago when Assad's father, Hafez al-Assad, was still in power.
Fatin Ramadan received a death certificate for her father several years after he was detained along with her brother in 2012. But when images of detainees who had emerged from the Hama central prison last week appeared on social media, she thought she recognized one as her father. An artificial-intelligence tool agreed.
"I thought he had come back from the dead and that the news of his death was false," said Ramadan, whose father was imprisoned in connection with her own work treating people wounded in antigovernment protests. She rushed to find the man -- only to discover it was someone else.
As opposition forces advanced, Omar al-Shogre feared the guards would kill the detainees before surrendering Saydnaya. He had been detained there himself after taking part in protests, escaping in 2015 after his mother paid a bribe. He then sneaked out of the country -- with no hope of returning as long as Assad remained in power.
"Now, when a Syrian is freed, he's freed back to his country; he doesn't need to flee anywhere," he said.
In Saydnaya, frantic relatives went from cell to cell, checking graffiti for traces of their missing relatives, according to Diab Serriya, a founding member of the Association of Detainees and Missing in Saydnaya Prison, who was imprisoned there himself.
Some relatives broke into the prison administration and ransacked files for clues about the fate of the missing. Files were burned and rumors spread that loyalists might be trying to destroy evidence of regime crimes, he said, urging rebel groups to impose order on the prison. He confirmed on Monday there were no more detainees left there.
The White Helmets, who are conducting the search at Saydnaya, offered a reward of $3,000 to anyone who provides concrete information about the locations of secret prisons, promising confidentiality to members of regime security agencies. The group also urged desperate relatives not to tamper with the prisons, warning they could destroy evidence needed to uncover the truth and support justice and accountability efforts.
"The fight in terms of bringing Assad down is over, but it's not over when it comes to justice," Shogre said. "We need to use the evidence we collected for 14 years to prosecute the criminals, because they cannot be among us in a free and democratic Syria."
By late Monday, the chances that Turkmani's cousin would emerge from Saydnaya appeared slim. Turkmani said Abdullah had initially been detained with his mother, who was tortured to pressure him into confessing to belonging to the armed opposition. After she was released, she refused to leave Homs with the rest of her family. She wanted to be there to open the door when Abdullah came home.
---
Stephen Kalin and Saleh al-Batati contributed to this article.
Credit: By Isabel Coles
