WASHINGTON -- Aging and fragmented technology has left the U.S. Navy unable to fully defend itself from persistent cyberattacks from China and elsewhere, defense officials said, prompting an effort across the service to upgrade and secure computer networks.
Alarmed by the technological shortcomings, the Navy's acting secretary circulated an internal strategy memo last week outlining goals to quickly modernize computer infrastructure.
The memo, reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, was released publicly Wednesday. It calls on the Navy to rapidly leverage innovations such as artificial intelligence and bolster its cybersecurity defenses.
The 17-page memo is the most recent call to arms by Navy leadership to address a blistering internal audit from nearly a year ago that concluded the service was "under cyber siege" by Chinese hackers and others who have stolen national security secrets in recent years. That audit depicted a branch of the armed forces under relentless cyberattack by foreign adversaries and struggling in its response to the scale and sophistication of the problem.
"The impact on warfighting and warfighting capability is critical," acting Navy Secretary Thomas Modly said in an interview, describing the importance of boosting the Navy's technology capabilities and data security.
Allowing information systems of the Navy and its industry partners to leak information "like a sieve" has created confidence among adversaries, Mr. Modly said, and "emboldens them to do things that perhaps they wouldn't do otherwise."
Some of the most pressing needs outlined in the new memo include updates to the technology the service uses, some of which dates to the 1990s. The Navy's current computer networks "fail to deliver modern user experience, and many users work around the network to accomplish their jobs," the memo states. Aged networks have rendered even simple capabilities, such as file sharing, cloud collaboration, and chat and video communication, unavailable to some sailors, according to the document.
Among the most concerning problems identified in the memo is that the old and fragmented technology limits the Navy's ability to identify and thwart cyberattacks -- which often expose sensitive research or data to foreign countries eager to copy and steal information about the U.S. military's advanced weapons systems.
"Our adversaries gain an advantage in cyberspace through guerrilla tactics within our defensive perimeters," the memo said. "Once inside, malign actors steal, destroy and/or modify critical data and information. The point of infiltration is often not the target location."
The memo reasserts many principles the Navy already has begun adopting, and doesn't lay out a detailed road map of a new security posture.
It calls for continuous auditing of employees and systems to ensure best cybersecurity practices are being followed. It also pledges to engage prime contractors to support cybersecurity among smaller subcontractors -- long considered a cybersecurity weak point in the military supply chain.
To grapple with the threat, the Navy restructured and consolidated its information-management functions in September. Navy officials named a new chief information officer, Aaron Weis, and assigned a chief technology officer, a chief of digital strategy, a chief data officer and a chief information security officer to report to him.
In interviews this week, Messrs. Modly and Weis said the changes were sizable but not insurmountable, and identified the problems as cultural as well as technological. Many commanders tend to see cyber defense as ancillary to their primary responsibilities, heightening the need for accountability as the Navy tries to rein in the problem, officials have said.
"For a long time, people looked at it as a cost center and not a strategic asset," Mr. Modly said. "This is not brain surgery."

Credit: By Dustin Volz and Gordon Lubold
