When H&R Block's chief financial officer, Tony Bowen, retires next month, he will leave the tax-preparation company on a high note.
The Kansas City, Mo.-based company's stock price has been on a tear, rising around 60% over the past year. Profit has increased in recent years due to a combination of steady revenue growth and a focus on controlling costs, according to Bowen. And the company has allocated capital to buybacks, boosting its earnings per share. In the fiscal year ended June 30, earnings per share rose 16% from a year earlier, to $4.14. Profit rose 8%, to $595.3 million.
H&R Block, best known for its green signage and neighborhood offices, also offers online, do-it-yourself tax preparation, as well as financial products such as online savings and small business services like bookkeeping. During the latest tax season, the company rolled out generative artificial-intelligence tools to its customers, including assistance for DIY customers and an AI-generated call center agent.
Bowen, who has been CFO for eight years and worked at the company for two decades, said his successor, Tiffany Mason, will confront a common challenge for CFOs: investing in technology while protecting the company's bottom line.
Mason will take over the role on Sept. 13. She was previously finance chief at Driven Brands, an automotive services company.
Bowen, who is 49 years old, says he is retiring early to spend more time with his family. Here are edited excerpts of The Wall Street Journal's conversation with Bowen after the company reported earnings two weeks ago.
WSJ: Why are you retiring?
Bowen: I've always had a goal of retiring earlier in my career. I didn't know exactly when that would be, but I had a goal of retiring early. And while this job has been fantastic, obviously, it takes a toll on you, and it limits your flexibility. I've got children -- one son who's going into high school, and a daughter who's going into middle school, and I just want to have the ability to spend more time with them, and more flexibility.
WSJ: Considering where the company is at right now, why does it make sense to step away?
A: We just reached an all-time high in our stock price, the market cap set an all-time high. The company is on probably the most solid financial footing we've ever been on. We're approaching what was announced as our [five-year strategic plan], which we launched in 2020. So I figure it's a good time to hand that off to a new team so they are building a strategy that they will own and execute. I'm turning 50 next year. It just felt like the right time.
WSJ: Where did the company's earnings growth come from?
A: We've grown the top line. We've grown customers and small businesses and DIY. We've added financial products. We've been able to realize pricing. We've done a really good job on the expense side. And then a big chunk of our EPS growth has come from capital allocation. So we're an aggressive share-repurchase company. We buy back a lot of shares, and we've reduced our shares outstanding by over 40% within that eight-year period.
WSJ: H&R Block this year launched customer-facing generative AI tools. How did that go?
A: It's been a big investment. We partnered with Microsoft, so it's all built on ChatGPT. One of the things we saw was that new customer conversion was up for people who interacted with generative AI. So we know that new customers are using it, and it's helping drive them over the finish line getting their taxes done. But it's also early in the journey. We have a long way to go.
WSJ: How have you made sure the company is generating returns from those investments?
A: The CIO [chief information officer] and I partnered last year. We came up with, "Let's not spread ourselves too thin, and let's have two key use cases." One that's focused on the customer, which is AI assist in the DIY product. And then the other one that's focused on more cost savings, so that's the one in our call-center operations.
We're adding a third use case, trying to think about, how can we automate some things in the tax-preparation space? We're trying to balance not just making this about cost-cutting, but also making it about delivering better tax preparation for our customers.
WSJ: What challenges will your successor, Tiffany Mason, be responsible for tackling?
A: Our fiscal year 2025 will end in June of next year, so we're essentially on the clock for having a new strategy to share at the end of June. So I think that will be a big focus for her and the team, figuring out: Where do we go next? How does AI play a role in what we're doing? How do we continue to invest in the business, but also manage the bottom line?
As a public CFO, everybody wants you to invest, but they don't want you to take your earnings down. And that's a really tricky box to be in. So it's possible, but you just have to time things out in a way that that all works, and that gets very, very tricky. I think that would be a big focus for her.
Generate image description

Credit: By Kristin Broughton
