Plopping down on a mattress, primping in front of a mirror or sitting on a toilet: In coming years, any of these activities could generate the most intimate data about your health, via sensors, wearables, machine-learning algorithms and data-mining systems.
Though they promise to make health care more personalized, our nonstop interactions with digital technologies and analytics are upending traditional notions of patient confidentiality.
In the U.S., the core federal law restricting the use and protecting the disclosure of health data is the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, or HIPAA. Congress enacted it in 1996, when much of the health system was paperbound and fax-reliant.
The law's age is showing.
Its disclosure rules, which took effect in 2003, don't apply to personal health data in general, just the patient information flowing through the health-care system. Doctors, hospitals, pharmacies and health insurers are all bound by its requirements. But technology companies offering health-related services via sensors, apps and online portals may not be.
Health policy experts say HIPAA may eventually be augmented or replaced by an overarching privacy law governing more than just health data, like Europe's General Data Protection Regulation. Lawmakers in Congress have suggested other ways of filling in the gaps in HIPAA. One proposal would prohibit tech companies from selling or sharing identifiable consumer health data stored on fitness trackers and health apps without users' consent.
So far, none of the half-dozen privacy protection measures proposed in Congress are near passage. But experts expect the questions around HIPAA to take on more urgency in the coming years, as more confidential health information spills outside the purview of the law.
New technologies and a greater awareness of public health after the pandemic could also fundamentally change our conception of health privacy, making it less about keeping information private than controlling how it is used.
"What we think about health information is changing dramatically," says Kirk Nahra, a privacy and data security attorney who represents health-care companies.
One concern is the proliferation of health and wellness consumer technologies. Internet-enabled devices and apps tracking our steps, monitoring our heart rates and oxygen levels, and sensing our emotions are generating masses of granular information about the mental and physical conditions of their users.
Health researchers see a future of smart homes constructed with mirrors that can detect skin abnormalities and heart conditions, floors that can sense dizziness and unsteady gait, mattresses that check vital signs and toilet seats that measure blood pressure.
Such sensitive bodily monitoring may not be subject to HIPAA's consent and disclosure requirements if the companies making the devices and analyzing the data operate outside the health-care system. The data gleaned from the technology could still be subject to other federal or state data regulations or a manufacturer's own privacy policy.
Some health law observers say our everyday digital routines pose an even trickier issue for medical confidentiality.
The world's largest tech companies, including Alphabet Inc.'s Google, Microsoft Corp. and Amazon.com Inc., are already plunging into the health-care space. Google, for example, is developing a search portal that doctors and nurses can use to diagnose diseases, and has agreements with some hospital systems and providers that permit the company to access tens of millions of personally identifiable health records with little or no input from patients. The huge data sets are helping to train machine-learning algorithms to recognize patterns in the clinical data. Smarter artificial intelligence could help physicians better identify and even predict medical conditions. Google has said its intentions in health are unconnected with its advertising business, but the prospect of tech giants' collecting troves of health records has raised concerns among lawmakers, patients and doctors, who fear the data could be used in unexpected ways.
Data mining could also expand the ability to infer health conditions from behavior and online activities that don't obviously have any medical connection.
Dr. Mason Marks, a health law professor at Gonzaga University, labels these inferences "emergent medical data." It consists of millions of "digital traces" harvested from social media accounts and devices like wearables that are plugged into algorithms to predict conditions like suicidal depression or alcoholism. Already, Facebook deploys an AI system programmed to identify potential suicidal language.
Data mining has the potential to improve health screening, facilitate medical research and better our understanding of diseases.
But "emergent medical data" is largely unregulated, Dr. Marks says, and could also be used for consumer profiling and marketing purposes and to discriminate against people flagged by the algorithms. He says he favors a privacy law that treats such health inferences the same as traditional medical data.
"Companies and governments shouldn't be able to collect health information out of thin air," he says.
Public sentiment could also shape health privacy laws. The U.S. legal system has long viewed health care as a domain requiring exceptional privacy protections, says Nicolas Terry, executive director of the Hall Center for Law and Health at Indiana University. The Covid-19 crisis could help give rise to a "solidarity-based health care" that puts less emphasis on individual privacy rights and more on public health. Personal health information would become less proprietary and treated more like "society's data," gathered for the wellbeing of the whole herd, Prof. Terry says. Such a shift could loosen privacy regulations around medical research and give scientists freer access to personal health information.
Concerns about HIPAA could also be addressed by putting in place broader antidiscrimination protections, making it unlawful to use the information to deny access to housing, employment or for targeted advertising.
Another approach is to give consumers more control over what kinds of data can be collected and how it is used.
"For example, the users of social media platforms could be presented with a menu of options that include predictions about self-harm, substance abuse, mental health conditions and physical health conditions," wrote Dr. Marks in a recent paper. Users could have the option of participating in different health surveillance programs or decide whether they want their information used for other purposes like targeted advertising.
Facebook users, he wrote, could be asked to opt in to suicide screening and choose whether to notify friends or family, or dispatch first responders to the home if a suicide risk is detected from their online activity.
"HIPAA worked fairly well back when it was written, when medical records were stored in paper charts," says Dr. Marks. "But today, in the Information Age, we need something new."

Credit: By Jacob Gershman
