Auto workers
Union name: United Auto Workers
Length of strike: 40+ days
Number of workers covered or affected: The UAW represents about 145,000 workers at General Motors, Ford Motor and Chrysler parent Stellantis. The union's targeted strikes hit nine U.S. factories and dozens of parts distribution centers, and they involved more than 45,000 workers.
Month tentative agreements reached: October
Key pay terms or increases: Auto workers won a 25% base pay increase over four years, plus the reinstatement of cost-of-living raises, improved retirement benefits, the right to strike over plant closures and better pay for temporary employees. The union didn't get a 40% raise or a 32-hour work week for a full 40 hours' worth of pay, both items that leaders initially put on the table.
AI and technology-related wins: The UAW fought to bring electric-vehicle battery production under its master agreement at the three automakers. It got partly there. The union convinced Ford and GM to put a few EV and battery plants under its main contract, pending a worker vote for some facilities. However, several key EV facilities were left hanging, and will likely be future organizing battle- grounds.
One surprising thing: The UAW called simultaneous strikes at all three Detroit automakers, talked openly about the back-and-forth at the bargaining table and took an unusually combative tone in its dealings with the company, regularly slamming the CEOs publicly. UAW President Shawn Fain's entire approach to talks was to keep the executives at GM, Ford and Stellantis guessing -- and by extension, everyone else.
Las Vegas casino workers
Union name: The Culinary and Bartenders unions
Length of strike: 0 days
Number of workers covered or affected: 40,000
Month tentative agreements reached: November
Key pay terms or increases: Largest wage increase in the union's 88-year history
AI and technology-related wins: Casinos agreed to give workers advance notice and training when they introduce new technology that could affect jobs.
One surprising thing: The union forged the final deal with Wynn three hours before the strike deadline.
Hollywood writers
Union name: Writers Guild of America
Length of strike: 148 days
Number of workers covered or affected: 11,500
Month tentative agreements reached: September
Key pay terms or increases: Studios and streamers agreed to a series of increases in minimums: Most increased by 5% in September, will increase another 4% in the spring and again by 3.5% in May 2025.
AI and technology-related wins: Writers won't lose out on writing credits or compensation when AI tools are used to assist in creating scripts. Writers can use AI tools to write if the company agrees, but employers can't require the use of such tools.
One surprising thing: The union got studios to agree to a minimum number of writers for a show, an issue that studios and streamers initially opposed. Studios agreed to a lower minimum than the union initially sought.
Hollywood actors
Union name: Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists
Length of strike: 118 days
Number of workers covered or affected: 140,000
Month tentative agreements reached: November
Key pay terms or increases: Two wage increases in the inaugural year of the contract that amount to a first-year increase of 11.28%. An additional 3.5% increase in the second year.
AI and technology-related wins: Studios must get actors' permission to use their name or features in creating an artificial version of their likeness that includes one of their recognizable facial features such as their eyes or mouth. They will generally be paid when their likeness is used by generative AI systems and receive the same residuals they would for a physical performance.
One surprising thing: Creation of a bonus on top of increased residuals that funds a pool of money distributed by the union and studios both to actors in hit streaming shows and other union members working on shows that haven't been top performers. The union initially asked for a cut of subscriber revenue from Hollywood studios, but later revised how the bonus pool is funded.
Airline pilots
Union name: Air Line Pilots Association unions and the Allied Pilots Association
Length of strike: No strike
Number of workers covered or affected: Over 45,000 pilots at Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and American Airlines
Month tentative agreements reached: Delta's union leaders reached an agreement in principle in December 2022, and members ratified the deal in March. United's pilot union reached a deal in principle in July, and members approved it in September. Leaders of the union that represents American's pilots had a preliminary deal in May but had to negotiate some elements in response to United's. Members approved the contract in August.
Key pay terms or increases: Pilots won pay increases of 34% to 40% or more over the terms of the new contracts, as well as improvements in schedules, retirement benefits and vacation policies.
One surprising thing: The contracts included "snap up" provisions to ensure that another carrier didn't offer a better deal, bringing pay rates at the major airlines into alignment.
Delivery workers (UPS)
Union name: International Brotherhood of Teamsters
Length of strike: No strike
Number of workers covered or affected: Roughly 330,000
Month tentative agreements reached: July
Key pay terms or increases: UPS pays new part-time workers a wage of $21 an hour. Existing UPS workers would get a raise of $7.50 an hour over the life of the five-year contract, including a $2.75-an-hour pay bump in 2023. UPS drivers will remain the highest-paid delivery drivers in the U.S. with the average top rate at $49 an hour.
AI and technology-related wins: Vehicles won't be equipped with inward-facing cameras. Driver-facing sensors will only be used for triggering in-cab audible alerts related to distracted driving.
One surprising thing: By the end of the new contract, the average full-time Teamsters-represented UPS driver would make $170,000 annually in pay and benefits, according to UPS Chief Executive Carol Tome.
