[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Like other big cloud software providers, Oracle's present is a bit dark. Its future, however, is much brighter, thanks to some help from generative artificial intelligence.
Oracle's fiscal fourth-quarter results late Tuesday showed revenue growing only 3% year over year to $14.3 billion.
That is the weakest growth the company has logged in three years, with revenue from cloud and on-premise licensing falling about 12% short of Wall Street's projections.
But remaining performance obligations, or RPO, shot up 44% year over year to $98 billion, which was well above the $85 billion expected by analysts for the period, according to consensus estimates from Visible Alpha.
RPO tracks contracted revenue not yet recognized, and thus is a closely watched metric for companies selling subscription-based cloud software services. Oracle's 44% jump for the quarter ended May contrasted sharply with the disappointing 15% rise recently reported by Salesforce for the period ended in April.
Oracle also noted that a big part of those new deals are related to AI training and said it expects revenue to grow by double digits for the new fiscal year -- beating the 8.6% growth analysts had been expecting. Oracle's stock thus shot up 13.3% Wednesday, hitting a record.
The latest jump puts Oracle's stock at a year-to-date gain of about 33%. That well exceeds most other large-cap cloud software providers, which have been struggling with a slowdown in major deal signings as corporate software budgets get tightened, with some money being redirected to AI projects.
It also has lifted Oracle's stock price to more than 22 times projected earnings, which is cheap compared to many other cloud names but still the highest multiple the shares have fetched in nearly 20 years -- and 40% above its five-year average, according to FactSet data.
That premium makes some observers nervous, given Oracle's still sizable legacy software business that doesn't offer the same growth potential. Only 54% of analysts rate Oracle as a buy, compared with 76% for Salesforce and 95% for Microsoft, according to FactSet.
"We think Oracle shares have been bid up more on deal-win headlines, total RPO figures, and the AI excitement wave, without a very deep analytical framework," JPMorgan's Mark Murphy wrote on Wednesday.
However, John DiFucci of Guggenheim described Oracle as one of "few names out there at this time that will likely accelerate growth during this period" in a note to clients. Oracle will have to make sure its AI cloud packs a big silver lining.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
