MARRIOTT INTERNATIONAL
China to Extend
Starwood Review
China's Ministry of Commerce said it has extended its antitrust review of Marriott International Inc.'s roughly $13.6 billion takeover of Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide Inc. due to the complexities of the case.
Chinese antitrust regulators launched their review on April 11, but extended it to May 11 and again on Aug. 9, said Commerce Ministry spokesman Shen Danyang in a news conference Friday, according to the official online transcript.
The review is taking longer "due to the complexity of the relevant products and regions involved in the deal," he said.
The two companies announced recently that they had given Chinese regulators more time to review the deal, but said they didn't believe it posed anticompetitive issues to China.
The transaction has received clearances from regulators representing more than 40 countries, including the U.S.
-- Eva Dou and Yang Jie
---
AURIZON HOLDINGS
Chief Executive
Plans to Step Down
Aurizon Holdings Ltd. said Chief Executive Lance Hockridge would step down and be succeeded by former Rio Tinto PLC executive Andrew Harding.
Mr. Harding left Rio Tinto, one of the world's top mining companies, in June amid a shake-up of the company's executive team. He worked at Rio Tinto for more than 24 years, most recently as the head of its iron-ore business.
Aurizon said Friday he would succeed Mr. Hockridge, who has led the Australian rail operator since its initial public offering in 2010, on Dec. 1.
-- Rhiannon Hoyle
---
AMAZON
Company Hires
AI Expert From eBay
Amazon.com Inc. recently poached an artificial-intelligence expert from rival eBay Inc., the latest move by the retail giant to strengthen its ability to quickly determine what users want.
Hassan Sawaf joined Amazon as its director of artificial intelligence in Palo Alto, Calif., at its A9 labs, according to his LinkedIn page, with the goal of improving "the user experience for users of Amazon's search capability across all products and businesses."
An eBay spokeswoman confirmed Mr. Sawaf left the company. Amazon and Mr. Sawaf didn't respond to requests for comment.
Amazon is part of the scramble to develop artificial intelligence assistants, including Apple Inc.'s Siri, Alphabet Inc.'s Google Now and Microsoft Corp.'s Cortana. These companies and others are pouring money into artificial intelligence.
-- Laura Stevens
