As companies increasingly use AI-powered chatbots to handle customer transactions, it remains to be seen how consumers feel about it. New research suggests that it may partly depend on whether consumers think they are getting a good deal.
The research , published by the Journal of Marketing in February, found that if a company is offering a less-than-ideal price on a product or service, consumers tend to respond better in terms of increased purchase likelihood and satisfaction if an artificial-intelligence agent makes the offer. But if the price being offered is perceived as being good, consumers will respond better if the offer is presented by a human rather than a robot, because shoppers like getting favorable deals from real people.
In one experiment, the researchers asked people to consider a deal for an aftermarket concert ticket, either from an AI agent or a human seller. The participants were informed that a similar ticket had been sold for either more, less, or the same price. Both AI and human sellers were then assigned to present the deals to participants. Another setup asked participants to consider the cost of an Uber ride to a restaurant for dinner. They were then offered a cheaper, more expensive, or similar-price ride home and were told it was coming from either a human or AI agent.
In both scenarios, participants were more likely to accept a less-than-satisfactory offer if it came from a bot rather than a human. But with offers that exceeded consumers' expectations, the human agent had the edge. For a similar-price deal, it didn't matter whether an AI or human agent made the offer.
Separately, the researchers explored whether changing the appearance of a bot affects how consumers respond to offers. They presented ride-share customers with photos of different-looking AI chatbots -- ranging from those that looked like real people down to robots with no human features. They found that the more humanlike an AI agent appeared, the more study participants would react to offers as if they were coming from a real person.
The study's results stem from what the buyers think about the seller's intentions, according to Aaron Garvey, an associate professor of marketing at the University of Kentucky's Gatton College of Business and Economics and co-author of the study.
People, he says, perceive that AI can't be greedy and isn't trying to take advantage of them, so they feel better about a worse-than-expected deal. A human making the same offer, however, is perceived as having bad intentions, making buyers want to avoid a purchase to punish them. By contrast, when a human presents a better-than-expected offer, buyers perceive this as another human being generous, improving the perception of the offer and the probability it will be taken, he says.
In the paper, the researchers say their insights could apply to situations other than just price offers, such as when a company has something positive to communicate -- say, an expedited delivery, rebate or upgrade -- or something negative, such as an order cancellation, status change or product defect.
Of course, there also is a danger that companies could use insights from the research to try to manipulate consumers into accepting worse-than-expected offers, the researchers say. "I'm not worried about AI," Dr. Garvey says. "But I am worried about if we have blind spots" about it.
---
Ms. Snow is a writer in Los Angeles. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Jackie Snow
