Stocks and government bonds rallied on the final trading day of July, capping a topsy-turvy month for global markets with big gains.
All three major indexes opened sharply higher, holding on to gains after the Federal Reserve held interest rates steady and Chairman Jerome Powell signaled the central bank is prepared to cut them in September if inflation keeps moving lower.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite jumped 2.6%, its best day since February. The S&P 500 added 1.6%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average added 0.2%.
July's star performer, the Russell 2000 index of small companies, added 0.5%, lagging behind the other indexes after racing past them in recent weeks. The Russell soared 10% in July, its best showing of the year.
Part of what has driven the Russell higher is a drop in government-bond yields, which continued Wednesday after the Fed's decision.
The 10-year Treasury yield fell to 4.107% on Wednesday, capping its biggest monthly decline of 2024.
Zhiwei Ren, a portfolio manager at Penn Mutual Asset Management, said he is now nearly certain of a September rate cut. Moreover, he said that Fed officials indicated they want to keep economic growth humming along.
"The market definitely likes that," Ren said.
Investors have gotten several bits of good news on the economy in recent weeks. The latest read on U.S. gross domestic product showed that growth smashed expectations in the prior quarter, while inflation has been falling steadily. Fed officials acknowledged progress in the inflation fight at the latest meeting.
Now, investors will be parsing Friday's monthly jobs report for clues on how the labor market is holding up.
For much of July, traders across Wall Street were gripped by the giant rotation that shook the U.S. stock market. The anticipation of lower interest rates in coming months has turbocharged cyclical corners of the market, as well as smaller U.S. stocks, which tend to be more sensitive to borrowing costs.
The S&P 500 and Dow added 1.1% and 4.4%, respectively, for the month. The Nasdaq lost 0.8%.
Still, trading Wednesday showed that investors aren't giving up on tech behemoths just yet. Nvidia shares, the poster child for the artificial-intelligence trade, surged 13%. Micron Technology added 7.1%. Other semiconductor companies also rallied, reversing some of the sharp swoons that occurred in July.
The Europe Stoxx 600 rose 0.8% on Wednesday and 1.3% in July.
At midday Thursday, Japan's Nikkei Stock Average was down 2.6% a day after the Bank of Japan raised interest rates and put forward a plan to reduce bond buying. S&P 500 futures were up 0.6%, while Nasdaq 100 futures were 0.8% higher.
Generate image description

Credit: By Gunjan Banerji
