BEIJING -- Hard-charging e-commerce firm JD.com is undertaking widespread layoffs and closing most offices abroad to cope with a slowing economy and rising competition, people familiar with the matter said.
In recent weeks, employees described deep unease in the ranks of the Beijing-based company, with a leaked memo taking aim at underperformers. Some departments have ordered members to engage in self-criticism sessions to assess their and others' performance, employees said, and departures have become an almost daily event.
The company's chief technology officer, the person who served as general counsel and chief human resources officer, and the chief public affairs officer left within weeks of one another, and the layoffs have extended to rank-and-file workers, according to the people familiar with the matter.
Some teams are expected to be cut by half, people familiar with the matter said, and offices in New York, Washington and elsewhere will be closed. The company's artificial-intelligence research center in Silicon Valley will remain open, they said.
JD.com spokesman Brad Burgess said there was no plan for large-scale layoffs and management is looking strategically at each office abroad. The company is "making organizational adjustments" to be more lean, he said.
"We are going back to our entrepreneurial roots," he said. "We hope these adjustments will help us return to our previous fast growth."
On Friday, founder and Chief Executive Liu Qiangdong, who also goes by Richard Liu, said on WeChat that JD.com hasn't implemented layoffs in four or five years and during that time the number of employees who don't work hard has ballooned.
"If we keep going this way, there definitely won't be hope for JD!" he wrote. "The company will be cruelly eliminated by the market eventually!"
The Information, a tech-focused news site, reported that JD.com could shed up to 8% of its workforce, or about 12,000 employees. Mr. Burgess said that number was inaccurate and said plans call for hiring 15,000 employees this year, with about two-thirds allocated to its logistics business.
Changes at JD.com are emblematic of a chill sweeping China's tech sector. A slowing economy and uncertainties created by the U.S.-China trade fight are crimping financing and consumer spending, causing many tech companies to trim their payrolls and bonuses.
JD.com, which is listed on the Nasdaq, grew rapidly along with a ballooning middle class willing to shell out more for speedy delivery and name-brand electronics and other products. But it has struggled to turn a profit, losing money each year since going public in 2014. Its heavy investments in research and technology, as well as its sprawling logistics network with over 550 warehouses across China, have eaten into profit margins. Consumers, pinched by the slowdown, are also turning to competitors, such as discounter Pinduoduo Inc. and Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., China's biggest e-commerce company.
In August, Mr. Liu was arrested in Minneapolis on suspicion of rape. He denied all wrongdoing, and in December, prosecutors declined to press charges against him. Still, the accusations dogged the company and dragged down its share price for months.
---
Xiao Xiao and Chunying Zhang contributed to this article.

Credit: By Shan Li
