Massive, open, online courses are coming to the office.
Providers of so-called MOOCs are joining with academics and experts to attract millions of users to their free or low-cost Web courses on subjects ranging from Android app development to Buddhist meditation.
But they are struggling to convert the enormous popularity of the content into cash, since few learners stick with classes long enough to pay for optional certificates of completion.
Now, MOOC operators like edX, Udemy Inc. and Coursera are finding steadier, and possibly more substantial, earnings opportunities in a well-established market: corporate training. For a fee, companies can access existing online courses or create their own, with perks like user analytics and separate study groups for employees.
EdX, an outfit founded by Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, announced on Wednesday that it is opening up registration for its first suite of professional education classes on topics including energy, entrepreneurship and cybersecurity, priced at up to $1,249 a person, with volume discounts available for some employers.
A March edX pilot on big data enrolled about 3,500 people from more than 2,000 organizations, including Microsoft Corp. and Thomson Reuters Corp. The class grossed nearly $1.75 million.
"This goes to our sustainability story," says CEO Anant Agarwal. Though edX is a nonprofit enterprise, it still needs cash to develop the free courses taken by nearly three million participants world-wide.
MOOC providers are looking to shear off a small slice of a corporate training market that tops $70 billion in the U.S. alone, according to estimates by Bersin by Deloitte, a human-resources research firm owned by Deloitte Consulting LLP.
"For a new company, it's meaningful," says Todd Tauber, Bersin's vice president of learning and development research, referring to the money being funneled to MOOCs thus far. "But in the grand scheme of corporate-training budgets, it's still a side project."
Forty-four percent of training outfits Bersin surveyed say they're experimenting with MOOCs, but only 8% say they're regularly using MOOCs for training purposes.
"Corporate training, in the past, has been a bit of a backwater in terms of innovation," says Dennis Yang, CEO of Udemy, a MOOC provider that offers more than 20,000 courses to four million registered users.
But companies say they are eager to shake up their employee training regimens after tiring of staid videos, time-consuming lectures and costly off-site classes for top executives. They want inexpensive, easy-to-scale and convenient instruction, all of which MOOCs can offer.
Datalogix Inc., a Westminster, Colo.-based data-services company, already gave each employee about 30 hours of curriculum annually on technical skills, security and leadership development.
After seeing strong employee interest in free courses last year, in May Datalogix rolled out a program that allows staffers to sign up for any of about 730 Udemy courses. Datalogix pays a flat fee covering all its 415 employees; 119 are actively using the site, enrolled in 248 courses.
"The right recipe is going to be a blend of the infrastructure we have in place and leveraging the stuff that they have," says President Eric Roza. For example, Datalogix's recent Data 101 training program included as prerequisite a Udemy class on database basics.
Udemy for Business launched late last year and now counts more than 350 paying company partners, including 1-800-Flowers.com Inc. and Oracle Corp.
Firms can license content for $29 a user a month, or pay a $15 monthly per-person fee to build customized courses on the Udemy platform. Bulk discounts are available.
Meanwhile, Coursera, which partners with top universities to offer weekslong courses in subjects like constitutional law and machine learning, is finding a ready white-collar audience for its offerings.
Earnings from corporate relationships haven't had a material impact on Coursera's revenue quite yet, but "it has been a really exciting ride," he says.
Credit: By Melissa Korn
