ASML Holding warned of a slower-than-expected recovery for some areas of the semiconductor industry after orders came in below analysts' expectations as chip makers held back spending on key production equipment.
The Dutch company, which supplies semiconductor-making machinery to chip makers, booked 2.63 billion euros, or roughly $2.87 billion, in orders in the third quarter, up from 2.60 billion euros a year earlier but well below analysts' forecast of 5.59 billion euros, according to consensus estimates by Visible Alpha.
"While there continue to be strong developments and upside potential in AI, other market segments are taking longer to recover," Chief Executive Christophe Fouquet said. "It now appears the recovery is more gradual than previously expected. This is expected to continue in 2025, which is leading to customer cautiousness."
The company expects between 30 billion euros and 35 billion euros in sales next year, below a previous forecast of up to 40 billion euros.
Chip makers need highly complex production equipment as they race to build more advanced semiconductors to power artificial-intelligence features in everything from smartphones and laptops to data centers, putting suppliers like ASML at the forefront of the AI-spending bonanza.
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., the world's largest contract chip maker, and South Korean memory-chip maker Samsung Electronics are among ASML's largest clients. The two companies face added pressure from their customers to churn out more capable chips that tech giants like Microsoft and Google owner Alphabet need to upgrade their data centers.
But while demand for AI semiconductors keeps booming, chip makers are still confronting an inventory glut as makers of consumer devices, electric vehicles and industrial equipment stockpiled the chips they needed years back and aren't placing as many orders now.
ASML's announcement came a day earlier than its scheduled release because of a technical error, it said. ASML's comments weighed on global chip stocks including Nvidia and Intel. ASML's shares in Amsterdam closed more than 15% lower on Tuesday.
The company said 1.4 billion euros in orders were for its high-end extreme ultraviolet tools that are used to print the most-intricate layers on chips used in the latest gaming consoles, smartwatches and phones. Analysts forecast 2.82 billion euros in EUV orders.
Credit: By Mauro Orru
