WALMART
WMT +6.6%
Walmart isn't seeing any slowdown in consumer spending amid recession fears. The country's largest retailer on Thursday posted strong quarterly sales, as U.S. consumers flocked to its stores for low-cost groceries. Walmart also raised its sales and profit targets for the remainder of the fiscal year. Executives said shoppers are gravitating to deals and to the convenience of online order pickup and delivery, leading to an increase in shoppers -- especially higher-income customers. The results helped assuage concerns that the U.S. was sliding into recession. Walmart shares gained 6.6% Thursday, closing at an all-time high.
STARBUCKS
SBUX +25%
Starbucks on Tuesday said it picked Chipotle Mexican Grill Chief Executive Brian Niccol as its next leader. Niccol is slated to take over as chief executive and executive chairman of its board on Sept. 9. Current Starbucks chief Laxman Narasimhan has spent roughly 16 months on the job, succeeding Howard Schultz after his third stint as CEO. Schultz had publicly criticized how Narasimhan and other executives were steering the chain. The switch comes as Starbucks works to turn around its business and contend with activist investors. Starbucks shares surged 25% Tuesday.
VICTORIA'S SECRET
VSCO +16%
Victoria's Secret named Hillary Super -- former leader of Savage X Fenty -- as its next CEO, after Martin Waters stepped down after three years. The company said Chief Financial Officer Timothy Johnson will serve as interim CEO until Super's appointment takes effect on Sept. 9. Super previously led Anthropologie before running Savage X Fenty after pop star and billionaire founder Rihanna stepped down in 2023. Super spearheaded Savage X Fenty's rebranding efforts. Victoria's Secret shares soared 16% Wednesday.
CISCO SYSTEMS
CSCO +6.8%
Cisco announced looming job cuts and a better-than-expected quarter. The networking-equipment company said it plans to cut its workforce by 7%, or about 6,000 people. Cisco cited a need to lower costs and invest in growth areas including artificial intelligence, the cloud and cybersecurity. The company had about 84,900 employees as of last July. Cisco unveiled its restructuring plan Wednesday, which will incur up to $1 billion in severance and other charges. The company also posted its fiscal fourth-quarter results, beating revenue and adjusted earnings expectations. Cisco shares jumped 6.8% Thursday.
TRUMP MEDIA & TECHNOLOGY
DJT -3.6%
Donald Trump's return to rival social-media platform X weighed on Truth Social's parent company. On Monday, Trump posted on Elon Musk's X -- formerly known as Twitter -- for the first time in nearly a year. Trump and Musk also appeared together on X's livestreaming service, Spaces. Trump's return to mainstream social-media platforms like X has made many analysts question Truth Social's prospects. The former president was previously kicked off X and Facebook following the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol. Trump Media shares fell 3.6% Tuesday.
ULTA BEAUTY
ULTA +11%
Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway took a roughly $260 million stake in Ulta Beauty in the second quarter, per a regulatory filing made public late Wednesday. The cosmetics-store operator had been a beauty-sector winner, with its steady revenue growth and commanding market share. But after three strong years, bolstered by a pandemic-era surge in beauty spending, the company warned of slowing growth earlier this year. Ulta has also been facing off against its LVMH-owned rival, Sephora. Ulta shares leapt 11% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
