LAS VEGAS -- At the world's largest technology hardware confab, one of the biggest brands is focusing on software.
Fitbit Inc. this week announced software updates and new app features for its fitness trackers and smartwatch at CES, the Consumer Electronics Show, betting that an experience linking users to each other will keep them coming back.
The turn to software marks a departure for Fitbit, which struggled last year to draw new users with its latest gadgets. Fitbit has introduced many new products at CES in the past.
"Software is taking a much greater importance for the hardware category," said James Park, chief executive of Fitbit. To keep customers engaged with companies like Fitbit, "hardware is important, but the software is where a lot of the magic will happen."
Fitbit's focus on software illustrates the difficulty hardware makers face in constantly developing new products. Tesla Motors Inc., which launched in 2003 as an electric car company, has dedicated more resources in recent years to technology such as artificial intelligence, which helps power its self-driving software features.
Apple Inc. slowed from its traditional pace of rolling out a redesign of its iPhone every two years when it released the iPhone 7 last year with minor updates to the previous model.
Last year, Fitbit introduced its first smartwatch, the Blaze, at CES. In 2015, the company started selling its Charge HR and Surge fitness trackers at the tech show, and four years ago it showed off its Flex activity tracker.
Fitbit's software launches attempt to tackle one of the biggest challenges makers of wearable tech face: how to keep users engaged.
About 30% of people in the U.S., U.K. and Australia who had ever worn a fitness tracker no longer use the device, according to a survey last summer by market research firm Gartner Inc.
Fitbit is now hoping software can help make the experience more sticky. On Thursday, it announced the creation of a new community section and personalized goal-setting in the app that pairs with its fitness trackers.
When the app update is available in the next couple of months, the community section will include a social feed where users can post exercise summaries, virtual badges and photos, as well as a place to discover workouts led by trainers in their area.
Users with one or more friends on the app take 700 more steps a day on average than users without any friends on the platform, Fitbit said.
"The people who are more social are clearly taking more steps," said Chris Mahoney, Fitbit's director of product marketing, software and services.
Fitbit wouldn't comment on whether users with more friends on the app stick around longer.
The company also announced software updates to its Fitstar personal trainer app, integrating it with its trackers to take into account a user's activity when it recommends a workout. New software features for its smartwatch add breathing exercises and a cardio measurer.
Credit: By Georgia Wells
