Highlights from The Wall Street Journal's The Future of Everything conference:
PRIVACY
Waze CEO Notes
Lack of Standards
The problem with privacy is that its definition keeps shifting, Waze Inc. Chief Executive Noam Bardin told the conference.
Privacy -- and what constitutes abuse of privacy -- means different things around the world, depending upon a person's nationality and background, said Mr. Bardin, whose company offers a GPS navigation software app.
He identified the U.S. as presenting particular challenges because "there is no official standard for privacy." He called for a regulatory environment that better suits today's tech companies.
-- Paul Berger
---
FOOD DELIVERY
Martha Stewart,
Postmates Team Up
Martha Stewart has only ordered delivery once. It was pizza from a local shop in Katonah, N.Y. Nevertheless, the food entrepreneur teamed up with food- delivery business Postmates Inc. for a new set of commercials encouraging people to "just Postmate it."
"I love people to want to cook," but delivery can be "valuable and useful" for people who don't have time, she said at the conference.
The Postmates commercials, released on Monday, depict Ms. Stewart in a variety of humorous kitchen situations, using Postmates to order food.
Ms. Stewart has increasingly dipped into a swath of business ventures, ranging from a wine-subscription business to a VH1 cooking show, "Martha & Snoop's Potluck Dinner Party," with rapper Snoop Dogg.
She also recently announced a partnership with marijuana grower Canopy Growth to develop cannabidiol food products. Ms. Stewart criticized the amount of food wasted in grocery stores in the U.S.
-- Michelle Ma
---
HUMAN BOTS
Relationships Raise
Ethical Questions
After seeing her son burst into tears when a social robot he played with went offline, artificial-intelligence expert Rana el Kaliouby was amazed at the very emotional bond that her child had developed with the program. But her son's experience raises the question: Can such machines manipulate us in unforeseen ways to buy certain products or behave in ways that benefit the companies that make them?
As the interactions between humans and machines become more intimate and personal, researchers, companies and governments must think more actively about the ethical and privacy implications, Dr. el Kaliouby and other AI experts said.
Dr. el Kaliouby is co-founder of Affectiva, which is developing AI systems capable of interpreting nonverbal communication cues. Her company is serving clients in the automotive industry to figure out whether drivers are alert or not, for instance.
-- Daniela Hernandez
