SEOUL -- Samsung Electronics Co. is hoping that a streamlined design and a new virtual assistant for its next flagship smartphone will help consumers forget last year's massive Galaxy Note 7 recall.
The South Korean technology giant is likely to omit a physical home button from the front of its new Galaxy S8 smartphone and showcase a new virtual assistant akin to Apple Inc.'s Siri -- to be called Bixby -- according to people familiar with the matter.
A fingerprint scanner for unlocking the Galaxy S8 will be moved from the home button to a new location on the back of the device, these people said, cautioning that features could still change with about two months remaining before the phone is available to consumers.
In a break from the past, Samsung will release only a curved-screen version of the new phone, though it will be available in two different sizes, one of these people said. Unlike Apple's latest iPhone, Samsung's new handset will have an earphone jack, this person added.
One of the people familiar with the matter said the new phone is set to be unveiled at an event in New York late next month. It will be Samsung's most closely watched product launch in years.
Samsung hopes the new features will convince consumers the S8 is worth buying, given lingering concerns about the safety of its smartphones. Last month, Samsung said its investigation concluded that battery suppliers were to blame for its Galaxy Note 7 phones catching fire.
The S8 might use batteries from Samsung SDI Co., the battery-making affiliate that was one of two suppliers blamed by the smartphone maker for the recall.
Cha Nam-hyun, Samsung SDI's vice president of marketing, told analysts last month that the company signed up to supply batteries for the S8, which would help Samsung SDI's sales in the first three months of 2017.
Since the Galaxy Note 7 recall, Samsung SDI says it has spent 150 billion won ($131 million) to strengthen product safety, while launching an X-ray inspection process for all of its batteries, a change from its previous method of conducting sample inspections.
Samsung Electronics declined to comment on the features of the phone and on its battery suppliers.
After the Galaxy Note 7 recall, which was triggered by reports of some devices overheating, the company said the ordeal cost it about $5 billion in losses and lost sales.
Samsung then lost its No. 1 position in the global smartphone market to Apple in the last three months of 2016, marking the first quarter in two years in which Samsung wasn't the leader in shipments, according to data from Counterpoint Technology Market Research.
In the Asia-Pacific region, Samsung fell to fifth place from first in the preceding quarter, dropping behind Apple and Huawei Technologies Co. as well as China's BBK Electronics Co., which owns the Oppo and Vivo brands.
Samsung is hoping that strong sales of the Galaxy S8 can turn the company's fortunes around.
The Galaxy S8's new artificial-intelligence-powered assistant, Bixby, is capable of answering questions spoken by users.
The Wall Street Journal reported in November that Samsung was devoting a new physical button on the side of the device to allow users to quickly use the service. The company is still planning on adding the artificial-intelligence button, the people familiar with the matter said.
Credit: By Eun-Young Jeong and Jonathan Cheng
