GOLDMAN SACHS
GS +5.7%
Bank stocks cheered this week's Federal Reserve decision to hold interest rates steady. The decision was a departure from the recent cycle of aggressive hikes aimed at bringing down inflation. The central bank on Wednesday also forecast three quarter-point rate cuts next year. Higher interest rates weigh on banks in more ways than one. They have to pay depositors more, and their bond holdings lose value, creating billions of dollars in paper losses. The post-Fed optimism boosted financial stocks. Goldman Sachs shares gained 5.7% Thursday, reaching a 2023 high.
HASBRO
HAS -1.1%
Hasbro kicked off the holiday season with not-so-jolly news. The toy company will cut nearly 20% of its workforce, or about 1,100 jobs, as it faces weak sales in the holiday shopping period, The Wall Street Journal reported Monday. Earlier this year, the Monopoly-maker said it would lay off 800 workers. The latest announcement came during toy makers' busiest time of the year. About half of toy companies' yearly sales come in the weeks leading up to the holiday, according to analysts. Hasbro shares lost 1.1% Tuesday.
PFIZER
PFE -6.7%
Pfizer's Covid business is still losing steam. The drugmaker on Wednesday said its revenue could fall next year due to waning demand for Covid shots and other related products. Pfizer was a pandemic-era darling, but its performance has been weighed down by a continued slowdown in vaccine sales. Nowadays, many big pharmaceutical companies are flocking to the latest buzzy arena: anti-obesity treatments. Pfizer's experimental treatments are still in the works. Pfizer shares slid 6.7% Wednesday.
MACY'S
M +19%
An investor group has launched a $5.8 billion bid to buy Macy's and take it private. Arkhouse Management and Brigade Capital recently submitted a proposal to acquire the famed department-store chain for $21 a share, the Journal reported. The group already has a big position in Macy's through Arkhouse-managed funds. Macy's shares soared 19% Monday to $20.77, leading to a gain of more than $1 billion in market cap.
CIGNA GROUP
CI +17%
Cigna is walking away from its pursuit of rival Humana. The pair had been discussing a combination that could have been finalized by the end of the year, the Journal reported late last month. Shareholders balked at the possible deal. Instead, Cigna said on Dec. 10 that it plans an additional $10 billion of stock buybacks, bringing its total planned repurchases to $11.3 billion. It didn't comment on the Humana talks. Cigna shares jumped 17% Monday.
ORACLE
ORCL -12%
Oracle shares plunged after the business-software giant on Monday posted weaker-than-expected revenue in its second-quarter. Oracle also said its overall cloud revenue increased 25% to $4.8 billion in the period, slower growth than the prior quarter. Chief Executive Safra Catz said demand for its cloud infrastructure and generative artificial intelligence services helped Oracle's bottom line. Oracle shares sank 12% Tuesday, making the stock the worst performer in the S&P 500 index.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
