[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Electronic Arts has a lot in the works. Just when it is all coming is the $1 billion question.
That is how much market value the videogame publisher lost on Tuesday when it hosted its first analyst meeting in eight years. The company used the occasion to preview several big games in development, along with new projects involving game creation using generative artificial intelligence and a new app designed to broaden its flagship sports-games business. A movie based on the popular "The Sims" franchise is in development with Amazon.com's MGM studio. Coming games include a new sequel to the company's "Battlefield" franchise, which hasn't had a release since the last one misfired in 2021.
For an event geared to financial analysts, however, it was light on financial details. EA gave no specific forecasts for long-term revenue and net bookings, saying only that it intended to outgrow the market through the 2027 fiscal year. Nor did it say when games such as the new "Battlefield" actually would see the light of day.
The company only said net bookings for the quarter ending this month and the fiscal year ending in March were on track to come in at the high end of its previous forecasts -- something already reflected in the consensus estimates tabulated by FactSet for those periods.
EA shares thus fell nearly 3% on Tuesday, and slipped again another 1.5% on Wednesday. Analyst James Heaney of Jefferies praised the "tangible AI use-cases and growth opportunities beyond games," but added that "those looking for near-term assurances on game pipeline timing may have been left wanting more."
Clay Griffin of MoffettNathanson said that "we generally found the forward year[s] guides, informal and couched as much as they were, somewhat underwhelming." Bernstein's Mark Schilsky wrote: "Functionally, they promised little that I would describe as 'concrete.' At the very least, they are keeping explicit expectations low."
There is at least some good reason for the latter. Top-of-the-line videogames these days have development budgets on par with blockbuster movies. But they must have much longer shelf lives, as the biggest games today are on network services designed to generate recurring revenue for years to come. EA itself now makes three-quarters of its annual net bookings through live services compared with 25% for full-game sales. Hence, the stakes are high for getting a game right when it first goes out the door.
That makes long-term release goals difficult to set with precision.
The largest stand-alone videogame publisher, EA also has lagged behind the broader market over that time. That can partly be chalked up to uncertainty about the company's game pipeline. It has also been going through a bit of a weak patch as its strong sports games business has been offset somewhat by weakness in its online shooter franchise, "Apex Legends." Wall Street expects EA's net bookings to rise just 2% in the current fiscal year compared with a 1% gain last year.
EA still has a lot going for it. The company's "College Football 25" game that launched in July has been a resounding success and revived a franchise that has been absent for more than a decade. The company also managed to transition its flagship soccer franchise to new branding without missing a beat; analysts expect the franchise, now called "EA Sports FC," to generate about $2.2 billion in net bookings this year -- up 8% from two years ago, when the last game under the FIFA brand launched, according to Visible Alpha estimates.
Analysts also generally praised the company's longer-term projects showcased this week; Doug Creutz of TD Cowen called the plans for generative AI as a tool to spark user-created content "much better than expected."
Wall Street likes EA's vision. When that vision becomes reality is still fuzzy.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
