China's CSI 300 index hit its lowest level in more than two years on Monday after a run of bad news pushed down the value of Chinese shares on every major exchange.
The benchmark, which tracks the 300 largest companies listed in Shanghai or Shenzhen, dropped 2.2% on its first trading day after a weeklong national holiday. Its 3720.94 closing level was its weakest finish since April 2020.
The closely watched Shanghai Composite Index fell 1.7% to its lowest level in more than five months after closing below 3000 points, a widely watched figure. Chinese stocks listed in Hong Kong also were sold heavily, leading to a 3% drop in the city's Hang Seng Index.
Mainland markets steadied early Tuesday, with the CSI 300 up 0.1% and the Shanghai Composite was down 0.1%.
An uptick in Covid-19 cases in China, recent weak consumer-spending data and a decision by the U.S. government to tighten semiconductor exports to the country all weighed on the market, said Wei Xuan, chief strategist at China Asset Management Co., a domestic fund manager.
He added that volatility in overseas stock markets during China's long holiday also hurt sentiment. U.S. stocks had a roller-coaster week, rising last Monday and Tuesday before falling sharply in the second half of the week after hawkish comments from Federal Reserve officials. In Europe, the benchmark Stoxx Europe 600 largely followed the ups and downs in the U.S., ending the week 1% higher.
"It's hard to be optimistic given the overall situation in the global financial markets, and it did not play a positive role in boosting the risk appetite for A shares after the holiday," Mr. Xuan said. Yuan-denominated stocks listed in mainland China also are known as A shares.
The tougher export rules, which require U.S. chip makers to get a license from the Commerce Department to export certain chips used in advanced artificial-intelligence calculations and supercomputing, came as a surprise, said David Chao, Invesco's global market strategist for Asia-Pacific excluding Japan.
"I thought we were pretty much out of the woods when it came to Washington implementing limitations on Americans selling to Chinese semiconductor companies," he said.
The U.S. government already requires licenses for various high-tech exports to China, although a recent analysis of trade data showed that most technology exports are still approved.
Chinese semiconductor shares fell Monday. The Hong Kong-listed shares of Semiconductor Manufacturing International, China's largest chip maker, dropped 4%. Manufacturers including Shanghai Fudan Microelectronics and Shanghai-listed Advanced Micro-Fabrication Equipment each slumped around 20%.
Economic data released in the past few days showed a drop in tourism spending and box-office receipts in China, the latest signs of weak consumer spending in the world's second-largest economy.
China's Covid-19 cases climbed steadily last week, forcing some cities to once again impose lockdowns. Cities in the Xinjiang province and Inner Mongolia banned people from entering or leaving. The entire Xinjiang province reported 70 cases on Sunday while Inner Mongolia logged 119 new cases.
Credit: By Rebecca Feng
