Stock investors' obsession with technology cut both ways Tuesday as optimism over quantum computing duked it out with anxiety about overvaluation in artificial intelligence. Bearish sentiment ultimately won out with major indexes closing slightly lower.
"We've just had this impenetrable broad-based rally arguably since the election," said Sylvia Jablonski, chief investment officer at fund manager Defiance ETFs. "It makes sense that markets are going to pause, especially ahead of CPI tomorrow."
Consumer-price index data is slated for release Wednesday in what will likely be the most important economic report before next week's Federal Reserve interest-rate decision.
The S&P 500, Nasdaq Composite and Dow Jones Industrial Average all slipped 0.3%. All three indexes wavered between positive and negative territory before settling lower.
The Nasdaq was helped by advances in shares of Tesla and Alphabet, Google's parent company, but hampered by declines in biotech.
Oracle stock was one of the biggest losers, falling 6.7% after the cloud-computing provider reported Monday afternoon slightly disappointing results. Before Monday afternoon's update, optimism about artificial intelligence had helped send Oracle stock up more than 80% this year.
Computer makers Dell Technologies and Hewlett Packard extended losses that started in November when they reported soft sales of home computers.
Stock of chip manufacturer Micron fell 4.6%.
One bright spot in technology, shares in Google's parent company gained about 5.6% as the tech giant announced a win in its effort to compete in quantum computing. Google on Monday had unveiled a state-of-the-art chip named Willow.
Walgreens Boots Alliance's shares jumped 18% after The Wall Street Journal reported that private-equity firm Sycamore Partners is in talks to buy the pharmacy chain.
The stock has still lost more than half its value since the start of the year, reflecting reduced traffic in its retail locations because of online commerce.
---
Elsewhere:
-- Ten-year Treasury yields inched higher for a second day, rising 0.021 percentage point to close at 4.219%.
-- High-end coffee broke a record that stood for nearly a half-century. Arabica futures nearly doubled over the past year and jumped 40% since October over worries for the Brazilian crop.
-- South Korean stocks rallied. Authorities have vowed measures to stabilize markets, in a bid to calm investors spooked by political turmoil.
-- Other overseas markets were mixed. Europe's Stoxx Europe 600 slipped, on track to snap an eight-day winning streak.
Credit: By Joe Wallace and Matt Wirz
