Japan's SoftBank Group Corp. is in talks to transfer a roughly 25% stake in U.K.-based chip designer ARM Holdings PLC to its proposed $100 billion technology fund, a person familiar with the matter said.
The SoftBank Vision Fund, which SoftBank's billionaire founder Masayoshi Son is hoping to launch in the next few weeks, is backed by a Saudi sovereign-wealth fund, as well as other investors such as Apple Inc. and Qualcomm Technologies Inc. Its purpose is to invest in technologies that Mr. Son sees as vital to future trends, such as sensors and artificial intelligence.
Mr. Son sees ARM -- which SoftBank bought for $32 billion in September, and whose chip designs are used in the vast majority of smartphones and mobile devices -- as an important developer of such technologies. The talks to transfer a stake to the Vision Fund are driven by the desire of some of the fund's partners to have an indirect investment in ARM, the person familiar with the matter said.
Negotiations over valuation for the stake are continuing, the person said.
Mr. Son is also eager to transfer a stake in ARM to help finance debt-strapped SoftBank's $25 billion contribution to the Vision Fund, another person familiar with the matter said. Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund has said it would invest up to $45 billion in the fund, with smaller investments coming from Apple, Qualcomm, Oracle Corp. founder Larry Ellison and Taiwanese manufacturer Hon Hai Precision Industry Co.
ARM's research is likely to play a key role in guiding Mr. Son's investments in the Vision Fund, providing him a road map on what devices will be able to do, when, as consumer and industrial devices become increasingly connected to one another, said people close to SoftBank's plans. Mr. Son has told ARM it need not focus on profits, but instead should accelerate its research and development, the people said.
SoftBank, founded in 1981 by Mr. Son, was an early investor in Yahoo Inc. and Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. He staged a coup in Japan's telecom market by buying Vodafone's Japan arm in 2006 and supplying the iPhone exclusively. The three investments have paid Mr. Son handsomely, helping him to secure financing for further deals, including his 2013 purchase of U.S. mobile carrier Sprint Corp. for $22 billion.
The proposed stake transfer in ARM was reported earlier by the Financial Times.
Credit: By Ben Dummett and Mayumi Negishi
