WASHINGTON -- The Pentagon said that it has issued formal solicitations to four major technology companies -- Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft Corp., as well as Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Oracle Corp. -- for a multibillion-dollar cloud-computing contract to replace the ill-starred JEDI procurement, which became mired in litigation and a torrent of objections from Congress.
The outcome represents a win for all the companies, but particularly for Amazon, which lost the competition for the original JEDI contract to Microsoft in a surprise outcome. Amazon later complained in court that the original award to Microsoft was the result of political meddling by then-President Donald Trump, a charge the Pentagon denied.
The Pentagon eventually canceled the JEDI project (short for Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure) and said it would start over with a new project called the Joint Warfighter Cloud Capability. It has said the new project likely would be a multibillion-dollar procurement, and officials have described it as a multi-vendor project.
The announcement Friday suggests that the four companies selected have a strong chance of eventually winning contracts under the project. But they must still engage in detailed negotiations with the Pentagon. The Pentagon is aiming to award contracts in the third quarter of 2022.
"We are confident that our market research was exhaustive and resulted in a fair and reasonable final determination," a Pentagon spokesman said.
The Pentagon didn't say why International Business Machines Corp., which had been viewed as another possible participant, wasn't included.
In a statement, IBM said it has "supported America's armed services for decades and we will continue pursuing opportunities to support the Joint Warfighting Cloud Capability" project.
Oracle spokeswoman Deborah Hellinger said the company was pleased to be included in the Pentagon's request for proposals, and was "committed to delivering the highest level of security, performance and value."
Microsoft declined to comment. Amazon didn't respond to requests to comment.
Google's participation in the project could be a test of Chief Executive Sundar Pichai's success in curbing opposition from opponents of defense contracts within the company's own ranks.
In 2018, the company came under fire from employee activists over a Pentagon contract to supply imaging tools used by drones.
The company later abandoned the contract and pledged not to allow its artificial-intelligence products to be used in military weapons. It also dropped out of the JEDI bid process.
Google on Friday pointed to a recent company blog post by Thomas Kurian, CEO of Google Cloud.
"If selected as one of the compliant vendors, we will proudly work with the DoD to help them modernize their operations following the process we have in place for working with our customers, including the processes we've developed around our AI Principles," Mr. Kurian wrote.
He cited the company's AI principles, which say it won't design or deploy AI in "weapons or other technologies whose principal purpose or implementation is to cause or directly facilitate injury to people."
The original JEDI contract, which was valued at up to $10 billion over 10 years, was designed to allow the Pentagon to consolidate its current patchwork of data systems. The aim was to give defense personnel better access to real-time information, and put the Defense Department on a stronger footing to develop AI capabilities that are seen as vital to military operations in the future.
Rebooting of the JEDI project this year became increasingly likely after a federal judge in April refused the Pentagon's motion to dismiss much of Amazon's bid-protest case, a decision that promised to extend the litigation for months or even years. The Pentagon finally pulled the plug on the original JEDI procurement in July.
Infighting over the JEDI contract wasn't the only factor at work in its rebooting this year. Some lawmakers and government-contracting experts also had contended that JEDI's original single-vendor approach should be scuttled because it was inappropriate and outmoded for mammoth enterprises like the Department of Defense.
These people said the Pentagon should move to an increasingly popular approach to enterprise cloud-computing that includes multiple companies as participants. Spreading out the work also reduces the risk of legal challenges from excluded companies, they said.
Credit: By John D. McKinnon
