Stocks fell again, continuing to decline from recent all-time highs.
The S&P 500 lost 0.3%, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq slid 0.4%. The blue-chip Dow industrials dropped 0.1%, or 31 points.
Micron Technology added 1.4% after hitting a record high a day earlier. The memory-chip maker is on pace for its best month since December 2009, when it rose 40%. Other top performers included data-storage company Seagate Technology, rising 7.4%, and Tesla, which climbed 2.9%.
Investors broadly aren't concerned about a significant pullback, said Thomas Martin, a senior portfolio manager at Globalt Investments.
While analysts are often wary when markets are euphoric, he sees strong underpinnings and more room for the rally to run. "There's plenty of real demand for chips out there, and real earnings growth" for companies like Nvidia, Micron and Broadcom, he said. "If that starts to crack, markets will likely look more vulnerable."
Martin doesn't see concerns about the artificial-intelligence boom materializing in first-quarter earnings reports, some of which are due in just a few weeks.
He is overweight shares of large and growth-oriented companies, meaning he has more exposure than the broader market.
Fresh economic data signaled the economy remains on solid footing, at least for companies and households with cash to spare.
Orders for long-lasting goods jumped in February, showing strong demand for aircraft and other transportation equipment.
Meanwhile, home prices rose 6% in January from a year earlier, the fastest clip since 2022.
"We're in an environment where growth continues to positively surprise," said Bill Merz, head of capital-markets research at U.S. Bank Wealth Management. "The market is telling us loud and clear what is apparent in some of the backward-looking economic data: This is a good environment to lean into risky assets."
A damper on the strong data was consumer confidence. At 104.7 for March, the Conference Board's index fell below analysts' expected 107.
The organization's chief economist, Dana Peterson, said that older Americans are feeling more optimistic, while lower-income individuals are growing wary as the job market cools.
International Paper shares sank 6.5% after the cardboard-box maker revealed an all-stock takeover offer for DS Smith. The deal values its U.K. rival at more than $7 billion.
GameStop, meanwhile, dropped in late trading after rising 2.5% during the regular session. The videogame retailer's fourth-quarter sales fell year-over-year.
Bond prices fell when yields rose after the durable-goods and home-price data. In the afternoon, strong investor demand for a record $67 billion Treasury Department auction of 5-year notes relieved the upward pressure on bond yields. The 10-year U.S. Treasury yield finished Tuesday at 4.233% from 4.252% the prior day, halting its recent climb.
The Stoxx Europe 600 index hit a second consecutive record high. It is up 6.7% this year. At midday Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 1%. S&P 500 futures were up 0.2%.
Credit: By Eric Wallerstein
