Scientists are embarking on an effort to keep sanctioned Russian timber out of Europe by mapping the unique chemical fingerprints of trees, a process that could be used to vet corporate supply chains for other banned commodities.
The project aims to bring science to bear in a fight by companies and governments to stop illegal wood from seeping into timber supply chains -- complex, difficult-to-police networks of logging companies, sawmills, wood manufacturers and traders.
To start, a team led by the Washington-based nonprofit World Forest ID set its sights on sanctions the European Union placed on Russian and Belarusian timber following the invasion of Ukraine. The team analyzed thousands of wood samples of trees, then layered in advanced statistical models and artificial intelligence.
The result was a database allowing customs officials and corporate auditors to verify the origin of timber with a simple, lab-based test.
Although work on the database is ongoing, furniture giant IKEA has already used it to vet suppliers for sanctioned timber after the war forced it to revamp its supply chain. Belgian authorities also have employed it to seize more than 260 tons of illegally shipped Russian timber.
If scaled up, the project could have broad implications for how companies source a range of other agricultural commodities, such as cotton and cacao, which have been linked to environmental and human rights abuses.
For IKEA, it took only a year of testing to realize the value of World Forest ID's work, said Mikhail Tarasov, the company's head of forestry. "We are today at a stage of fully integrating this as part of our due diligence system," he added.
World Forest ID launched in 2021 to stop deforestation by creating a more reliable, scientific approach to tracing timber origin. After Russia invaded Ukraine, the nonprofit saw an opportunity to test its methods as part of efforts to prevent sanctioned timber from entering the EU.
Enforcing sanctions on Russian and Belarusian timber has posed a challenge for EU member states because imported timber may travel through several countries and be mixed with wood from other sources before arriving in the bloc.
To stop illegal timber, customs agents and corporate auditors primarily look for inconsistencies or other red flags in paper trails that are created as timber travels from forest to factory floor. Some companies and independent certification bodies also conduct on-site visits of suppliers. But such visits are costly and can only be done on a small percentage of the supply chain.
"It's really hard to check after the wood has left the forest where it actually came from," said Laura Boeschoten, a researcher at Columbia University who has studied timber-origin verification methods.
Trade data and media reports since Russia's invasion of Ukraine suggest timber suppliers and traders in intermediary countries have evaded sanctions by re-exporting Russian wood to the EU. The European Commission last year launched an investigation following concerns around a precipitous rise in plywood imports from Turkey and Kazakhstan, which don't prohibit trade of Russian timber.
Companies in the EU are supposed to take steps to ensure supply chains remain free of sanctioned timber. For IKEA, that was an enormous task, said Tarasov. Before the war, the company sourced around 16% of the timber it used for its products from Russia and Belarus.
Although commercial labs have offered forensic testing for timber and other products for years, sampling and testing protocols are often inconsistent and treatment of the data is rudimentary, said Victor Deklerck, World Forest ID's head of science. Since its inception, the nonprofit has sought to develop a more sophisticated approach to testing timber origin.
The group started with rigorous sampling. It hired specialists at a Danish nonprofit to collect samples across Europe by extracting 10-millimeter diameter cores of wood tissue. Following the invasion of Ukraine, World Forest ID focused in particular on species commonly exported from Russia, including birch, pine and oak.
World Forest ID currently uses two tests to identify the chemical composition of wood samples. One measures the ratios of stable isotopes, which vary based on factors such as rainfall or temperature. The other test measures trace elements such as magnesium and copper, which vary based on the soils in which trees grow.
The group interpolates results spatially using advanced statistical methods and machine learning. Those innovations on traditional forensic testing methods allow World Forest ID to predict the chemical signatures of trees harvested in areas where the group didn't take samples.
The results so far are impressive, said Boeschoten, who peer reviewed a paper Deklerck and his team published in March in the journal Nature Plants. "It was really cool to see what they are already able to do on a small scale," she said.
World Forest ID's model identified false origin claims in 40% to 60% of cases, according to the paper. Deklerck said the test was designed to be conservative to minimize the chance of incorrectly identifying shipments as illegal.
Belgium's federal health-and-food safety agency, which oversees timber-related regulations, has several ongoing cases using World Forest ID's reference data to back up forensic tests of timber shipped into the country, according to spokeswoman Annelies Wyn-ant.
A growing regulatory regime is putting pressure on companies to crack down on commodities tied to environmental degradation or human -rights violations.
Starting next year, companies in Europe must perform additional due diligence on timber and other commodities found to contribute to deforestation. World Forest ID has already started collecting samples of two other commodities: soy and cacao.
Forensic testing could transform how companies comply with the new regulations -- as well as how governments enforce the measures. Unlocking those capabilities won't be easy, however. Expanding World Forest ID's approach, for example, could require analyzing potentially tens of thousands of samples of organic commodities from across the world.
"It's still nascent," said Marc Jessel, chief system integrity officer for the Forest Stewardship Council, a certifier of sustainably harvested wood. Jessel said his organization has joined with World Forest ID to test wood species from Gabon, but has yet to make such testing a regular part of its supply-chain audits.
"We still don't have a globally valid database of all of the sorts of isotope profiles of all the different species across the world and it's going to take a while to get there," he said.
But World Forest ID could be the first to produce such a database, Jessel said, adding, "We believe the approach they stand for is the way to go."
Credit: By Dylan Tokar
