Imagine hoisting a pair of heavy dumbbells off the floor in a sweaty gym or studio class: "Keep your back straight!" a trainer might bark, or "squeeze your glutes!" When you're working out at home, by contrast, no one tells you what you might be doing wrong.
Enter a new class of at-home fitness equipment that monitors your movements and can correct you in the moment. These devices use a type of artificial intelligence called computer vision, a field related to how machines interpret photos and videos. A company will train its software to understand the mechanics of how the body moves, then equip it to identify proper form.
As you perform a workout with Nautilus's JRNY tablet app and a supported set of dumbbells, for example, a camera tracks your body -- displayed as a stick figure on the screen's top corner -- and delivers audio cues (such as "Look forward and keep your neck aligned," if you're in a squat) that tell you how to adjust your movements. (Generally, you need about 4.5 feet by 6 feet of unobstructed space to "train" a camera via a few basic poses -- like standing with arms overhead and laying flat with arms and legs extended -- so it can properly detect your movements.)
Some machines use input from live experts to determine correct form, but others, like the workout mirror Fiture, look for trends in data. Fiture uses a sensor to map points on your body against millions of movements in its database to formulate advice in real time.
Similarly, Tempo Studio, an all-in-one smart home gym, houses a motion-sensor camera that homes in on essential joints; with each rep, AI measures range of motion to provide visual insights and personalized technique tips. Ali Van Straten, 34 years old, a blogger from Plymouth, Minn., said that when she's lifting weights overhead, the critique Tempo most often offers is that she's leaning backward, "which is totally in line with what my physical therapist told me. As soon as I engage my core, like the machine and my PT suggest, the Tempo tells me 'Good job.'"
Though most such AI systems spit out feedback on your form in real time, some platforms also tap into a predictive element. Every time you perform a workout, these machines ingest information -- metrics including number of reps, weights used and heart rate -- that helps it recommend what you should do next, said Jerrold M. Jackson, the head of Machine Learning and Data at Exos, a performance brand which trains professional athletes and corporate clients.
In the case of JRNY and Tempo, AI uses this types of information to suggest what weights you should use next. Peloton Guide's Movement Tracker, on the other hand, shows what muscles you worked most after you finished exercising and then recommends additional classes to round out a whole-body routine.
"The AI system takes into account the workouts I've done before, so if I've been focusing on upper body strength, it might recommend a lower body strength class to help build balance and symmetry," said Michael Hamlin, 35, a certified trainer from Calgary, Alberta.
This ensures your workouts are always evolving, but it doesn't necessarily mean that an AI-enhanced tool can replace your coach. As Mr. Jackson points out, machine-learning models, unlike human trainers, treat all people as generic, rather than individuals with their own needs and quirks.
Just think about everything you bring to a training session that software wouldn't know. Did you tweak your shoulder while carrying a heavy box? Did you recently get your heart broken, leaving you sluggish and distracted? In these instances, AI could tell you what you're doing wrong, but it can't sympathize.
Credit: By Ashley Mateo
