IBM
Head of New Unit
Leaves After Months
The head of International Business Machines Corp.'s newly formed Cognitive Business Solutions group left the company after just months on the job.
Stephen Pratt confirmed his departure but declined to say why he left IBM or what he would do next.
"IBM is a great company with great people and a bright future in cognitive computing," he said.
IBM launched the 2,000-person Cognitive Business Solutions group in October with Mr. Pratt as its leader, saying the unit would focus on selling data analytics and artificial intelligence services to business customers.
"We have no comment on personnel matters," an IBM spokesman said.
IBM's revenue has taken a hit as its corporate customers shift their buying habits toward software and services delivered through the Internet. The company has bet its future on new-breed offerings including the artificial-intelligence and analytics services sold by Mr. Pratt's group.
-- Robert McMillan
---
HERMES INTERNATIONAL
Luxury-Goods Brand
Warns on Revenue
French luxury-goods brand Hermes International SCA warned on Wednesday that its 2016 revenue growth would decline as a weakening global economy and geopolitical tensions reduce consumer demand for expensive handbags and fashion.
Hermes said 2016 sales wouldn't meet its 8% growth target due to "economic, geopolitical and monetary uncertainties."
The luxury sector has been hit with difficulties in recent months as a slowing global economy, currency volatility and terrorist attacks have hurt consumer enthusiasm for the world's most expensive watches, leather handbags and other baubles. While Hermes remains the industry leader, in both its prices and revenue growth, the company's new forecast shows that even the sector's front-runner is affected.
The maker of Birkin and Kelly bags said its sales rose to 1.4 billion euros ($1.58 billion) in the last quarter of 2015, from 1.2 billion euros in the same period in 2014. A weak euro and strong demand in Japan boosted sales, offsetting a sluggish quarter in France that was affected by the fallout from the Nov. 13 Paris terror attacks.
-- Jason Chow
---
AUTOS
Mercedes Gets Off
To a Strong Start
In the tight race for leadership among Germany's big three premium car makers, Daimler AG's Mercedes-Benz brand has started off the year in pole position, ahead of rivals Audi AG and BMW AG, and looks set to stay out front this year.
With January sales data now in for all three brands, it is clear that Mercedes started the year with a substantial lead and is growing considerably faster than its German rivals. Analysts said Mercedes could retake the throne this year as the world's leading premium car brand by sales, which it lost to BMW a decade ago.
Daimler reported on Feb. 5 that January sales of its Mercedes-Benz brand rose nearly 20% to 150,814 vehicles world-wide. Audi and BMW released their January sales figures on Wednesday, showing slower growth than Mercedes in most major markets.
It isn't clear how much Volkswagen AG's emissions-cheating scandal is affecting sales of its luxury brand Audi, which posted its best-ever January, but Audi's growth paled in comparison to Mercedes.
Audi global sales grew 4% to 143,150 vehicles in January, compared with 137,702 vehicles a year earlier. Audi sales were driven higher by more than 20% growth in sales of its Q3, Q5 and Q7 sport-utility vehicles.
Munich-based BMW said January sales of its BMW brand rose 7.5% to 133,883, putting it behind Mercedes and Audi. The luxury compact 1-Series and SUVs drove BMW sales higher. The X1 small SUV posted 60% growth in sales for the month.
-- William Boston
