Business leaders are sending a warning to staff: Dissent that disrupts the workplace won't be tolerated.
Google's decision to fire 28 workers involved in sit-in protests against the tech giant's cloud-computing contract with the Israeli government is the most recent and starkest example of companies' stricter stance.
Rifts with employees have spilled into public view at National Public Radio, the New York Times and other workplaces. Bosses are losing patience with staff eager to be the conscience of their companies, especially as employees pressure them on charged issues such as politics and the war in Gaza, executives, board members and C-suite advisers said.
The moves are a shift from the past several years, when corporate leaders often brooked dissent and encouraged staff to voice their personal convictions.
On issues such as immigration policy and racial justice, many chief executives publicly expressed corporate solidarity. Google, in particular, has long prided itself on an open work culture that fostered internal debate, much like a college.
It is an open question as to what rights workers really have to speak out on the job. "None of this is settled," said Genevieve Lakier, a law professor at the University of Chicago.
Workers in the private sector aren't protected by the First Amendment's guarantees of free speech, and "there is still a lot of uncertainty about how much free expression by workers is consistent with the operations of the workplace," she said.
Numerous workers reported being fired from companies after writing contentious social-media posts about the Oct. 7 Hamas attacks in Israel or the war in Gaza.
At Google, leaders said the protesting workers violated company policy by taking over office spaces and disrupting work. While preserving the company's open culture is important, Google CEO Sundar Pichai wrote to staff afterward, "we also need to be more focused in how we work, collaborate, discuss and even disagree."
Hasan Ibraheem, a Google software engineer who was arrested and then fired after taking part in the protest at the company's New York office, said the firings didn't square with his image of Google when he was hired less than two years ago.
It was "the big company that was still fun and vibrant. You were allowed to express yourself," said Ibraheem, 23 years old, who had been active in pro-Palestinian demonstrations before joining Google. Though he knew of a few co-workers who had quit because of their opposition to the $1.2 billion Israeli contract that Google shares with Amazon.com, called Project Nimbus, he said he had opted to stay so he could protest the contract from within.
Google had been responsive to employee concerns about government work before. In 2018, it decided not to renew a separate Pentagon contract after that work became the subject of intense internal debate. The company also pledged not to make artificial-intelligence technology for military weapons and adopted a set of AI principles to guide its work.
A Google spokesman said staffers complained the protesters disrupted their work.
Other companies have found themselves in clashes with dissenting employees. This month, NPR suspended a senior editor -- who subsequently resigned -- after he published a critique of the radio network's news coverage in another media outlet. The New York Times, where divisions over its Gaza war coverage have roiled the newsroom, investigated whether staffers leaked confidential materials to another outlet. It closed the probe last week without a conclusive finding.
Starbucks sued the union representing around 410 of its more than 9,700 U.S. stores after local affiliates of Starbucks Workers United posted pro-Palestinian tweets and reshared an image of a bulldozer breaking through the fence encircling Gaza. The coffee chain alleged the union's use of the Starbucks name and branding led people to misattribute such sentiment to the company. (The two sides have since said they are working toward resolving the litigation.)
Until recently, many company leaders viewed speaking out as less risky than appearing unresponsive to calls for social action -- such as in the aftermath of George Floyd's 2020 murder, when businesses voiced support for the Black Lives Matter movement.
But issues that have boiled over in workplaces since then -- from state abortion bans to the war in Gaza -- don't lend themselves to simple pronouncements of solidarity or town halls where employees can share their personal experiences.
The perils of being ensnared in partisan politics is changing the calculus of how responsive companies should be to any issue that doesn't directly affect business, some executives and corporate advisers said.
Many of them point to Disney's now-resolved legal battle with Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican, as a cautionary tale. The fight stemmed from Disney's move in 2022 to publicly oppose Florida's Parental Rights in Education bill, as it faced pressure from LGBTQ employees and advocacy groups. Last year's damaging boycott of Anheuser-Busch InBev's Bud Light -- after the brand's marketing promotion with a transgender influencer -- has also made companies leery of moves that risk landing them in a culture war, they said.
Corporate leaders "are very concerned about public backlash, especially boards of directors," said Jonathan Bernstein, chairman of Bernstein Crisis Management, which advises companies on corporate communications and reputation management.
Credit: By Vanessa Fuhrmans, Miles Kruppa and Lauren Weber
