SoftBank Group Corp. and its Vision Fund are closing a $1 billion investment in online sports retail company Fanatics Inc., part of a sizable bet the startup's licensing agreements with the National Football League and others give it the power to compete with e-commerce giant Amazon.com Inc., according to people familiar with the matter.
The investment in the e-commerce company is scheduled to close this month as part of a round of funding that will lift its total valuation to $4.5 billion from $3 billion, the people said. Other investors in this round include the NFL and Major League Baseball, which invested about $95 million and $50 million, respectively, earlier this year.
SoftBank in April made an initial investment of an undisclosed sum, according to a person familiar with the matter, but the bulk of the $1 billion investment comes from SoftBank's $100 billion Vision Fund. The fund, whose investors include Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi sovereign-wealth funds as well as companies such as Apple Inc. and Qualcomm Inc., is still being completed after gathering $93 billion in an initial closing in May.
In addition to Fanatics, the Vision Fund has committed to invest nearly $3 billion in shared-office-space giant WeWork Cos. and $1 billion in satellite-internet startup OneWeb Ltd., among others.
The Fanatics deal reflects the belief by SoftBank and its Vision Fund that the company has built an e-commerce business that can withstand the pressures of Amazon, the people said.
Still, selling sports jerseys and caps online appears to stray from the Vision Fund's stated mission: investing in startups at the forefront of artificial intelligence and machine learning. Investments fitting that mold include the acquisition of Google's robotics division Boston Dynamics and a stake in chip maker Nvidia Corp.
Fanatics has signed long-term licensing agreements through at least 2030 with major U.S. sports leagues, giving it exclusive rights to sell and make licensed merchandise. It also has agreements to manage e-commerce sales and operations for international soccer clubs like Manchester United and Real Madrid.
The company's revenue last year topped $1.4 billion, up from about $1 billion in 2015. It expects to generate $2.2 billion in revenue this year. About three-quarters of revenue is direct-to-consumer sales from Fanatics.com or the 200-plus team and league sites the company operates.
Fanatics' revenue pales in comparison to Amazon, which had $94.66 billion in net product sales last year, and eBay Inc., which did nearly $80 billion in gross merchandise volume on its marketplace.
Analysts largely believe those large e-commerce players will continue to grow by acquiring smaller competitors or forcing rivals out of business. Only some niche players are expected to survive.
---
Mayumi Negishi contributed to this article.

Credit: By Tripp Mickle and Liz Hoffman
