Shailesh Prakash, a Google News executive central to the tech giant's relationships with publishers, has resigned, people familiar with the situation said.
The high-profile departure comes amid a continuing rift between Google and news outlets over how the search engine drives traffic and uses their content.
Prakash, a vice president and general manager for Google News, joined the tech giant two years ago from the Washington Post, where he spent more than a decade overseeing data and technology.
At Google, he brought an understanding of publishers' frustrations as they have grappled with traffic declines and seek compensation for the Alphabet unit's use of their content. While he oversaw product and engineering for the News group, he also communicated with leaders at news publishers regarding changes related to search and generative AI.
A representative from Google declined to comment on Prakash's departure.
During his decade-plus tenure at the Post, where he was chief information officer, Prakash helped transform the news outlet's digital operation and oversaw technology experiments including an advertising-technology and digital-publishing business that serviced publishers beyond the Post. He was among the Post executives in close contact with Jeff Bezos following the Amazon founder's acquisition of the storied publication in 2013. Before the Post, he held senior engineering roles at various corporations, including Sears and Microsoft.
When Prakash joined Google, the tech giant was working to clinch deals with publishers in the U.S. for its Showcase product, which pays publishers in exchange for featuring their content on some Google platforms.
Publishers in recent months have held discussions with Google about compensation for the use of their content, including deals that encompass generative AI.
Google is the greatest source of traffic to publishers' websites, because when people search for information, the results often direct them to news articles.
Publishers have balked in recent years at payment offers from Google, arguing that their content is worth more than Google has been willing to pay.
Credit: By Alexandra Bruell
