SEOUL -- The English-language version of Samsung Electronics Co.'s new voice-activated virtual assistant likely won't make its debut in the U.S. until at least late June, according to people familiar with the matter, more than two months after the launch of the South Korean technology company's latest high-end smartphone.
Samsung officials had aimed internally for a late May U.S. rollout of Bixby, the Galaxy S8's artificial-intelligence service, The Wall Street Journal reported in April.
A company spokesman said at the time that Bixby would be ready in the U.S. by "later this spring," without specifying a date.
But the English-language Bixby is still weeks away from being finished, according to people familiar with the matter, though no ultimate decision has been made on timing. Recent internal tests of the service have revealed the voice-activated assistant is struggling to comprehend English syntax and grammar, one of the people said.
Bixby, akin to Apple Inc.'s Siri, is an artificial-intelligence service used to field tasks. Samsung has made the feature a selling point of the Galaxy S8, which hit shelves April 21 and is Samsung's most closely watched product launch in years after last year's global recall of the Galaxy Note 7.
"Bixby Voice benefits from time to further enhance natural language understanding, and we are currently growing our user testing in the U.S. to prepare for launch," a spokeswoman for Samsung said in an email, adding that other elements of the virtual assistant, such as image-recognition features, were already available.
The Galaxy S8 won strong reviews for its physical design. In its home market, Samsung has sold one million Galaxy S8 handsets in 37 days -- reaching that figure in half as many days as it took the prior year's device, the company spokeswoman said. That phone, the Galaxy S7, eventually became the company's best-selling smartphone.
Samsung didn't provide updated U.S. sales figures, though mobile chief D.J. Koh said in mid-April that preorders in the U.S. for the new handset had surpassed those during the prior year for the Galaxy S7.
Virtual assistants aren't a significant hit with smartphone users. Just 9% of consumers use artificial-intelligence services such as Siri or Bixby on a regular basis, with 50% saying they had no interest or knowledge in digital assistants, according to Ovum, a market-research firm that surveyed 4,000 consumers in Asia, the U.K. and U.S. during April and May.
Silicon Valley, nonetheless, is betting big on artificial-intelligence software that often incorporates voice activation or recognition. The success of Amazon.com Inc.'s Echo speaker last year showed that consumers were open to talking to devices, accelerating the tech industry's battle to dominate the web-connected smart home. Smartphones are the fulcrum of these digital ecosystems, as many services are controlled by handsets.
There were 3.5 billion active devices -- smartphones, televisions, tablets and other gadgets -- using so-called native virtual digital assistants in 2016, meaning they are preinstalled, not downloaded, onto products, according to Ovum. By 2021, the number is likely to reach 7.5 billion, exceeding the U.S. Census Bureau's projections for that year's world population, Ovum said.
In 2021, Alphabet Inc.'s Google Assistant is likely to capture about 23% market share, Ovum estimates, followed by Samsung's Bixby at 15%, Apple's Siri at 13% and Amazon's Alexa at 4%. "Digital assistants are important for consumer loyalty in the future because they will eventually be used more," said Ronan de Renesse, Ovum's practice leader for consumer technology.
It is unclear whether Bixby's delayed launch will curb Galaxy S8 sales appreciably, according to analysts.
Credit: By Timothy W. Martin
