Nvidia's sales surged in its latest quarter and profit nearly doubled, a sign of the strength of an artificial-intelligence boom that has made the chip giant the world's most valuable company.
Nvidia projected on Wednesday around $37.5 billion of revenue for its current quarter, topping forecasts, suggesting its next-generation AI chips, known as Blackwell, are in high demand from customers like Microsoft, Alphabet's Google, Meta Platforms and Elon Musk's xAI.
The company, whose chips have powered the rise of AI technology, said that it expects its next-generation Blackwell chips to ship in the current quarter and be in short supply into its next fiscal year.
Sales were $35.1 billion in the fiscal third quarter, the company said, up by 94% from a year earlier and ahead of forecasts in a FactSet survey of analysts.
Profit reached $19.3 billion, also ahead of analyst forecasts.
Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang said in a callS with analysts that demand for its current generation of chips and for Blackwell was "incredible" as leading AI developers scale up computing infrastructure.
Nvidia's shares fell 2.5% in after-hours trading, however, with the results falling short of some investors' expectations following several quarters of sky-high revenue and profit.
Nvidia's market capitalization has increased by $2.36 trillion in 2024 through Wednesday's close, greater than the entire current value of Google parent Alphabet.
Led since its founding in 1993 by Huang, Nvidia has engineered a stunning rise to the top of the semiconductor world over the past two years. Nvidia's chips -- initially developed to improve computer graphics -- were well-suited to AI tasks and big technology companies began investing tens of billions of dollars to build advanced AI tools.
So hot was the demand that Nvidia couldn't keep up with it and its chips became the most coveted products in the tech industry.
Huang's tech celebrity rose into a stratosphere occupied by visionaries like the late Apple co-founder Steve Jobs. Revenue and profit rose to unprecedented levels, and the stock surged, roughly tripling this year alone.
Nvidia hit a $2 trillion valuation in February, crossed the $3 trillion mark in June, and reclaimed the title of world's most valuable company earlier this month.
Analysts had been expecting a strong quarter for Nvidia following earnings reports from big tech companies that outlined rising capital spending. With the AI boom, much of the tech giants' spending goes toward Nvidia's chips.
The company's rise has come with complications. In its previous earnings report in August, Nvidia blamed engineering issues with Blackwell chips for narrower profit margins and a $908 million provision. Despite the hiccup, the company was on track to exceed a previous forecast of several billion dollars of revenue in the current quarter, Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress said during the call with analysts Wednesday.
Kress also said in prepared remarks on Wednesday that the company had completed tweaks in Blackwell's design that improved their manufacturing yields. She said production shipments were expected in the current quarter and that demand was expected to exceed supply for several quarters in its next fiscal year.
Nvidia's increased size over the past two years means it is getting harder for the company to sustain its revenue growth rates. Revenue more than tripled in its quarter ended in April but has lost pace in the two quarters since.
Nvidia is also being challenged by competitors including Advanced Micro Devices, which expects to sell $5 billion of AI chips this year, and by a crop of AI chip startups offering newfangled approaches to the computations that underlie the most advanced AI models. Some of Nvidia's biggest customers, including Amazon.com, also have been working to develop their own AI chips and reduce dependence on Nvidia.
Antitrust regulators in Europe and the U.S. are looking at Nvidia's business given its dominance. Analysts estimate it has more than an 80% share in the AI-chip market.
Generate image description

Credit: By Asa Fitch
