Individual investors are pouring money into popular technology stocks, contributing to a booming rally that is lifting major indexes amid economic uncertainty related to the coronavirus pandemic.
The faith investors have in fast-growing tech companies and stimulus measures by the world's central banks and governments helps explain how stocks have shaken off the worst U.S. economic contraction and civil unrest in decades. Many internet stocks favored by individuals are also popular for hedge funds and institutional investors seeking assets with attractive growth prospects.
Powered by advances from companies including Apple Inc. and Amazon.com Inc., the S&P 500 has surged to its highest level since late February and erased nearly all of its drop for 2020.
The Nasdaq Composite, meanwhile, is up 9.4% for the year and on Friday eclipsed its February intraday record. The tech-laden index ended the day just below a new peak on a closing basis.
Stocks surged on Friday after hiring data showed U.S. employers unexpectedly added jobs in May, a hopeful sign for the economic recovery.
The Nasdaq's run underscores the strength of the recent rally in stocks, a dizzying milestone considering how quickly the index fell in February and March.
The recent gains are drawing more investors into the rally and could give rise to more milestones in the days ahead, analysts say.
Some market professionals remain concerned that certain tech stocks are overvalued and their shares will suffer if the economic fallout from the pandemic lockdowns spreads in unexpected directions.
But investors from venerable Wall Street hedge-fund managers to small traders on popular trading apps remain resolute that these tech companies will continue growing.
Their reasoning: The coronavirus lockdowns and remote working are accelerating many trends -- from cloud computing to digital payments -- that they expect to persist beyond the pandemic.
When stocks tumbled earlier in the year, trading activity by investors through brokerages such as TD Ameritrade Holding Corp. and Charles Schwab Corp. surged, helping power the recovery.
Much of that trading has been concentrated in the technology sector. If major indexes fall again, many of these investors say they are ready to buy internet shares on the cheap. That gives some market watchers confidence that stocks will recover quickly even if they slide anew.
One recent buyer is Gabriel Daniels, a 38-year-old who lives in Chantilly, Va. He has added about $2,000 worth of investments in recent weeks to his $15,000 portfolio that includes behemoths Microsoft Corp., Facebook Inc. and smaller tech firms such as Slack Technologies Inc. and Datadog Inc.
The CEO of a small cybersecurity-consulting firm, Mr. Daniels thinks trends like artificial intelligence, 5G wireless technology and big-data analysis will support these stocks for years to come. "Those are the things of the future," he said. "I wouldn't say I have FOMO -- the fear of missing out -- but I want to keep my eyes open."
He said he has $5,000 ready to deploy in the sector if markets tumble again.
After this past week's gain, the S&P 500 has risen 43% from its March 19 low and is down just 1.1% for the year. The information-technology sector has climbed 11% in 2020, while the communication-services and consumer-discretionary groups that house some internet shares are also positive for the year. Many popular tech stocks have risen 25% or more this quarter.
Investors in the coming week will be monitoring the Federal Reserve's latest policy statement and comments from Chairman Jerome Powell to gauge the central bank's views on the economy. Fresh data on jobless claims will be in focus after Friday's jobs report showed the unemployment rate unexpectedly fell last month.
Still, the economic fallout from the pandemic is hurting many companies and driving bleak earnings projections for the months ahead. Some technology firms are part of a narrow group expected to continue growing, making them mainstays for many different types of investors. As individual investors pile into technology, they join hedge funds and other institutional investors also favoring the group.
Many popular stocks for ordinary investors are also common for hedge funds to hold, including Amazon, Microsoft and Facebook, Goldman Sachs Group found in a recent analysis.
"The market is so starved for growth," said Dan Morgan, a senior portfolio manager who focuses on tech at Synovus Trust Co.
After their recent gains, Microsoft, Apple, Amazon, Google parent Alphabet Inc. and Facebook make up more than 20% of the S&P 500. Five years ago, the concentration of market value in the index's largest five components was 12%.
Their shares, and those of smaller tech companies like Zoom Video Communications Inc. and Canadian e-commerce firm Shopify Inc., are popular among traders who frequently buy and sell shares to capitalize on short-term opportunities. Trading activity on TD Ameritrade, Charles Schwab and Interactive Brokers has increased in recent months, as has the number of accounts trading common tech holdings on the app Robinhood.
The number of Robinhood user positions in S&P 500 stocks doubled between mid-March -- just before the S&P hit its low point for the year -- and mid-May, Goldman found.
Reza Shahsavari started trading stocks and options that allow the holder to buy or sell shares at a certain price by a specific date on Robinhood late last year. The 38-year-old manager of a medical practice in Southern California has a roughly $4,500 portfolio and frequently trades technology companies like Netflix Inc. and Nvidia Corp. He has had much more time to trade lately with the pandemic keeping him at home.
"It's become an addiction to where I want to wake up and look at the stock market in the morning," Mr. Shahsavari said.
Even for investors holding the stocks, the big moves up and down are unsettling. Joshua Nash sold roughly half of his $300,000 portfolio of mostly tech stocks to raise cash back in March as stocks tumbled. The 38-year-old technology consultant living in Victoria, British Columbia, has since bought more shares and now has roughly 25% of his portfolio in cash.
Some of his main holdings are Shopify, cloud-computing firm Twilio Inc., electric-car maker Tesla Inc. and digital-payments firm Square Inc.
Mr. Nash regrets unloading so many shares during the selloff and is shocked by how quickly many of these stocks have risen. He is waiting for a future downturn to buy more shares, wagering that long-term drivers of the rally will persist. "They've just gone through the roof," he said.

Credit: By Amrith Ramkumar
