In 2014 -- a year in which cyber thieves stole customer information from at least four Fortune 500 companies -- venture capitalists invested a record amount in privately held companies in the cybersecurity industry.
Venture-backed companies in the U.S. that provide cybersecurity technology or services raised $1.77 billion from investors last year, topping the previous high of $1.62 billion set in 2000 during the dot-com boom, according to industry tracker Dow Jones VentureSource. Globally, venture-backed cybersecurity companies raised $1.9 billion last year, also a record.
Cybersecurity has become an unending arms race, with companies and governments trying to protect themselves against attackers that include organized crime and increasingly nation-states.
Startups in the sector have approached the problem in different ways. Some provide software and services to businesses, some offer protection to consumers, and some focus on hardware and software at the infrastructure level that can potentially protect both.
Startups are taking different approaches to detecting and understanding threats. Some, for instance, are using crowdsourcing, gathering information from a wide range of sources about recent cyberattacks to keep up with hackers' latest methods. Others are using machine learning -- computers reacting to and anticipating new situations without reprogramming.
Still others focus on technologies to protect network endpoints -- anything from PCs to mobile devices to sensors in a manufacturing plant.
A growing concern among investors is the "Internet of Things," a term for the connection of everyday items, such as toothbrushes, baby pajamas and cars, to the Internet. "It's a huge threat," says Alex Doll, founder of TenEleven Ventures, a venture-capital firm that specializes in information security. "It's great that everything is connected, but all that data is one click away" for hackers, and it isn't protected as well as it would be in a more contained network, he says.
Protection of data, regardless of where it resides, has become paramount -- more so than building perimeter defenses. New cybersecurity technology is designed with the idea that attacks can't always be prevented and may have already occurred.
"Something will get through the network, and you're trying to make it irrelevant," says Ted Schlein, a general partner at venture-capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers.
---
Ms. Gage is a Wall Street Journal reporter in San Francisco. She can be reached at deborah.gage@wsj.com.

Generate image description

Credit: By Deborah Gage
