Cybersecurity firm Rapid7 Inc. last year installed tiny cameras around its Austin, Texas, office to track how its staff used the space. Now it's using those same cameras to keep workers apart.
People-counting cameras, also known as artificial-intelligence-powered sensors, have become a niche tool in recent years to help companies better use their office space, and in some cases trim real-estate costs. They are now being repurposed to meet a surge in demand from employers eager to comply with government guidelines on social distancing because of the coronavirus pandemic. However, that versatility is also a concern for privacy advocates, who worry the technology could be changed again to track individuals and monitor productivity.
Traditional occupancy sensors and motion detectors, made by larger firms including Honeywell International Inc. and Texas Instruments Inc., often use infrared technology. Startups populate the newer field of cameras using computer vision, a form of artificial intelligence, to count how many people are in a room and measure how far apart they are. The technology can identify moving bodies or objects but not faces, and the low-resolution images aren't made available to clients, who instead see data turned into numbers and charts.
Before the pandemic, VergeSense Inc., a San Francisco startup that supplied Rapid7, had nearly 100 companies including Royal Dutch Shell PLC and Quicken Loans Inc. using its cameras to track how staff were using office space. In recent weeks, following increased interest from customers wanting to track physical distance rather than collaboration, it has updated its software to track and score social distancing. The company is profitable and has just under 50 employees.
"Everyday we're just swamped," said Chief Executive Dan Ryan, who says the company's devices are sensors and not cameras because they don't store images. "Some customers are thinking of having a floor-safety coordinator, and they would also be a potential consumer of information like this. Like 'I'm detecting overcrowding in the kitchen.'"
Users -- typically building facilities managers or real-estate executives -- can get notifications on their phone about overcrowding. Each device costs a few hundred dollars, while the analytics software costs under $100 a year to run, Mr. Ryan said.
Offices are undergoing major transformations in anticipation of staff returning, from plexiglass barriers to one-way walking systems, and Rapid7 sees the camera technology as a longer-term investment, said Jamie Kinch, the company's vice president of real estate.
The approximately 60 ceiling-mounted cameras installed at the company's Austin office, in conference rooms and above desks, have proved useful by showing how space gets wasted. For instance, one camera mounted over four leather chairs in a chill-out area showed they were only being used 5% of the time, prompting Mr. Kinch's team to eliminate the space from designs for a new office.
VergeSense's social-distancing update will give Mr. Kinch a live floor plan, showing which desks are occupied, and highlight any overcrowding in particular locations. He'll see regular social-distancing scores for the office, which he plans to share with colleagues.
Another VergeSense client is Autodesk Inc., a software developer, which said that while their regular security cameras could give occupancy data, they couldn't offer other useful details.
"We can't live without that type of information now to manage our space. We need to know what's going on," said Charles Rechsteiner, Autodesk's director of facilities and corporate real estate. The company said it already has 25 VergeSense cameras at each of its offices in San Francisco and Boston, and plans to install hundreds more at those locations and others, Mr. Rechsteiner said.
Adappt Intelligence Inc. of India has also recently updated its technology to measure social distancing, and has received orders to deploy 10,000 "vision-based cameras" across offices in India and Japan, CEO Vivek Bagri said. Before the pandemic, the six-year-old company, which had 40 employees, had deployed 20,000 cameras across offices in Asia to track how staffs were using space. Its devices cost about $200, while the software costs just over $100 a year to run.
Real-estate consulting firm Jones Lang LaSalle Inc. is advising its clients in India to install Adappt's cameras, saying they could be useful during and after the pandemic.
Companies in India and China are under significant pressure to track staff movements, said Rajat Malhotra, a director of facilities management for JLL in Asia, adding that government officials in both countries regularly visit offices to check they aren't more than 30% to 50% occupied. Two JLL offices in India were checked in April, he said.
"Governments will want us to provide reporting which is transparent to them," Mr. Malhotra said. "There's no better way to measure this than with technology."
Once pandemic-tracking measures lift, he said, body-tracking cameras can go back to monitoring how well real estate is being used. They could help decide if a company should end a lease agreement to save money, for instance. "It's all about the productivity of those square feet," Mr. Malhotra said.
But that ability and willingness to pivot is a cause for concern, said Albert Gidari, director of privacy at the Stanford Center for Internet and Society. "The biggest risk is mission creep, even if the initial implementation is health and safety in the workplace," he said. Down the line, vendors could repurpose their technology to monitor some other behavior. "It's not a stretch to see this as a productivity-measurement tool."
Both VergeSense and Adappt said their technology respected employees' privacy and didn't store images. Adappt said it couldn't identify individuals in the same way Bluetooth or Wi-Fi tracking technology could.
Despite these reassurances, Mr. Gidari said employers should be transparent with workers and consider removing the technology postpandemic. "There's an open question in my mind about how these systems can be justified," he said.

Credit: By Parmy Olson
