Alphabet Inc.'s Google division last week hired the director of Stanford University's artificial intelligence lab to lead a new AI unit, the latest in a long line of academic stars in artificial intelligence lured away by tech giants.
Fei-Fei Li, a respected computer scientist, wrote in a Facebook post that she joined Google partly to "democratize AI." She joined several other top professors who have left academia in recent years for tech industry posts.
In recent years, Geoffrey Hinton joined Google from the University of Toronto, New York University's Yann LeCun went to Facebook Inc., Stanford's Andrew Ng joined Baidu Inc., and Carnegie Mellon University's Alex Smola moved to Amazon Inc. Many of these researchers continue to work at the universities in a diminished capacity.
Researchers warn that tech companies are draining universities of the scientists responsible for cultivating the next generation of researchers and who contribute to solving pressing problems in fields ranging from astronomy to environmental science to physics. The share of newly minted U.S. computer-science Ph.D.s taking industry jobs has risen to 57% from 38% over the past decade, according to data from the National Science Foundation. Though the number of Ph.D.s in the field has grown, the proportion staying in academia has hit "a historic low," according to the Computing Research Association, an industry group.
Such moves could have a long-term impact on the number of graduates available for teaching positions because it takes three to five years to earn a doctorate in computer science.
"People are starting to question whether we are, in some sense, jeopardizing our ability to meet industry demand in the future," said Mark Riedl, the director of the Georgia Institute of Technology's Entertainment Intelligence Lab. The squeeze is especially tight in deep learning, an AI technique that has played a crucial role in moneymaking services like online image search, language translation and ad placement, said Yoshua Bengio, director of the University of Montreal's Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms.
Students in artificial intelligence are "worth somewhere between $5 million and $10 million to a company's bottom line," said Andrew Moore, dean of CMU's School of Computer Science.
The tech giants offer perks that few universities can match, including steady funding, immense data sets and computing power, and the thrill of creating products that touch millions of people.
Corporate salaries are much higher and may include a potential bonanza in stock options.
---
Deepa Seetharaman contributed to this article.
Credit: By Daniela Hernandez and Rachael King
