Sydney -- What can humans learn from dragonflies?
Australian researchers have developed an artificial-intelligence system based on a dragonfly's vision that they say could help improve the eyesight of people who can see almost nothing. The system also is expected to find applications in automated technologies that rely on artificial sight, such as robots and driverless cars.
In the latest research, published in the Journal of the Royal Society Interface, scientists showed how a computer program can mimic the eyesight of a dragonfly.
Compared with humans, dragonflies have a limited ability to distinguish details and shapes of objects. But they are one of the insect kingdom's best predators because their wide field of vision and ability to detect fast movements allow them to keep track of prey even among a swarm of insects.
Researchers say the discovery could be integrated into bionic eyes, which use a retinal implant connected to a video camera to convert images into electrical impulses that carry signals back to the brain. Mimicking a dragonfly's 360-degree field of vision and tracking ability could help visually impaired people sense when someone unexpectedly veers into their path, for instance.
"The dragonfly chases prey at speeds up to 60 kilometers [37 miles] per hour, capturing them with a success rate over 97%," says Zahra Bagheri, a mechanical engineering Ph.D. student at the University of Adelaide and first author of the study. "They perform this task despite their low visual acuity and a tiny brain -- around the size of a grain of rice."
The human brain adapts to obstacles in a way that most automated technologies aren't yet able to. Robots currently deployed in manufacturing, for example, tend to be large, dangerous to anyone who strays too close to their whirling arms and limited to one task, like welding, painting or hoisting heavy parts. Even more advanced, collaborative robots frequently have to slow down or stop when they encounter something unexpected because sight and dexterity, along with common sense, have proven difficult to translate into a string of computer code.
Companies have long worked to overcome the engineering challenges to develop bionic eyes. One company, Second Sight Medical Products Inc., of Sylmar, Calif., has regulatory approval to market its retinal prosthesis in the U.S. to treat a certain kind of blindness. The device uses a video camera embedded in a pair of eyeglasses to collect visual input in the form of light and transmit it to the implant as an electrical signal.
The dragonfly-based visual system is "particularly well-suited" to prosthetic devices such as bionic eyes, says Steven Wiederman, a neuroscientist at the University of Adelaide who led the team that developed the motion-sensing mechanism. His earlier research involved inserting a tiny electrode into a dragonfly brain to record the responses involved in visual processing.
The team chose to study a dragonfly, rather than a human brain, because it would likely take many decades to unravel the complex human neurological system, Dr. Wiederman says. The initial project was funded by the U.S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research, he says. The more recent research involving computer modeling and robotics received funding from Australian Research Council grants.
In the current work in the Australian project, involving a test robot on wheels, the researchers are focused on the motion-detecting neurons in insect optic lobes, which transmit messages between the eyes and the brain. By replicating this in a robot, they hope to create a machine that can react to moving targets in a predictive manner.
The researchers expect the technology could someday be used in driverless cars, making them more responsive to moving objects, such as pedestrians or other cars, and helping them swerve to avoid a collision.
"If the field results are as good as simulations predict, then I envision commercial applications within five to 10 years," Dr. Wiederman says.
Turning the research into a commercial reality could still prove elusive. The current test robot is a large, ground-based vehicle because it needs to carry a computer processor big enough to simulate a biological brain. The researchers are optimistic they will be able to create a much smaller device because the insect-based algorithms are much more efficient than traditional engineering approaches. The computer program runs around 20 times faster than state-of-the-art surveillance software designed to track moving targets, Ms. Bagheri says.
"Detecting and tracking small objects against complex backgrounds is a highly challenging task," says Ms. Bagheri. "Consider a baseball player trying to take a match-winning catch in the outfield. They have seconds or less to spot the ball, track it and predict its path as it comes down against the brightly colored backdrop of excited fans in the crowd -- all while running or even diving toward the point where they predict it will fall."
She says robotics engineers dream of one day creating a machine with "the combination of sharp eyes, quick reflexes and flexible muscles that allow a budding champion to master this skill."
Credit: By Rachel Pannett
