With U.S. unemployment near lows seen a half-century ago and labor so scarce that companies complain of shortages, you'd think American workers, with more bargaining power, are getting a bigger slice of the economic pie.
They're not.
Labor's share of domestic income has been declining since 1970 and has barely recovered in this expansion from lows last seen when the U.S. was pulling out of the Great Depression.
Employee pay and benefits fell to 52.7% of gross domestic income in last year's third quarter, for the fourth straight quarterly decline, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis. It was as high as 59% in 1970 and 57% in 2001. If workers were commanding as much of domestic income as they did in 2001, they'd have nearly $800 billion more, or $5,100 per employed American.
While the labor share has fallen, business profits are on the rise. Income of corporations, proprietorships, landlords and other businesses has climbed from less than 12% of gross domestic income in the 1980s to more than 20%.
The numbers reflect a decadeslong trend that has coincided with stagnant middle-class incomes, lower union membership and increased global trade. While corporate profits benefit some households in dividends and higher stock prices, wages are the biggest source of income for most Americans.
What's puzzling about the labor share's decline is that it occurred at a time when unemployment was below 4%, wages were growing at the fastest pace in a decade and many company executives were complaining of worker shortages. Similar conditions in the past have pushed the labor share up and the profit share down as companies dug into their margins to retain increasingly scarce workers.
"It should be rising," said Julia Coronado, founder of economic-research firm MacroPolicy Perspectives. "This is the point of the cycle where workers should be able to bid back some of the production, and that really hasn't materialized."
For most of the 20th century, economists believed labor and capital would claim relatively constant shares of output because an overdependence on either would yield diminishing returns. An office with 10 state-of-the art computers and just one employee would become vastly more productive by hiring additional workers, just as an office with 10 Harvard graduates but a dial-up internet connection would benefit from upgrading its equipment.
"This is one of the most-surprising, yet best-established facts in the whole range of economic statistics," famed British economist John Maynard Keynes wrote in 1939 of the idea that wages claimed a relatively steady share of output, even though economic-growth rates varied. He called it "a bit of a miracle."
From 1960 to 2000, employee compensation averaged 56.4% of gross domestic income. While the level fluctuated with the business cycle -- rising in the run-up to recessions and falling in their aftermath -- it never dipped below 55% for a full year.
Since then, its downtrend has intensified. In the current decade, workers' wages and compensation have never gone below 51.6% or above 53.4% of gross domestic income.
Economists cite a number of possible explanations.
One is that workers' ability to negotiate wage increases has weakened. Local labor markets in the U.S. grew increasingly concentrated in the hands of fewer employers between 1977 and 2009, according to a 2018 paper by economists Efraim Benmelech, Nittai Bergman and Hyunseob Kim. Union representation has fallen from about a quarter of the U.S. employed population in the 1970s to less than 12% now. And employment contracts have become increasingly riddled with noncompete agreements, occupational licensing requirements and no-poaching clauses that inhibit worker mobility.
Globalization and technology have also played a role.
Soaring international trade, particularly after China's entry to the World Trade Organization, gave manufacturers a cheap labor alternative. Moreover, corporate success is increasingly measured on a global scale, creating winner-take-all firms that displaced smaller, more localized competitors.
"One of the features of these very big firms is that they've got high profits but they have low labor shares," said John Van Reenen, an economics professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
As unemployment falls, labor share ought to pick up. But on several occasions since the recession ended, the Congressional Budget Office projected the labor share would stage at least a partial comeback. Instead, it kept falling.
The next challenge: Rapid advancements in robotics technology and artificial intelligence are expected to displace millions of jobs.

Credit: By Paulkiernan
