The "union" formed by workers last week at Google parent company Alphabet isn't really a labor union in the traditional sense. Rather it's a pressure group funded by the Communications Workers of America, which will provide staff and support to generate negative publicity about management at the Mountain View, Calif., company. The so-called Alphabet Workers Union is composed of fewer than 800 workers among Alphabet's roughly 250,000 employees and contractors, some of whom are technically employed by completely separate entities, some of which are already unionized.
The AWU describes itself as a "minority" or "members only" union, but such things are unlawful under federal labor law. Alphabet has no obligation to meet with, recognize or afford the AWU -- or the CWA -- any special rights. The group has no legal authority to bargain with Alphabet, and there is no reason the company should do so.
A real union has a democratic mandate, with a majority of employees voting to designate it their exclusive representative to bargain with their employer. Real unions represent a group of employees, with a true community of interest, bound by job location and classification and with legal standing to negotiate for better wages and working conditions.
The union movement in the U.S. arose to address workplace concerns far more pressing than the ones faced by Alphabet employees. For highly paid white-collar tech employees to co-opt the union label -- while other workers still fight for safe workplaces, livable wages and essential benefits -- is an insult to the American labor movement.
It is hardly surprising that the tech industry has shown little interest in a unionized workforce. Most tech workers are highly skilled and enjoy generous pay and benefits. The dangerous conditions and unfair work practices that unions were created to combat simply don't exist in an environment where the average employee makes more than $250,000 and receives Cadillac health-care, tuition reimbursement and other benefits -- including free food.
The AWU is asking the public to accept an unrealistically dismal picture of life at Google. Alphabet regularly comes out on top in surveys as one of the best places to work and has a better record than most on workplace issues. In the San Francisco Bay Area, where I live, Google and other tech companies have been catalysts for change, requiring vendors and staffing partners to pay workers a minimum $15 an hour, and provide them with medical insurance, paid time off and sick leave. By any measure, this is an extraordinarily unlikely target for "union" activity.
The AWU claims it wants to influence Alphabet's business decisions on topics ranging from government contracts to the development of artificial intelligence. Perhaps that's a noble goal. Yet, Alphabet employees already have been loudly pushing, through petitions and similar campaigns, a variety of progressive causes. The company has responded to many of them, giving employees exactly what they want. It's hard to see a "union" doing any better.
Either the AWU seeks to violate federal labor laws by forcing Alphabet to recognize and bargain with a minority union or it is adopting the "union" label as pretense for a pressure campaign, knowing that the minority union provides no legal benefit and is unlikely to advance its cause any more than the status quo. Either way, the AWU harms the labor movement. Real unions need the power of the collective to protect their workplace rights.
"This is not the company we want to work for," the AWU's founders say. If so, they should leave. Tech employees are in high demand across Silicon Valley and elsewhere. There's a wide variety of technology being built, to suit every individual and political taste. Certainly, there are other tech companies offering employees generous stock options, health care and wages.
---
Mr. Holland is employment partner at McDermott Will & Emery LLP.

Credit: By Ron Holland
