After the Fourth of July fireworks, someone always pipes up, "Not as good as last year." Defeatists say the same thing about the U.S. Yes, I mean those protesters bleating about U.S. complicity in genocide, racist highways, colonizing oppression and a pending climate Armageddon -- our Omnicause flaws.
American exceptionalism, the thinking goes, is over. China controls the key ingredients of our antibiotics and penicillin while it's dumping U.S. dollars and buying gold. Russia is rebuilding its Soviet footprint. Meanwhile, 51 million of us watched a debate between two cranky old men arguing over their golf handicaps. The New York Times style guide seemingly requires "the end of democracy" for every Trump mention.
Should you buy property in Costa Rica? If you like bananas, sure. Otherwise, no way. Fuhgeddaboudit. Despite -- or perhaps because of -- our political dysfunction, the U.S. still rules.
Technology is the driver of global growth. Six U.S.-based technology companies are worth more than $1 trillion. Actually, U.S. stocks make up almost 70% of the MSCI World Index, a proxy for global equities. That's no accident. The U.S. enables innovation, while the rest of the world, with a few exceptions such as TSMC, ASML and Novo Nordisk, is mired in statism. Japan was an exception until industrial policy misdirected its economy.
Despite China's juggling, the dollar is, and will remain, the reserve currency. Try visiting Costa Rica with Chinese renminbi. Or bitcoin. China is our factory floor, though it's now contracting. I'm convinced manufacturing will eventually move to India, once they sort out the socialist mess the British left them. I would hurry that up.
The U.S. is oil independent. Thank you, horizontal fracking. With the Biden administration's ban on liquefied natural gas lifted, we could export enough LNG to Europe and Japan to make them independent of Russia and the Middle East as well.
We lead in pharmaceuticals. And we have the best weapons and military. Our movies and TV shows, even larded with social lecturing, are world hits. And we're outproducing. From 2010 to 2023, the cumulative economic growth in the U.S. was 34% vs. 21% for the European Union.
Why? Simple: Capital flows to where it's treated best. Like entrepreneurs, capital looks for opportunity, merit and upside. Democracy is the political system of choice because it best enables capitalism. Generative AI and large language models require boodles of capital and our markets obliged, sending Nvidia to the moon, for now.
Yes, we have some European-like overregulation, but our economic system is a sandbox of progress, meaning anyone with talent can come in and play, raise capital and build castles. Elsewhere, the so-called elite drive the economy, often into the ground. A party member's son gets capital instead of a worthy entrepreneur. Here, Hunter is the exception, not the rule.
Sure, the U.S. isn't a pure, free-market capitalist system. That will never exist. Democracy, like the mob, often requires payoffs to grease the skids, to buy votes. But cronyism kills. Government projects end up like California's high-speed rail. But that's a burden for mature industries, not innovators.
To beat American defeatism, let that sandbox flourish. Don't pick winners and losers. Industrial policy preached by the likes of Jake Sullivan (green, union) or Peter Navarro (trade, tariffs) are payoffs, not capital-attracting, progress-inducing innovations.
Unlike other political systems, democracy and capitalism are magnets for capital. Monarchy failed. National socialism, fascism, communism, even lighter forms of Marxism have all failed. Socialism is on its last legs in India and much of Europe. And whatever you want to call China's political system -- perhaps authoritarian crony capitalism -- is circling. In 2022, China's purchasing power parity GDP per capita at $21,476 was 72nd in the world, right behind Mexico. The U.S. was eighth at $76,399. Wake me up when they get closer.
So whine all you want about America's decline as you drive your Tesla to Whole Foods to buy overpriced free-range strawberries whimpering about corporate greed. You're wrong. Warts and all, the U.S. is stronger than ever. This despite having no capitalism-friendly presidents since Ronald Reagan, well maybe since George H.W. Bush before he reneged on his "read my lips, no new taxes" pledge.
Thankfully, innovation has been stronger than any administration, but there are no guarantees. Policy affects growth. Heaping on tax and regulatory burdens causes strong growth to turn weak. We need to give D.C. something to focus on that can't damage the rest of us. Golf handicaps? So much technology is out in the open for politicians to harm. Elon Musk belches and the world reacts. Big Tech gets threatened with breakups. Innovators are best if left alone.
Fortunately, it's the innovation sandboxes hidden in the shadows, where entrepreneurs are perfecting cool new technologies, that drive progress. AI is only the latest. Watch for them to rise from between the cracks, like fireworks. And better than last year.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: In Appreciation of America" -- WSJ July 18, 2024)
Credit: By Andy Kessler
