Sixty years ago on Feb. 20, astronaut John H. Glenn orbited Earth three times. The Mercury capsule Friendship 7 placed on top of an Atlas LV-3B launch vehicle (a modified intercontinental ballistic missile) reached a height of 162 miles and a speed of 17,544 miles an hour. After 4 hours and 55 minutes, it splashed down 800 miles southeast of Bermuda. Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin did a single orbit the year before.
So yes, the space race was on. "Come on Space Truckin'." By the 1969 moon landing, it was clear the U.S. had beaten the Soviets, though oddly by using a Soviet-like command-and-control structure, which "Star Trek's" Romulans and "Star Wars'" Galactic Empire would endorse.
Remarkably, Glenn had no computers on board, only a few thrusters controlled by gyroscopes. There were a few issues and Glenn briefly took control of the spacecraft. Semiconductor-based computers were later used in the Gemini program, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration became an important early customer of Silicon Valley. The invention of integrated circuits lowered costs for commercial computers and the space program. In the 1980s, the military funded the Very High Speed Integrated Circuit to develop fast chips, leading to talk that the U.S. government created Silicon Valley. Hardly. Even though semiconductors are now a more than $500 billion industry and computers in the multitrillions, we still hear echoes of Barack Obama's July 2012 campaign speech: "If you've got a business, you didn't build that, someone else made that happen." That thinking is as outdated as phone booths.
Last year Jeff Bezos' Blue Origin took 90-year-old William Shatner -- Captain Kirk! -- into space, though not into orbit, and they surely didn't "boldly go" on a "five-year mission to explore strange new worlds." A few months before, Richard Branson's Virgin Galactic pilots flew slightly off course during a July flight. Even still, I'm trying to reserve an economy-plus seat. The Mercury program cost $2.2 billion in current dollars, more than $300 million a launch. Elon Musk's SpaceX announced last week that launches into orbit will cost $10 million within two or three years. Could a Bezos-like private company have funded the space program in the 1960s? It's doubtful, but that doesn't make the space program a model for public or private investment decisions.
Let's look at the numbers. In 2019 U.S. research and development spending was $656 billion -- three quarters by business, the remaining $170 billion divided among the federal government, universities and nonprofits. Google spent $26 billion on R&D in 2019, Microsoft about $17 billion, Apple $16 billion, Intel $13 billion. I guess they did build that. For the record, federal money for research goes, in order, to the departments of Health and Human Services, Energy, and Defense, and then NASA.
A lot of that nonbusiness R&D spending is for basic research, as it should be. Where does basic research end and development begin? Alphabet, Google's parent company, funds an experimental R&D group named X, which it describes as a "moonshot factory," funding projects like self-driving cars, robots, internet-access balloons, geothermal energy, and advanced artificial intelligence. That's a lot of basic research before product development. Unlike government projects, Google management can decide when to expand or kill projects based on their economic merit, not on how it affects a senator's state. Universities can provide valuable basic research, as can government labs. But turning them into commercial products that scale to millions or billions isn't a government trick.
Now we're heading backward. The Senate-approved U.S. Innovation and Competition Act includes $52 billion to boost domestic chip production. Sadly, Intel, an icon of free enterprise and Silicon Valley success, has its hand out. CEO Pat Gelsinger said, "We're investing $20 billion in capital this year. But we also are looking for and seeking subsidies and support from governments." The company got the subsidies by investing $20 billion in two new plants in Ohio, the state John Glenn served as senator from 1974 through 1999. Government handouts and industrial policy are a recipe for failure.
Operation Warp Speed worked with the private sector and preordered Covid vaccine doses. This is a smart model -- even NASA ordered semiconductors from Silicon Valley.
Stop with the "you didn't build that." Every entrepreneur knows he stands on the shoulders of giants. Even though government-run GPS satellites orbit the earth, do you think Chuck Schumer could write code to direct an Uber to your location?
Government might still be good at basic research, but certainly not at execution. Remember when the Food and Drug Administration required CD-ROMs sent by paper mail for the early Covid-test applications? Or how in 2020 New Jersey put out a call for Cobol programmers to upgrade ancient unemployment-benefits software? The private market's accountability would never have permitted these errors.
In reality, Silicon Valley's venture-capital industry came of age when the government got out of the way with President Reagan's capital-gains cut. Treating capital well gets companies funded with enough competition to keep them honest. The stock market provides access to expansion capital, sometimes even for the crazy ideas like space tourism. Let's celebrate Glenn's orbits but remember that progress may begin with basic research, but it scales with the private sector.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
