Not too long ago, when life was normal, Morgan Blackford had a routine. She went to high school too early in the morning. She had sports practice in the afternoon. She did homework too late at night.
Morgan has another routine now. She wakes up, finishes her assignments and walks outside to play basketball until it's too dark to play basketball.
"Basically my whole day," Morgan says, "is school and basketball."
Morgan, Mackenzie and Marissa Blackford -- 15, 14 and 12 years old -- have been stuck at home in the suburbs for nearly a month now. Their house is their school. It's also their basketball court.
This disruption to everyday life is one of the most unsettling consequences of the pandemic. It's minor in theory but feels major when it's your reality. A talented freshman starter on her school's varsity basketball team, Morgan was until recently a regular at her local recreational center, where she would take about 300 shots per day. But once the lockdown began, the only thing she could practice with other people was social distancing.
That's when Morgan set her quarantine goal: 1,000 shots per day. She hasn't taken a day off since. She was outside so late one night last week that she watched the sky turn from blue to pitch black and had trouble seeing the last of those 1,000 shots. "So my dad got a flashlight," Morgan said.
This is not just happening in the Blackford family driveway in Solon, Ohio. Morgan, her sisters and kids around the world suddenly have free time and free technology. They're using both to improve at basketball.
In the three weeks since March 20, the shot-tracking app HomeCourt recorded 5 times more shots and 25 times more dribbles than in the prior month, according to the company's data. At this time last year, the app had logged a total of 10 million dribbles. Now it's seeing more than 12 million dribbles per day.
"We're really trying to take advantage," Morgan said, "to make ourselves better."
The past month will be the formative event for an entire generation of developing athletes. But when you look at the Blackfords, you can see how that might not be such a bad thing. There is a long history of plague years producing unexpected outcomes, and this may turn out to be the sports version of Shakespeare writing "King Lear" in quarantine.
This is harder in some places and impossible in others. The rims have been removed from parks in some cities, and suburban gyms remain closed indefinitely. But kids are resourceful. And the Blackford sisters are still finding ways to work on their basketball skills.
They happen to have one thing that Giannis Antetokounmpo wishes he owned: a home basketball hoop. NBA players can get into palatial gyms whenever they want. Or at least they could. Even the world's greatest shooter built an outdoor hoop to have a place to shoot when he was locked out of his team's practice facility. "It took me back to playing the game when I was a kid," Stephen Curry said.
But a few of those kids already had an outdoor ball, a basket and each other. That was everything the Blackfords needed to keep playing through a pandemic.
They also had a product called HomeCourt, which has been Apple's most popular sports app for most of the past month, more popular than ESPN, the NBA or the NFL's apps. Adults have Zoom. Kids have HomeCourt.
This basketball app turns any shooting workout on any rim into a trove of data. It's powered by artificial intelligence and the smart premise that phones can be transformative basketball equipment, and it turned out to be prescient in a way that no amount of artificial intelligence could have predicted. The only places to play basketball these days are home courts.
Not long after schools across the U.S. were shut down, the company behind HomeCourt made the product free. It was around this time when the Blackfords installed the app, moved a tripod to their driveway and began shooting.
Morgan started on March 21. By March 22, she'd made 500 shots. She was up to 1,000 by the next day, 5,000 by the next week and 10,000 by last week.
The world is so weird at the moment that Morgan and her sisters are now shooting more than NBA teams. They shoot layups. They shoot from the mid-range. They even shoot 3-pointers after measuring their very own line.
"We had it in chalk, but it kind of erased," Mackenzie said.
"Multiple times," said Colleen Blackford, their mother. "And now we're out of chalk."
They have also encountered another problem of playing outdoors: weather. Sometimes they go inside their garage for HomeCourt's customized skills workouts. "And sometimes we shoot in the rain," Morgan said.
Their father likes to dress appropriately when he rebounds for them. His daughters in shorts like to remind him that he looks ridiculous in a wool cap and gloves.
"Don't let them fool you," Darrin Blackford said. "It's cold out there."
The early results of this natural experiment in youth sports are oddly promising. Their focus on individual skills is almost like a sabbatical from the endless scrimmages, games and tournaments of youth basketball. And they're each getting something different from being on the driveway at the same time. Morgan is tracking her progress through her statistics. Mackenzie is perfecting the consistency of her shot's arc. Marissa is experimenting with her left hand.
They don't have the competition of playing games with their friends against complete strangers. They're trying to manufacture it for themselves. The shooting contests between the sisters get heated, and they're even battling their own teammates in HomeCourt's drills and workouts.
They still don't know the next time they'll play basketball with other people. The only thing they can do in the meantime is exactly what they've been doing. So they keep shooting. And before long the Blackford sisters might be shooting in a place that's not their driveway.
"I want to play Division I basketball," said Morgan.
"Me, too," Mackenzie said.
"Me, three," Marissa said.

Credit: By Ben Cohen
