Corrections & Amplifications
The online education company Udacity recently forwarded the resumes of 200 students from one online class to companies. The Marvels column in Saturday's Review section incorrectly said it was 15 students.
(WSJ March 27, 2012)
Turn down the Rihanna. No more bikinis and beer. Spring break is winding down, and college students are heading back to campus -- which, if they're at a name-brand school, is the one place, whatever their actual smarts or behavior, that guarantees them approval. Kids don't put Harvard stickers on their rear windshields, parents do.
But for how long? These schools have much to recommend them: impressive students, organic dining halls, presidential alumni. To maintain their reputations, however, elite colleges have long relied on limiting access -- Harvard's class of 2015 is about 1,700 students, Yale's is 1,300 -- and that may be coming to an end. Revolutionaries outside the ivy walls are hammering their way not onto campus but straight into class.
It's a thrilling collegiate coup. Last fall, a couple of hundred Stanford students registered for Sebastian Thrun's class on artificial intelligence. He offered the course free online, too, through his new company Udacity, and 160,000 students signed up. For the written assignments and exams, both groups got identical questions -- and 210 students got a perfect overall score. They all came from the online group.
So if you bluffed your way into the Ivy League with plumped-up credentials or an essay edited by somebody else, it's time to start breaking a sweat.
"I like to compare it to film," Mr. Thrun told me at a coffee shop between Stanford and Mountain View, Calif., where his day job is running Google X, the company's experimental lab. "Before film there was theater -- small casting companies reaching 300 people at a time. Then celluloid was invented, and you could record something and replicate it. A good movie wouldn't reach 300 but 3,000, and soon 300,000 and soon three million. That changed the economics."
It is education's time to change now. At the high-school level, interactive study sites are increasingly ingenious: Look at Piazza, Blackboard and Quizlet, founded by a 17-year-old. TED-Ed just launched a channel on You Tube, with three- to 10-minute lessons for kids. YouTube's EDU Portal has been viewed 22 billion times. Khan Academy, a favorite of Bill Gates, has four million unique users a month and thousands of educational videos, from "Napoleon's Peninsular Campaigns" to "Python Lists." If you think that last one is about snakes, please download Khan's new iPad app immediately.
The next big thing, though, is college-level MOOCs and MOOSes: Massive Open Online Courses and Seminars. Harvard already showcases coursework like professor Michael Sandel's "Justice" lectures online, gratis. Now Georgia Institute of Technology, MIT, Stanford and others are offering advanced online courses, some with accreditation.
"The current search for new educational funnels must be reversed," wrote Austrian philosopher Ivan Illich, in "Deschooling Society." He called for "educational webs" woven among us all. That was 1971. Today, Web courses don't just meet but beat their impersonal offline counterparts. Studies show that tutorial-style teaching is more effective than lecturing (as Oxford and Cambridge have known for centuries), even when prerecorded. Mr. Thrun's online students told him that the course felt more personal.
In this new educational model, the shy and the easily distracted get advantages. You can rewind a video and watch whenever and as many times as you like. Plus, teachers save time with computerized grading and students save money. (U.S. college debt, nearly $1 trillion, is bigger than housing or credit card debt.)
Most important, the system promotes driven and talented students who might otherwise be denied access to higher education: a kid in Afghanistan, a young mother in Scotland, an ignored pupil in Detroit. From Mr. Thrun's class (translated into 44 languages) Udacity chose 15 students based purely on performance and, a few weeks ago, forwarded their resumes to companies including Amazon, Bank of America and BMW.
There are glitches, of course, including a high online dropout rate, complaints about speed, questions on accreditation and the predictable whining from old-school alumni who have gotten too cozy in their club chairs.
To be truly egalitarian, classes will need to go not just online but mobile. Still, the upshot of it all is clear: more smart people is better. Just watch that ivory tower topple.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Technology Can't Replace a Personal College Experience" -- WSJ March 31, 2012)
Credit: By Holly Finn

ERIC Subject: College Students; Access to Education; Online Courses; MOOCs; Distance Education; Debt (Financial)
