WASHINGTON -- As a $52 billion bill to bolster semiconductor manufacturing in the U.S. approached a critical juncture, Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo reached out to some unusual figures to cultivate support in Congress: former Trump administration national-security officials.
A member of her security detail told her that H.R. McMaster, national security adviser to former President Donald Trump, praised her on Joe Rogan's podcast. Ms. Raimondo brought in Mr. McMaster and three other former Trump officials to talk up the importance of semiconductors to national defense alongside Democratic and Republican lawmakers.
The event "defined competition with China as a nonpartisan issue," Mr. McMaster recalled. The legislation passed the Senate four months later with 17 Republicans in support.
The Commerce Department has been called the "hall closet" of the federal government with an eclectic mix of responsibilities including business promotion, patents and weather forecasts.
But Ms. Raimondo, 51 years old, has positioned the department as a driver of administration efforts to confront China's geopolitical ambitions and Russia's aggression in an era when supply chains, advanced technology and economic alliances are major battlegrounds.
"The most important thing we can do to compete with China is invest in America," Ms. Raimondo said in an interview. "We need America to dominate in certain areas of technology -- critical minerals, electric vehicle batteries, semiconductors, artificial intelligence."
It amounts to a level of industrial policy that the U.S. government has traditionally eschewed. Ms. Raimondo's pursuit of it has stoked unease among progressives in her own party, who view her as too cozy with business, with political opponents and with some foreign leaders. But it is a role she has embraced with some early signs of success.
Following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the Commerce Department launched a regime of export controls with friendly nations to cut off shipments of semiconductors, telecommunications and other key products aimed at crippling Russia's ability to build and repair weapons.
And Ms. Raimondo has taken the lead in lining up partners for President Biden's signature foreign economic initiative, the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework, which aims to boost cooperation in areas such as digital trade and supply chains to counter China's influence. Trade agreements in the past would have been the primary responsibility of the U.S. Trade Representative.
The Biden administration's USTR, led by Katherine Tai, has declined to pursue traditional trade agreements that it considers at odds with the president's focus on bolstering workers and unions, limiting the USTR's role in Mr. Biden's overseas economic engagement. "USTR has worked relentlessly to rebuild our economic ties around the world, and we are pursuing an ambitious agenda with our colleagues across the Biden administration," said USTR spokesman Adam Hodge.
With the semiconductor bill and last year's infrastructure law, Ms. Raimondo is set to control more than $100 billion in additional funding, more than any of her predecessors.
At a White House briefing Tuesday, Ms. Raimondo outlined her department's plans for allocating the new federal semiconductor money, describing it as "rocket fuel for our global competitiveness."
About $28 billion will go to loans and grants for building facilities that produce and assemble the most advanced chips, while about $10 billion will be used to expand manufacturing for older and specialty technologies. Much of the rest will support industry research and development.
A former venture capitalist and Rhode Island governor, Ms. Raimondo has a history of being at odds with progressives in her own party. Her leading critic is Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D., Mass.), who contends Ms. Raimondo is too close to Big Tech companies, and has sent her a series of letters (which Ms. Warren made public) citing specific objections.
Ms. Warren criticized Ms. Raimondo for a video message she delivered to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce last December in which she voiced concerns that a European Union proposal on tech regulation would harm U.S. tech companies. The message was "a rush to defend the market share and profits of giant multinationals," Ms. Warren said in her Dec. 14, 2021, letter to Ms. Raimondo.
In a July letter, Ms. Warren called the presence of former technology executives within Ms. Raimondo's senior ranks evidence of "Big Tech Revolving Door" at her department.
Ms. Raimondo brushed off the criticism. "I'm the Commerce secretary," she said in the interview. "It is my job to work with business, and to listen to business and to partner with the private sector."
There are other friction points. Commerce is responsible for ensuring that advanced U.S. technologies don't go to adversarial countries. China hawks say that under Ms. Raimondo, the department has given priority to U.S. commercial interests over national security. Commerce was also asked to revise federal rules to address potential security risks from TikTok and other foreign-owned apps, but more than a year later no such rules have been issued.
Ms. Raimondo said her team has worked aggressively to protect American technology and intellectual property, including through adding more than 100 Chinese companies to the entity list for export restrictions.
Ms. Raimondo has used personal diplomacy to advance the administration's causes. She lobbied Piyush Goyal, India's minister for commerce, industry, consumer affairs, food and public distribution, to join the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework despite India's protectionist history. "Gina is very, very committed to outcomes. She likes speed. She is frank and she speaks her mind," Mr. Goyal said in an interview.
A few weeks after Taiwan's GlobalWafers Co. gave up a $5 billion expansion plan in Germany and started seeking an alternative site in February, her team launched a campaign to woo it. She weighed in with a one-hour call in June with GlobalWafers Chief Executive Doris Hsu. Ms. Hsu said that without U.S. aid, its new plant would have to go to South Korea where construction costs would be one-third. "We will make the math work," Ms. Raimondo assured the CEO. Two weeks later, GlobalWafers announced a new plant in Texas with up to $5 billion in investment and 1,500 jobs.
---
Catherine Lucey contributed to this article.
Credit: By Yuka Hayashi
