International Business Machines Corp. plans to purchase consulting firm Promontory Financial Group LLC, the two companies said, creating a new IBM offering called Watson Financial Services.
The companies didn't disclose financial details of the deal, which they said is subject to regulatory approvals and expected to close by the end of the year. The idea, they said, is to combine Promontory's financial regulatory expertise with Watson, IBM's artificial-intelligence computer system, to help banks meet regulatory expectations in areas such as anti-money-laundering detection systems, consumer-complaint databases and "stress tests."
Financial regulatory requirements are "rapidly outstripping the capacity of humans to keep up," a joint press release from the companies said Thursday.
Closely held Promontory was founded in 2001 by Eugene Ludwig, a former U.S. comptroller of the currency, and has hired a small army of former senior regulators and government officials to advise financial firms. It now has about 600 full-time employees and 19 offices, 14 outside the U.S. Promontory will keep its name and will become an IBM subsidiary.
Banks and government agencies use Promontory as an adviser, but also as a sort of outsourced regulator, which sometimes performs jobs the government doesn't have the resources to do.
For example, regulators might hire Promontory to monitor a financial firm's compliance with the terms of a settlement.
At times, the business has drawn controversy, with Promontory facing accusations it is too close to financial firms.
In August 2015, Promontory agreed to pay $15 million to settle allegations by the New York Department of Financial Services that it watered down reports about potential sanctions violations by Standard Chartered PLC, the bank that had engaged the consulting firm on an internal review of its compliance.
The department accused Promontory of exhibiting "a lack of independent judgment in the preparation and submission of certain reports" from 2010 to 2011. Promontory admitted it didn't meet certain standards.
Promontory previously took heat when regulators tapped it to search for errors in mortgage foreclosures at big banks after the financial crisis. It was paid more than $900 million for the work, it disclosed in 2013, even as lawmakers and other critics said wronged homeowners weren't being adequately compensated.
The company said at the time that it put in several million hours on the project and stood by the quality of its work.
Credit: By Ryan Tracy and Katy Burne
