Radiologists can scrutinize hundreds of images before identifying an area of concern in a patient's body. Mark Michalski likens the process to "playing 'Where's Waldo?' on each of those images."
But a type of artificial intelligence known as deep learning could soon help medical experts pinpoint problems faster and more accurately, says Dr. Michalski, executive director of the Boston-based Center for Clinical Data Science at Massachusetts General Hospital and Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Deep learning includes algorithms, or computer programs, that search for, identify and analyze problems without direction from people, though many humans still guide the algorithms today. For months, Dr. Michalski has used hundreds of thousands of medical images to train a deep-learning system to detect pulmonary nodules and strokes, measure tumors and look for traumatic injury and fractures, among other tasks. Now he's testing the system in his hospitals. The early results "are promising," he says. "The technology really does work."
More hospitals, universities and tech companies are training and testing systems that use AI, including deep learning, to see how they might be used to improve the medical diagnosis process. Most efforts today are focused on recognizing patterns in medical images such as CT and MRI scans. IBM Research estimates that, based on file-storage sizes, images account for at least 90% of all medical data.
Some deep-learning systems also incorporate other information, such as medical reports or lab-test results. The more data that gets fed into these systems, experts say, the better they tend to perform as they compare a patient's medical information with data from thousands or sometimes millions of other patients.
This sector has grown in recent years. AI systems within health care brought in $1.06 billion in revenue globally last year, up from $811 million in 2015 and $633 million in 2014, according to Frost & Sullivan, a market-research firm. That is projected to increase as more AI-driven apps arrive.
"A lot of what we're doing right now is taking what has been proven in the lab and trying to commercialize it," says Steve Tolle, global vice president and chief strategist for IBM Watson Health Imaging.
Some tech companies working in this space are teaming up with health-care systems, academic medical centers and other partners to get access to medical data. Through these partnerships, experts say, deep-learning algorithms can become more accurate and ultimately help more clinicians.
IBM Watson Health, which launched in 2015, formed such a medical-imaging collaborative last year to help doctors address different types of cancers and other diseases. The network, in which the health-care systems get to see results from tests run by IBM Watson Health, has expanded to 30 members from 15. One tool being worked on is a score indicating how confident the system is that something found is, say, a cyst or a tumor. Another tool would flag areas of concern that a physician might have missed.
"The goal is to scale the expertise of the clinician," says John Smith, manager of multimedia and vision at IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center. "The computer can see a lot more data than any clinician can ever see."
There are certain limitations to these kinds of approaches, however. Some images, for instance, don't label areas to help machines identify what they are looking at.
Another hurdle is companies are competing to identify and recruit data scientists. GE Healthcare, for one, is working with some colleges to advance their curricula in science, technology, engineering and math.
There also are some security concerns in the health-care industry about companies accessing medical records and patient data. But there seems to be a greater worry about whether radiologists or other medical experts might get displaced by AI altogether.
Both health-care experts and corporate executives say there is still an important role for people; it is still a person who makes a formal medical diagnosis. "What we're developing is a suite of applications to make them [people] more effective" through better diagnosing and treating patients, says Charles Koontz, chief digital officer of GE Healthcare.
Health-care experts and companies say most AI-assisted tools have helped doctors make faster decisions and consider more possibilities when making diagnoses. "There's no doubt it's more accurate," says Siddharth Saha, vice president of transformational health for Frost & Sullivan.
In December, a study published in the medical journal JAMA presented a deep-learning algorithm capable of interpreting signs in photographs of diabetic retinopathy -- an eye condition that can cause blindness. It performed on par with ophthalmologists, according to researchers at Google, who co-wrote the study.
In the future, some experts argue that AI could improve the accuracy of diagnoses at smaller hospitals, including in countries where there may be shortages of doctors. Says Mr. Koontz, "We believe these applications will really improve outcomes in midsize hospitals, and quite frankly, in developing countries."
---
Mr. Parmar is a writer in Toronto. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Neil Parmar
