LONDON -- The free-trade agreement that the U.K. struck with the European Union on Christmas Eve will heap new challenges onto a British economy that has performed worse than its peers through 2020.
While avoiding a trade disruption of the magnitude that would have followed if efforts to reach a deal had failed, the new agreement is the first in history that will put more obstacles in the way of U.K. trade with the European continent. That is happening as the U.K. copes with a fast-spreading variant of the coronavirus that has forced lockdowns over most of the country.
It will take effect with the U.K. and economies across the world already straining under the pandemic and governments' efforts to contain it. The U.K. has been among the worst-hit, with gross domestic product at the end of the third quarter almost 10% less than it was a year earlier.
Britain will have to adjust to the new relationship with the EU as it deals with the economic pain caused by the virus. That risks hindering a recovery, economists and business executives say, with unpredictable consequences for jobs and livelihoods as businesses adapt to the upheavals of both challenges.
The government's hope is that greater freedom from Brussels-led regulation will, over time, yield economic benefits. From next year, Britain will be able to sign its own trade deals and redirect EU budget contributions toward education and technological research at home. It will be freer to set its own labor and environmental regulations.
"I do see the opportunities," said Nik Kotecha, chief executive of Morningside Pharmaceuticals Ltd., a maker of branded and generic drugs based in Loughborough, England. He said that in the past four years, resources that could have been directed to investment and research and development have been absorbed by Brexit contingency planning. Now he is hoping to redirect his energy toward expanding sales in developing markets.
For decades, manufacturing and financial-services companies, livestock farmers, fishermen and others have focused on mainland Europe's markets, where they could sell their products almost as easily as they could at home. Supermarkets sourced much of their produce -- and manufacturers their components -- from the continent, hauling them to Britain without hindrance.
There was a ready supply of labor from across the EU, whose citizens had the right to live and work in the U.K.
In stepping outside the EU's customs area and single market, the U.K. is making it costlier to trade with neighbors that consume almost half its exports. Though the new free-trade accord eliminates the need for new tariffs, it means extra costs and paperwork for exporters and potentially higher prices for consumers. Companies seeking to hire staff will need to go through new bureaucratic procedures to get work permits.
U.K.-based financial-services firms will be barred from some activities in European markets, such as lending and deposit taking, and other activities will hang on a unilateral decision from the European Commission that has yet to be announced.
The arguments in favor of Brexit were mostly political: that it would return decision making to London from Brussels and curb immigration from the EU. But Brexit was also sold on the basis that greater political freedom would bring economic benefits.
Advocates of Brexit say stricter immigration controls will bring more opportunities and fatter paychecks for British workers. They say a smaller labor supply might push up wages and encourage businesses to make investments in automating processes.
U.K. Prime Minister Boris Johnson also wants wider latitude than is available under EU subsidy rules to pump public cash into promising industries, such as green energy and artificial intelligence.
Nonetheless, most economists expect Britain will be poorer in the years ahead than it would have been had it remained an EU member state. Leaving the bloc will crimp trade and diminish Britain's attraction as an investment destination for foreign companies seeking a bridgehead to European consumers, they say. Lower levels of trade, foreign investment and immigration will drag on already slow productivity growth.
Longer term, the agreement heralds a period of reorganization that will play out for years, as workers and companies find new markets or shift into new activities.

Credit: By Jason Douglas
