[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Salesforce might not have to fight a war, but it still has plenty of battles ahead.
The cloud-software pioneer issued a joint statement Monday with Elliott Management, one of a handful of activist investors that had taken a position in the once-beaten-down stock. According to the statement, Elliott won't mount a proxy challenge on Salesforce's board at the company's coming annual meeting. In return, "Salesforce and Elliott have committed to continue the productive working relationship they have developed together."
That may read like an Elliott capitulation. But in truth, the sometimes-pugnacious activist had little remaining ground on which to mount a challenge following Salesforce's surprisingly strong fourth-quarter report. That report included a doubling of the company's stock buyback and what was effectively a swearing off of future major acquisitions -- key items on the activists' wish lists. Salesforce shares have jumped 14% since that report and 26% since Elliott's position was first reported in mid-January.
Salesforce just has to keep at it, which means maintaining double-digit growth for a company generating more than $30 billion in annual revenue while significantly boosting the bottom line. And all this must be achieved during an economic slowdown during which corporate customers are scrutinizing every penny of spending and rivals are fighting for every penny of sales.
Salesforce also will have to face the slowdown without some of the tools it has relied on in the past. Major deals are clearly off the table; Chief Executive Officer Marc Benioff said in the recent earnings call that the company's board has disbanded its M&A committee and replaced it with a new group "to ensure a high degree of accountability." And its ambitious profitability goals mean Salesforce also will have to keep reining in the sales and marketing expenditures that are the highest among large cloud-software companies. Salesforce expects to raise its annual adjusted operating margin by nearly 5 percentage points in the current fiscal year -- the largest such jump in more than a decade. But staying competitive in the cloud isn't getting any cheaper -- especially with the craze over generative artificial intelligence tools such as ChatGPT, which tech giants such as Microsoft and Google are adopting into their own cloud software. Microsoft is adding its AI chatbot to Dynamics, its suite of cloud-based enterprise software that competes most closely with Salesforce.
Salesforce is hardly standing still; Mr. Benioff used the company's last investor call to tout its own generative AI tool called Einstein GPT. But generative AI is costly to implement and operate. Moreover, Microsoft already boasts superior operating margins to Salesforce, plus an annual capital expenditure budget more than 30 times its rival's size. Mr. Benioff's job may be safe, but it won't be easy for a long while.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
