TOKYO -- Investors have spent a lot of time analyzing Bank of Japan statements for clues to its monetary-policy decision Friday. Two firms in Tokyo say they also have computers on the job.
Nomura Securities Co. and Credit Suisse Securities said recently they have artificial intelligence crunching the text of BOJ economic assessments to supplement their human employees' judgment regarding possible policy shifts.
The two firms have joined data analysts -- including social scientists, journalists and central bankers themselves -- in the growing use of algorithms to quantify text in search of insights into sentiment. Such text mining, or natural-language processing, might parse BOJ statements for the frequency of words such as "inflation," or phrases such as "weakening expectations."
Credit Suisse said it has created a numerical indicator of the likelihood the BOJ will ease monetary policy. Designing the indicator, the BOJ Text Index, involved using an algorithm to analyze more than three million Japanese characters contained in 2,400 pages of BOJ statements and reports -- as well as speeches and news conferences by the BOJ governor -- from January 2010 through December 2015.
The program learns as it goes, checking the correlation between keywords for economic or price conditions and keywords indicating concerns or negativity.
Nomura also uses deep learning, in which software mimics neurological functions, to study and interpret the BOJ's views. The Nomura AI economic-sentiment index is based on analysis of the BOJ's monthly economic reports.
Nomura's research group had been experimenting with AI for about a year and a half, analyzing information from sources such as corporate-financial reports, chat boards and news articles. Last summer, the team decided it was ready to apply the technology to macroeconomic analysis.
Yuhki Yamamoto, Nomura's senior quantitative analyst, who led the project, said AI analysis offers a higher level of objectivity, partly by eliminating human discretion about what words should be analyzed or given more weight.
Credit Suisse cautioned that its index provides only a "decent level of indicative value," and only in the nearer term, and should be used to augment human analysis.
Still, its indicator, which wasn't yet in place, would have flagged a "high chance" of additional BOJ action in October 2014, when the central bank shocked markets with a big expansion of its easing program, Credit Suisse said in a recent report. And it pointed to a limited chance in October last year, when many were predicting action but the central bank stood pat, Credit Suisse said.
Similarly, Nomura's index had also shown an uptick in the central bank's economic assessment before last October's meeting.
"Some market participants had held on to their wrong expectation for easing even though the BOJ's economic sentiment was improving," said Nomura economist Yoshiyuki Suimon.
Of course, central bankers are hardly forthright when talking about their intentions for monetary policy, making matters more difficult for humans trying to read tea leaves or computers processing text. Sometimes the BOJ comes out of left field, as it did in December when it announced "supplementary measures" to augment its easing program.
Neither firm's indicator points to an expansion of easing Friday, but because they only cover BOJ statements through the most recent monetary-policy meeting, they don't reflect the effects of recent global-market turbulence, which has resulted in the yen gaining strength and Tokyo shares tumbling in recent weeks.
"Our AI tells us that the BOJ's economic assessment has turned up, supporting our view that the BOJ wouldn't act immediately," said Mr. Suimon, who expects the BOJ to hold its fire until April as long as the U.S. dollar stays above 115 yen.
Yutaka Matsuo, an AI expert and a project associate professor at the University of Tokyo, said he doubted that AI-based analysis will become dominant in the financial sector soon. He said he is hopeful such technology will become available within the next 10 years.
The BOJ itself is among central banks watching developments in the field of computational-text analysis, although it is still premature to say it can be useful in policy making, said Seisaku Kameda, head of the economic and financial-studies division at the BOJ's Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies.
"It is still at a stage where we should examine how [automated text analysis] can complement existing data," he said.
Credit: By Megumi Fujikawa
