Sequoia Capital, one of the most powerful names in technology investing, said it would separate its China and U.S. businesses, a move that underscores the growing tussle between Beijing and Washington over who controls the next generation of cutting edge innovations.
The Silicon Valley-based firm, famous for investments in startups including the owner of social-media platform TikTok, epitomized the once symbiotic relationship between tech investors on both sides of the Pacific. It and other firms like it have been forced more recently to confront the geopolitical tensions that have enveloped the U.S.-China business world.
Sequoia told its investors in a note Tuesday that it would split into three independent firms, in the U.S., India and China, by March 2024.
"It has become increasingly complex to run a decentralized global investment business," said Sequoia's investor note, signed by the leaders of its practices in the U.S., China and India.
The note cited several business reasons for the split and didn't directly address geopolitical concerns. The firm has "seen growing market confusion due to the shared Sequoia brand as well as portfolio conflicts across entities." The firm has hence decided to embrace what it called a "local-first approach."
The split takes place as the firm has come under increasing pressure from officials in Washington over its China business.
U.S. national security officials have grown concerned about the two-way flow of money and information among tech companies and their investors. They worry that Chinese investors in U.S. tech companies could lead a foreign adversary to gain information about sensitive burgeoning technologies such as artificial intelligence.
They have also stepped up efforts to stop U.S. money from funding Beijing's development of sensitive technologies.
The Biden administration has been preparing an executive order to prohibit some investments in China and other geopolitical rivals, targeting U.S. private-equity and venture-capital investments in advanced technologies that U.S. officials believe pose a national-security risk, according to people familiar with the administration's plans.
The new regulations would bar future investments in advanced-semiconductor and quantum-computing firms, while requiring disclosure of investments in older semiconductor technologies. The administration has discussed how to include investments in artificial intelligence in the plan, though officials have struggled to define which forms of AI pose a national-security risk, according to some of the people familiar with the plans.
Beijing, meanwhile, has pushed for splits of its own, such as a recent ban imposed on the use of chips made by U.S. manufacturer Micron.
Numerous U.S. venture firms have scaled back their Chinese investment operations as a result of growing tensions and restrictions.
While geopolitical issues were a major driver in getting the talks started, by the end, the split was also about business concerns, people familiar with the matter said. As the China and India funds have grown, for example, they have sought to invest in companies in which the U.S. fund is already invested in a major competitor, the people said.
A storied firm founded a half century ago, Sequoia placed early bets on many of the world's most successful tech startups, including Apple, Google and Airbnb.
Backed by college endowments, nonprofits and other large asset managers, it has had an equally illustrious record in China.
Sequoia launched its China arm in 2005 and put it under the leadership of Neil Shen, one of China's best-known venture capitalists. The operation made early bets on food-delivery company Meituan and e-commerce marketplace Pinduoduo. It has stakes in hundreds of other companies in the technology, consumer and healthcare sectors. More recently, it branched out into public-market and infrastructure investments, as well as buyouts.
Sequoia China currently has about $56 billion in assets under management, according to a person familiar with the matter, who said U.S. investors currently account for about half of its total investor base.
Among its most prominent holdings is a large stake in the Chinese tech giant ByteDance, the owner of short-video platform TikTok. Authorities in the U.S. have targeted the social-media platform, which is wildly popular with U.S. teens.
Sequoia has signaled a growing divide with its China and India branches as the businesses grew rapidly.
In 2021, Sequoia announced a majorchange of strategy in its fund business that gave it more discretion about how to spread around investors' money. But the shift didn't include the China or India units. And when the firm named a new leader of its overall business, it chose top U.S. partner, Roelof Botha, passing over Shen.
For years, the units had operated with relative autonomy. Sequoia's U.S. operation raised its own funds for startup investing in the country and Europe, while Shen and his India-based counterpart, Shailendra Singh, did the same in China and India -- often targeting separate investors.
Still, all the units share operations with the larger U.S.-based Sequoia, which directed money from a large global fund into more mature startups in all three regions. Beneficiaries included companies like ByteDance.
Once separated, the three independent units will stop sharing back-office functions such as IT, finance and accounting, Sequoia said in its investor note.
Last year, Sequoia China raised $8.5 billion from global investors that included U.S. institutions, drawing scrutiny from U.S. officials and lawmakers, The Wall Street Journal reported previously.
Sequoia has had a rocky year. A plunge in tech and startup valuations erased billions of dollars in paper profits in Sequoia's venture funds, while the firm suffered a black eye for its investment in now bankrupt crypto exchange FTX.
Earlier this year, Sequoia Capital started allowing independent U.S. national-security experts to vet some of its China arm's potential investments, the Journal reported.
The investment screening will remain in place even after the separation, according to a person familiar with the matter. Sequoia China also manages a stable of domestic funds in China denominated in the country's local currency, the yuan.
---
Andrew Duehren and Aruna Viswanatha contributed to this article.
Credit: By Jing Yang and Eliot Brown
