LOS ANGELES -- Hollywood's biggest strike in 60 years is exposing fault lines between the industry's giants, with traditional entertainment companies expected to take a near-term hit while streamers such as Netflix are better positioned for a long stalemate.
Though they hope for a quick resolution, entertainment executives say they are contemplating the prospect that the joint strike by actors and writers could drag on for months -- even through the end of the year.
Warner Bros. Discovery, Paramount Global and Walt Disney are among the traditional companies whose broadcast-TV and movie businesses could be massively disrupted within months. Netflix and Amazon.com might not feel the pinch until 2025 or beyond, entertainment executives and analysts said.
Over time, the industry's solidarity may be tested. That said, for now the big media and tech companies are operating in lockstep. The writers went on strike in May and the actors joined them last week, pushing for higher pay and guardrails for the use of generative artificial-intelligence technology in the industry, among other issues.
In the broadcast realm, advertisers made spending commitments this spring, thinking network shows such as ABC's "Abbott Elementary," CBS's "Young Sheldon" and NBC's "Law & Order: SVU" would be in production this summer in time for the fall season. They aren't, and instead the lineups will feature many reruns, shows from streaming services, international programming and already-produced reality fare.
In the premium cable and streaming world, fans could be waiting a long time for some high-end favorites to return. Warner's HBO is set through the middle of the next year with shows such as "The Gilded Age," "True Detective" and "House of the Dragon." But a work stoppage through year's end could push the next installments of high-profile shows like "Euphoria" and "The White Lotus" into 2025.
A prolonged strike may even lead companies to rethink when they release finished shows and movies, if the stars aren't available to help promote them.
At the heart of the fight between the companies and the two unions -- the Screen Actors Guild and the Writers Guild of America -- is the entertainment industry's dramatic transformation over the past decade, with the fading of a lucrative system fueled by cable-TV subscriptions and rerun sales and the rise of a profit-challenged streaming industry in its place. Having made huge bets on content, traditional companies are collectively losing billions of dollars a year on streaming.
"All of this was caused by streaming overinvestment and various levels of delusion," said Barry Diller, a veteran media mogul who was once a top executive at Paramount and Fox. "If you drive all the business models only towards streaming, the result of it is that all of the feeder mechanisms -- broadcast, cable -- disappear." Diller is now chairman of media conglomerate IAC.
The unions want the new streaming world to carry on practices of the old guard, including big-enough royalty checks, or "residuals," to help actors and writers from successful shows and movies navigate the fallow periods between jobs. Entertainment executives have offered increases but not enough for the strikers. A return to the old ways is impossible, they say.
Alan Ruck, who played overshadowed sibling Connor Roy in HBO's "Succession," said he's frustrated to hear entertainment executives say old practices of paying residuals don't fit the streaming world. "It doesn't apply anymore, because it's streaming. Why? Just because you said so?" said Ruck, who was protesting outside the Warner Bros. studio lot alongside a throng of others from SAG and WGA.
Privately, some entertainment executives say the pivot to streaming was the work of both sides. Many writers and actors welcomed big upfront paydays from the likes of Netflix in lieu of a potential payoff from reruns, the executives say. They enjoyed the flexibility of 10-episode seasons in streaming compared with the 22-episode network-TV grind. In short, they say, the talent wanted this new world order -- until it wasn't working out.
Entertainment companies will see savings from the production shutdowns, but spending likely will just be shifted to later, said Tim Nollen, an analyst at Macquarie. "That's a short-term phenomenon, for however long the strike lasts," he said.
Executives say the strikes are a dangerous development for the movie industry, which was in the middle of a fragile recovery from the pandemic -- consumers heading back to theaters, though in smaller numbers. For Warner Bros., the buzz of its coming release of "Barbie," which looks poised for a major opening, will give way to uncertainty about holiday movies such as "The Color Purple," while if the strike drags on past the summer future productions such as Universal's disaster film "Twisters" and Paramount's next "Mission: Impossible" movie could be delayed.
---
Jessica Toonkel and Sarah Krouse contributed to this article.
Credit: By Joe Flint and Amol Sharma
