Satya Nadella wanted to make nice with longtime rival Google when he became chief executive of Microsoft almost a decade ago. Those days now feel like a distant memory.
Google's antitrust trial in Washington, D.C., has provided a stage for Microsoft to air long-simmering grievances about the search giant's market dominance. It also has opened a window into the events that led to a straining of relations between the two companies, a dynamic that has grown increasingly tense during the boom in artificial intelligence.
Called to testify by the Justice Department, Nadella said Alphabet-owned Google's business deals had hobbled Microsoft's search engine, and he accused the search company of using similar tactics to box out competitors working to develop AI. Three other Microsoft witnesses have testified in the case, more than any company other than Google.
Google has pointed the finger back at Microsoft. Its lawyers have drawn attention to Microsoft's efforts to promote the Bing search engine on Windows computers, while emphasizing that most people still prefer Google even when they use Windows.
The escalating conflict, which leaders of both companies previously attempted to defuse, promises to play a role during the current AI boom that is shaping the future of the internet and cloud computing. Both companies have poured billions into the technology and used it to launch new attacks on each other's largest and most profitable businesses.
Google lawyers and policy staffers have complained that Microsoft's lobbying, which stretches back more than a decade, sparked Google's current legal trouble with the Justice Department, said people familiar with the matter.
In addition to the search case, the government sued Google earlier this year, seeking the breakup of its business brokering digital advertising across much of the internet. People involved in bringing the cases said Microsoft did little to influence the process.
Nadella's testimony shows he "probably thinks he didn't get his money's worth" from making peace with Google, said Gene Burrus, a former Microsoft lawyer who led a team focusing on competition policy.
In a statement, Microsoft's vice chair and president, Brad Smith, said the company has been both an ally and a critic of the search company.
"We respect Google as a competitor, welcome our broad collaboration on technology policy topics and sometimes disagree on issues of principle or commercial practice," Smith said. "The testimony by Microsoft executives under oath in the DOJ's trial against Google obviously falls into the last category."
A Justice Department spokeswoman declined to comment on Microsoft's role in the lawsuit.
The government's search lawsuit, filed in 2020, has roots in arguments Microsoft presented to the Federal Trade Commission and European regulators under former CEO Steve Ballmer. The FTC declined to bring charges following an investigation, while the European Commission in 2018 levied a record fine against Google.
The Justice Department's case centers around contracts making Google's search engine the default on browsers such as Apple's Safari and smartphones running the Android operating system. Google has said that Apple and other companies pick its search engine because it is the best product and that Microsoft planned poorly for the shift to mobile.
Google is in the third week of mounting its defense in a nonjury trial that kicked off in September in federal court. U.S. District Judge Amit Mehta isn't expected to make a ruling until next year.
Microsoft stands to gain the most if Mehta rules against Google and orders changes to its business. Microsoft's Bing search engine -- the second-largest, with about 3% of the market -- has struggled to gain ground on Google since Nadella unveiled a new version of the product that uses AI to hold conversations with users.
Mikhail Parakhin, Microsoft's head of advertising and web services, testified that the company has tried persuading Apple to make Bing the default search engine in Safari. Apple never appeared to seriously consider switching from Google, he said.
"If we were able to convince Apple to use Bing instead of Google as default, it would be transformational for us," Parakhin said.
Parakhin, who led development of the new version of Bing that has an AI-based chatbot, has told employees that one aim of the project is raising the cost of providing search results for Google, said a person who heard the remarks.
Google later announced a new search engine feature that uses AI to produce passages of text and answer follow-up questions, requiring greater amounts of computing power than typical results do.
Investors signaled approval of Microsoft's AI efforts last month, sending the company's stock climbing after it reported stronger-than-expected cloud sales, driven partly by growth in the division's AI services. Shares in Alphabet fell more than 10% after sales growth in its cloud division moved in the opposite direction.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa and Tom Dotan
