Since its public debut in 2022, the chatbot ChatGPT from OpenAI has quickly taken center stage in discussions about artificial intelligence and its tools, including large language models. But while use of the chatbot is growing, exactly what it is and what it does remain an enigma to many.
How much do you really know about ChatGPT, its origins and founders, and about other large language models? Take this quiz to find out.
1. What is GPT an abbreviation for?
A. Greater Programming Technology
B. Global Plaintext Tool
C. Generative Pre-trained Transformer
D. Gateway Processing Toolkit
2. Sam Altman, chief executive and co-founder of OpenAI, is a graduate of what university?
A. Stanford University
B. Harvard University
C. Carnegie Mellon
D. None of the above
3. Who is not a member of OpenAI's board?
A. Company CEO Sam Altman
B. Carnegie Mellon University Prof. Zico Kolter
C. Former Sony Entertainment President Nicole Seligman
D. Tesla CEO Elon Musk
4. Among U.S. adults, those with what level of education have the highest percentage of ChatGPT users among them?
A. High-school diploma or less
B. Some college experience
C. Postgraduate or other advanced degree
D. Only a bachelor's degree
5. What share of employed Americans say they used ChatGPT on the job as of February 2024?
A. 8%
B. 20%
C. 14%
D. 43%
6. Where did the five voices used by ChatGPT come from?
A. A drawing was held among family members of the OpenAI management team.
B. The voices are those of Sam Altman's five favorite Disney movie characters.
C. Hundreds of applications from voice and screen professionals were considered.
D. Computers randomly chose the voices from a year of YouTube clips.
7. ChatGPT said recently it has more than 200 million weekly active users. How does that compare with November 2023?
A. Double
B. Triple
C. Quadruple
D. Half
8. When did ChatGPT launch its initial model?
A. Feb. 1, 2020
B. July 14, 2022
C. Nov. 30, 2022
D. None of the above
9. What percent of people under age 30 have used ChatGPT?
A. 43%
B. 62%
C. 27%
D. 15%
10. What is a large language model?
A. A global effort using AI to create one language the whole world will speak.
B. A grammar-based computer program that helps people better understand and recognize language patterns.
C. A type of artificial-intelligence program that can recognize and generate text.
D. A prototype multilingual educational tool in beta testing for enlarging people's vocabularies.
---
ANSWERS
1. C.
Generative Pre-trained Transformer refers to a family of large language models that can understand and generate text in natural language.
2. D.
None of the above. Altman dropped out of Stanford, where he studied computer science, after two years to start Loopt, a location-sharing app. He is widely quoted as saying that playing poker with peers gave him more valuable insight than attending lectures
3. D.
Elon Musk, while an early investor, isn't a member of OpenAI's board.
4. C.
Highly educated adults are most likely to have used ChatGPT, according to Pew Research. Notably, 37% of those with a postgraduate or other advanced degree have used it, compared with 29% of those with a bachelor's degree only, 23% of people with some college experience and 12% of people with a high-school diploma or less.
5. B.
The share grew to 20% in February from 8% in March 2023, according to Pew Research.
6. C.
OpenAI worked with casting and directing professionals to narrow down more than 400 submissions to five voices. The company has since paused one of those voices, after actress Scarlett Johansson said it sounded like her own. In the movie "Her," Johansson plays an AI virtual assistant with whom a man falls in love.
7. A.
OpenAI said recently that ChatGPT has more than 200 million weekly active users, or twice as many as it had just under a year ago.
8. C.
In the short time ChatGPT has been available, AI has become a force in how business operates and consumers behave, with more use cases being introduced and competitors launching their own versions.
9. A.
That is up 10 percentage points since summer 2023, according to Pew Research.
10. C.
ChatGPT is one example of a large language model that recognizes and generates text. It provides users with near-instantaneous online support and information.
---
Cheryl Winokur Munk is a writer in New Jersey. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Cheryl Winokur Munk
