When I was growing up, my father offered me a deal that changed my life. From time to time he'd drive the family to a big bookstore a few miles from our apartment. I could buy any book I wanted using my (very limited) allowance, but he'd chip in half, or sometimes the whole price, for books he approved of. This made a big impression on me, because in general my father didn't like to spend money -- and I didn't use up my allowance lightly. The store carried a full line of books published by Dover Press, including a lot of reprints of scientific classics. My father generally approved of those, and I took advantage.
In one of those subsidized books, I found an inspiring role model. Niels Henrik Abel (1802-1829) did not live long, but he left a lasting legacy in math. I took the following passage to heart, and it has stuck with me: "It appears that if one wants to make progress in mathematics one should study the masters and not the pupils." It's good advice for physics, too, and for other fields. (Darwin, when he's not going on about barnacles, is a great read.)
There's nothing quite like the experience of interacting with great minds at their best. Apart from the technical content, they teach you how to think and how to express yourself. Let me mention a few examples, which you can take as summer reading suggestions.
There's still no better introduction to special and general relativity than Einstein's original papers. These are reprinted, in translation, in Dover's "The Principle of Relativity," which also contains the remarkable lecture by Hermann Minkowski, a teacher of Einstein's, in which he introduced the modern concept of space-time. For aspiring students of general relativity, Einstein's paper, short by modern standards, provides a clearer yet more profound introduction than modern textbooks a hundred times its length.
The early part of each of these works is deeply conceptual and broadly accessible. In those halcyon days, people took the trouble to explain why they were doing what they were doing.
Similarly, the best place to start with quantum theory is the early part of Paul Dirac's "Principles of Quantum Mechanics." Legend has it that when he lectured on quantum theory at Cambridge, Dirac recited long passages from memory. Once a student asked, "Professor Dirac, your explanation is very similar to what you wrote in your book, and I still don't understand it. Can you explain it in a different way?" Dirac thought this over and replied, "You know, when I wrote that book, I thought very hard about everything I wrote in it. There are no clearer explanations."
For a popular introduction to physics it's hard to beat Richard Feynman's "Character of Physical Law." As with the other masterworks I've mentioned, and the music of Mozart, the surface simplicity emerges from hidden depths. My own initiation into physics came through "The Feynman Lectures on Physics." These are meant for aspiring professionals, but the early chapters in each volume and the early parts of most chapters are relatively easy and nonmathematical.
Recently I had a rewarding experience rereading another Dover book by a master: "An Introduction to Information Theory," by John Pierce. Together with Claude Shannon's original papers, it's the best introduction to that subject. (Pierce prepares you for Shannon.) It's an old book by now, but that adds to the interest. It's fun to find that many recent developments in artificial intelligence were anticipated and that some apparently promising directions have not been pursued -- yet.
Let me close with a striking insight from Pierce about the human condition: "We will never again understand nature as well as Greek philosophers did. A general explanation of common phenomena in terms of a few all-embracing principles no longer satisfies us. We know too much."
Eating directly from the Tree of Knowledge can reduce one's taste for lesser stuff. Still, I recommend it.

Credit: By Frank Wilczek
