General Motors Co. is working with U.K.-based software maker VocalIQ Ltd. to develop an advanced voice-control system for vehicles that would allow spoken commands to access navigation and entertainment systems and accessories.
The work is being overseen by GM's Advanced Technical Center in Israel, which focuses on research and development of autonomous vehicles, robotics and human-machine interface. The two companies are negotiating a contract, according to two people familiar with the process, although they have been cooperating for several months.
Spun-out in 2011 from the University of Cambridge's Dialogue Systems Group, VocalIQ recently raised GBP 750,000 ($1.3 million) in funding from investors led by Amadeus Capital Partners. VocalIQ, which is still based in Cambridge, develops machine learning software to enable voice control of devices.
GM and VocalIQ have been working on a prototype for a dialogue management system that could be integrated into dashboard navigation systems, the people said. The development would allow drivers to turn on wipers, adjust the volume of its entertainment system, or request directions by spoken commands.
GM now offers several 2014 models with Apple Inc.'s Siri Eyes Free voice system tied to its Chevrolet MyLink infotainment system.
Richard Anton of Amadeus Capital Partners said VocalIQ's technology was a step beyond the currently available voice-recognition products.
"The technology enables the machine to learn how people say different things," he said.
VocalIQ Chief Executive Blaise Thomson said: "Our plan is to build a demonstrator application that could be used in automotive and show that the performance really is better using our approach."
Gil Golan, director of the GM technical center in Israel, said the company has been working with VocalIQ's chairman, an expert in spoken language processing, for almost three years and with VocalIQ itself over the past year.
"The dialogue system developed by VocalIQ can be applied to many different industries," Mr. Golan said.
The dialogue-management system that VocalIQ develops is a software component that sits on top of speech-recognition systems, like those developed by Nuance Communications Inc. and Google Inc.
"The recent launch of OnStar 4G/LTE systems in GM models in North America means that we now have the bandwidth necessary to put the dialogue manager either in the cloud or in the car itself and we are considering both options. Implementation via the cloud can mean a shorter time to market. Basically, any input that is currently being done via a button can be done through voice potentially," Mr. Golan said.
Credit: By Amir Mizroch and Orr Hirschauge
