Lux Capital has led a $51 million venture-capital financing in Enveda Biosciences Inc., a biotechnology startup led by an entrepreneur who helped build another successful life-sciences company in Lux's portfolio.
Enveda founder and Chief Executive Viswa Colluru previously was an early employee of Recursion Pharmaceuticals Inc., a company Lux first backed during its 2016 first, or Series A, round of financing. Recursion went public in April and now has a market capitalization of $6.3 billion.
Recursion, where Dr. Colluru was a scientist and senior product manager, has used biological lab research and tools such as machine learning to build a pipeline of potential drugs for inherited diseases, cancer, neuroinflammation and other conditions. Dr. Colluru left Recursion in early 2019 to launch Boulder, Colo.-based Enveda, which is using machine learning and other technologies to develop medicines based on compounds found in nature.
Compounds extracted from plants and other natural sources have been the source of many drugs, including statins used to lower cholesterol. But the search for natural compounds with medicinal value has been a laborious process that relied a good deal on serendipity, said Zavain Dar, a partner with Lux.
As a result, drug companies have come to rely more on screening libraries of synthesized compounds to discover new medicines. Nature has a much-wider variety of compounds than what scientists have created in labs, but companies haven't had a way to pinpoint the most-promising molecules quickly and on a large scale, according to Dr. Colluru. "We're inspired by the fact that nature is the greatest source of products we know," he said. But "more than 95% of it is a complete chemical mystery."
Enveda developed what it calls a search engine for natural compounds that could be developed into medications. Its platform combines machine learning with metabolomics, the study of chemical compounds organisms produce, to uncover molecules Enveda can fashion into disease treatments.
Credit: By Brian Gormley
