Facebook Messenger is getting down to business.
At its annual F8 developer conference in San Francisco this week, Facebook Inc. will feature enhanced tools for commerce using its Messenger app, according to people familiar with the matter.
The new offerings will use so-called chatbot technology to help users order goods and services through the app, the people said.
This would be the second consecutive year Facebook has highlighted Messenger at F8, a sign of messaging's growing prominence inside the company.
Last year, Facebook opened Messenger to outside developers, including makers of photo- and video-editing apps, and businesses such as Everlane clothing retailer and e-commerce company Zulily, which use the app to field customer questions and provide shipping updates.
Facebook has cited 1-800-Flowers.com Inc., which sells and delivers flowers and food baskets, as a potential partner for the new Messenger services, according to a person familiar with the conversations. Under one scenario, 1-800-Flowers could contact past customers using Messenger about upcoming holidays such as Mother's Day and highlight promotions.
A 1-800-Flowers spokeswoman declined to comment. Tech news site The Information earlier reported the potential tie-up.
Separately, Facebook is expected to reveal more about its push into live video. Facebook recently introduced changes to get more users to create and stream live video, including a feature that would allow users to stream live video to select people such as family, instead of all followers.
Facebook didn't respond to requests for comment.
During the past year, Messenger has intensified efforts to connect its 900 million users with businesses. Users can tap the app to hail rides on Uber Technologies Inc. and Lyft Inc. In late March, Dutch airline KLM said it would provide booking confirmations, flight updates and boarding passes through Messenger.
The services, however, have attracted few users so far, because Americans and Europeans tend to use messaging apps for communication rather than commerce. In China, by contrast, Tencent Holdings Ltd.'s WeChat is hugely popular as a hub for commerce and entertainment.
Chatbots, software programs that answer questions inside a messaging app, could help Messenger lure businesses to the platform, analysts and developers say.
"For businesses this will be actually easier to staff," said Jeff Lawson, CEO of Twilio, which helps apps such as Uber add messaging to their services.
In a note Friday, Macquarie Securities analyst Ben Schachter suggested Facebook may open a "bot store" for outside developers.
Bots are getting better at mimicking human conversation, but the technology remains buggy. Microsoft Corp. recently pulled the plug on a chatbot, Tay, after users taught it to spew anti-Semitic posts. The incident "probably did a great disservice to conversational commerce," Mr. Lawson said.
Bots are a part of Facebook's broader investments in artificial intelligence.
It is developing M, a virtual assistant that is expected to rival Apple Inc.'s Siri, Alphabet Inc.'s Google Now, Microsoft's Cortana and Amazon.com Inc.'s Alexa. Facebook says M can complete tasks for users, including making travel arrangements and booking appointments.
Facebook is laying the groundwork for Messenger to generate revenue. Some users are starting to see ads for Uber and Lyft within the app. Evercore ISI analyst Ken Sena says eventually Messenger and Facebook's second texting app, WhatsApp, could generate $4 billion in annual revenue.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman
