David Gelernter writes that "no computer will ever feel anything," going on to assert that artificial intelligence one day could construct a simulated mind down to the last detail that operates in the world as a human would "despite being unconscious" ("Machines That Will Think and Feel," Review, March 19). A nuanced functional artificial mind would hold the same kinds of beliefs that a human does.
Humans believe that they have consciousness, and presumably so would the AI creation. We wouldn't be able to convince such a creation that it wasn't consciously experiencing color, or pain or many other states its operations would functionally instantiate.
Many philosophers and cognitive scientists reject that consciousness is an ineffable substance separate from beliefs, associations and other seemingly less mysterious mental phenomena. The machine's various and subtle convictions in its own consciousness, according to this school of thought, amount to its genuinely having experience. Once AI researchers can integrate creative and emotional thoughts with problem-solving, and their designs more fully emulate human functioning, the resulting technology won't necessarily lack feeling.
Francis Fallon
Jamaica, N.Y.
---
What Prof. Gelernter doesn't raise is the problem that has haunted philosophy since Plato gave us his "Republic," a utopia directed by a council of guardians. Such persons don't exist, but should, if only to control the programmers of tomorrow's AI world. The question remains: Who guards the guardians?
Jascha Kessler
Santa Monica, Calif.
---
Given the intricacies of the human mind, will and emotions, and the complexities (some might say impossibilities) of recreating these in AI, it seems scientists would be drawn to a theory other than evolution regarding man's origins. At some point, one would think a "creator" as opposed to a "crapshoot" would be a logical conclusion.
John F. Thomas
Wyoming, Mich.
---
The world has little to fear from robots and artificial intelligence. I'm sure that years from now they'll be using all their resources to try to figure out how to get a printer to work on a local network.
David Brown
Sun City Center, Fla.
