LULULEMON ATHLETICA
LULU +4.8%
Lululemon's stock was back in fashion this week. The athletic-apparel company on Wednesday said its revenue rose last quarter, boosted by its presence in China. Lululemon also announced a $1 billion increase to its share-buyback program, the second increase in six months. Before its latest earnings results, Lululemon's shares were down roughly 40% year-to-date, weighed down by fears of slowing growth in the core Americas market and Chief Product Officer Sun Choe's resignation last month. Lululemon has been expanding its horizons beyond yoga wear into women's footwear and other areas. Lululemon shares gained 4.8% Thursday.
SPOTIFY TECHNOLOGY
SPOT +5.7%
Spotify said it would raise prices for the second time in a year. Starting next month, Spotify Premium subscribers on the audio streaming platform will have to pay $11.99 a month, up from $10.99. The latest price hike comes as the company struggles to post consistent profits, despite being the most popular music streamer by subscriber count. This increase is expected to help cover the cost of Spotify's push into audiobooks. Spotify shares jumped 5.7% Monday.
NVIDIA
NVDA +5.2%
Nvidia broke into the $3 trillion club. The chip maker ended Wednesday with a market value of more than $3 trillion, becoming the third U.S. company to hit that milestone. Apple became the first $3 trillion company last year, and Microsoft became the second earlier this year. Overwhelming demand for its artificial-intelligence chips has powered Nvidia's rise. Its stock price has more than doubled so far this year after more than tripling in 2023. Nvidia shares advanced 5.2% Wednesday.
GAMESTOP
GME -39%
The videogame retailer on Friday unexpectedly released first-quarter earnings and announced a stock sale, saying it narrowed its loss while sales dropped more than 29%. The recent re-emergence of Keith Gill, the headband-wearing investor known as "Roaring Kitty," has reignited interest in the stock. GameStop shares have been volatile, gaining 19% Wednesday and 47% Thursday. GameStop shares slid 39% Friday.
DOLLAR TREE
DLTR -4.9%
Discount retailer Dollar Tree is exploring a potential sale or spinoff of Family Dollar, the struggling chain it bought in 2015. Dollar Tree also said it expects to close an extra 150 stores this fiscal year, and detailed its losses tied to the destruction of a distribution center. Earlier this year, the company said it would close nearly 1,000 Family Dollar stores over several years, while it has plans to open hundreds more Dollar Tree locations. Dollar Tree shares fell 4.9% Wednesday.
J.M. SMUCKER
SJM +4.6%
The maker of Folgers coffee and Meow Mix on Thursday beat quarterly earnings expectations. The company's sales got a boost from strong growth for its frozen Uncrustables sandwiches, while higher prices for products like Jif peanut butter were offset by volume declines. Smucker's better-than-expected earnings are a bright spot amid an extended slump for food makers, as consumers cut spending amid inflation. Smucker shares gained 4.6% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
