Shortly after the release of OpenAI's ChatGPT in November, Jeff Maggioncalda, the CEO of online education company Coursera Inc., jumped into the technology to see if it could save him time.
He began using the chatbot to draft company letters and notes, and asked his executive assistant to try the same for drafting replies to his inbound emails. She prompts ChatGPT based on how she thinks he would respond, and he edits the answers it generates before sending.
"I spend way more time thinking and way less time writing," Mr. Maggioncalda said. "I don't want to be the one who doesn't use it because someone who is using it is going to have a lot of advantages."
Around the world, business people across industries including architecture, software and entertainment are testing out tech's new frontier: so-called generative AI programs that produce writing, images and art much like humans do.
In the past, AI was hidden within layers of back-end infrastructure for streamlining logistics or automating content moderation. Now, applications like ChatGPT and the image-generator Midjourney have placed the technology directly into the hands of individuals and small businesses who are using the tools to see if they can automate laborious tasks or speed up creative processes. Some are driven by the thrill of being able to do things not previously possible; others by an existential push to master the nascent technology so they don't fall behind.
The groundswell of experimentation has put larger corporations on notice that such tools could soon shake up their industries. From Netflix Inc. to oil-and-gas producer Devon Energy Corp., some companies have started taking tentative steps with generative AI.
AI experts caution, however, that such tools should only be used to support people who are already experts in their domain. Generative AI has been shown to spew disturbing content and misinformation, while other concerns have surfaced over intellectual property theft and privacy.
"The purpose that it is serving is not to inform you about things you don't know. It's really a tool for you to be able to do what you do better," said Margaret Mitchell, chief ethics scientist at AI research startup Hugging Face.
Telmo Gomes, the co-founder and IT director of LiveSense, which is based in Melbourne, Australia, said ChatGPT saves him significant time on research. After his company was hired to develop a system that can detect vaping in public places, he spent hours calling people and googling to determine which sensors worked best. Information was limited; other companies selling vaping detection solutions didn't disclose what they were using.
Then he typed the question into ChatGPT. Within a few seconds, it spat back several answers, including ones that exactly mirrored the solutions he had settled on from his research. It also added a note of caution to consider the ethics of monitoring people's behaviors.
"It completely blew my mind," Mr. Gomes said. "We're a small company. It will let us do more with less."
Nidhi Hegde, a designer at Wimberly Allison Tong & Goo, an architecture firm specializing in luxury hotels, said she concluded generative AI would transform her profession when a client sent her team early concept sketches of the building they wanted, which they had created with Midjourney.
Midjourney, which launched in July, takes a range of prompts from text to three-dimensional forms and gives users a high degree of control to edit its generated images.
The sketches that the client provided are traditionally the architect's job, but Ms. Hegde embraced the process. She fed the client's images back into Midjourney and asked the program to create several new variations with different structures while keeping a similar design. The clients loved the final version, she said.
"The role of the architect really, really changes," she said. "Within the industry, we really have to rethink what we're doing as a service."
Ms. Hegde now regularly uses Midjourney and dedicates the first half-day of each project to what she calls "the failure stage." Once, she fed Midjourney an image of a rock and asked it to "make the rock gold." It generated a glittering gold torso of Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson.
At the Oklahoma headquarters of driller Devon Energy, leadership grew excited about ChatGPT after a group of technicians showed that they could use the tool to test their computer code, said Trey Lowe, the company's chief technology officer. The group manages the firm's automation system, which controls equipment in oil fields.
Separately, engineers and scientists have started using the tool to summarize large technical documents, he said. The experiments persuaded the company to pay close attention to how the technology develops.
Many in white-collar and creative professions fear that once generative AI advances enough, it will replace them the way robots have replaced factory jobs.
In February, Netflix faced backlash on Twitter after saying it used generative AI to create the background images in a short anime film posted on YouTube. Critics said the move threatened to take opportunities away from human artists.
Taiki Sakurai, Netflix's director of anime, said the company is committed to supporting human talent.
---
Sarah Krouse and Alexandra Bruell contributed to this article.
Credit: By Karen Hao, Chip Cutter and Benoit Morenne
