AI company Abnormal Security raised $250 million in Series D financing, its second bumper funding round in two years as it prepares for a potential initial public offering next year.
The round was led by venture-capital firm Wellington Management, a new backer, with participation from existing investors Greylock Partners, Menlo Ventures, Insight Partners and security company CrowdStrike's Falcon fund.
Abnormal uses artificial intelligence to analyze company email and determine the behavioral characteristics of users, which could indicate when an account is compromised by hackers. This includes scanning attachments for malware and understanding when accounts act erratically, such as making changes to their usual correspondents and a difference in tone or language. The tools look for telltale signs of compromise, such as urgent requests for payment or changes to financial information.
Since it raised $210 million in a May 2022 Series C round, the company grew rapidly, doubling its employee base, said Evan Reiser, chief executive and co-founder. It counts around 17% of the Fortune 500 as customers, he said.
The company is capitalizing on a renewed focus on email security because of the emergence of generative AI platforms such as OpenAI's ChatGPT, which experts say allows criminals to produce increasingly sophisticated social-engineering campaigns at scale. Such campaigns aim to fool users into thinking they are talking to a trusted contact, to gain access to confidential information, install malware as a beachhead into systems or other nefarious goals. News Corp, owner of The Wall Street Journal, has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI.
"If you're a professional phisher or social engineer, generative AI is probably the best tool you have ever received in your life," Reiser said.
While many popular platforms, including ChatGPT, have safeguards built in to guard against malicious use, the underlying technology of generative AI, known as a large language model, is widely available.
Criminals can use these models, which can take direction from simple prompts to generate reams of personalized text in near-perfect English and combine them with web-scraping tools to generate highly convincing, personalized messages in seconds. Before generative AI, advanced social-engineering campaigns often took weeks or months to build.
These tailored attacks can sidestep traditional security protections, said Saam Motamedi, a partner at Greylock.
"A lot of security, historically, is very much based on threat intelligence. That works well in certain contexts, but it doesn't work when I'm personalizing an attack against you, when it's a very unique social-engineering attack," Motamedi said.
The scale at which such attacks can be launched through automation means human analysts, already swamped with alerts from their cybersecurity systems, are unlikely to keep up as the technology develops and proliferates, said Rob Mazzoni, the sector lead for technology at Wellington.
"The old approach just doesn't work anymore," he said.
Abnormal's Reiser said the company plans to use the cash infusion to expand its sales reach into regions such as Asia-Pacific, specifically Japan, and to continue the lengthy authorization process required to become a supplier to the U.S. government.
Credit: By James Rundle
