Google reported its first drop in advertising revenue since the beginning of the pandemic, as a slowdown in online marketing continues to weigh on the search giant's business.
Alphabet Inc., Google's parent company, posted $59 billion in advertising revenue for the fourth quarter, a decrease of 3.6% from the same period in 2021. Those results marked the second time ad sales fell since Google became a publicly traded company in 2004.
Google is navigating one of the most challenging environments for its core advertising business in recent memory. While the company's fortunes soared during an uptick in digital advertising in 2021, it has recently faced pressures from a worsening economy and new competitive forces in fields such as artificial intelligence.
Chief Executive Sundar Pichai said Google would make one of its most powerful AI programs, LaMDA, or Language Model for Dialogue Applications, available as part of a broader rollout of the company's models to the public in the coming months.
Google will also introduce the models as a companion to the company's search engine, Mr. Pichai said.
"AI is the most profound technology we are working on today," Mr. Pichai said on an earnings call. "Our talented researchers, infrastructure and technology make us extremely well-positioned as AI reaches an inflection point."
New challengers such as OpenAI, creator of the popular chatbot ChatGPT, and the research company's main backer, Microsoft Corp., have recently spurred Google to move faster in turning AI advances into consumer products.
"You will see us be bold, put things out, get feedback and make things better," Mr. Pichai said.
Alphabet said it will begin reporting the artificial-intelligence unit DeepMind as part of the company's corporate costs beginning this month. DeepMind previously reported with Other Bets, a collection of high-tech companies that operate separately from Google under the Alphabet umbrella.
The change will reflect DeepMind's "increasing collaboration with Google Services, Google Cloud, and Other Bets," Alphabet said.
Advertising revenue fell short of Wall Street's expectations of $60.4 billion in the quarter, according to the consensus estimate from analysts surveyed by FactSet.
The only previous drop in ad revenue was in the second quarter of 2020, as the pandemic halted spending from some of Google's biggest customers in areas such as travel and consumer products.
Alphabet reported $76 billion of revenue overall for the fourth quarter, a slight increase from the same period in 2021. Net income fell 34% to $13.6 billion, coming in below analyst expectations.
Alphabet's shares fell more than 5% Thursday in after-hours trading following the results before regaining some ground. They closed at $108.80, up 7.3%, in regular trading.
Google's video platform, YouTube, recorded a second straight quarter of declining revenue for the three months through Dec. 31, with sales retreating 7.8% from the year-earlier period to $8 billion.
Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. posted its third straight quarter of declining revenue on Wednesday, and the social-media company Snap Inc. warned on Tuesday that sales in the current quarter would likely drop from the same period last year.
Some analysts said Google would still be well positioned if advertising spending picked up again. The company's search engine typically attracts businesses hoping to directly measure the performance of marketing campaigns, rather than so-called brand advertisers that are quicker to pull back in times of uncertainty.
"Sentiment is as negative as we've seen on Google, though we believe much of the new fears are overblown," Bernstein analysts wrote in a research note last month.
Alphabet said last month it would lay off about 12,000 workers, or 6% of its workforce, in response to a weakening economy. Mr. Pichai said during a companywide meeting that top executives would take cuts to their bonuses.
"Over the past two years we've seen periods of dramatic growth," Mr. Pichai wrote in a message to employees announcing the layoffs. "To match and fuel that growth, we hired for a different economic reality than the one we face today."
Google said on Thursday it expects $1.9 billion to $2.3 billion in employee severance and related charges, most of which will be recognized in the first quarter. It also expects $500 million in costs as it exited office space.
Employees in the 1,300-member Alphabet Workers Union planned to protest the layoffs outside Google's New York offices on Thursday, according to an announcement.
Alphabet reported 190,234 employees at the end of the fourth quarter, before the layoffs.
Google also faces a new antitrust lawsuit from the Justice Department seeking a breakup of its business brokering advertising around the internet. The company is fighting the case and said the lawsuit "attempts to pick winners and losers in the highly competitive advertising-technology sector."
Google's Network business, which includes the areas targeted by the Justice Department, reported an 8.9% drop in revenue to $8.5 billion during the fourth quarter, its second straight year-over-year decline.
The Google Cloud business reported $7.3 billion of revenue for the quarter, an increase of 32% from the same period in 2021. That marked a slowdown in growth from the previous quarter, when sales rose 38%, a closely watched metric as Google tries to catch up to Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft in the cloud-computing sector.
(See related article: "iPhone maker's three-year streak of revenue, profit rises ends amid China Covid disruptions" -- WSJ Feb. 3, 2023)
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
