While controversies over Iran and North Korea have dominated the recent news, most Americans remain focused on the economy, where declining unemployment and faster growth have improved President Trump's standing. But can the U.S. economy return to the 3% annual increases in gross domestic product witnessed during the postwar years? This question was the subject of last week's Wall Street Journal debate among four opinion contributors -- Mary Anastasia O'Grady, Arthur Laffer, Jason Furman and me.
We agreed on the normative proposition that the U.S. would benefit from faster economic growth. More upward mobility expands the American dream and reduces competition over scarce opportunities. Growth increases government revenue, taking the edge off tough choices between guns and butter, and between the present and the future.
We also agreed on the basic framework for analyzing growth. If economic production is determined by the number of hours worked times output per hour, then we can increase long-run growth through a larger labor force, higher productivity, or both.
And finally, we agreed that there was room to raise the aggregate level of work in our society. Consider the basic facts. This April, the official employment rate was 3.9% -- the same level as in April 2000. But this apparent similarity masks a consequential change. Over those 18 years, labor-force participation among Americans of prime working age (25 to 64 years) dropped by 2.5 percentage points. In the same period, labor-force participation for U.S. women 25 to 64 fell from eighth to 26th among nations in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. For men, the ranking dropped from eighth to 29th. American men experienced the largest decline of any OECD country, and American women were the only female cohort in the entire OECD whose workforce participation fell.
These international comparisons strongly suggest that better policies could make a difference. We need to make it easier for formerly incarcerated men to rejoin the workforce, for women to balance the demands of work in the home and in the market, and for older Americans to continue working well past what previous generations considered retirement age. We need to attack substance abuse -- especially opioids -- which thwarts too many men and women on the threshold of the workforce. And where there is solid evidence that poorly designed social supports discourage work, we should restructure them.
Although these changes would make a difference, they can do nothing to alter the reality that America is aging rapidly. Two thousand was the last year in which the entire baby-boom generation was of prime working age, and 2019 will be the first year in which none of it is. During the last two decades of the 20th century, the U.S. workforce expanded at an annual rate of about 1.5%. During the next two decades, it will expand at an estimated 0.5% annually. By itself, this slowing growth of the workforce will be enough to knock a full percentage point off annual economic growth. Productivity improvements that once yielded 3% growth will now yield only 2%.
There is no sign of a new baby boom on the horizon. On the contrary, the birthrate reached an all-time low in 2017, continuing six decades of decline. So there is only one way to boost the growth rate of the workforce: expand dramatically the number of working-age immigrants admitted each year. If the U.S. prioritized working-age entrants the way most other advanced countries do, it would increase annual labor-force growth by up to 0.3% without increasing the aggregate level of immigration.
I've said little about the other key component of economic growth -- productivity -- because most economists regard it as unpredictable. Between 1950 and 1973, it grew at 2.4% annually before collapsing to just 0.7% from 1974-81. It accelerated to 1.7% between 1982 and 1990, and to 2% from 1991-2001. But then, just when analysts began to hail a new golden age of information technology, productivity growth fell to 1.4% in 2002-07, and to 0.9% during the past decade.
We understand the basics of productivity -- investment in the workforce, plant and equipment, research and development, and infrastructure, plus an environment that encourages innovation. But the pace at which new technologies and processes are integrated into the workplace remains mysterious. If a new generation of robotics and artificial intelligence yields a productivity boom, we could return to the growth of the postwar years. But we don't know enough to bet on it.

Credit: By William A. Galston
