TaskRabbit chief executive Stacy Brown-Philpot still remembers running home one day to escape a group of grade-school bullies, only to have her grandmother lock her out of the house. "She said, 'You're going to have to get through this yourself,' " Ms. Brown-Philpot says. "And I had to stand up for myself and fight."
Ms. Brown-Philpot, now 41, lost that fight with a punch in the face, but she learned a valuable lesson. "You have to learn to get through it yourself, because there are going to be times in your life when there's going to be no one else around but you," she says.
Ms. Brown-Philpot credits the lessons of her childhood, growing up in a tough neighborhood in Detroit, with helping her to succeed. In the past six months, she has expanded TaskRabbit, an on-demand chore service, to 21 new locations, bringing its presence to a total of 39 U.S. cities (plus London). This spring, she confirmed reports that the company is exploring a potential sale after receiving unsolicited interest from a buyer.
Through the TaskRabbit app, users can choose a task they want done, such as assembling furniture, moving, delivering packages or cleaning. Users then get a list of local "taskers," people who are willing to do the job and have been vetted by the company, along with their hourly rate. The company takes a 30% cut of each completed task.
In the next few months, Ms. Brown-Philpot says, the company will launch a series of new partnerships, adding to its recent collaborations with IKEA and Amazon. Since it was founded in 2008, the company has raised about $38 million. Documents related to a 2015 financing round put the company's value at around $50 million. A company spokesman says that the firm is "very close to overall profitability."
Outside of TaskRabbit, Ms. Brown-Philpot joined the board of the department-store retailer Nordstrom in May and has been on the board of Hewlett-Packard since 2015.
She grew up the child of a single mother who was an insurance-claims adjuster. After graduating from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, she earned her M.B.A. from the Stanford Graduate School of Business and then eventually found a job in sales at Google.
In 2009, she moved from the San Francisco Bay Area to Hyderabad, India, to become senior director of Google's online and sales operations in the country. It was a difficult decision. She and her husband had been thinking about starting a family when she got the offer. At first, she turned it down, but then her husband, who also works in technology, convinced her to take the job.
A year later, she returned to the Bay Area and soon had her first child. (She and her husband now have two daughters, ages 6 and 2.) She ran Google's global consumer operations before becoming an entrepreneur in residence there. She joined TaskRabbit as its chief operations officer in 2013 and became CEO in 2016.
Today, in an industry notoriously lacking in women and minorities, Ms. Brown-Philpot is one of the few black women running a sizable technology company. She is working to increase diversity at her own firm. TaskRabbit works with Code2040, a nonprofit aimed at providing minorities with training, experience and internships at tech companies. She also expects recruiters to present her with a diverse list of candidates, especially for senior roles. Her goal is to raise the percentage of African-American employees at her company from its current 12% to 13% by the end of the year.
"The big problem is that a lot of Americans, whether they are underrepresented minorities or from rural areas, do not know about career opportunities in the tech industry because they may not have had role models who are part of this field or learned about STEM in school," she says. "One goal for Silicon Valley must be to redouble our collective efforts to make sure people of all backgrounds are aware of opportunities in tech."
When she's not at TaskRabbit, Ms. Brown-Philpot spends time with her family and enjoys exercising. Last month, she ran a half-marathon in San Francisco. She was so anxious that she could barely sleep the night before. "I've not always had as much confidence as I have now," she says, but "there are days . . . even now, where I'm not sure [of myself]."
Ms. Brown-Philpot is looking to artificial intelligence to expand her company's range. She thinks that people will someday be able to talk to their devices to set up tasks. And appliances such as refrigerators could automatically signal to a tasker that, say, a filter needs changing.
Employees must act as a tasker every few months. That includes Ms. Brown-Philpot, though she's kept her company title hidden. One user hired her to help clean his apartment before he moved out, and asked her, "Why do you task?" She said, "Because I love making people happy. And because I just want you to get your security deposit back."

Credit: By Alexandra Wolfe
