He used to be boss of a tech giant. Now he's studying fish and rice.
After he appeared to fall out of favor with China's leadership following a 2020 speech he gave that criticized financial regulations, Jack Ma, co-founder of Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., generally has kept a low profile.
Outside the public eye, the 58-year-old multibillionaire, who stepped down as Alibaba's executive chairman in 2019, has been quietly building a life that includes earnest investigation of the world's food problems, in an echo of Microsoft Corp. co-founder Bill Gates's work on global health.
During the past year, Mr. Ma visited a Japanese lab specializing in farmed tuna and a Dutch university to learn about sustainable food production.
This week, Mr. Ma returned to Alibaba's headquarters city of Hangzhou. On Tuesday, after a long-running regulatory push by Beijing aimed at reining in China's tech companies, Alibaba said it planned to split itself into six independently run companies. Mr. Ma didn't respond to requests to comment sent through the Jack Ma Foundation and Alibaba.
The absence of the attention-loving executive from public events sparked comment from the likes of Tesla Inc.'s Elon Musk, who wondered aloud in September 2021, "Where is Jack Ma?"
But Mr. Ma never completely disappeared. He was spotted in China several times in 2021, and on May 10, 2022, he attended an internal meeting at Alibaba in Hangzhou, according to employees who saw him and a state media report.
That month was the last time Mr. Ma's presence in mainland China was confirmed until Monday, when he showed up again in Hangzhou and visited a school to discuss topics such as artificial intelligence with teachers, according to the school.
His reappearance comes as Beijing grapples with a battered economy and seeks to revive entrepreneurs' confidence following years of regulatory curbs and Covid-19 restrictions.
During his absence from China, Mr. Ma spent considerable time in Japan, said people who know him. Despite strained diplomatic ties with Beijing, the country has become a popular destination for wealthy Chinese who find their own country less hospitable.
A local magazine, Friday, reported he was living part of the time at a house in Hakone, a venerable hot-springs resort about 50 miles from Tokyo. An employee of a sushi shop nearby told The Wall Street Journal that an assistant to the mogul often came by to pick up takeout, but the employee said the shop hasn't had orders from him recently.
Mr. Ma also traveled extensively during this period, often to pursue his interests in food and related fields, according to people who know him.
In a 2017 speech, Mr. Ma said technologies such as cloud computing and big data could help farmers in China. He called modernizing agriculture "a bright spot and important growth pillar for China's economic development," and in a 2019 appearance at the World Economic Forum, he said that if he could start a new business, he would go into farming.
This past July 2, he visited Wageningen University & Research in the Netherlands. The university said Mr. Ma "would like to fully devote his time and efforts to agriculture and food sustainability.
A few months later on Oct. 17, he toured Kindai University's Aquaculture Research Institute in Japan's Wakayama prefecture next to Osaka, according to a university official and a photo of the event. The university's researchers are noted for having figured out how to farm the unruly bluefin tuna, a step toward creating a stable supply of the fish beloved by sushi fans.
Mr. Ma was part of a delegation of businesspeople visiting and he didn't identify himself, the university official said. Days later, staffers saw a photo of the delegation and realized they might have had a famous visitor. "So we went through the names signed by the visitors, and his name was there," the official said.
Credit: By Yang Jie, Raffaele Huang and Jing Yang
