The New York Times has hired an editorial director of artificial-intelligence initiatives, signaling a significant commitment to the new technology as major news organizations explore its potential capabilities and risks.
The Times has tapped Quartz co-founder Zach Seward to work with newsroom leadership in establishing principles for "how we do and do not use generative A.I.," Executive Editor Joe Kahn and Deputy Managing Editor Sam Dolnick said in a note to staff Tuesday morning.
"He shares our firm belief that Times journalism will always be reported, written and edited by our expert journalists," the note said of Seward. He is expected to build a small team to experiment with AI tools and prototype ideas, and will help design AI training programs for journalists.
The hire comes as news organizations cautiously explore generative-AI tools to assist in creating news content.
The technology has the potential to help with a range of tasks that could make newsrooms more efficient, from automating publishing to drafting headlines or entire articles.
Many journalists are wary that AI tools could compromise quality, leading to factual mistakes and creating risks that they will reuse material already published elsewhere. Others are worried about the impact on jobs, reflecting workers' concerns across many other sectors of the economy.
The technology also raises business questions. AI tools from companies including OpenAI, Microsoft and Google are trained on vast amounts of internet data, including news articles. Many news outlets oppose the use of their content in training AI models without compensation.
The Times has already begun allowing newsroom staff to apply for the opportunity to experiment with AI tools, according to a spokesman. At one meeting in August, around 50 senior newsroom employees discussed ways the paper could use the technology to make existing work more efficient, including generating headline ideas or parsing data, according to people familiar with the matter.
Already, some publishers who have embraced AI technology for producing articles have come under fire for factual errors.
Gannett's Columbus Dispatch, for example, ran an AI-generated article about a high school soccer game that left blanks where the winning teams' mascots belonged. The Dispatch updated the article with a note saying it had corrected "errors in coding, programming or style."
Gannett said it paused the experiment in all local markets where such stories were published and "will continue to evaluate vendors as we refine processes to ensure all the news and information we provide meets the highest journalistic standards."
CNET earlier this year suspended a test that used AI to assist in generating articles after discovering errors. "Like other advice brands, we are continuously assessing and reviewing AI tools and technology," the company said. "CNET will continue to update our policy page as we pursue testing and learning."
At Quartz, Seward has served as chief product officer, editor in chief and CEO. He also has worked at The Wall Street Journal.
Credit: By Alexandra Bruell
