Cupertino, Calif. -- If I had a dollar for every time an executive said "Apple Intelligence" at its developer's conference on Monday, I'd have a steak dinner with all the trimmings. (So, yes, about 60 times.)
After nearly two years of sitting out the generative-artificial-intelligence frenzy, Apple jumped in the deep end. The company is injecting AI tools throughout coming versions of its biggest platforms: iOS 18, iPadOS 18 and MacOS Sequoia. There's an improved Siri you can even text with. There's a new partnership with OpenAI that will bring ChatGPT into Apple apps. There are ways to generate images and emojis on the fly. Apple says we'll start seeing features this fall, but some of the more ambitious ones might not debut until 2025.
So what was Apple's strategy with all these updates? To show AI integrated into the apps and products you already use. And it put a big emphasis on privacy and processing on the device when possible.
"We think AI's role is not to replace our users but to empower them," said Craig Federighi, Apple's senior vice president of software engineering, after the event. "It needs to be intuitive. But it also needs to be informed by your personal context."
Yes, Apple can do far more than any free-standing chatbot when it comes to answering questions about our lives. Our photos, notes and messages -- even notifications -- could be aided by some good AI tools.
As I sat through Apple's event and talked with executives on Monday, my big thought was: Are these really cutting-edge, useful tools? Or is Apple just stuffing in AI to catch up to front-runners Microsoft and Google, and sell us more iPhones to boot? Spoiler: It's a bit of both. I'll know more when I can actually test it. For now, we have to go on Apple's presentation and tightly controlled demos.
A brand new Siri
Since Siri's birth in 2011, Apple's been promising "a humble, intelligent, personal assistant that goes everywhere with you and can do things for you, just by you asking."
Yeeaaah. That's not exactly how things worked out. Yet maybe now is Siri's moment. Apple envisions Siri as your AI personal assistant, who you can ask anything about your private info -- or public info out in the world.
Similar to other chatbots, you can now text with Siri. But unlike other chatbots, Siri has access to all your Apple stuff. When all of the promised updates arrive, it will be able to see what's on your screen and work across apps. "Add this address to his contact card." "Text yesterday's picnic photos to my mom." Things like this make total sense to a human but up until now were out of Siri's reach.
In one demo, Apple showed Siri helping to fill out a PDF form. The assistant was able to find a photo of the user's driver's license, extract the number and type it into the form. In another, Siri was able to search across Messages and Mail for a recipe sent by a friend.
The thing that really elevates Siri is its new friend, ChatGPT. When you ask Siri to do some things it doesn't know how to -- say, come up with dinner ideas based on your recent grocery haul -- it asks permission to check with an integrated version of OpenAI's bot.
You don't have to be a ChatGPT Plus subscriber. If you have an account, you can connect to it and access the paid extras. Federighi said Apple plans to let users choose their preferred large-language models later.
My AI-nalysis: If Apple can pull off what it showed and convince people that Siri is no longer painfully stupid, it might be a tech miracle. That's a big if. The company has a decadelong history of underwhelming Siri improvements.
Writing tools
What do I use generative AI for every day? Writing. No, not my columns. (You could tell!) I use it to sum up articles and reports, draft emails and more.
Apple is adding summarization, rewriting and proofreading to Notes, Mail, Pages and more. The integrated writing tools will suggest responses and different tones for messages and emails. While most of that is done using Apple's AI, more creative writing (say, "A poem about Apple's iPhone") will be farmed out to ChatGPT. Again, it will ask your permission before sending the prompt.
My AI-nalysis: This one was table stakes. Google, Samsung and Microsoft have been integrating these tools throughout their operating systems and devices for the past year, and summarization is perhaps the lowest-risk/highest-reward use of generative AI to date. Still, it's a very welcome update.
Voice transcription
Nothing gets a journalist more excited than easy ways to transcribe audio. Within the Notes app, you'll be able to record a conversation, get a transcription and then an AI summary of the transcription.
Even better, the Phone app will now be able to record calls and do the same. Yes, Apple says the other caller will be notified that the call is being recorded.
My AI-nalysis: Samsung and Google both have on-device AI transcription. Apple is just getting with the program.
Image generation
We were promised flying cars and we got . . . AI that can make emojis of flying cars. Yes, Genmoji. You can generate these new emojis by adding a description. You can use them as stickers, in-line emojis or even "tapback" reactions in Messages.
The Image Playground app is Apple's answer to OpenAI's Dall-E and other image-generation apps. It's built into apps like Messages and Pages. But it won't give you photorealistic images or anything close to a deepfake. You can choose from three cartoony styles: animation, sketch and illustration.
Apple Intelligence will make it easier to search through photos with more specificity. ("Pictures of Fred in front of the red car.") Plus, like Google's Magic Eraser, the Clean Up tool will help remove objects or people in the background.
My AI-nalysis: Instagram and Facebook have had generative image creators built-in for months and I can't say I've used them more than once. What's exciting here is the blending of AI with the photos we've already taken. But as I've said before, if you can change a photo so drastically, what is reality?
Notifications and more
Taking another page from Google and Samsung, Apple will use AI to prioritize your notifications -- the most important on top. And if you get a ton of group messages, your iPhone will summarize the chatter. No more plowing through 52 texts to see if Thursday drinks are still on.
My AI-nalysis: Woo hoo! That's it.
The bad news
Apple Intelligence will start appearing with iOS 18, iPadOS 18 and MacOS Sequoia. First in the beta versions this summer and more broadly this fall. And it's only in English at first. That brings me to the big bummers: As I said, not all the features will be available right away. Apple won't say specifically when the ChatGPT integration will arrive, just before the year's end. Some features will likely take longer.
And all of this requires new -- or at least very recent -- hardware, and not the lower-end stuff. You'd need an iPhone 15 Pro or Pro Max, or an iPad or Mac with an M chip. That excludes several iPhone and iPad models Apple currently markets.
AI might change the way we interact with our devices. But it will also force us to buy new ones.
"Hey Siri, do you know where I can dig up $1,200 for a new phone?"
Credit: By Joanna Stern
