Corrections & Amplifications
Michael Bay directed "Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen." An Arena article on Friday about science-fiction movies incorrectly said it was directed by Matt Reeves. In addition, Mike Cahill wrote the screenplay for "I Origins." The article incorrectly said he co-wrote it with Brit Marling.
(WSJ May 31, 2014)
For his new film "The Signal," which opens on June 13, writer-director Will Eubank had to make do with a budget of about $4 million, minuscule by mainstream science-fiction movie standards. He was able to cast a genuine science-fiction movie star, Laurence Fishburne, who worked for far below his normal pay rate as a mysterious scientist. He squeezed into a small space after the big-budget production "Transcendence" decided to use the same New Mexico facility. (Mr. Eubank filmed his previous movie in a makeshift international space station he built in his parents' yard.)
He needed to economize in other ways while making "The Signal," which tells of three college computer geniuses who find themselves transported to an otherworldly lab. He shot some scenes using the kind of Canon digital camera you can get on eBay for $500, lighted by what he calls "IKEA lighting." One of the film's cool visual effects -- an earthshaking attack -- involves Mr. Eubank and his brother banging on a trampoline to make pieces of cork bounce.
This summer will have no shortage of science-fiction extravaganzas costing $100 million and up to produce. But a new generation of filmmakers is showing you don't need an "Avatar" budget to probe sci-fi's mind-bending themes, topics like the mysteries of outer space, the implications of time travel, the future of artificial intelligence, and humanity's origins. Low-fi sci-fi has morphed into something new. By focusing on concepts and characters over spectacle, these directors are distancing themselves from the low-budget sci-fi of the past, those classic B-movies that gave us rubber-suit monsters and paper-plate flying saucers.
"Suddenly everyone who has a cool story in their mind can make a sci-fi movie. It's not like there are more nerds or geeks than there were yesteryear, just that now we're armed," says Mr. Eubank.
In "I Origins," which opens July 18, a startling discovery by molecular biologists raises questions about science and spirituality. Directed by Mike Cahill, with co-writer and actress Brit Marling, it came in at about $1 million. To save money, Mr. Cahill shot scenes in friends' apartments and an unoccupied lab at New York's Rockefeller University. Then he put a good chunk of his budget on one spectacular shot he wanted to get in India that required an expensive crane and elaborate camera movement.
"I think if you just pick those important moments, you can make the movie look expensive and big," he says.
"The Machine" which premiered in the U.S. in April, was made for about $1.5 million. It examines the merging of human and artificial intelligence, a topic that the Johnny Depp film "Transcendence" tackled this year with a budget close to $100 million higher. The film is set in a British research lab in a near-future society, but director Caradog James avoided trying to create a "Blade Runner"-ish outside world. He kept the action almost exclusively inside a single, dark warehouse.
"We filmed almost everything in one location, which was something we learned," he says. "If you try and move a film crew down the road, even if it's only 20 people, five will get lost."
Low-fi sci-fi films are serving as a training ground for some filmmakers who are increasingly getting picked off for big-budget assignments. Director Colin Trevorrow graduated from the 2012 indie time-travel "Safety Not Guaranteed" (estimated budget $750,000) to the forthcoming "Jurassic World" ($150 million-ish). Director Neill Blomkamp's budget nearly quadrupled from "District 9" in 2009 to "Elysium" in 2013. Matt Reeves, who directs this summer's "Dawn of the Planet of the Apes," rose from the $25 million "Cloverfield" in 2008 to the $200 million "Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen" in 2009.
Before directing this spring's $160 million blockbuster "Godzilla," Gareth Edwards had directed only one other feature film, a 2010 movie called "Monsters." It had a budget of $500,000. He served as director, screenwriter, cinematographer, set designer, and visual-effects department, He can't even calculate how many people it took to do all those jobs on "Godzilla."
"The credits for 'Godzilla' are like six minutes long," he says.
Driving around Mexico and Central America, Mr. Edwards's tiny cast and crew for "Monsters" shot scenes on the fly, jumping out of their van when the scenery looked promising. They brought in locals as actors and filmed a "Day of the Dead" festival they came upon, then worked it into the story line. When shooting was done, Mr. Edwards created the film's visual effects, including a huge squid-like alien that attacks a gas station, on a laptop PC in his bedroom, using off-the-shelf graphics software.
"We say 'home computer,' but the reality is your laptop at home is more powerful than the computers they used to animate 'Jurassic Park,'" Mr. Edwards says. "It's leveling the playing field."
Before "The Signal," Mr. Eubank built an international space station in his parents' yard, using $17,000 of supplies from Home Depot. He did that to make "Love," a 2011 film about an astronaut stranded in space. He was 24 years old, unemployed, and had moved back into his parents' house in southern California. Produced for about $500,000, "Love" preceded the $130 million, Oscar-nominated "Gravity" by a couple of years but often looks very similar to it.
He assembled semicircular skateboarding half-pipes from plywood and flipped them on top of each other to create the space station's tubular passageways. He ordered blinking LED Christmas lights from Amazon to make control panels flash, guided by a photo book of the international space station his father got him. To depict the vastness of space that his marooned astronaut (Gunner Wright) gazed at through a porthole from inside the space station, Mr. Eubank put a flat-screen TV, showing an outer-space program, outside the round window. With no way to simulate antigravity, he simply rotated the camera sideways or upside down. He shot "Love" with a donated digital camera and edited it on his home computer. It won him the award for best director at the Athens International Film Festival in 2011.
"Under the Skin," an indie that opened in April, delves into identity, as a predatory alien becomes aware of her individuality for the first time. Its filmmakers used hidden cameras to capture Scarlett Johansson (working far below her normal pay rate) mingling and improvising with nonactors in Scotland. It was conceived as a $40 million film with Brad Pitt co-starring but made without him for around $11 million. Filmmakers ruthlessly pared down its ambitions to get it made. An opening scene showing an alien synthesized in space, which alone would have cost more than $1.5 million, was scrapped and became a close-up of an eye. The alien's voyage to Earth is suggested more than shown.
The low-fi sci-fi boom is attracting studio attention. Paramount Pictures, which distributed the low-budget "Paranormal Activity" horror films, launched a unit in 2010 called Insurge Pictures to distribute micro-budget films, including science fiction. Its pipeline includes "Project Almanac," about a group of teens who discover (and of course get on video) plans for a time machine. "The opportunity in these [fake amateur video] movies is that you can take very, very, big ideas and photograph them in a scrappy sort of way," says Adam Goodman, president of Paramount's Film Group. "The technique allows you to experience something in real time that has global appeal, but without having to build gigantic sets or cast thousands of people." Insurge also is developing "God Particle," about a glitch in a physics experiment that makes Earth appear to vanish.
A small budget really doesn't need to be a disadvantage for most sci-fi themes. Time travel? The 2004 film "Primer," which inspired many low-budget sci-fi filmmakers, reportedly was made for $7,000. It is about computer engineers running a startup circuit-board company out of a garage who stumble onto technology that can send objects back in time. Writer-director Shane Carruth filmed it in his parents' garage, borrowed high-tech instrumentation to use as props from a family friend, and built a human sized time-travel-box out of PVC tubes and sheet metal. Part of what makes "Primer" work is its scenes filled with ultraspecific technical language, jargon that more mainstream films often shy away from. The Cahill-Marling screenplay for "I Origins" has similar scientific authenticity, with researchers (Michael Pitt and Ms. Marling) running lab tests and charting detailed possibilities on whiteboards.
Mr. Cahill and Ms. Marling previously collaborated on "Another Earth" (2011), a story of loss and redemption involving the discovery of a parallel version of our planet. That film, shot with a borrowed digital camera, had a $100,000 budget, which, Mr. Cahill recalls, seemed gigantic.
"We thought 'We can do anything!'," he says. "The main visual effect was this Earth in the sky, using motion-tracking software which you can do on a home computer. Really we relied on the imagination of the audience to create the visual effects."
"Safety Not Guaranteed" is about a lonely man who places a classified ad seeking a companion for time travel, using a device he claims to have invented. An oddball romance develops between co-stars Mark Duplass and Aubrey Plaza. The time machine was cobbled together with recycled metal and junk parts.
"I love the idea of someone tapping into something from the confines of their garage," says Mr. Trevorrow, the director. "In a way, that's what we do when we set out to make an independent film in the first place."
Want to set a film in outer space? Even James Cameron and George Lucas can't shoot on location. The deck of a spaceship usually is a soundstage, whether it is in a $130 million production like Ridley Scott's "Prometheus" (2012) or a $5 million picture like Duncan Jones's "Moon" (2009).
How do you avoid a budget-busting alien-invasion scene? In "Monsters," Mr. Edwards begins by simply describing it in text screens: "Six years ago, NASA discovered the possibility of alien life within our solar system . . ."
Mr. Edwards ended up having 30 "creature" shots in "Monsters," about the same as in "Jurassic Park," he says. There's no need to spend time and money overdoing it: "If you look at how many times you see the shark in "Jaws' or the alien in 'Alien,' they're very efficient with it. You don't have to see this stuff all the time to feel it."
And even though powerful digital tools are now available to filmmakers, Mr. Edwards offers a caution. He spent 10 years as a visual effects artist before using common software (including Adobe After Effects and Autodesk 3ds Max) to create the impressive creatures in "Monsters." The barriers to making a film have been lowered, yes, but these tools still require skilled craftspeople to make them work.
"It's funny," he says. "One of the typical reactions I get is, 'Oh wow, what software did you use? How much is it?' It's kind of like if you read a book you really liked, and you asked the writer, "Did do that on Microsoft Word? Can I buy that font?'"
---
What's an Extra $99 Million?
The grand themes of science fiction often soar onto the screen with big-budget flamboyance. Or, at a fraction of the cost, they can be explored with inexpensive cameras and off-the-shelf software. Here's how some low-fi sci-fi films stack up against well-heeled counterparts when grappling with similar story lines.
-- D.S.
SPACE TRAVEL
'Gravity' (2013) $130 million*
In director Alfonso Cuaron's Oscar-nominated film, much of the international space station scenery that Sandra Bullock floats through is computer-generated imagery. She was attached to an elaborate harness to simulate antigravity effects.
'Love' (2011) $500,000
Filmmaker William Eubank built an international space station in his parents' yard using skateboard ramps and supplies from Home Depot and Lowe's. Christmas lights became blinking control panels. He couldn't simulate antigravity.
HUMANITY'S ORIGINS
'Prometheus' (2012) $130 million
In director Ridley Scott's offshoot of the "Alien" films, Michael Fassbender is among late-21st-century researchers who find clues on Earth that suggest mankind had extraterrestrial beginnings. They travel to a distant moon to learn more.
'I Origins' (2014) $1 million
In director Mike Cahill's film, Brit Marling and Michael Pitt play molecular biologists whose research into the evolution of the eye suggests a revolutionary possibility about human evolution. They travel to India to learn more.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
'Transcendence' (2014) $100 million
After a brilliant scientist (Johnny Depp) is mortally wounded, his face, voice and brain are scanned into a quantum computer, and he continues to exist and interact with human colleagues. As he develops vast new powers, it isn't clear whether he will use them for good or bad.
'The Machine' (2014) $1.5 million
After a computer scientist (Caity Lotz) is mortally wounded, her face, voice and brain are uploaded via quantum computer into a superstrong cyborg. Her lab boss hopes the research can help heal his daughter's illness, but the military agency funding the lab has other plans.
MONSTER ATTACK
'Godzilla' (2014) $160 million
Directed by Gareth Edwards, the latest of the many "Godzilla" films tells the monster's origin story anew. The lizard who feeds on nuclear radiation wreaks havoc in Hawaii and San Francisco before fighting two other monsters.
'Monsters' (2011) $500,000
Before directing "Godzilla," Gareth Edwards wrote and directed "Monsters," about a near future in which alien creatures live permanently on Earth. Mr. Edwards did the visual effects himself using off-the-shelf software and a laptop in his bedroom.
TIME TRAVEL
'Edge of Tomorrow' (2014) $120 million
A soldier (Tom Cruise) is infected with alien blood in a war against an extraterrestrial invasion. From then on, whenever he gets killed, he goes back in time to repeat the same day of battle, becoming increasingly skilled at defeating the enemy. The film uses plenty of computer imagery, and Mr. Cruise wore a heavy exoskeleton in many scenes.
'Primer' (2004) $7,000
Shane Carruth produced, wrote, directed, edited, acted in, and did music for his film, in which two engineers (Mr. Carruth and David Sullivan) build a machine that lets them explore the implications of time travel. He filmed in his parents' garage, and made a human-sized time-travel-box out of PVC tubes and sheet metal.
Credit: By Don Steinberg
