CHICAGO -- Rukiya Winston, a 16-year-old 10th-grader in one of this city's most violent South Side neighborhoods, has sworn off social media.
She is disconnecting from what she sees as a major part of the culture of violence around her.
"It takes things to a whole new level. You see people get into it with someone [on Facebook] and the next day they are beaten up or shot," Ms. Winston said. "It is just too much."
Facebook and other platforms have emerged as fresh challenges in the fight against violent crime that continues to grip major cities.
In Chicago -- which is on track to have more than 600 murders for the second year in a row, a number it had been below for more than a decade before that -- community leaders and police say the immediacy of these platforms has played a major role in escalating disputes, while also providing more evidence that can aid arrests and convictions.
"It pours an accelerant on what was already there," said Eric Sussman, the first assistant state's attorney for Chicago's Cook County.
The Chicago Police Department and prosecutors don't keep data on how many instances of violence were provoked by an exchange on social media, but they say anecdotally that they are seeing a rise in the number of "petty conflicts that have leapt from social-media platforms to violent crimes on the street." A Wall Street Journal tally found at least 100 cases nationally where an act of violence was streamed on just one of these platforms, Facebook Live, since it was launched in early 2016.
"Unfortunately, in too many instances, these conflicts are resolved with a gun," said a Chicago police spokesman.
Prosecutors and law-enforcement agencies in other cities, including Dallas and Wilmington, Del., say social media mirrors and contributes to gang-related behavior on their streets, too. Police in Dallas this year attributed a string of drive-by shootings to incidents in which one gang challenged another and posted their location on Facebook or Instagram, prompting an act of violence.
Tatyanna Lewis, an 18-year-old from Chicago, was in a running Facebook feud over a man with Chynna Stapleton, 24, in mid-May, when Ms. Stapleton allegedly ran over Ms. Lewis with a car, pinning her to a tree. Ms. Stapleton has been charged with first-degree murder, to which she has pleaded not guilty.
In Wilmington, law-enforcement officials and prosecutors say they see the same escalation of violence through social media.
The exchanges, however, arm prosecutors with evidence, including Facebook photos and tags, that they can use in court.
"If you have a defendant and you are trying to get some large sense of whom they are affiliated with, what other activities they might be involved in and what may have led to their crime, there's information available publicly," said Delaware Attorney General Matthew Denn.
Chicago police have invested heavily in data-driven, crime- reduction technology in the past year, building out eight "nerve centers" in the most violent police districts, providing a wealth of information about the neighborhood and offenders there.
The centers, which cost $1.3 million each, integrate data like live-feeds from cameras in the neighborhood and a suspect's criminal record. Police say this technology has contributed to a 13% drop in murders, compared with this time last year. Separately, crime analysts also review open-source accounts and monitor gang conflicts through social media.
Chicago prosecutors and officials have repeatedly called on Facebook and other tech giants for more proactive action to help curb violence.
Cook County Commissioner Richard Boykin said he facilitated a meeting this summer between Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg and young men from a violent South Side neighborhood where they discussed how easy it is to get guns and drugs, and the role of social media in provoking violence.
Mr. Boykin said a team at Facebook has been in "constant contact" with city and county officials since then.
"[Facebook] is getting better with it, they're obviously very concerned," he said. "There's a lot of work we have to do to stop the drugs and guns flowing into our city, and social media is an area we focus some of that attention."
A spokeswoman for Facebook said that the company will double the number of people working on safety and security -- reviewing content on Facebook for dangerous and hateful speech -- to 20,000 from 10,000 in 2018. Threats to someone's personal safety violates the platform's community standards, the spokeswoman added.
Facebook has also invested in Artificial Intelligence tools to monitor content on Facebook Live, and has simplified the process by which people report problematic videos online.
"People don't want false news or hate speech or bullying or any of the bad content that we're talking about," Mr. Zuckerberg said on an earnings call this month. "So to the extent that we can eradicate that from the platform, that will create a better product," he said.
---
Deepa Seetharaman contributed to this article.
---
Killings Are Sparked
By Drill Rap Videos
In Chicago, violence on the South Side has, in part, been fueled by the proliferation of drill rap videos on YouTube, defined by dark, grim and nihilistic lyrics that sometimes insult a rival gang and its members.
Community leaders in the Woodlawn neighborhood point to the recent murders of Sherrod Rhyme, 18 years old, and Terry Barry, 21, both drill rappers who were shot in June and September, respectively.
"They got involved in this world, and within the course of three or four months, they ended up dead," said Donnell Williams, who works with middle-school youth at the Sunshine Gospel Ministries.
A Chicago police spokeswoman said it didn't have any information that linked the videos to the killings of Mr. Rhyme and Mr. Barry, and that no arrests have been made.
Mr. Williams described a petty yet high-stakes world where drill rappers would make a disrespectful reference to a dead member of a rival gang, sometimes saying they are smoking their ashes in a cigarette. This would then lead to a retaliatory shooting.
Steve Gates, Chicago program director for the Youth Advocate Program, a nonprofit that works with at-risk youth, said many young men he works with turn to rap videos to overcome the hopelessness they feel in their lives, faced with few job prospects and blight in their neighborhoods.
"They go extra hard on projecting this image, and showing that they can hurt somebody," Mr. Gates said. "It is the same story as on the streets, but just on a different platform -- the only platform that they think they have a voice."
-- Shibani Mahtani

Credit: By Shibani Mahtani
