What does the future hold for the streaming business? The industry faces a range of tough questions -- from how much it can realistically charge users to how much to leverage generative AI.
For insight into the topic, The Wall Street Journal's editor in chief, Emma Tucker, spoke with Ted Sarandos, co-chief executive of Netflix, at the annual WSJ Tech Live conference last week in Laguna Beach, Calif.
Here are edited excerpts of the discussion.
WSJ: Netflix released its third-quarter earnings last week, and they were extremely positive. So, things are looking good for Netflix, but the market is undoubtedly troubled. How do you see the future of streaming in this troubled market?
TED SARANDOS: I think the entertainment landscape is not troubled. I think the way that people consume it has become disaggregated. I think people are doing it in a bunch of different ways, and they're favoring things that favor the consumer, which I think does play into our strength as a company.
I always think around the roots of watching entertainment at home. Television, of course, had a very limited selection for many years -- just three, then eventually four, networks to choose from, and they barely competed with each other for eyeballs and attention with basically the same things to watch. Home video comes along, and it's super inconvenient. You had to get in the car and drive each way to the video store to get your movie.
Netflix was trying to solve a lot of problems. Other companies have tried to migrate into what we do; they still have their roots in old legacy-media model -- not at your timetable, with narrow choices of things to watch. Netflix can be very broad and have a big variety of programming. So, I don't think entertainment is in trouble, and I think that consumers are speaking loud and clear that they prefer streaming.
WSJ: What did you learn from the writers' strike? A lot less content was created at the time, and that remains the case today, yet your customers are still sticking around.
SARANDOS: Relative to other people, we had a lot of things in the pipeline to keep things going, but it definitely had an interruption in our output this year. Our film slate was stalled, some of our biggest returning shows got pushed out into those back parts of the year.
It's very important that the studios and labor speak all the time. We have to have healthy working relationships together. We hope that we'll never see something like that happen again.
WSJ: Did you end up making more stuff overseas? Have you hedged your bets by moving more production?
SARANDOS: We have. More than half of our business is overseas, so we produce original content in 50 countries. The mandate of those is that they're relevant in the country they're made for. If they happen to travel, that's a windfall. "Wednesday" and "Squid Game" are the two most global shows we've ever had, but neither of them was engineered to be global in any way.
"Squid Game" is a fun example because there's something incredibly human about having a hard time predicting something bigger than you've ever seen before. When I ask teams to predict, "How big will this be?" usually the biggest thing they could say will be, "It'll be as big as the last big thing we had." Nobody predicted "Squid Game" was going to be twice as big as anybody had ever seen before. Nobody had predicted -- because no one was trying to make it a global show -- that it would catch on the way it did. It had some very universal messages in it.
It was because it was so specifically local, it was so uniquely and authentically Korean. People like that they see something else in it and it reminds them of how small the world is. When you do it right, it's that thing. But when people predict how big something might be, they are limited by how big they've ever seen.
WSJ: Is Netflix using generative AI at the moment, and if so, how so?
SARANDOS: I look at generative AI as a tool for creators to create content, not for Netflix to create instead of creators. --That's really in the hands of creators and we try to enable them. If generative AI passes the big test, which is, can this use of this tool make a better show, then it will be really transformative and be helpful.
WSJ: How important do you think advertising is going to be in the future for Netflix?
SARANDOS: Like any big business, new things have got to do a lot to make a big dent or to be very impactful. So advertising will grow slowly over the next couple of years. We're happy to see how it's growing. We have about 40 million users on the ad tier now, and growing pretty quickly.
We want the programming that people care about. People want to watch it, advertisers want to be close to it. If we do all those things well, we'll compete really well in that space.
WSJ: How much more will consumers tolerate when it comes to the subscription fee?
SARANDOS: The more time you spend watching Netflix, the more you value the things you watch on Netflix, is in direct correlation to how much we can charge for Netflix. If you don't think Netflix is valuable to you at that price point, you just click one button and you're off. So, we are constantly in search of adding more value. Every once in a while, we come back to members and ask for an increase so that we can keep that cycle going. But I don't think we can do it unless we continue to add to the value.
WSJ: You credit your success with focus on engagement.
SARANDOS: Our business was always going right to the consumer with an instant-feedback model. So, we've always been focused on that: Are you happy with what we're providing you? I have found that there's no better measurement of joy than engagement, because I've never seen anybody turn off a show that they love unless they just have to go to bed and they're going to watch more tomorrow. And I've never seen one stick around for a show that they hate.
WSJ: The next generation is spending more time on YouTube and TikTok. Do you feel like you need to be playing in that space as well?
SARANDOS: In some ways, social media is going to be a training ground for storytellers and creators, which is great. In other ways, it's a way that people kill time. Killing time and spending time are two different activities. You have to be careful not to get too distracted by chasing everything that people are doing.
A lot of what's happening on social media is interesting and exciting. But I look at the monetization model, and it isn't possible to do something at the scope and scale that we do on Netflix through that model.
WSJ: What's the one series that Netflix didn't make that you wish you had made?
SARANDOS: I love "The Bear" [the FX series on Hulu]. I wish that was one of ours. "Ted Lasso" [Apple TV+] spoke to the time really well. People were looking for something light and fun, and it was just that.
---
Write to reports@wsj.com
Credit: By Emma Tucker
