Microsoft will invest $1.5 billion in a technology company backed by the United Arab Emirates, a deal that includes an intergovernmental pact to ensure artificial-intelligence security as the U.S. and China increasingly compete for influence in the Gulf.
Relations between the U.S. and U.A.E. have been strained in recent years over Abu Dhabi's growing ties to China and its technology firms. The agreement between one of America's biggest tech players and Abu Dhabi-based G42 signals a pivot toward Washington for the Gulf state.
Terms of the deal or a valuation of G42 weren't disclosed as the firms announced the agreement Tuesday. Microsoft President Brad Smith will join the Abu Dhabi firm's board and G42 will use the U.S. company's cloud services for its AI applications, the companies said.
The partnership also aims to create "a skilled and diverse AI workforce" for the U.A.E. and create a $1 billion fund for developers, the firms said.
The U.A.E. has set a goal of becoming a world leader in artificial intelligence and recently held talks with OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman about investing in a multitrillion-dollar initiative that would boost the world's chip-building capacity and expand its ability to power AI, The Wall Street Journal reported in February.
As part of those discussions, Altman spoke with the U.A.E.'s Sheikh Tahnoun bin Zayed al Nahyan, who chairs G42. He is also the country's national security adviser and brother of the U.A.E. ruler, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed.
In October, G42 announced a partnership with OpenAI, which is behind AI systems such as ChatGPT, to "deliver cutting-edge AI solutions to the U.A.E. and regional markets." G42 in August unveiled its own Arabic large-language model, the technology behind ChatGPT.
Microsoft is the biggest investor in OpenAI and has a major customer base in the U.A.E. The U.S. firm opened two large cloud data centers in the country in 2019, and last year said it would tie up with G42 to introduce "sovereign" cloud offerings that could secure the data of government-related companies, which generally offer the biggest contracts for Western companies selling in the U.A.E.
The deal is the latest in a series of investments and big hires Microsoft has made to help maintain its lead in artificial intelligence. The company is reorienting its business around AI, following the success of OpenAI's chatbot chatGPT.
Microsoft has been pouring billions of dollars into investments beyond OpenAI. Earlier this year, it invested $16 million in Mistral, a French startup that makes open-source AI technology. It has also unveiled plans to invest a total of around $8 billion in building new data centers in Germany, Spain and Japan.
Last month, the company hired Mustafa Suleyman, the CEO of AI startup Inflection, in a newly created role of CEO of AI. Microsoft has previously invested in Inflection, and the company has hired a significant number of employees from the AI startup to join Suleyman in the new division.
Microsoft's outsize presence in the AI startup sector has raised concern among some regulators worldwide. Officials in Europe are looking into its relationship with OpenAI.
The latest deepening of commercial ties with the U.A.E. reflects a broader realignment of diplomatic interests.
Mohamed, the U.A.E. leader, has tried to court the U.S., China and Russia in recent years to diversify his country's economy away from its dependence on oil and draw foreign investment.
Credit: By Rory Jones and Tom Dotan
