Imagine a world in which every product that leaves a factory is flawless, every time.
That is the goal of zero-defect manufacturing, an idea gaining traction among industry executives. Surging recalls and high-profile problems like the door plug that blew off a Boeing jet midflight in January have cast a harsh light on the quality of American manufacturing. But some companies say a combination of technology, training and focus can eliminate errors.
Ford Chief Executive Jim Farley has said the automaker must reach "a zero defect destination," telling investors last year the company has used assembly-line artificial intelligence and extensive test drives to catch problems in Super Duty trucks. Stellantis, similarly targeting zero defects, said new standards have led to a double-digit percentage drop in warranty claims.
Companies in industries as varied as pharmaceuticals and snack foods have announced zero-defect goals. Brewer Science, a Missouri-based maker of chemicals and materials used in semiconductors, said it has reduced impurities to less than one part per billion through exhaustive measurement and testing. Chief Operating Officer Srikanth Kommu said its definition of defects is growing more stringent.
The newsletter Warranty Week found that in 2022, vehicle makers spent record amounts on warranty claims. Recalls announced by the federal Consumer Product Safety Commission hit a six-year high in 2023. Sedgwick, a firm that assists companies with recalls, found recalls jumped last year among pharmaceutical and food manufacturers.
Battered by quality issues, Spirit AeroSystems -- which makes fuselages for Boeing -- has begun a program that aims to simplify the manufacturing process. The company will use drill templates that are color-coded, with the appropriate tool, preset at the correct speed, matching that color. Spirit also will automate manual tasks, and scanners will search for deviations in the final product while capturing every inch of the fuselage.
The zero-defects philosophy took shape in the early 1960s when defense contractor Martin sought to eliminate errors from Pershing missiles. The company had relied on inspections but refocused on prevention. Martin's quality director, James Halpin, wrote that errors plunged.
Many U.S. companies adopted the practices, but Robert Leachman, a professor of industrial engineering and operations research at the University of California, Berkeley, said the effort stalled when businesses began outsourcing work to low-cost regions.
The technology and processes adopted in pursuit of zero defects can be expensive, though some companies, such as industrial-parts maker Parker Hannifin, have said their initiatives save money. Mary Litteral, who trains companies in zero-defect principles, said the cost of poor quality can equate to at least 10% of sales once all factors are taken into account.
The regimen of Schneider Electric, which makes products for the energy industry, includes torque wrenches that indicate when the correct tension is reached and AI tools that find anomalies. Aamir Paul, president of North America operations, said employees are encouraged to speak up -- anonymously, if they prefer.
Daniella Picciotti, a quality auditor and the incoming chair of the American Society for Quality, said companies usually focus on critical parts, with others inspected via sampling. That makes catching everything a challenge, she said, and even well-run systems can be undone by new suppliers, materials or employees.
"The risk of failure is inherent," she said. "It's always going to be there."
Credit: By John Keilman
