Advertising agencies' ability to work more efficiently because of AI may upend the way those agencies make money.
Agencies have long billed marketers by the number of hours their employees spend producing client work, using rate cards to charge different amounts for contributions by people according to their roles.
Now, AI is eroding the number of people, hours and roles required to deliver for clients, and agencies may find the standard billing arrangement comes up short.
AI is helping agencies rapidly produce personalized creative images, for example, or altering elements like color, position, lighting and language -- tasks that were once highly manual.
It is also letting copywriters, who once may have needed several hours to write 50 variations of copy for a given ad, now generate 100 variations immediately, then choose to edit and curate them.
"Just in ChatGPT and Adobe alone are hundreds of use cases on how the creative side of agencies can shave so much time off," said Tracey Shirtcliff, chief executive and founder of ScopeBetter, which helps companies price their services, among other offerings.
Billing for time doesn't explicitly account for everything agencies do, including valuable aspects of a creative campaign such as generating strategic insights and big ideas, but it helps them cover such costs and keep the marketing machine humming.
Ad holding company WPP, which owns agencies including Ogilvy and Wunderman Thompson, told investors earlier this year that the use of AI will help the company move away from hours-based pricing toward output and return-based pricing models.
WPP CEO Mark Read suggested that AI is enabling new tactics that have new costs of their own, such as employing people to manage the technology.
"Look at other industries that have been impacted by technology," Read said during the company's capital markets day. "You look at the movie industry, as AI has reduced the cost of special effects, the cost of making movies has increased."
Some agencies and their marketer clients are moving to pricing that pays based on what they deliver or measurable results, meaning they get paid a certain amount regardless of how long a task took.
Credit: By Megan Graham
