The Trump administration has sued Facebook Inc., accusing the social-media company of illegally reserving high-paying jobs for immigrant workers it was sponsoring for permanent residence, rather than searching adequately for available U.S. workers who could fill the positions.
The lawsuit reflects a continuing Trump administration push to crack down on alleged displacement of American workers.
In a 17-page complaint filed Thursday, the Justice Department's civil-rights division said Facebook inadequately advertised at least 2,600 positions between 2018 and 2019 that were filled by foreign professionals on H-1B visas when the company was looking to sponsor them for permanent residency permits, known as green cards.
Companies sponsoring workers for employment-based green cards are required to show as part of the application process that they couldn't find any qualified American workers to fill the job.
A Facebook spokesman said the company "has been cooperating with the DOJ in its review of this issue and while we dispute the allegations in the complaint, we cannot comment further on pending litigation."
The lawsuit adds to a broader set of actions by the administration against the tech industry, including ongoing antitrust investigations into Facebook and other companies and scrutiny of the social-media platforms' liability shield known as Section 230.
The Trump administration has viewed the H-1B visa program for foreign professionals -- the primary pathway international graduates of U.S. colleges remain in the country -- with antagonism, believing that employers are displacing American workers with foreign staffers who demand smaller salaries.
It rejected 21% of new H-1B visa applicants in 2019, compared with 6% in 2015, according to an analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan Washington think tank.
The administration banned the visas outright in June due to the coronavirus pandemic and imposed new rules that would have significantly raised the salaries that companies are required to pay their H-1B visa workers. Both moves were overturned by federal courts.
"This is a new tactic under the guise of protecting American workers," said Jesse Bless, a former Justice Department official who is now director of federal litigation at the American Immigration Lawyers Association. Normally the government would seek to work or settle with a company before suing them, he said. "It tells me that, since they took this route, they are trying to set an example."
Justice Department officials said their investigation kicked off when Facebook filed an application with the Labor Department to hire a foreign worker as an art director, a role that requires a bachelor's degree and two years of experience. The officials said Facebook should have been able to find an American to fill this type of job. Other positions included a number of software jobs as well as nontechnical positions.
The lawsuit alleged that, though Facebook followed the advertising and recruiting requirements for these jobs, it didn't publicize the openings as extensively as it normally would. For example, Facebook didn't advertise the positions on its website and required candidates to mail in their applications rather than accepting them online, the suit said. As a result, the company received no more than one application from a U.S. worker in nearly all the jobs at issue, rather than the hundreds who normally apply for open Facebook postings, the complaint said.
When U.S. workers did apply, the suit said Facebook hired them into different jobs, reserving the open position for the H-1B worker.
"Simply put, Facebook reserves these positions for temporary visa holders," the suit alleged.
Tech companies such as Facebook say they rely on H-1B visas to plug gaps in their technical workforce, which they say is essential to building the software that powers products like the Facebook news feed.
Tech executives have said there aren't enough American students graduating with science and engineering degrees to meet their demand, a problem they say is only worsening as products grow more complex and reliant on advanced technology like artificial intelligence.

Credit: By Michelle Hackman, Deepa Seetharaman and Sadie Gurman
