President Biden may practice old-style Democratic coalition politics, but his party's progressives have gotten a sweet deal. Look no further than the White House's embrace of national economic planning. The younger generation wants a sharp break with the past, and the president is listening. Mr. Biden's new model is the Washington Ordered Economy: a tale of WOE.
National security adviser Jake Sullivan recently laid out the theory, explaining the link between U.S. international and industrial policies. In a speech at the Brookings Institution, Mr. Sullivan rejected Clinton and Obama-era orthodoxies as contributing to 50 years of American economic decay. The "new Washington consensus," as Mr. Sullivan labeled it, yearns for the national and global economies of a century ago, though now augmented by Washington planning, mandates and financing.
The new economic and social order incorporates six connected elements. The first is an aversion to trade. The new planners in Washington need trade barriers to limit competition with their protected national economy and reward special interests. But protectionist tariffs add to everyone's bills. The U.S. has given up negotiating open markets abroad and lowering prices at home. U.S. Trade Representative Katherine Tai told a union panel in Detroit that trade policy had focused too much on liberalization, efficiencies and lower costs.
In the past, U.S. trade leadership established rules for topics such as services, technology, fair agricultural standards, anticorruption, and even basic environmental and labor protections. Today's trade agenda should advocate enhancing digital and data connectivity while respecting different approaches to privacy. The U.S. can't compete with China's economic model if it won't sit at the table of trade liberalizers.
Second, the administration's industrial policy requires huge subsidies for favored causes. Such policies are notoriously difficult to implement and require not-so-fine tuning. Chad Bown of the Peterson Institute for International Economics has pointed out that the U.S., once the leading exporter of electric vehicles, provoked tariff escalations that pushed Tesla in 2018 to announce a manufacturing shift to China. Beijing is now the principal exporter of electric vehicles. Mr. Biden responded by subsidizing U.S. production. When the European Union threatened retaliation, the administration created a loophole for imports of leased vehicles, which escape even the restrictions that apply to U.S. production. Electric-vehicle imports, especially from the EU, continued to grow this year.
In another industry, the Commerce Department now has to decide which semiconductor producers to subsidize, for what types of chips, for how long and with what restrictions. If Washington orders companies not to sell any chips to China, American producers will lose earnings for research and development and expansion. Washington also has to decide what inputs must be produced at home -- if feasible -- and to expect retaliation.
A third element contributing to WOE: Antitrust authorities are blocking acquisitions on the theory that "big is bad," regardless of consumer interests and price effects. As former Federal Trade Commission Chairman Timothy Muris observed in these pages, the new policy reverses 40 years of bipartisan, principled economic standards and opens the door to political favoritism. The FTC, led by Lina Khan, wants to dismantle business models of entrepreneurs selling innovations to larger enterprises with more capital and marketing reach. That comes right as the advent of artificial intelligence and cloud services has intensified competition and probably will create opportunities for invention within more open-source systems.
Fourth, under Washington's new theory, regulations must prohibit or discourage disfavored sectors and business models while also controlling consumer and business behavior. Securities and Exchange Commission reporting requirements on detailed carbon emissions by suppliers or customers will invite litigation to challenge corporate compliance. The administration wants to expand solar energy as part of its green economy, but Congress demands high tariffs on solar panels, increasing costs for U.S. investors and consumers.
As America's productivity slows, and Washington constrains foreign competition, planners will demand more restrictions. Some states want to ban gasoline cars and gas stoves, regardless of users' willingness to pay carbon charges. Freedom of choice thus yields to failed theory. American regulation is fracturing the advantage of a huge national market.
Fifth, Washington uses investment reviews and reports to steer capital, including foreign investment, toward approved causes. Procedures for approval may also dictate preferred corporate practices, ranging from hiring, training and unionization to child care.
Finally, the Biden program assumes Washington can supplement its planning with large spending packages or debt forgiveness to boost favorites and offset slowdowns. This financial largesse will increase the federal debt and increasingly squeeze out private investment. Yet that may prove difficult to get past Republicans, who have begun to push back against unrestrained spending and an ever-larger debt burden. People who paid their college loans or didn't attend wonder why they should absorb losses for canceled student loans.
The first cracks in Mr. Biden's new economic order are already appearing. Sticky inflation punishes all families, especially poorer ones, and the Federal Reserve will need higher interest rates for longer. Tight monetary policies are stressing regional banks, cutting asset values and increasing credit losses. These banks can't lend, so medium-size businesses will struggle to get financing at any price.
Higher costs, inefficient businesses and bad experience will eventually bring a conclusion of Mr. Biden's tale of WOE. But once government barriers, rules and subsidies are embedded, they're hard to reverse. After the stagflation of the 1970s, America needed a bipartisan rethink to spur revival. Clinton-Obama Democrats and Republicans who favor market discipline, openness and freedom need to think again.
---
Mr. Zoellick served as U.S. trade representative (2001-05), deputy U.S. secretary of state (2005-06) and World Bank president (2007-12). He is the author of "America in the World."
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: How the Tariff War Started" -- WSJ June 13, 2023)
Credit: By Robert B. Zoellick
