When tens of thousands of software engineers, tech enthusiasts and salesmen descended on San Francisco for the annual Salesforce megaconference in September, startup founder Jari Salomaa had an idea: What if he rented out a sauna?
Salomaa was looking to pitch his startup Valo, which has built an artificial-intelligence tool that helps users on Salesforce's platform. But an anti-alcohol movement that's sweeping through the tech industry is disrupting work gatherings that revolve around drinking or eating. That's leading Salomaa and others to try "social saunas," where networking happens inside a steamy 200-degree box. In bathing suits.
The experience can take some getting used to. Bathrobes and bikinis can be distracting. It's also very sweaty.
But investors and venture capitalists say it's refreshing to have someplace other than a bar to gather and that business is getting done everywhere from a pop-up sauna in a Napa vineyard, to an 80-person sauna in New York.
Salomaa, 46, grew up in Finland where the sauna was part of everyday life and at his first job for Nokia in Helsinki, saunas were built inside the offices.
"There are more saunas than cars in Finland," he said. "As many saunas as toilets."
Still, he worried how Americans would react to hanging out in their bathing suits for a corporate event. "Scandinavians are more at ease with body images than the average American," he said.
He thought about having one event for women and another for men, but the planning soon got complicated. In the end, Salomaa decided on a sort of social experiment: a coed gathering in San Francisco. He wound up with a wait list of 100 guests.
Salomaa imposed some sauna etiquette -- bathing suits required and stay hydrated. And he started the event like any other investor pitch, by giving a PowerPoint presentation to an audience clad in bathrobes.
Attendees shared images of the event on social media, and soon Salomaa was fielding calls from friends in the tech industry, asking how they could do a similar event. He's eager to help, but maintains some reservation about moving too much work inside the sauna. "If it's all talk about work, it kind of kills the vibe," he said.
At Othership, a new sauna facility that opened in New York City's Flatiron district in July, the sauna can fit up to 90 people. Lined with ambient lighting that can switch from warm red to neon pink, the sauna looks more like a nightclub than a place of tranquility. Founder Robbie Bent, 40, said young tech founders make up a large part of his clientele. "They want to be healthier, meet like-minded people, and often don't want to be out late," he said.
The company hosts founder nights, as well as events for investors and founders to mingle. Othership has also offered to organize complimentary "team sweats" as team-building exercises. But according to Bent, they received pushback from human resources at companies across tech and Wall Street. Colleagues congregating in bathing suits wasn't going to fly. In response to these critiques, Bent designed a "corporate swimsuit" -- basically a full-body rashguard for people to wear in the sauna.
Will Drescher, 29, built a social sauna in Boulder, Colo., after going to one in Minneapolis this year. "Neither me nor my co-founder drink," said Drescher. "And we just thought, why don't we have this?" They built Portal, a "more DIY" option than the saunas popping up in New York and San Francisco, said Drescher.
"We wanted to bridge what's happening in the coasts with what we're seeing in the middle of the country," said Drescher.
Venture investor Helene Servillon, 35, proposed a meeting with a founder of a tech company at Portal.
The meeting lasted an hour, which allowed them to cycle in and out of the sauna for three sessions.
After learning more about the startup, Servillon said she plans to invest in it soon. "VCs socialize a lot. If we only have two options -- have a drink or a meal -- that can just get really exhausting," she said. When founders or investors ask to meet for happy hour these days, she will often counter-propose with a sauna or a hike.
Not all tech workers have bought in. Laila Danielsen, chief executive of an AI software company, was invited to a social sauna event in October. She enjoyed the event and the environment it provided to have conversations, but she didn't go into the hotbox.
"I don't know if I'd necessarily put on my bikini to go out and pitch a VC, you know what I mean?" the 55-year-old said. "I'll consider meeting them at the sauna after we close the deal."
Credit: By Angel Au-Yeung
