For years, conventional wisdom said the smart way to build a blockbuster company was to amass big amounts of information on your customers. Now comes the downside: Big Data can also inflict big harm on a business.
Companies are facing an erosion of faith in their ability to do the right thing with what they've learned. A growing number of people don't trust tech giants to responsibly handle what we share.
Facebook Inc. Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg is the most visible tech executive to face the music thus far. Facebook shares crashed this past week after reporting slower-than-expected revenue growth in the wake of the Cambridge Analytica privacy scandal.
The confidence problem transcends Facebook. In 2017, credit-reporting firm Equifax Inc. disclosed that the personal information of nearly 150 million people was compromised in a data breach. Before that, Uber Technologies Inc. paid hackers $100,000 to keep secret the theft of 57 million accounts. The list goes on.
Analysts have for a while been predicting a downturn in public sentiment toward Big Data. In 2013, for instance, consulting firm Ernst & Young in a survey report titled The Big Data Backlash said "the Golden Age of anytime, anywhere, free-for-all access to customer data" would come to end in 2018.
Regulations could slow the ability to collect data. Take the European Union's new General Data Protection Regulation: Its enforcement began in late May and led to a decline of one million Facebook users in that region during the second quarter.
Companies are responding by appointing more chief data officers who report directly to the CEO, Ernst & Young's global analytics leader, Beatriz Sanz Saiz, said in an interview. While this promotes better accountability, it is primarily because "the first priority for most executives is to leverage their own internal data."
Ms. Sanz Saiz estimates companies typically use only 5% to 10% of the data they collect. They would like to use more. That's why a slate of industries -- from oil to transportation to health care -- are beefing up internal data departments or forging new partnerships with tech giants like Alphabet Inc.
Companies can't just leave these strategies to the tech guys, said Andrew White, an analyst with tech research firm Gartner. Boards of directors need to look at the functions tied to Big Data (machine learning, artificial intelligence or cloud computing, for instance) with the same rigor as executive pay, financial auditing or management succession.
"IT cannot do the type of governance we're talking about," Mr. White said.
Ernst & Young's survey found nearly 80% of respondents believe companies collect data in order to line their pockets rather than to simply make life easier for consumers. "As a result, they are becoming more selective about who they share data with and a backlash is building," the firm said.
To counter this, companies must prove they can do more than simply "monetize" our data. The Cleveland Plain Dealer recently published columns illustrating one consequence of Big Data fears: Older people were being required to have their license swiped before buying age-restricted items at Giant Eagle grocery stores -- and they were concerned about the protection of their personal information.
"They're not scanning it because of your age," Roy Hewitt, a 71-year-old-retired sports editor at that paper, told me."My beard is older than 21." He alerted a columnist at Plain Dealer about the practice.
A Giant Eagle spokesman said: "We understand that some customers might have reservations about having their identification cards scanned and want to reassure those customers that Giant Eagle takes its responsibility to protect their personal data very seriously."
Mr. Hewitt says he no longer gets carded, but still has a dim view. "You can't trust some banks and some companies to look at your credit and not get hacked. How in the world are you going to trust a grocery store?"

Credit: By John D. Stoll
