REDDIT
RDDT +10%
Reddit is teaming up with OpenAI. The social-media company struck a licensing deal with the artificial-intelligence startup that will give ChatGPT access to its data, following similar arrangements made with Google and public-relations software firm Cision. Reddit on Thursday said the deal will bring its content to OpenAI's ChatGPT chatbot, the startup will become a Reddit advertising partner, and Reddit users and moderators will gain new AI-powered features. Founded in 2005, Reddit went public in March. The company has yet to turn a profit and recently said it has 82.7 million daily active users. Reddit shares jumped 10% Friday.
SQUARESPACE
SQSP +13%
Website-development company Squarespace agreed to a $6.6 billion all-cash takeover by private-equity firm Permira. Under the terms of the deal, Squarespace said Monday its shareholders will receive $44 in cash for each share they own, a 15% premium to Friday's closing price. Chairman and Chief Executive Anthony Casalena took Squarespace public in 2021. The company expects the takeover to close by the fourth quarter of this year. Squarespace shares soared 13% Monday.
MCDONALD'S
MCD +1.2%
McDonald's U.S. restaurants will sell a new "meal bundle" -- a McDouble or McChicken sandwich, small fries, small soft drink and a four-piece Chicken McNuggets -- for $5, as the company aims to retain cost-conscious consumers. McDonald's said the restaurants of U.S. franchisees had returned to prepandemic profitability levels and could afford to put some profits into value offerings now. The roughly monthlong promotion is set to begin June 25. McDonald's shares added 1.2% Wednesday.
GAMESTOP
GME +74%
Meme stock GameStop experienced a rally reminiscent of the pandemic-era. This run-up was triggered by the re-emergence of X user "Roaring Kitty," aka Keith Gill, whose social-media accounts had been inactive for years. The videogame retailer said it expects a sales decline, a narrower loss in the spring quarter and registered to sell up to 45 million more shares. GameStop shares surged 74% Monday, and rose another 60% Tuesday.
WALMART
WMT +7%
Walmart sales keep rolling in. The retail giant posted a rise in U.S. comparable sales, and raised its profit and sales expectations for the year. Executives are focused on increasing spending beyond groceries and everyday necessities to grow. The company is also cutting costs in some areas. Earlier in the week, Walmart told employees it would cut hundreds of corporate jobs and ask most remote workers to move to offices. Walmart shares gained 7% Thursday.
AMERICAN AIRLINES
AAL +3.7%
Major American airlines are suing the U.S. government. Carriers including United Airlines, Delta Air Lines and American Airlines, along with the trade association Airlines for America, filed a lawsuit against the Transportation Department to block a new federal rule requiring upfront disclosure of add-on fees. The carriers argued in a court filing that the DOT doesn't have authority to make such a rule. American Airlines shares rose 3.7% Monday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
