Elon Musk revived his lawsuit against OpenAI in federal court, alleging that he was manipulated into believing that the artificial-intelligence company he was helping launch was a nonprofit.
Sam Altman, chief executive of OpenAI, allegedly courted and deceived Musk, promising him they would pursue a nonprofit venture, according to the complaint filed in U.S. District Court in Northern California on Monday. Musk invested tens of millions of dollars and recruited top AI scientists for the project, according to the lawsuit.
"Altman assured Musk that the nonprofit structure guaranteed neutrality and a focus on safety and openness for the benefit of humanity, not shareholder value," the complaint said. "But as it turns out, this was all hot-air philanthropy -- the hook for Altman's long con."
The complaint alleges that OpenAI co-founders Altman and Greg Brockman engaged in fraud and racketeering. It also accuses OpenAI and Altman of breach of contract for breaking a founding agreement. Musk also asked the court to cancel OpenAI's licensing agreement with Microsoft because it breaches the deal Musk made with Altman and OpenAI.
OpenAI is governed by a nonprofit board, which controls the for-profit entity. News Corp, owner of The Wall Street Journal and Dow Jones Newswires, has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI.
Musk previously filed a similar lawsuit against OpenAI in March, saying that the company had broken its founding agreement by giving priority to profit over the technology's potential benefit to humanity. Musk, the billionaire CEO of Tesla and owner of social-media platform X, withdrew the complaint in June.
In a March blog post written after Musk filed his initial complaint, OpenAI disputed Musk's version of events and said that the company would move to dismiss all claims. The blog post also contained emails sent by Musk. OpenAI has denied that there was a founding agreement governing the company and said that the lawsuit rested on questionable facts.
"As we said about Elon's initial legal filing, which was subsequently withdrawn, Elon's prior emails continue to speak for themselves," a spokesperson for OpenAI said.
Microsoft didn't respond to a request for comment.
Altman and Chief Strategy Officer Jason Kwon sent emails to staff at the time of Musk's initial complaint, saying OpenAI's success made it a target for lawsuits. In their emails, Altman and Kwon said the company aimed to balance creating an AI system with guardrails while producing a commercialized product so it could make money to support AI research.
Musk was the primary funder for OpenAI's beginnings. Altman and Musk clashed over plans to commercialize the project, according to the latest lawsuit. Musk stepped down from the board in 2018 and stopped investing in the venture in 2020, the suit said.
In 2017, Musk and OpenAI decided to make the project a for-profit company in order to compete with Google's DeepMind project, according to OpenAI's blog post. Musk wanted to be made CEO and have majority equity and initial control of the board, the blog post said.
OpenAI objected to Musk's terms, and he later suggested merging OpenAI into Tesla, OpenAI said. Musk later would abandon OpenAI and said he would start his own AI project at Tesla. He also said OpenAI had a zero probability of success.
"We're sad that it's come to this with someone whom we've deeply admired -- someone who inspired us to aim higher, then told us we would fail, started a competitor, and then sued us when we started making meaningful progress towards OpenAI's mission without him," OpenAI said in March.
Marc Toberoff, a lawyer for Musk, said the defendants' recent actions make clear that their mission was always self-enrichment.
Credit: By Joseph De Avila
