A wave of 5G-ready smartphones, laptops and other devices is expected to hit the market this year, though many chief information officers say the technology's business impact is years away.
The fifth generation of wireless networks, 5G is eventually expected to offer speeds up to 100 times as fast as today's 4G networks.
To date, 5G services in the U.S. have been rolled out only in certain cities and consumer adoption remains modest, with few 5G apps emerging that would justify a costly upgrade.
Global sales of 5G smartphones are expected to reach roughly 170 million units by 2021, from an estimated 12 million in 2019, according to a report by ABI Research, a technology market advisory firm.
Over the same period, sales of 5G network devices, excluding smartphones, are expected to climb to 10 million units from about two million.
International Data Corp. predicts that 5G will account for about 9% of mobile-device connections by 2023.
Samsung Electronics Co. sells a 5G version of its Galaxy S10 smartphone, while Verizon Communications Inc. offers a Motorola Solutions Inc. phone with a separate clip-on attachment to operate at 5G. Apple Inc. doesn't offer a 5G-enabled iPhone.
Financial-services company Cowen Inc. predicts that "true 5G" services won't be available before 2022.
Until then, many technology leaders say 5G is getting more attention than it deserves. "5G continues to be overhyped. It's still a few years away from true applicability," said Tim Nall, CIO of Jack Daniel's maker Brown-Forman Corp.
That was the consensus among 30 CIOs who responded via email to a Wall Street Journal survey about their thoughts on emerging technologies and other issues.
"Emerging technologies are just that. They are new and companies embrace them earlier than others, depending upon problems they are trying to solve," said Elizabeth Hackenson, CIO at France-based industrial company Schneider Electric SE.
She said 5G likely would gain traction as network providers expand their geographic footprints, making increased mobile speeds and bandwidth more accessible and cheaper, she added.
For businesses, 5G networks offer the promise of easily scaling information-technology projects by removing the need to build their own costly fiber-optic networks to keep large amounts of data flowing.
Superfast mobile networks will enable internet-connected devices and sensors deployed in manufacturing, transportation, retail and other sectors to transmit and analyze large amounts of information. That extra data can be fed into software programs aimed at improving everything from production processes to customer services, especially when combined with artificial intelligence.
"5G is going to elevate performance as it becomes more readily available and more economically viable for network providers to roll out," said Bill Menezes, a senior principal analyst at IT research firm Gartner Inc.
Hitachi Vantara CIO Renee Lahti, responding to the Journal survey, said 5G is a "telecom buzzword" with no substance behind the hype: "For much of the year we heard growing chatter around the term," she said, adding that the value of 5G from a business perspective is only starting to emerge.
Undue attention on any new technology can have a negative effect, said Manjit Singh, group vice president and CIO of Toyota Motor Corp.'s North American unit. He said the hype around 5G is creating false expectations. As a result, corporate spending on 5G projects will require extra scrutiny, Mr. Singh said.
---
James Rundle contributed to this article.

Credit: By Angus Loten
