Index Ventures could join a select group of venture firms that are hauling in megafunds this year, but its new vehicles reflect the scaled-down plans of today's private-market investors.
The global firm is looking to raise $1.5 billion for Index Ventures Growth VII, a fund that would back later-stage private companies, according to people familiar with the situation. That would be less than the amount Index collected in 2021 for its $2 billion sixth late-stage fund.
Index is also raising $800 million for its next early-stage fund, Index Ventures XII, the people said. Its last fund in this category was $900 million in size.
The downshift in Index's growth strategy isn't because of a lack of demand for the firm's funds, but rather a reflection of market changes where fewer mature, private tech companies are raising large financings, people familiar with the situation said.
Other venture firms have also curtailed or even eliminated their growth investing ambitions. Y Combinator axed its growth arm last year. Andreessen Horowitz, meanwhile, collected $3.75 billion for its fourth growth fund earlier this year, down from $5 billion for its prior growth vehicle.
Despite a surge of funding in the generative AI sector, overall, the late-stage venture market has taken a sharp downward turn since the pandemic-era market boom.
Last year, late-stage companies in the U.S. raised $72.4 billion in venture capital, down from $93.4 billion the prior year and less than half the amount collected in 2021, according to the latest PitchBook-NVCA Venture Monitor, an industry tracking report. Higher interest rates and fewer initial public offering opportunities have contributed to a slowdown in late-stage venture activity. The trajectory of late-stage dealmaking did turn upward in the second half of last year, but funding totals are still much lower than they were three years ago.
Demand for Index's new funds is already exceeding fundraising goals, the people said. The firm expects to collect all its capital from existing limited partners and not raise from new ones, according to one of the people. Index has made filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission that indicate fundraising, but not the amounts targeted.
Index, which operates out of offices in San Francisco, New York and London, has significant positions in companies including cybersecurity company Wiz, interface design company Figma, productivity startup Notion and social platform Discord.
Index has made a push into the booming generative AI sector, with large language model companies Mistral and Cohere in its portfolio, as well as data-management company Scale AI and AI-translation startup DeepL.
Founded in 1996, Index has seen several of its portfolio companies go public in recent years, including software company Datadog, videogame company Roblox and online brokerage Robinhood Markets.
If successful, the new fundraising would put Index Ventures into a small group of venture firms capable of pulling in large funds in a much slower venture market. Globally, only seven venture funds raised $500 million or more in the first quarter of this year, compared with 150 funds in that category in all of 2021, according to PitchBook Data.
Credit: By Yuliya Chernova
