[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Advanced Micro Devices got where it is now by outmaneuvering a rival more than 10 times its size. Now comes the hard part.
The chip maker has managed to build up a substantial business in supplying server processor chips to tech giants that operate massive data centers. It has done this largely at the expense of Intel, which controlled an estimated 99% of the server market before a series of missteps cost the storied Silicon Valley pioneer its lead in the most advanced chip manufacturing.
AMD showed off its latest developments for data-center computing on Tuesday. Among those was a so-called superchip for high-performance computing, which combines a central processor with a graphics processor and memory in the same chip packaging. AMD also announced a graphics-processor-based "accelerator" for artificial-intelligence uses in data centers. That pits it squarely against Nvidia in what has become the hottest segment of computing with the rise of generative AI technologies such as ChatGPT.
Tech giants such as Microsoft, Amazon.com and the parent companies of Google and Facebook are rapidly adopting generative AI, which would appear to make AMD's latest chips a guaranteed success. But Nvidia has a very strong head start in this market.
Furthermore, AMD's latest data-center accelerator won't exactly be striking while the iron is hot. CEO Lisa Su said Wednesday that the chip won't begin "sampling" with major customers until the third quarter, with production beginning in the fourth quarter. That suggests volume shipments might not really start until sometime around mid-2024. Analyst Stacy Rasgon of Bernstein wrote in a note Tuesday that this would be about 18 months after Nvidia's competing product came to the market.
Meanwhile, tech giants facing cost pressures are cutting spending on other data-center components to pour more investment into generative AI. That has affected demand for some of AMD's more traditional server processors. The company's data-center segment saw no revenue growth on a year-over-year basis in the March quarter compared with 42% growth in the December period, and Wall Street is expecting a 7% decline for the current quarter before growth rebounds in the second half of the year. AMD's data-center revenue is expected to rise by 11% for the full year -- paltry compared with the 91% growth analysts polled by FactSet expect for Nvidia's data-center sales in the company's fiscal year that ends in January.
Still, Matt Ramsay of TD Cowen noted in a report after Tuesday's event that AMD is "the increasingly obvious choice as the market looks for alternatives to the AI market leader Nvidia." That alone will keep the company of high interest to the tech giants that are the chip industry's most important customers. Reuters reported Wednesday that Amazon is considering AMD's newest offerings, sending AMD shares higher premarket. But AMD's battle against Intel was helped greatly by the latter's own mistakes. Nvidia has so far shown no propensity to give competitors that sort of help.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
