Google's new Pixel Fold looks like a regular, schmegular phone from the outside. You know, a rectangular slab of glass with a camera on the back.
But you can open it like a book to reveal a bigger screen on the inside.
On Wednesday, Google announced its first flexible-display phone at the company's annual I/O developers conference in Mountain View, Calif.
Even though we haven't tested it yet, I'm intrigued. Samsung has had folding phones for years, and I was never convinced of their appeal. I couldn't come up with a reason to lug around a mini tablet. But with Google's relatively thin, hand-friendly model entering the fray -- bringing along practical gimmicks like a dual-screen face-to-face translation app -- folding phones are starting to make sense.
The Pixel Fold improves on some of the latest Samsung Galaxy Z Fold's weird quirks. The exterior -- aka "front" -- screen on the Samsung model is long and skinny. It's where you would type responses to most of your texts, and because of that, the keyboard can feel cramped. The Pixel Fold's front display is wider, like ones on regular non-folding phones, making it more comfortable to type on.
There's also a nagging design issue on the Samsung that isn't on the new Google phone: The Samsung Galaxy Z Fold's two screen halves don't lie flat when folded, leaving a small gap where the hinge is. The Pixel Fold's screens are flush.
When opened, the Pixel Fold has a big black border around the large interior screen. While some may be disappointed, I see it as a plus: The bigger bezel makes the phone easier to hold in tablet mode.
Google says the Pixel Fold is the thinnest foldable phone, at least in the U.S., U.K., Germany and Japan, where the device will be sold in June. The difference is millimeters -- a closed Galaxy Z Fold is 15.8 mm at its thickest point, while the Pixel Fold is 12.1 mm. That's still like two Hershey's bars stacked on top of each other, so it isn't exactly sleek.
What is all this screen good for, exactly? Seeing the big picture -- literally. Google optimized most of its Android apps to work on the Pixel Fold's 7.6-inch expanded screen, including YouTube, Gmail and Meet. Several third-party apps, such as Spotify, Zoom and Minecraft, will also be Fold-ready.
Some optimized apps will be exclusive to the Pixel at first, including a Live Translate mode that uses both screens. You will see what the other person is saying, in your preferred language, on the interior screen facing you. They will see what you are saying, in their language, on the exterior screen. (The app will be fully functional after Android 14 launches this fall.)
You can also run multiple apps side by side. Dragging and dropping photos into a messaging app went smoothly, but we plan to test this more extensively with other file types. I would use the heck out of the tabletop mode, where half the screen is flat on the table and the other half is propped up. It's great for watching videos, reading articles or taking hands-free photos.
You could turn the Pixel Fold into a mini laptop, with a keyboard on one side of the screen and an app with text input propped up on the other side. It isn't a laptop replacement -- typing on the world's tiniest laptop would only be fun for minutes, not hours -- but it costs as much as one.
The Pixel Fold starts at a whopping $1,799, the same price as Samsung's Galaxy Z Fold 4. Google's nonfolding phone options are the $899 Pixel 7 Pro and the newly introduced $499 Pixel 7a, which has an impressive camera.
For the Fold's price, I was disappointed that its camera system didn't get a bigger upgrade.
The Pixel Fold does have five cameras, however. There are three in the back: a normal, ultrawide and 5x telephoto camera. There's one on the exterior "front" screen: a 9.5-megapixel selfie camera. And you'll find yet another 8-megapixel camera on the interior screen, meant for video calls.
Another point for foldables: high-resolution selfies. When you unfold the screen, you can hold it with the interior dual-screen pointed away. With the "front" screen and the rear-facing camera array pointed at you at the same time, you can take a well-framed selfie with the nicest cameras.
The case for these expandable devices with bendy screens is getting stronger. That said, they're still priced mainly for enthusiastic early adopters who want a big screen wherever they go.
Google is now accepting preorders for the Pixel Fold, which will ship in June. A Verizon spokesman said the device will be widely available at the carrier on June 27.
Foldable fans who are ready to dive in might like the clean, bloatware-less version of Android found in a Pixel Fold. But they may want to see what Samsung has in store in August, when the next Galaxy Z Fold is due. Sorry, Apple people, there's still no buzz of an iFold in the works.
---
Dalvin Brown contributed to this article.
Credit: By Nicole Nguyen
