Databricks agreed to acquire generative artificial-intelligence startup MosaicML in a deal valued at roughly $1.3 billion, a move aimed at capturing the fast-growing demand from businesses to build their own ChatGPT-like tools.
Databricks, a data-storage and -management startup based in San Francisco, says the deal combines its AI-ready data-management technology with MosaicML's language-model platform, enabling businesses to build low-costlanguage models themselves with proprietary data.
Right now, most businesses rely on third-party language models trained on troves of publicly available data accessed online.
Also based in San Francisco, MosaicML, which was launched in 2021 and will become a stand-alone service belonging to Databricks, has been focused on bringing down the cost of using generative AI -- from tens of millions of dollars to hundreds of thousands of dollars per model, according to Naveen Rao, co-founder and chief executive officer.
MosaicML has 62 employees and has raised $64 million to date.
The deal is expected to close during Databricks's second quarter ending July 31.
Generative AI applications are designed to produce original text, images and computer code based on users' natural-language prompts. Interest in the technology has surged since November, when AI startup OpenAI launched ChatGPT, an online generative AI chatbot.
Companies like Anthropic and OpenAI license ready-made language models to businesses, which then build generative AI apps on top of them. Driven by strong commercial demand for these models, the generative AI market has expanded dramatically -- creating openings for startups like MosaicML that say they can offer similar AI models, but at lower cost and customized with a company's data.
"If you're building a model from scratch, you know what you're feeding it," said Databricks Chief Executive Ali Ghodsi. Off-the-shelf models, which are ready to use because they have already been trained on internet data, are filled with extraneous information that can skew results, Ghodsi said.
Many companies are wary of privacy and security issues around sharing their data in models built by outside vendors, he said.
Credit: By Angus Loten and Belle Lin
