[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Cloud giants are feasting on Nvidia's chips again. The company had better hope they don't step away from the table soon.
Nvidia's fiscal fourth-quarter results last week were the latest from chip makers enjoying a strong uptick in data-center spending. Intel Corp. and Advanced Micro Devices reported solid results for their respective data-center businesses last month. But for Nvidia, the comeback is especially sweet since the data-center opportunity is what caused Wall Street to significantly re-evaluate the company previously known mostly for videogaming processors. Thanks to sharp gains since last week's results, Nvidia's shares finally crested their peak value before a brutal selloff late in 2018.
That also sets a high bar. At 40 times forward earnings, Nvidia is once again among the most expensive chip stocks. It falls upon its data-center business to justify that multiple. Data-center revenue surged 43% year over year to $968 million in the quarter ended Jan. 26 -- nearly twice the growth rate Wall Street expected. Analysts expect Nvidia's data-center growth to average 54% on a year-over-year basis in the next four quarters.
That is possible as long as its largest customers don't move into another "digestion" period. Cloud giants Google, Microsoft and Amazon.com spend billions a year building out their networks, but in a lumpy and unpredictable way. Capital spending by those three rose only 9% in 2019 after surging 49% the year before. Intel, which logged pronounced weakness in its own data-center business earlier in the year, said major cloud players were taking time to "digest" previous investments. In its fourth-quarter earnings call, the chip giant predicted a similar phase later this year.
Nvidia made no such projection. In its own call, the company said a growing portion of its data-center business is coming from demand related to "inference" in which artificial-intelligence systems start making decisions based on trained models.
Several analysts believe the market for AI inference is ultimately much larger than that of AI training, where Nvidia's graphic processors have also been popular.
In other words, Nvidia seems to be at another early stage of a potentially big market. That is great for the long term, but it doesn't shield the chip maker from the unpredictable cycle of spending by large customers.
Those lumps can be painful. After the stock hit its last peak, Nvidia shed more than half its market value in less than three months. That selloff was sparked by a dual slowdown in data-center revenue and the collapse of the cryptocurrency mining bubble, which had inflated demand for the company's videogaming processors. Stacy Rasgon of Bernstein, who upgraded Nvidia to a "buy" rating on Wednesday, noted that "investors will need to be prepared for more volatility" as Nvidia's business keeps driving higher.
Digestion can sometimes be painful.

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
