BEIJING -- A student at an elite Chinese university accused the school of trying to muzzle her #MeToo activism in a surprising open letter that set off a scramble by the country's censors.
In the letter, which began circulating online Monday, Yue Xin said she joined other Peking University students in submitting an open-records request about a rape allegation from 20 years ago involving a then-professor. The school rejected the request on Friday, the letter said, and two days later a university official burst into her room late at night with her mother.
They forced her to delete materials related to the case from her phone and laptop, the letter said, and the following morning Ms. Yue was told to sign a statement swearing off further involvement before being taken home by her mother."I'm afraid and furious. Applying for open information constitutes what kind of crime?" Ms. Yue said in the letter.
In a statement posted online, the university disputed Ms. Yue's account. It said that her adviser contacted her mother after failing to reach the student on the phone and that she left campus to avoid disturbing other students. It didn't address other allegations by Ms. Yue, such as the forced statement. The university didn't respond to a request to comment. Ms. Yue and her family couldn't be reached to comment.
Ms. Yue's letter ricocheted around Chinese social media and went viral among the university's large and influential alumni, with users battling censors to keep it online. Searches for Ms. Yue's name were blocked on the Twitter-like Weibo microblogging platform. Several local media reports about her campaign were taken down on Tuesday.
The rape allegations from 20 years ago that drew Ms. Yue's attention resurfaced this month and set off calls for action against teachers at several other universities. The activism is a mark of the pent-up frustration over sexual harassment in China, and the pushback from authorities -- such as the tussle over Ms. Yue's letter -- shows their determination to keep social movements under control.
To keep Ms. Yue's letter from being scrubbed, some users of the popular WeChat messaging app posted images of the letter printed askew or upside down in an apparent effort to confuse the platform's censorship algorithms. A copy of the letter was also uploaded to the blockchain network of cryptocurrency platform Ethereum, making it theoretically impossible to censor.
Critics of the Communist Party have found themselves kicked off platforms such as YouTube and Twitter that are outside Chinese government control, typically after armies of users loyal to the party reported them for violations of community guidelines. Posting Ms. Yue's letter on the Ethereum network negates that tactic, because data added to a blockchain, the decentralized ledgers used to track cryptocurrency transactions, can't be altered or erased.
Weibo Corp. and Tencent Holdings Ltd., which owns the WeChat social-messaging service, didn't respond to requests to comment.
In recent years, sensitive political discussions have rarely outrun China's online censorship machine, which relies on human censors, software filtering and, lately, artificial-intelligence applications. One previous instance, in 2016, concerned the death in police custody of a graduate from another of Beijing's elite universities and led to the firing of four policemen.
Feng Yuan, a leading feminist scholar, said Peking University's intimidation of Ms. Yue, although it could hurt the #MeToo movement, is likely to do more damage to authorities by making them seem deaf to calls for fairness and transparency.
"Even people who don't care very much about sexual harassment or gender discrimination are still concerned with social justice," she said. "This sort of repression just makes more people pay attention."

Credit: By Josh Chin
