Chinese authorities are set to approve Qualcomm Inc.'s planned $44 billion acquisition of Netherlands-based NXP Semiconductors NV in the next few days, according to people familiar with the matter, in what would be another significant step toward easing frayed U.S.-China trade relations.
China's State Administration for Market Regulation has been conducting the antitrust review. The people said a contingent of Qualcomm's legal team arrived in Beijing to hammer out final details.
Approval would remove the last hurdle for a deal that has been stuck for months amid U.S.-China trade tensions, but one of the people said it could come with conditions. Chinese regulators have expressed concerns that the merged company would crowd out domestic businesses in areas such as mobile payments. NXP offers technology and services used for mobile payments.
The likely approval comes as the Trump administration is battling Congress to roll back penalties on Chinese telecommunications giant ZTE Corp., and as U.S. Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross prepares to lead an interagency delegation to Beijing starting June 2, where he is set to meet China's chief economic envoy, Liu He.
The acquisition of NXP is considered critical for San Diego-based Qualcomm, which is dominant in smartphone chips but is looking for growth in other areas. Among NXP's products are chips for automobiles, a rapidly expanding sector as more technology is packed into cars.
Qualcomm had been waiting for Beijing's approval to proceed with the purchase of the Dutch company, having secured permission from the eight other major antitrust regulators around the world.
A spokesman for China's Commerce Ministry said last month that the agency had conducted a preliminary review of the Qualcomm deal's impact on competitors and the market and had found "issues that are hard to resolve, making it difficult to eliminate the negative impact."
The State Administration for Market Regulation couldn't be reached for comment.
On Saturday, Qualcomm President Cristiano Amon spoke at the Big Data Expo in Guiyang, China. While he didn't touch on the company's plan to acquire NXP, he emphasized Qualcomm's commitment to China. "China is very important for Qualcomm," he said. "We're rooted in China, we have developed a number of very strong partnerships. Nothing can separate us from China."
Earlier last week, Qualcomm announced artificial-intelligence-related tie-ups with several Chinese companies including Baidu Inc.
---
Yang Jie contributed to this article.

Credit: By Yoko Kubota and Lingling Wei
