South Korea's SK Hynix plans to invest roughly $4 billion to build an advanced chip-packaging facility in West Lafayette, Ind., according to people familiar with the matter, a boost to the Biden administration's ambitions to restore America's standing as a semiconductor power.
The SK Hynix facility, with nearby access to Purdue University, home to one of the U.S.'s biggest semiconductor and microelectronics-engineering programs, is expected to create around 800 to 1,000 new jobs, the people said. A mix of state and federal tax incentives and other support are expected to be made available to help finance the project, the people said. Operations could begin in 2028, one of the people said. SK Hynix's board is expected to soon vote on the matter to complete the decision.
SK Hynix, one of the world's largest chip makers by revenue, has seen its profile skyrocket during the latest artificial-intelligence boom. It dominates in the so-called high-bandwidth memory market, with SK Hynix serving as the exclusive partner to Nvidia's most-advanced graphic-processor units. The two types of chips get bundled together, enabling faster data-processing speeds critical to generative AI tools, such as OpenAI's ChatGPT.
Based in Icheon, South Korea, SK Hynix has seen its market capitalization more than double in the past year to roughly 129 trillion Korean won, or $96 billion. Chief Executive Kwak Noh-jung said this year that AI could help drive the company's valuation to 200 trillion won.
A SK Hynix spokeswoman said the company "is reviewing its advanced chip packaging investment in the U.S., but hasn't made a final decision yet."
Nvidia's AI chips are the crown jewel of the semiconductor industry. Being able to claim at least some parts of the manufacturing supply chain for such prized tech components would represent a significant breakthrough for the U.S., when nearly all the related production occurs in South Korea, Taiwan or other parts of Asia.
Advanced chip packaging -- the final steps of semiconductor production -- is a critical facet of the Biden administration's U.S. Chips Act.
SK Hynix accounts for roughly 73% of the HBM market by memory gigabytes, with South Korea's Samsung Electronics at around 22% and Idaho-based Micron with about 5%, according to SemiAnalysis's latest estimates.
Credit: By Jiyoung Sohn and John Keilman
