Oklo, a nuclear-fission startup backed by Sam Altman, plans to go public through a merger with his special-purpose acquisition company, company officials said Tuesday.
The deal would add to recent SPAC mergers involving nuclear companies and test investor appetite for clean-energy startups, which surged in 2020 and early 2021 before falling out of favor. Companies such as Oklo trying to build a new generation of smaller nuclear-power projects must prove they can deliver on time and on budget, unlike the fleet of large nuclear plants that preceded them.
California-based Oklo is developing a small modular nuclear-reactor design and plans to sell electricity into the competitive-power market, including through the kind of agreements that wind and solar developers often cut with corporate and industrial firms that want to buy carbon-free power.
Altman, the chief executive of OpenAI -- the artificial-intelligence startup behind the viral chatbot ChatGPT -- said the nuclear-energy industry can make electricity that is "a way better deal than anything else out there."
Nuclear fission can generate energy without greenhouse-gas emissions, and, unlike other technologies such as solar, it can do so 24 hours a day. The process of splitting atoms in nuclear-fission power plants provides nearly 20% of U.S. electricity.
Oklo is valued in the transaction at roughly $850 million. Somewhat unusually, it would go public by combining with AltC Acquisition, a SPAC co-founded by Altman and Michael Klein, a former Citigroup banker and SPAC creator.
Also known as a blank-check company, a SPAC is a shell company that raises money, then lists publicly with the sole intent of combining with a private company to take it public. After regulators approve the transaction, the company going public replaces the SPAC in the stock market.
Such deals are known for enriching company insiders at the expense of other investors. At least a dozen startups that went public during the SPAC boom have filed for bankruptcy, and many others are burning through their cash.
Even in the risky world of SPACs, it is uncommon for an investor to take one of their companies public through one of their own blank-check companies, though not unprecedented. Having the same investor on both sides of a deal can raise concerns for other shareholders about whether they are getting the best outcome.
The AltC SPAC is also running up against its deadline to do a deal before it has to return cash to its investors, raising questions about the merger's timing.
AltC and Oklo said they have been working on the transaction for nine months and that AltC had entered into a letter of intent that extended the deadline for three months. Altman recused himself from the transaction review and approval processes on both sides. Altman, Oklo's founders and Klein have agreed not to sell shares until well after the deal closes, the companies said.
AltC holds $500 million in cash that Oklo could use to expand the business, though that figure will likely drop. SPAC investors can pull their money out of such deals before they close and have been withdrawing in droves during market turbulence over the past two years, making it harder for companies to raise substantial amounts of cash from the transactions. Mergers that lack simultaneous private investments such as the proposed Oklo transaction have been among the worst performers.
Small modular reactor startup X-energy is attempting to go public through a SPAC backed by private-equity firm Ares Management in a $1.8 billion deal. The two sides lowered the valuation by $300 million last month. Competitor NuScale Power went through a blank-check merger last year. Its stock is down about 25%, less than the average decline for companies that went public this way.
"It has been a difficult year in the SPAC world but I always try not to pay too much attention to trends and look at each opportunity," Altman said.
Altman is also a backer of nuclear-fusion startup Helion Energy, which signed a deal with Microsoft, believed to be the first commercial agreement for fusion power. Nuclear-fusion systems such as Helion's would theoretically generate electricity from the energy released when hydrogen and helium are combined, the process that powers the stars. Microsoft has agreed to purchase electricity from Helion within about five years.
Both Oklo and Helion will try to directly compete with other forms of power generation, as opposed to asking utility companies and their ratepayers to commit to funding projects for which the first-of-a-kind design costs could be uncertain.
Oklo plans to deliver its first reactors in Idaho and Ohio and must navigate a rigorous licensing process with the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Altman said the goals of making artificial intelligence and energy cheap and abundant are tied together.
"The AI systems of the future will need tremendous amounts of energy and this fission and fusion can help deliver them," Altman said, adding that he thinks that as AI advances it will contribute to nuclear-system designs.
Credit: By Jennifer Hiller and Amrith Ramkumar
