Suddenly, computers can do things that seemed impossible not so many years ago, from mastering the game of Go and acing Atari games to translating text and recognizing images. The secret is that these programs learn from experience. The great artificial-intelligence boom depends on learning, and children are the best learners in the universe. So computer scientists are starting to look to children for inspiration.
Everybody knows that young children are insatiably curious, but I and other researchers in the field of cognitive development, such as Laura Schulz at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, are beginning to show just how that curiosity works. Taking off from these studies, the computer scientists Deepak Pathak and Pulkit Agrawal have worked with others at my school, the University of California, Berkeley, to demonstrate that curiosity can help computers to learn, too.
One of the most common ways that machines learn is through reinforcement. The computer keeps track of when a particular action leads to a reward -- like a higher score in a videogame or a winning position in Go. The machine tries to repeat rewarding sequences of actions and to avoid less-rewarding ones.
This technique still has trouble, however, with even simple videogames such as Super Mario Bros. -- a game that children can master easily. One problem is that before you can score, you need to figure out the basics of how Super Mario works -- the players. Simply trying to maximize your score won't help you learn these general principles. Instead, you have to go out and explore the Super Mario universe.
Another problem with reinforcement learning is that programs can get stuck trying the same successful strategy over and over, instead of risking something new. Most of the time, a new strategy won't work better, but occasionally it will turn out to be much more effective than the tried-and-true one. You also need to explore to find that out.
The same holds for real life, of course. When I get a new smartphone, I use something like reinforcement learning: I try to get it to do specific things that I've done many times before, like call someone up. (How old school is that!) If the call gets made, I stop there. When I give the phone to my 4-year-old granddaughter, she wildly swipes and pokes until she has discovered functions that I didn't even suspect were there. But how can you build that kind of curiosity into a computer?
Drs. Pathak and Agrawal have designed a program to use curiosity in mastering videogames. It has two crucial features to do just that. First, instead of just getting rewards for a higher score, it's also rewarded for being wrong. The program tries to predict what the screen will look like shortly after it makes a new move. If the prediction is right, the program won't make that move again -- it's the same old same old. But if the prediction is wrong, the program will make the move again, trying to get more information. The machine is always driven to try new things and explore possibilities.
Another feature of the new program is focus. It doesn't pay attention to every unexpected pixel anywhere on the screen. Instead, it concentrates on the parts of the screen that can influence its actions, like the columns or walls in Mario's path. Again, this is a lot like a child trying out every new action she can think of with a toy and taking note of what happens, even as she ignores mysterious things happening in the grown-up world. The new program does much better than the standard reinforcement-learning algorithms.
Super Mario is still a very limited world compared with the rich, unexpected, unpredictable real world that every 4-year-old has to master. But if artificial intelligence is really going to compete with natural intelligence, more childlike insatiable curiosity may help.

Credit: By Alison Gopnik
