Nvidia's sales and earnings more than doubled in its most recent quarter, showcasing the momentum of the nearly two-year-old AI boom despite concerns that investment has surged ahead too quickly.
The company also said Wednesday that gross profit margins narrowed in the quarter compared with the period that ended in April. Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress pinned the blame partly on production issues with its next-generation Blackwell chips that required a design tweak. However, Nvidia said production will ramp up as expected and demand is strong.
The overall results, although still robust, highlighted challenges from the increased complexity of Nvidia's newest products and showed its growth slowing from the supercharged clip over the past year.
Investors responded by sending its shares down by more than 6% in after-hours trading. Through Wednesday's close, the shares had gained more than 150% this year alone, pushing its valuation above $3 trillion and making it the second-largest listed company in the world behind Apple.
Analysts on an earnings call peppered Nvidia executives with questions about the sustainability and returns of the tech industry's massive investments in its chips and the other infrastructure that powers new generative artificial intelligence systems.
Chief Executive Jensen Huang tried to allay those jitters, pointing to new opportunities that generative AI is throwing up for large companies and startups.
"There's just so many different directions that generative AI is going, and so we're actually seeing the momentum of generative AI accelerating," he said.
Nvidia's chips have become the computational workhorses of the AI boom, essential to the creation and deployment of AI systems like OpenAI's ChatGPT. As its sales have surged, its stock has pushed up the broader market and its quarterly earnings reports have become regular tests of the boom's staying power.
The AI chip giant on Wednesday said sales in the three months through July more than doubled from a year earlier to $30 billion, and it projected around $32.5 billion for its current quarter. Nvidia's profit also more than doubled to $16.6 billion. All those figures topped Wall Street forecasts in a FactSet survey.
Big technology companies' outlays on AI have been driving Nvidia's results.
Google parent Alphabet said last month that its capital spending would be elevated through the second half of this year, at least $12 billion a quarter. Amazon.com, Microsoft and Meta all stepped up spending in recent quarters, too, with much of the money going into AI-focused data centers that house Nvidia's chips.
In its latest quarter, the lion's share of Nvidia's revenue -- $26.3 billion of it -- came from the data-center division that houses its AI chips. The company's gaming and AI personal computer division had $2.9 billion of sales, the company said, up 16% from a year earlier.
The AI boom has brought challenges. To boost the performance of its Blackwell chips, Nvidia moved to a new method of stitching the silicon together that analysts said is causing manufacturing challenges.
It recently informed customers of a several-months delay in the chips' rollout, although the company is expecting to produce them in large quantities in the coming months.
Nvidia said Wednesday that it made a change to Blackwell's design to improve the quality of its manufacturing. The company booked provisions of $908 million in its last quarter related primarily to the issues with Blackwell manufacturing, according to a securities filing.
Huang said in the analyst call that the alteration was complete and that no "functional changes" were necessary.
Nvidia faces growing competition from startups and more established rivals such as Advanced Micro Devices, which is projecting $4.5 billion of revenue this year from its AI chips.
Regulators are taking a closer look at Nvidia's dominance in AI chips, and U.S. restrictions on the sale of its most advanced chips to Chinese customers are limiting its opportunities in the country.
Nvidia has repeatedly blown through Wall Street forecasts and its own guidance.
But its growth rate has also begun to ebb in recent quarters, as it butts up against comparisons with last year's bonanza, and it is becoming harder to significantly outpace outsize expectations each quarter.
Still, the company remains atop an AI-chip market that Gartner forecasts will have sales of more than $84 billion this year, up from an estimate of $71 billion as recently as May.
Nvidia's stock in June briefly became the most valuable listed company in the world before a summer swoon where it fell more than a quarter amid concerns over the outlook for AI spending. It bounced back almost as sharply since.
Generate image description

Credit: By Asa Fitch
