Chinese technology companies have long taken their cues from Silicon Valley, hence the Chinese equivalents to Google, YouTube, Twitter and Uber.
This past year brought a reckoning for some Silicon Valley icons. Uber Technologies had to do some soul-searching about its workplace culture that allegedly permitted sexual harassment. Facebook and Google parent Alphabet acknowledged roles in spreading fabricated news that might have amped up social divisions in the U.S. during last year's presidential election.
So will 2018 see China's tech giants engage in a bout of soul-searching too? After all, 2017 has seen their power and social impact swell. Alibaba Group Holding and Tencent Holdings -- which dominate mobile internet services -- doubled in market value, lofting them among the world's 10 most valuable tech companies. Beijing Bytedance Technology, parent of artificial-intelligence-powered news app Toutiao, is seeking $30 billion in valuation in its newest funding round, higher than Twitter's $18 billion.
Some investors, others in the industry and social-media users think the big tech companies should do some self-reflection, pointing to a brewing dissatisfaction with their outsize influence and commercial power.
"Do you really think that the internet world is yours and that you can control it easily, use it whichever way you like and rob it as you wish?" Qin Shuo, a former editor of newspaper China Business News, wrote recently on his personal blog.
Mr. Qin has written of his disappointment with the big tech companies' penchant for public spats and smear campaigns. He has called out Alibaba and Tencent for not behaving in ways that he thinks great companies are supposed to.
Like their Silicon Valley counterparts, Chinese tech companies have created innovative products and services. As in the U.S., their founders enjoy rock-star status among the public. They're seen as smart and hardworking, unlike moguls in industries such as real estate, which are seen as rife with bribery and nepotism.
The influence their companies wield over society is arguably much greater than their U.S. analogues. Alibaba, which started in e-commerce, and Tencent, in online games and social media, oversee empires that stretch from payments to entertainment and meal delivery, and they reach nearly all 751 million Chinese internet users.
That has given them huge swaths of customer data while facing fewer restrictions than their U.S. counterparts. They also see little option other than to work with China's authoritarian government, which is determined to harness new technologies to build a surveillance state and control society.
"Internet moguls are worse than robber barons," an investor told me last week. "If I look at my career, I have created a bunch of monsters, unfortunately."
Tencent didn't respond to requests to comment. An Alibaba spokeswoman says the company creates jobs and economic opportunities for small business in China and advocates for rural education, poverty alleviation, environmental conservation and other social causes.
Liu Xingliang, head of research at Beijing-based analytics firm Data Center of China Internet, says critics of the tech giants don't appreciate how powerless they are, facing a government that can punish their disobedience or reward them with lucrative orders. As for developing facial-recognition and other surveillance technologies, he says, if the big companies don't form partnerships with the government, someone else will.
"The giants are dancing with shackles on their feet," says Mr. Liu. "Ordinary folks only see their glamorous dancing steps but miss the shackles."
Still, the Chinese internet industry would do well to heed the social-media chatter and grumbling from investors as signs that the public's goodwill is dwindling. To prod that soul-searching, here are questions they can ask themselves.
First, how influential is your company? When talking to executives at the biggest internet companies, I always find it perplexing that, while they're proud that their services and products are popular, they're reluctant to admit that their companies are influential.
Like it or not, these internet platforms wield enormous power. Search engine Baidu decides the results of online queries for most Chinese. Toutiao determines what news its 219 million monthly active users read. If that isn't influence, what is?
Second, as powerful as the Chinese government is, is it absolutely crucial to compete for government orders? When I challenge the companies about taking government contracts, they always say that if they don't do it, their rivals will. But the market is now big enough for companies to survive without government largess. True, their size, share price and market valuation might lag behind as a result, but, in turn, they might face fewer demands from the government.
Third, is a little courage possible? I expected the big Chinese e-commerce companies to show some spine after the Beijing government this winter cleared tenements seen as fire hazards, summarily evicting large numbers of migrant workers, including delivery workers for Alibaba and JD.com. None of those companies spoke out. Instead, Alibaba and Tencent started a very public war, with their executives nattering at conferences and online that the other's business model is more harmful to society.
"Chinese companies will only have a little humility when their valuations fall," says a venture capitalist. "Winning is everything."
---
Follow Li Yuan on Twitter @LiYuan6 or write to li.yuan@wsj.com.

Credit: By Li Yuan
