WASHINGTON -- The Federal Trade Commission said it would investigate the growing arms race among the biggest technology companies to produce and commercialize artificial intelligence.
The agency said Thursday it had issued orders seeking information about AI investments to Microsoft, OpenAI, Amazon.com, Anthropic and Google owner Alphabet. OpenAI is the developer of ChatGPT, the AI chatbot that was released in November 2022 and now has versions tailored for business applications.
The FTC under Chair Lina Khan has expressed concern about whether dominant technology firms would quickly command the growing field of generative AI, systems that have humanlike abilities to converse, create media, write computer code and more.
The FTC, which shares antitrust authority with the Justice Department, said it would use its study to probe the companies' investments and partnerships and how they affect the competitive landscape for AI.
Microsoft has invested $13 billion in OpenAI since 2019 in exchange for the right to 49% of future profits. OpenAI says Microsoft holds a "minority economic interest" in an OpenAI for-profit entity.
Some FTC officials were concerned that the agency wasn't told about the investment in advance. Last year, officials began an informal look into whether that Microsoft-OpenAI transaction model could be used to avoid early antitrust review of AI investments.
Google and Amazon are major investors in Anthropic, a rival of OpenAI.
Adam Kovacevich, chief executive of the Chamber of Progress, said the FTC's focus on three big technology companies and two AI developers shows that Khan has "embraced the idea that the AI space is already locked up and she views these investment deals as evidence of that."
Kovacevich, whose group's members include Google and Amazon, said the market for AI products and services is more competitive than the FTC's study suggests.
Google said that its investments preserve room for AI companies to work with competitors and that it doesn't have exclusive rights to use Anthropic's technology.
Microsoft said it would cooperate with the FTC's request. "Partnerships between independent companies like Microsoft and OpenAI, as well as among many others, are promoting competition and accelerating innovation," said Rima Alaily, a corporate vice president for competition and market regulation.
Credit: By Dave Michaels
