Advanced Micro Devices is starting to roll out its newest chips for artificial intelligence, the company said on Wednesday, presenting Nvidia with perhaps its toughest challenge yet in the race to supply semiconductors that undergird the AI boom.
The chips are expected to become widely available as manufacturers of servers incorporate them into their systems and cloud-computing companies including Microsoft and Oracle begin to offer access to them.
"The year has shown us that AI isn't just kind of a cool new thing; it's actually the future of computing," Chief Executive Lisa Su said.
AMD is expecting a strong reception. The company said in its latest earnings report that it anticipated $400 million of revenue from its AI chips in the fourth quarter and more than $2 billion next year, driven by insatiable demand for computing power that is necessary to produce advanced AI systems such as OpenAI's ChatGPT or Google's Bard.
AMD's shares closed down 1.3% at $116.82 each on Wednesday. Nvidia dropped about 2.3%.
Nvidia has been the dominant player in the AI chip market. The company reported about $14.5 billion of sales in the division that houses its AI chips for its latest quarter, up from $3.8 billion the same period the previous year. The sharp jump in sales sent Nvidia's stock soaring, and the company became one of a handful worth more than $1 trillion in June.
AMD is among a number of startups and large tech companies trying to capitalize on AI demand and challenge Nvidia. Chip maker Intel has a suite of AI chips already in the market, and Amazon.com and Google have been making their own AI chips. Microsoft said in November that it, too, was making an AI chip called the Maia 100.
The market for AI chips in data centers, where most artificial-intelligence computation takes place, could grow to $400 billion by 2027, Su said. That far exceeds other industry forecasts, including from the research firm Gartner, which in August predicted AI-chip revenue to reach around $119 billion in 2027, up from about $53 billion this year.
Neither AMD nor Nvidia can sell their most advanced AI chips to Chinese customers without a license from the U.S., however, constraining their ability to tap one of the world's biggest computing markets. The U.S. Commerce Department has placed curbs on the chips out of concern China could use them to carry out cyber warfare and develop advanced weapons. Nvidia has developed China-specific chips that fall below performance thresholds that would require a license, something AMD has yet to do.
AMD said systems outfitted with its new chips were as good as Nvidia's top-of-the-line H100-based systems in creating complex AI tools, but were faster at generating responses from large language systems, although the claim couldn't be independently verified. The company touted the large amounts of computer memory it was bringing to the table, which allowed it to handle ever-larger AI systems.
The company is offering two variants of its latest chips. One, called the MI300X, is an advanced graphics processor adapted for AI computation. The other, called the MI300A, combines graphics processing capabilities with standard-issue central processing units, and is aimed both at AI and scientific research.
Nvidia has been dominant in the early phases of the AI boom partly because it invested in the technology years before it was in high demand, and the surge in interest in generative AI caught competitors like AMD by surprise. More software has been written to do AI computations using Nvidia chips, making them an industry standard and leading to a surge in demand that the company has at times struggled to keep up with.
The company isn't standing pat, either. In November, it announced a system called the HGX H200 that features more advanced computer memory to cater to big AI language systems. Further advances in the lineup are expected next year.
Nvidia's lead has led to a thirst for alternatives that AMD hopes to capitalize on. AMD's Su said this year that she was "not a believer in moats when the market is moving as fast as it is."
Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella said in November that his company's Azure cloud-computing service would be first to offer AMD's new MI300X AI chips.
Meta Platforms, Facebook's owner, is another customer planning to put the chips in its data centers to help run its AI systems.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
