Salesforce reported a sharp increase in quarterly earnings and upgraded its projection for annual profitability as the benefits of cost cuts outweighed sluggish growth in sales of its business software.
Net profit rose nearly 19-fold in the three months through July, while revenue increased by 11%. Both numbers topped analysts' expectations, but the sales-growth figure was similar to that of the prior quarter, which was the lowest on record for the San Francisco-based company.
Salesforce said it now expects its operating profit margin to be 13.3% for this fiscal year, which runs through January, compared with an estimate of 11.4% it gave three months ago.
Salesforce shares rose 6% in after-hours trading following the results announcement.
Like other major tech companies, Salesforce has been grappling with the hangover of a pandemic boom when much of life and work shifted online. Weakening profitability attracted a cluster of activist investors in the past year. The company, which specializes in software that helps sales staff manage customer relationships, laid off 10% of its workforce and restructured its sales team this year in a bid to reorient the business toward maximizing profits and away from a focus largely on revenue growth.
It has been a big adjustment for Salesforce Chief Executive Officer Marc Benioff.
"I'm a growth CEO, so that's what I like to do," he said Wednesday during an earnings conference call. "But I'll tell you now, I am quite addicted to the bottom line as well."
Investors have responded positively to the belt tightening and to the prospects that new artificial intelligence will enhance its product offerings. Salesforce is the best-performing stock in the Dow Jones Industrial Average this year, rising more than 60% through the market close Wednesday. That outpaced tech giants including Apple and Microsoft, which have each gained less than 45%.
Benioff has been reducing the company's head count, relying more on automated selling, paring real-estate costs and intensifying its scrutiny of spending. Salesforce had long used mergers and acquisitions as a way to grow, but it disbanded its M&A committee to reflect the company's new focus on efficiency.
The company's net income in the three months through July rose to $1.27 billion from $68 million a year earlier as its revenue expanded to $8.60 billion.
Salesforce, which held an event in June to demonstrate its plans to integrate AI into its products, is one of the many companies trying to ride the wave of interest in AI services. Sparked by the popularity of the OpenAI chatbot ChatGPT, tech companies have made big bets on generative AI, which can produce sophisticated images and text from simple prompts.
Still, it could take time before AI demand kicks in, said Mike Spencer, Salesforce's head of investor relations. He said sales from its newest AI-powered software won't likely have a noticeable impact on revenue this year, adding that anemic economic growth is still weighing on the company's top line.
Salesforce executives said during the earnings call that customers are scrutinizing their software spending more and taking longer to make buying decisions
"It's a consistent overhang, and I don't think we're alone in that environment," said Spencer.
The stock is still trading below its record high reached in the fall of 2021, when the pandemic-related boom fueled many tech shares.
Credit: By Tom Dotan
