By virtue of their medical training, doctors have a wealth of knowledge, experience, wisdom and judgment. Yet even the greatest of human brains can't remember or interpret a tiny fraction of the information now available on human health and disease. Just a few years ago, most medical decisions were based entirely on the knowledge in the head of the doctor at the time the decision was made. Today that is beginning to change, thanks to the rapid development of artificial intelligence.
The evolution that brought the world ChatGPT and similar large language models is making AI one of the most quickly adopted technologies in history, promising profound changes for the way we live and work. Some of the most important will take place in the field of healthcare. As the technology behind these systems progresses, AI will soon be as much a part of our healthcare experience as doctors, nurses, waiting rooms and pharmacies. In fact, it won't be long before AI has mostly replaced or redefined all of these.
A host of AI "decision support systems" are already helping to give physicians access to a wealth of information at the point of care. These systems leverage what computers are naturally good at -- storing, recalling and correlating vast amounts of information virtually instantaneously -- and link it to the ability of a human expert to reason intuitively and think creatively.
When early so-called "expert systems" were first being developed in the 1980s and 1990s, they were met with hostility by many physicians who worried that computers would soon be in charge of medical decision-making, taking the "doctor's touch" out of the equation and binding the hands of physicians whose opinions differed from the computer's analysis. But that's not what happened. Research has shown that these systems have gotten better and better at helping doctors spot potential outcomes that they might have missed, without taking the ultimate decision-making authority out of their hands.
We are fast approaching a time when "centaur doctors," combining the best parts of human intelligence and AI assistance, will be empowered to make bold medical decisions with far fewer unintended consequences. That's vitally important, because medical mistakes account for about a quarter of a million deaths annually in the U.S. alone. It is not an exaggeration to say that AI-enabled healthcare already has saved countless lives.
An AI program called Med-Aware, for example, helps doctors avoid accidentally prescribing the wrong medication. The system was pioneered by Dr. Gidi Stein after he heard about a 9-year-old boy who died because a doctor clicked the wrong box, ordering up a prescription for a blood thinner instead of asthma medicine. Mistakes like this are frighteningly common: About 70% of medication errors that result in adverse effects are prescription errors.
It's not hard to understand how this could be such a pervasive problem. The FDA has approved tens of thousands of prescription drug products, many of which have very similar names. There's Novolin and Novolog, vinblastine and vincristine, hydroxyzine and hydralazine. If you recall that doctors have famously bad handwriting, you can imagine how this could have been problematic in the days in which most "scripts" were written by hand. It's still a challenge in the digital age, when a simple misspelling or temporary lapse in memory can deliver the wrong medication to a patient.
When a doctor prescribes a medicine that doesn't match the patient's medical needs as assessed by MedAware, that physician gets an alert. The system also signals doctors if they attempt to prescribe a medication that could interact negatively with one of the patient's existing medications -- another common error that is almost never checked by physicians. In hospitals around the world using MedAware, the doctor still has the final say. The system simply offers an extra check, one that is particularly beneficial when physicians are overworked and exhausted.
There is also another advantage. The risk of making mistakes often keeps doctors from thinking creatively, restricting their options to a small number of familiar treatments. These practices, at their best, are grounded in clinical trials, but with the combined power of AI and individual data clouds, we can do much better than "following the average." An AI-assisted doctor could quickly and confidently evaluate tens of thousands of possible outcomes -- taking into account an individual's unique genetic makeup, biochemistry, lifestyle and personal history -- before offering a selection of recommended treatments.
Clinical decision support systems also help make test results more personalized, adjusting the ranges for age, sex, ethnicity, disease subtypes and so forth. DXplain, an AI tool developed at the Laboratory of Computer Science at Massachusetts General Hospital, provides a probable diagnosis based on clinical manifestations. A randomized control trial showed that using DXplain helped family-medicine residents score significantly better on a diagnosis test involving 30 clinical cases, improving their accuracy rate from 74% to 84%.
Clinical decision-support systems are also used these days to help with laboratory testing and interpretation, providing alerts and highlighting abnormal lab results. They sometimes help avoid the use of riskier or more invasive diagnostic strategies in favor of safer alternatives. Liver biopsies, for instance, are considered the gold standard -- more accurate than noninvasive lab tests -- for diagnosing hepatitis B and C. But AI models can combine multiple data sources, including imaging, blood markers and genetics, to gain much higher accuracy rates without the need for a biopsy.
Pathology reports drive many critical medical decisions, and AI can be used to perform tasks such as automated tumor grading. A study showed that urinary bladder tumor analysis could be performed with AI at an accuracy rate of 93%. Other AI systems are used today for patient safety, clinical management, cost containment and diagnostics support. One decision support system alerts physicians when a patient's electronic health record shows they are eligible for a clinical trial. Another helps ensure documentation accuracy -- for example, confirming that a patient has received vaccines to prevent bacterial infections following surgical spleen removal. Such systems are tremendously useful in places with limited access to clinical experts, bringing a higher level of specialized care than would otherwise be available.
Though there is still some resistance, doctors are increasingly asking for AI systems that can be used as aids. Some will fight against the new technology; that's what happens when diagnostic power balances are in flux. But those who fold these systems into their practices will be doing their patients (and themselves) a great service. At their best, they are akin to having not one expert but thousands upon thousands, all working together at top speed. Because AI is generally inexpensive to run once it has been developed, the potential for optimizing care and making it radically cheaper is striking.
Advances in medical AI are owed in large part to the increasing amount of data at our disposal. Enormous caches of electronic health records, or EHRs, have been amassed about patient interactions at all major health organizations. A 2017 study found that an average of 80 megabytes of information were generated by each patient per year. These records include imaging data, basic testing results, information on patient outcomes and more. And that's before we add in the larger data sets that will become part of each patient's data cloud when we start amassing and integrating genomics, blood analyses, gut microbiome analyses and data from wearable devices.
By feeding data from patients into a deep knowledge system for analysis and interpretation, doctors can derive leading-edge diagnostic and therapeutic approaches uniquely targeted to the individual. One early effort to use large language models this way is GatorTron, developed at the University of Florida, which has been trained using 90 billion words from electronic medical records, enabling it to extract clinical concepts and answer medical questions.
To meet a future in which computer systems can reason, decide and explain their decisions to humans for final approval, new advances in AI will be needed. Traditional computer "expert systems" have been hard to scale because they tend to get convoluted as the rules pile up, leading to incredibly complex decision trees. Human thinking, by contrast, is not purely rule-based. Unlike computers, we are quite good at recognizing when rules shouldn't be applied to a particular case or where the logic breaks down. One of the marvels of the human brain is that it is able to deal with the unexpected.
A breakthrough similar to the one that propelled data-driven AI systems is sorely needed for knowledge-based AI systems. This would lead to a world in which "deep learning" could be joined by "deep reasoning," such that AI can understand implicit relationships, not just ones that have been specifically programmed into its code. What makes this challenge so difficult is that unlike deep learning, where adding massive amounts of computing power and data fueled the leap forward, we need conceptual advances to make deep reasoning achievable.
Soon, however, such systems will become essential in order for doctors to function in a world of exploding data, medical understanding and insights. In the versions of this collaboration most likely to be realized in the immediate future, AI will offer a selection of proposed decisions explained in terms that physicians can understand, giving them a chance to critically assess the underlying reasoning. This closely matches how a medical specialist might guide a family practitioner to make the ultimate care recommendation to a patient. AI will become a powerful teaching tool as well as a powerful tool for dispensing health.
Eventually, with advances in natural language processing and especially recent large language models like ChatGPT, humans and computers will be able to engage in sophisticated, reasoned discussions about a patient, thinking through possibilities together in a real-time exchange. The doctor will be the final arbiter of what gets decided, while being relieved of the impossible burden of learning and integrating the troves of new data and knowledge required to make the most informed decision. Deep reasoning will in time begin to identify connections and concepts that humans simply cannot see or understand without the help of AI.
When this happens -- when AI starts surfacing complex insights rather than just correlating data -- what will doctors do? If these interventions work, will they be incorporated even if we humans cannot explain why they work? That might sound like a step too far, but it's worth emphasizing that we know that many pharmaceutical remedies work without completely understanding the biochemical processes at play, and we are continually awed by the blinding complexity of human physiology.
It's always been this way. The ancient Sumerians and Egyptians were creating medicines from salicylate-rich plants such as willows long before humans understood why such chemicals reduce pain and inflammation. And even though the modern drug derived from these practices, aspirin, has been around for more than 165 years, the mechanisms underlying its effect on the human body are still being studied today. In the end, we suspect that AI will be like aspirin: We will use it because it works, even if we don't fully understand it. It will take a leap of faith, but innovation often involves venturing into the unknown for a time before it finally becomes known.
---
Dr. Hood is the CEO of Phenome Health and a co-founder and professor of the Institute for Systems Biology, and Dr. Price is chief science officer of Thorne HealthTech. This essay is adapted from their new book, "The Age of Scientific Wellness," published on April 4 by Harvard University Press.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Doctor-Patient Eye Contact" -- WSJ April 18, 2023)
Credit: By Lee Hood and Nathan Price
