The prospect of Google offering a mobile search app suited to China undercut shares of the dominant Chinese search engine, but analysts cautioned the U.S. company faces hurdles in regaining entry to a country it split with eight years ago over the issue of censorship.
Shares of Beijing-based tech giant Baidu Inc. fell 7.7% on Wednesday following news that Google is testing a mobile version of its search engine that would adhere to China's strict controls over content.
Trade friction with the U.S. is one broad obstacle to Google's re-entry into China's search market.
"At this moment, it's not a particularly hospitable environment," said Mark Natkin, managing director of industry research firm Marbridge Consulting. "I'd imagine getting such a search permit would be difficult, if not impossible for the company."
The Cyberspace Administration of China, which would need to approve a Google search engine, didn't respond to requests for comment.
There is also Google's troubled history in China.
When the business, now a unit of Alphabet Inc., left China in 2010, company co-founder Sergey Brin attacked Beijing's policies on censorship and human rights -- and the government isn't likely to have forgotten, said Ben Cavender, a senior analyst at China Market Research Group. "China has a very long memory," he said. "I would expect a lot of push back from regulators."
Even as its search engine is locked out of China, Google maintains a sizable presence in the country. It runs three offices of about 700 employees in Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen, and continues to test new programs and expand its investments in China, including opening an artificial-intelligence lab in Beijing in December. The company also hopes to bring its official Google Play app store back into the Chinese market, according to people familiar with the matter.
Mr. Cavender noted other American tech companies such as Facebook have been courting China with little to show for it so far. At the same time, Google's Android smartphone operating system is used by China's smartphone manufacturers, who count on good relations with Google for product development, especially for phones sold globally.
Google also could face push back outside China if it tries to use a censor-friendly version of its search engine to work its way back into the country.
In a statement on Twitter posted Tuesday but later removed, Google researcher Meredith Whittaker said the project was "a violation of Google's pledge" against technology that infringes on human rights. Ms. Whittaker also co-directs a New York University research unit on artificial intelligence and society.
In a tweet, Sen. Marco Rubio (R., Fla.) said the news was "very disturbing," but added he was willing to give Google the benefit of the doubt until more information is presented.
During Google's long absence, China's own search engines and other web services have advanced, erecting yet another obstacle to re-entry, said Shawn Yang, executive director at Blue Lotus Capital Advisors. "They are facing a different environment," he said. "The competition is fierce."
---
Christopher Cameron in Hong Kong contributed to this article.

Credit: Liza Lin, Shan Li
