KALAHARI DESERT, Botswana -- Crouching in the sun-scorched sand, De Beers geologist Charles Skinner picked up an ashy, white cylinder of rock and looked for shimmering evidence that an ancient volcano was sitting below his feet, containing billions of dollars' worth of diamonds.
Mr. Skinner is leading a new effort by diamond merchant De Beers to uncover the first major diamond mine in at least 20 years. De Beers began an early-stage exploration push last year, focusing on the desert of southwest Botswana.
De Beers's undertaking highlights the dilemma faced by diamond miners, who forecast diminishing supplies if they don't discover new caches of gems. Only a blockbuster find will enable them to keep long-term production at current levels, according to De Beers and analysts.
The problem: Only a fraction of the world's underground diamond deposits are large enough to justify the expense of harvesting them.
The push by De Beers, a unit of Anglo American PLC, combines old-school drilling techniques with sophisticated big-data and artificial-intelligence technology in the quest to strike it lucky.
"On the odds side, the deck is stacked against you," Mr. Skinner said. But "exploration depends more on perseverance than on luck." Other diamond miners, such as Alrosa Group, the No. 2 producer by value behind De Beers, are ramping up exploration as production plateaus.
Alrosa, whose core operations are in Russia, says its diamond reserves are sufficient to sustain stable production for 17 years. In Botswana, it is exploring four areas for diamond deposits. "We continue to replenish depleted reserves and search for new deposits," an Alrosa spokeswoman said in an email.
Global diamond production is expected to peak in 2017, when 164 million carats of diamonds are forecast to be produced, according to McKinsey & Co. After that, production is expected to go into a long-term decline, unless major new discoveries are made.
"If you look on a long-term basis, the deposits are not being found," said Phil Swinfen, mining analyst at brokerage firm Numis Securities. "The rock that hosts diamonds is very rare."
Diamond miners have been struggling this year. Softening demand for jewelry and other luxury goods has weighed on prices for rough diamonds. A September sale of rough diamonds by De Beers met with poor demand, and prices could fall even further, analysts said. Detailed results from the sales aren't made public.
De Beers, which mines rough diamonds and sells on to firms that ready them for the market, has slashed production this year as sales ebb. On Thursday, De Beers said third-quarter diamond-sales volume fell 59% from the previous year and production slid 27% to six million carats.
One of the industry's last large-scale diamond finds was Gahcho Kue in Canada, developed by De Beers and Mountain Province Diamonds Inc. Discovered in 1995 and due to start production next year, Gahcho Kue could yield about 4.5 million carats a year over 11 years, based on its reserve base of 55.5 million carats.
That isn't enough to stop the bleeding. De Beers's current crop of diamond mines -- including the world's most valuable, Jwaneng, in Botswana -- are running thin. While they will continue to churn out diamonds for decades, production at many of these mines has peaked.
De Beers is marshaling new technology, including computer algorithms that can comb through the mass of data the company gathers as it scans the Kalahari for signs of a diamond-studded kimberlite, a pipe of solidified lava containing rich veins of diamonds pushed up from the earth's mantle. Only about 15 in 100 kimberlite pipes contains even one diamond, and only a fraction of those have enough to make them worth building a mine, Mr. Skinner says.
Mr. Skinner, a nearly 30-year veteran of De Beers, also focused on sites in Canada, Angola and South Africa. But in the past year he narrowed his search to the Kalahari.
The area in focus, 20 miles north of the village of Tsabong, near the South African border, was first prospected for diamonds in the 1970s, Mr. Skinner says. But the miners weren't able to peer much more than 300 feet below the surface, and abandoned the hunt. He believes evidence of a trove of diamonds may be found deeper -- more than 1,000 feet down.
The evidence so far is inconclusive, Mr. Skinner says. Even if he finds convincing evidence, he would need to persuade De Beers's board that the effort is worth sinking millions into. If the evidence isn't strong enough, the team will have to move its search elsewhere.
Credit: By Scott Patterson
