SHANGHAI -- Chinese e-commerce tycoon Jack Ma used a government-sponsored forum to suggest regulators take a lighter touch in dealing with technology companies, saying the market should be allowed to decide how new industries such as artificial intelligence develop.
"I personally think that the government has to do what the government should do, and the companies do what companies should do," Mr. Ma said at the World Artificial Intelligence Conference in Shanghai on Monday, recalling a conversation he said he had last year with U.S. Secretary of Transportation Elaine Chao about self-driving cars.
"Protecting the backward forces who are crying out loud will be the most important factor in destroying innovation," Mr. Ma said.
Mr. Ma's comments came a week after he announced his plans to retire in one year as executive chairman of Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., the internet giant with businesses in online retailing, cloud computing and mobile payments.
Mr. Ma said he wanted time to pursue philanthropic interests, but some observers saw his decision as part of the fallout from China's authoritarian government increasing restrictions on internet companies.
In recent weeks, Tencent Holdings Ltd.'s shares plunged as the government announced its plan to tighten its grip on videogames. Ride-hailing firm Didi Chuxing Technology Co. has come under scrutiny after police said a driver killed a passenger, the second since May.
In January, Alibaba's mobile-payments affiliate Ant Financial Services Group became a target when Chinese regulators said the company violated new standards on protection of personal data.
Mr. Ma didn't directly refer to any of those events in his speech, which also included his views on how artificial intelligence could transform businesses and society. Mr. Ma urged traditional industries to embrace new technologies and spoke about how sectors such as manufacturing could be transformed through data.
In his speech, Mr. Ma also referenced the recent crackdown on Chinese peer-to-peer lenders, which match small borrowers with ordinary investors. These internet lenders have been blamed for stranding investors when they fail.
Mr. Ma suggested many of those lenders operated illegally under the camouflage of internet-driven financial services. He said the risk with companies that use actual data and artificial intelligence to control risks is low.
---
Yang Jie in Beijing and Liza Lin in Singapore contributed to this article.

Credit: By Yoko Kubota
