Parent, project manager . . . what's the difference?
Back-to-school season means spending weekday afternoons frantically checking and updating multiple calendars, wondering when kids are done with class or practice, figuring out who is going to pick them up. And when everyone is finally home, somebody has the nerve to ask, "What's for dinner?"
There is new technology to minimize the chaos.
Basic online calendars from Google, Apple and others are essential. But new services combine those calendars with other software to keep schedules and carpooling in the same space as grocery lists, meal planning and to-do lists. Home voice assistants and even ChatGPT can also be used to minimize family-organizing headaches.
These tools can help you stay organized -- and sane -- as your kids' schedules once again take over your life.
Maple
This family-management app is a one-stop shop for all of your household needs, including a basic calendar. The app, available free, also has a meal-prep folder and grocery list. You can create folders to keep track of car and home maintenance, pet records and kids' chores.
Maple's best feature: It lets you assign or take ownership of household tasks. The app displays a photo of the person responsible for each chore or to-do item, so no more arguing about who was supposed to buy plane tickets or sign up the kids for piano lessons.
For $7.99 a month, you can get an ad-free version -- otherwise you see banner ads about once every two days. More important, when you pay, you can sync your Google and Apple calendars. Next month, Maple's developer, Grow Maple, plans to add an expense-tracker spreadsheet to the premium version.
Good for: Families with multiple caregivers, such as grandparents and babysitters, because everyone can take on to-do's and track whereabouts.
Cozi
This family organization app is similar to Maple. It includes a shareable calendar, to-do lists and shopping lists. Its unique features include appointment reminders and premade checklists for occasions such as birthday parties and trips. There is a focus on meal planning: You can browse recipes curated by Cozi, import recipes you find online and transfer recipe ingredients to your grocery list.
The key features are free, but a $39-a-year premium version called Cozi Gold is ad-free and includes a birthday tracker and a way to notify people via text when calendar changes are made.
Good for: Very busy or large families who need extra help with meal planning and remembering appointments.
Skylight
This touch-screen device with an integrated calendar has gained a cultlike following. It can sync with Google, Apple, Outlook, Yahoo and even Cozi calendars.
Each calendar -- a 10-inch $160 model and a 15-inch $300 one -- can be mounted to a wall or placed on a stand. Families can keep track of chores, save meal plans and create lists right on the device. If you add events to your existing calendars, they show up on your Skylight calendar. If you add events to the Skylight calendar they will show up on your Google calendar but, for now, they won't show up on other providers' calendars.
An annual $39 subscription adds two nice-to-have features: You can forward emails or PDFs from your child's school and Skylight will extract events to add to your calendars. And you can turn your calendar into a picture frame with unlimited cloud storage. (Skylight separately sells a digital photo frame without the calendar function.)
Good for: Families with older children who want to check their own schedules, manage their own calendar entries and track their chores.
Other tools
-- Echo Show 15: Amazon's $280 15-inch Echo Show contains the same shared calendar that works across Echo Show devices, but the larger screen makes it easier to see the events. Google, Apple, Outlook and Microsoft Office 365 calendars all sync.
With Alexa, you can use your voice to add calendar entries, add items to the shopping list and assign reminders to people. ("Alexa, remind Craig to take out the trash at 6 p.m. every Wednesday.") Alexa Skills such as Allrecipes, Recipe Speak and Betty Crocker can help with meal prep -- with some even guiding you through recipes while you cook.
-- AI Chatbots: With Open AI's ChatGPT, parents can create calendar templates to track kids' activities and appointments. Parents can also ask ChatGPT to create a meal plan for the week, along with a shopping list, based on the number of people in the family and any dietary restrictions.
I tested this out and within seconds I had an impressive list of healthy meals, recipes and shopping lists. On Bard, Google's conversational AI, and on Microsoft's Bing, I got similar results.
When life gets busy, why not outsource the management to tech?
Credit: By Julie Jargon
