Chief executives, politicians, philanthropists and others will gather at Davos, Switzerland, for the 50th time this week. For executive chairman Klaus Schwab, it's a moment to emphasize his version of stakeholder capitalism, or as he puts it "free enterprise with a social orientation."
The concept, which Mr. Schwab started taking about in the 1970s, is often misunderstood, he says. "Stakeholder responsibility means not necessarily that you give money to some third party; it means that you use your know-how, your capacities, to address social or environmental issues," he says. "It's not so much a contradiction between profit and society, it's a contradiction between short term and long term."
It has become more relevant again in recent years, he says, as the very successes of globalization have cast light on the "winners and losers."
"People would say you cannot leave parts of the population behind anymore," says Mr. Schwab, 81, citing protest movements that have broken out around the world. "Those left behind don't care whether, say, a large part of the population in China is doing much better. And they have the capability with social media to organize themselves and to become a tremendous political force."
After development in the past half-century that was for the most part "linear," he says, the planet now faces large and somewhat abstract "tipping points," from climate change to mass migration to artificial intelligence. Advances quickly outstrip the capacity of existing institutions and laws, which adds to the social ferment.
Exacerbating the challenges, he argues, are new technologies that grow ever more complex. "We created the automobile. People could understand what it is," he says. "But today's new technologies, like artificial intelligence, or if you go even further to speak about symbiotic biology or quantum computing, people cannot understand anymore, in a direct way, what the impact on their life will be."
The World Economic Forum, which Mr. Schwab launched as a young academic in 1971, has grown to be an independent international organization under the auspices of the Swiss government, much like the Red Cross. With hefty membership fees, it has $345 million in annual revenue and 800 employees and offices in half a dozen cities around the world, and it holds events all year long, including an annual meeting in China.
Besides the more than 1,000 members and partners, Mr. Schwab works assiduously to forge ties with business and world leaders, including Chinese leader Xi Jinping and President Trump, who is scheduled to speak Tuesday in Davos.
The World Economic Forum has faced plenty of criticism, including internally, as a gathering of self-involved elites who preach virtue more than they practice it and are out of touch with real-world concerns.
Reaching decision makers
Mr. Schwab is defensive about those critiques, arguing that the group does more good than not.
"It's not only unfair, it's incorrect," he says. "Whatever you do, you have people who are making decisions. I would label them decision makers on a political level, on a business level."
As he prepares for the 50th meeting at Davos, he is also emphatic that capitalist-minded business leaders, despite criticisms from populists and others, can address the challenges of the era.
"If I take what has happened the last 50 years, every indicator you take, we have made progress," he says, pointing to population growth but a lower poverty rate, the world-wide spread of literacy, and even his own longer lifespan, about 10 years longer than when he was born. "I'm really an optimist."
---
Mr. Murray is editor in chief of The Wall Street Journal.

Credit: By Matt Murray
