[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
China's push for cloud-computing infrastructure has sent data-center stocks to the stratosphere. That rarefied air will likely prove too thin for some of them.
Data centers are one of the areas in China's "new infrastructure" plan. Instead of building more bridges and roads, this new public-investment initiative is supposed to give a structural upgrade to the economy while boosting short-term growth. Other areas include 5G, artificial intelligence and electric-vehicle charging stations.
Many big Chinese companies heeded the call: Tencent and Alibaba said they plan to invest tens of billions of dollars in cloud computing and cybersecurity infrastructure. That sparked a rally in data-center stocks that count those tech giants as customers. Shares of Nasdaq-listed GDS Holdings surged 66% this year, while those of 21Vianet Group nearly quadrupled.
The pandemic has driven many activities onto the cloud, which raised demand for data centers. Beijing's policy push will bring benefits. Banks will likely lend money at more favorable rates, a boon for asset-heavy industries such as running data centers. Higher share prices make raising money easier: GDS and 21Vianet tapped the market last month.
And local governments will likely follow Beijing's lead and roll out additional incentives. The biggest cities impose quotas on the power data centers can consume. Relaxing such quotas would make it easier for data-center operators to expand closer to customers.
But the push to build more data centers will likely tempt new entrants, potentially creating excess supply. That would drive down prices in low-end segments such as data storage, in which proximity to end users isn't that important.
After the epic rally this year, valuations of such companies are stretched. GDS is unprofitable with an enterprise value equal to 30 times next year's earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, according to S&P Global Market Intelligence.
The coronavirus downturn certainly has a silver lining for Chinese data-center operators. But some of those shares are likely to fall back to Earth, particularly if a rush of new competitors emerges to push down margins, as is often the result of Beijing-backed industrial policies.

Credit: By Jacky Wong
