Peterborough, N.H. -- Presidential incumbents are seldom subjected to competitive primary challenges. Not since 1992, when Pat Buchanan scored 38% in the New Hampshire primary, has anyone given a sitting president a scare. Credit Joe Biden and his friends at the Democratic National Committee with foresight: Somehow they knew 2024 would be scary.
A year ago the DNC demoted the first-in-the-nation Iowa caucuses and New Hampshire primary and put South Carolina's primary first, on Feb. 3. Mr. Biden's stated reason was "diversity," the Palmetto State having far more black voters than either Iowa or New Hampshire. But South Carolina Rep. Jim Clyburn, whose endorsement helped revive Mr. Biden's campaign in 2020, told CNN's Chris Wallace in May that the president had the calendar order rearranged to avoid "embarrassment." "Why should President Biden sit back and allow a state that he finished fifth in" -- New Hampshire -- "be first up?"
New Hampshire Democrats weren't keen on the new calendar. State legislators of both parties cited a state law requiring the Granite State to hold the nation's first presidential primary. So the Democrats will hold a primary on Tuesday -- but Mr. Biden's name won't appear on the ballot and the DNC won't consider the outcome valid. The only national officeholder who will appear on the ballot is Rep. Dean Phillips, who has represented Minnesota's Third Congressional district since 2019.
Mr. Biden's New Hampshire supporters are mounting a write-in campaign in the contest he says doesn't count. What if Mr. Phillips -- or, for that matter, self-help author Marianne Williamson, who also ran in 2020 -- racks up an impressive number of votes against the sitting president? Twice before, as John Fund noted in these pages last week, a U.S. president has been so embarrassed by the New Hampshire primary result that he ended his bid for re-election: Harry S. Truman in 1952 and Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968.
The RealClearPolitics polling average shows Mr. Biden with 58% in New Hampshire to Mr. Phillips's 9.8%. But an American Research Group survey, not included in the average, has the congressman at 28% as of Jan. 15. What I saw of Mr. Phillips last week made me think he may top 10%.
At Post & Beam Brewing in Peterborough, a town west of Manchester, Mr. Phillips was scheduled to speak at 5 p.m. I arrived at 4:40 and found only three elderly women there to hear the candidate, none of whom knew much about him. I asked one, Cynthia Caddell -- she was wearing one of the "Keen on Dean" buttons handed out at the door -- if she'd come as a Phillips supporter.
"No, I love Biden," she said. "But I like to hear all voices. I like to hear from everybody."
Twenty minutes later, the room was at capacity with maybe 125 people. Mr. Phillips strode in nearly on time, his hair elegantly disheveled, wearing a double-vent navy blazer of superior quality, a white button-up shirt and black jeans.
Mr. Phillips is fluent, charming and quick-witted. His half-hour talk combines subtly self-serving stories about his reasons for getting into politics (on the day after Donald Trump's election in 2016, he saw the fear in his daughter's eyes and promised her he would "do something") with claims that Americans aren't as divided as the "anger-tainment industry" wants us to believe. "You can't create a business and intentionally divide, demean and diminish 50% of your potential customers," he said in one of many riffs on the unity theme. "And that's what politics has become. It's a business in which you literally try to offend half your customers."
The justification for Mr. Phillips's candidacy is, of course, Mr. Biden's mental and physical deterioration -- a delicate topic for Democrats. Mr. Phillips brings it up by first criticizing his Republican colleagues in Congress for disparaging Mr. Trump in private and praising him in public. Now, he said, Democrats are indulging in the same hypocrisy by acknowledging Mr. Biden's decline in private but pretending he's fine in public. "His poll numbers are declining. People all over the country are saying they don't think he should run again," he told the Post & Beam crowd. "We were having these conversations quietly. But when the cameras came on, it was 'ridin' with Biden.' "
Mr. Phillips draws another parallel: Republicans aligned with Mr. Trump tried to steal an election, and Mr. Biden and the DNC are disfranchising New Hampshirites in 2024. You'd think Democratic voters would bristle at that comparison, their party's leaders and the media having spent the past three years describing the Jan. 6 Capitol riot as the greatest crime ever committed. But the line drew nods and cheers every time I heard it.
There are, by my reckoning, two kinds of Democrat in the 21st century: the angry redistributionist who wants to punish the rich and reward the working class (Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez) and the optimistic redistributionist who has a smooth technocratic answer to every conceivable problem (Barack Obama, Pete Buttigieg). Mr. Phillips fits firmly into the latter category. At a rally on Thursday at the University of New Hampshire at Manchester, Mr. Phillips -- appearing alongside Andrew Yang, another technocratic evangelist -- promised to be the "first AI president in American history." Artificial intelligence, he said, "will make the federal government . . . much more effective and efficient." A President Phillips will "put together a task force of the best and brightest to anticipate what is coming" and then create a "Department of AI in Washington to essentially be the overseers of this extraordinary opportunity, both protecting us from the worst uses of it, but also encouraging the best uses of it."
For Mr. Phillips, no political disorder or social pathology is beyond repair by the best and brightest. Asked at the Peterborough pub what he'll do to bring about racial equality, he expressed the usual bromides about white racism and then offered four policy prescriptions. One: thousand-dollar American Dream Accounts for every baby born in the country, to be invested in equity markets. Two: free college tuition for all. Three: free health insurance for all. Four: a $15 minimum wage. These "repair strategies," Mr. Phillips said, "would help everybody in America, but they will particularly help the black community." A cynical observer might have pointed out that reallocating wealth was tried already, but Mr. Phillips's listeners loved it.
I asked Ms. Caddell if she'd been persuaded to support Mr. Phillips. She answered flatly: "Yes."
Mr. Phillips is solidly progressive on policy, but he is careful not to demonize the right. He is proud, for example, of having worked with Texas Rep. Chip Roy, the Freedom Caucus tub-thumper, on reforming the pandemic-era Paycheck Protection Program. When he's president, he tells audiences, he'll host regular dinners and invite right-wingers and progressives, Republicans and Democrats.
At another gathering in Peterborough, this one in a private residence, someone asked Mr. Phillips about attempts to cut Social Security. "I'll be honest," he said, "Democrats have been trying to have you believe that Republicans want to cut your benefits. I do not see evidence of it." He added: "I'm saying the quiet part out loud." This sort of answer won't win him any friends in the Democratic Party, but it lends his candidacy an air of originality and sincerity rarely to be found on either side.
What's creating interest in Mr. Phillips's candidacy in New Hampshire, however, isn't his policy views or his thoughts on national unity. It is Joe Biden's manifest intellectual infirmity. In that Peterborough living room several of us stood around before the meeting in our socks (our snowy shoes and boots deposited near the door) talking about Mr. Biden. The president "doesn't present well," Laura Mazur, 64, said. She respects him, she added with a pained look, but "he's not as quick as he should be. Four more years? I don't see it."
Mr. Phillips's aide, a young man named Conrad, introduced him as "the next president of the United States." Each time I heard giggles. Mr. Phillips won't be the next president. Democrats in Florida and North Carolina struck his name from the primary ballot. If Mr. Biden removes himself, or is removed, from electoral consideration, the party won't hand the nomination to Mr. Phillips but to California Gov. Gavin Newsom or some other Democrat who didn't say the quiet part out loud.
That doesn't mean Mr. Phillips's campaign will have no consequence. If he achieves nothing else, he'll give President Biden exactly the thing he thought he'd avoided: embarrassment.
---
Mr. Swaim is an editorial page writer for the Journal.
Credit: By Barton Swaim
