The Texas attorney general sued Alphabet Inc.'s Google on Thursday, alleging the search giant violated state laws by collecting biometric data on face and voice features without seeking the full consent of users.
Texas alleged Google's data-collection practices stretched back to 2015 and affected millions of the state's residents, according to a complaint filed in state district court in Midland County, Texas.
"Google's indiscriminate collection of the personal information of Texans, including very sensitive information like biometric identifiers, will not be tolerated," Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton said. "I will continue to fight Big Tech to ensure the privacy and security of all Texans."
Mr. Paxton "is once again mischaracterizing our products in another breathless lawsuit," said Google spokesman Jose Castaneda. He said that Google Photos helps users organize their pictures, via a feature that is easy to turn off, and that the same is true for the company's other services. "We will set the record straight in court."
The case follows a similar suit Texas brought against Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. in February. Meta, which discontinued its use of facial-recognition technology last year, said the claims were without merit.
In the latest complaint, Texas alleged Google had used features in Google Photos and Google Assistant, as well as its Nest smart-home products, to collect and store facial- and voice-recognition data without obtaining proper consent.
Google used the data for commercial purposes such as improving its artificial-intelligence algorithms and selling users cloud storage, Texas alleged.
A law passed in Texas in 2009, the Capture or Use of Biometric Identifier Act, outlawed the collection and sharing of biometric information in the state without informed consent.
"Google has now spent years unlawfully capturing the faces and voices of both non-consenting users and non-users throughout Texas -- including our children and grandparents, who simply have no idea that their biometric information is being mined for profit by a global corporation," Texas wrote in the complaint.
Google previously agreed to pay $100 million to settle a class-action lawsuit in Illinois alleging the company's face-grouping tool violated Illinois privacy laws.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
