Striking Hollywood writers and actors are united in their demands for a bigger piece of the streaming-revenue pie and protections against the encroachment of artificial intelligence. Their views of whether independent productions should continue during the strike, however, vary widely.
Oscar-winning filmmaker Sian Heder, who before the strike had begun casting a new film, "Impossible" -- but since has put it on hold -- is on the front lines of the debate.
As an independent film, "Impossible" likely would qualify for an exemption from the actors union, which so far has allowed members to work on 110 movies that aren't funded by big studios or streamers. But Heder, who is a member of the Writers Guild of America, said rolling her cameras "would feel like crossing a picket line." Plus, making a movie that a major studio or streaming company might buy would feed the pipeline of content for streaming companies and studios that strikers are trying to deplete. She plans to wait until the strikes are resolved before beginning production.
The issue of whether the actors union should make exceptions is a growing source of tension between unions and among some guild members. It threatens to drive a wedge between the small portion of actors who can still work and the writers, actors and directors who can't -- or who won't because they think the exemptions undermine the strikes.
The WGA said this week that the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers (or AMPTP), the association that represents the big studios, asked for a meeting Friday to discuss negotiations, which have been at a standstill since the strike began.
For Heder, who is known for her work on the Best Picture-winning drama "CODA," several hurdles complicate moving forward. For starters, most movies require extensive rewrites on set and in the early stages of production, and while SAG-Aftra, the actors union, has made exceptions for productions so far, the writers union hasn't.
"The strategy of a strike is to withhold labor," a WGA spokesman said.
Representatives for SAG-Aftra, which counts as members most film and TV actors, didn't respond to requests for comment. The union sent a letter to its membership Sunday defending the interim agreements for the projects not backed by major studios or streamers.
Credit: By Robbie Whelan
