The Senate's passage of a proposed overhaul to the U.S. tax code caps a period of uncertainty for the tech industry, spurring a sigh of relief from venture-capital investors.
In the months leading up to the landmark bill, Silicon Valley was rife with uncertainty over how new provisions would treat partnership profits at venture firms and the taxation of employee stock options. Investors feared that changes to the carried-interest deduction, which is the roughly 20% share in the profits enjoyed by general partners of venture firms, would have weakened the incentives for taking risks on investment in private companies.
"Six months ago, there were a bunch of proposals that felt hostile to the entrepreneurial ecosystem and seemed targeted to harm the innovation economy -- we seem to have avoided most of them," said Venky Ganesan, managing director at Menlo Ventures and former chairman of the National Venture Capital Association.
The GOP tax plan, which passed 51-49 in the Senate on Saturday, was a big victory for Republicans, lowering the corporate tax rate to 20% from 35%. The tax measures, which also provide for a one-time tax cut to U.S. companies for repatriation of earnings and cash held overseas, stand to boost financial markets.
It will still require House and Senate reconciliation of the different versions, which lawmakers aim to do before Christmas.
"Chairman [Kevin] Brady actually came out here and listened," said Don Dixon, managing director at Trident Capital, of the House Ways and Means Committee chairman's commitment to talk with Silicon Valley.
Codified treatment of carried interest as long-term capital gains requiring a three-year holding period, versus a one-year holding time, is seen by many venture-capital investors as a reasonable compromise, particularly amid concerns over removing the deduction altogether.
"We want to encourage the long-term investing that leads to disruptive innovation," said Bob Ackerman, managing director of venture firm Allegis Cyber, via email.
Long-term holding requirements for the deduction might not be ideal in all situations, as some startups reach liquidity in a shorter period.
"About 20% of deals get sold in less than three years," Mr. Dixon said.
Carried interest wasn't the only thing at stake for Silicon Valley, as startup employees faced a potential tax on unvested stock options. Now lawmakers propose deferring taxes until a liquidity event such as if the startup gets acquired or holds an initial public offering.
Initially there were worries that employees would become liable for taxes without a liquidity event, said Reza Zadeh, founder of Palo Alto, Calif.-based Matroid, a machine-learning startup.
"This change regarding option taxation is likely to be helpful to startups," Mr. Zadeh said. "It will help us recruit world-class talent and let those employees share in our success."

Credit: By Scott Martin
