ARMONK, N.Y. -- The disconcerting messages started popping up on Virginia Rometty's screen not long after the IBM chief executive began a webcast to explain to her nearly 400,000 employees in 170 countries how she planned to reorganize the tech giant.
"I can't hear."
"I can't see you."
"Is this on?"
When the January presentation ended, Ms. Rometty fumed at colleagues, "We're only the IBM Company -- we're better than this," according to people who were there. "Get this fixed now!"
That is a directive Ms. Rometty is giving a lot these days as she tries to reinvent the nearly 104-year-old icon while it continues a yearslong slump. International Business Machines Corp.'s sales for 12 straight quarters have fallen from the year-earlier quarter.
The 57-year-old Ms. Rometty, who goes by "Ginni," has spent her three years as CEO trying to revamp slowing businesses like big computers and licensed software. She has shifted toward higher-growth markets she has targeted, like "analytics," which help corporations make sense of their growing data hoards, and "cloud" technologies to manage companies' operations over the Web and mobile devices.
But many of IBM's older businesses continue to drag, while divesting some of them has reduced overall revenue. In finding new revenues, Ms. Rometty hasn't moved fast enough for some investors. The stock is down 9.6% since she became CEO in January 2012, compared with a 67% rise in the S&P 500.
IBM "is at the make-or-break point," says James Lebenthal, a Rometty supporter and CEO of Lebenthal Asset Management LLC, which holds a small IBM stake. "Ginni needs to balance strategic vision with tactical survival."
Ms. Rometty (rhymes with confetti) says IBM is at "an inflection point." But, she says in an interview in her Armonk office last month, she isn't focused solely on the near-term concerns of some Wall Street critics. "My job," she says, "is to balance remaking IBM for the moment with an enduring IBM for the future."
Spending time with Ms. Rometty over four recent weeks shows how her task is unlike that of past CEOs, who also remade IBM but mainly by shifting toward new markets it could quickly dominate. Ms. Rometty is overseeing a more fundamental shift, turning IBM into a company that also competes where it isn't in a position of strength.
"I can only change a company this size by making big bets" in new markets, she says.
On Monday, IBM reported $2.33 billion in net income, down from $2.38 billion a year earlier, on $19.6 billion in revenue, down 12%, largely meeting Wall Street expectations. But the company posted earnings per share of $2.91 excluding pension and some other items, beating analyst estimates, up from $2.68 a share from continuing operations in the year-earlier period. Also a bright spot: One of Ms. Rometty's growth pushes, cloud computing, was up 60% in revenue.
Still, with declining revenue and an underperforming stock, the IBM chief remains under pressure to show more progress.
Ms. Rometty recently got a vote of confidence from Warren Buffett, when his Berkshire Hathaway Inc. -- IBM's largest shareholder -- increased its holdings to 7.8% from 6.3%. Mr. Buffett didn't respond to inquiries.
Apple Inc. CEO Tim Cook, with whom she has begun a partnership to go after the corporate mobile market, says "Ginni is a modern CEO." Mr. Cook, who once worked at IBM, says: "She has the charisma and raw leadership to cut through the thick culture at IBM."
Ms. Rometty has made her goal clear: She wants more than 40% of IBM's revenues in 2018 to be from corporate markets in analytics, cloud computing, cybersecurity, social networking and mobile technologies. Those businesses were 27% of IBM's $92.8 billion in 2014 revenues, up from 15% of $105 billion revenues in 2011.
Computer hardware was 11% of 2014 revenues, versus 16% in 2011. Ms. Rometty sold off low-end servers and divested IBM's chip maker -- which her CFO likens to "spinal removal surgery" -- once integral elements of its hardware business. These units were producing revenue but not profits, she says, dubbing them "empty calories."
Her challenge is to rejuvenate what's left of IBM's hardware business, such as its newest mainframe rebuilt for mobile transactions. "Hardware was the original soul of this company," she says. Restructuring that business is "probably one of the things I'll be remembered most for," but "we can't hold on to our past."
To get faster-growing businesses to her 40% goal, she has been crisscrossing the globe to pitch them to customers and investors while prodding IBM staff to hurry up.
On trips, she carries a backpack with paperwork, school-sized notebooks and pencils -- along with her iPhone. She seldom goes anywhere without a Starbucks Venti Chai Tea Misto in hand and a metallic hair band.
Among customers and investors, she is known for her forceful demeanor. She often moves in close to people's faces, touching them to make a point.
One day in March found her at BNSF Railway Co.'s Fort Worth, Texas, offices. She swooped into a conference room to bearhug Matt Rose, the railroad's executive chairman, before launching into business.
IBM has been providing analytics technology to help the railroad reduce derailments. With 2,000 sensors checking acoustics, pressure and temperature readings, IBM's analytics detect or predict when readings indicate a railcar component may fail. Analytics are an IBM strong suit that plays well in the era of "big data," the floods of information that companies collect and parse for profits. Ms. Rometty wants to expand that advantage into many industries.
Last week, IBM launched a health-care-analytics platform named "Watson Health," after the Watson artificial-intelligence system, to process data from companies including patient records, research studies and input from wearable devices.
Before leaving BNSF, she recommended Mr. Rose add other IBM offerings, including cloud services that would promise extra security. Mr. Rose says he agreed to migrate to IBM's cloud.
Ms. Rometty's drive into mobile markets was the topic of another meeting that day, with AT&T Inc. CEO Randall Stephenson, at IBM's Austin design lab. The companies together sell IBM's cloud services over AT&T mobile networks.
One topic of discussion: bids to European clients. When the AT&T and IBM managers there said some customers don't want the entire package at once, Ms. Rometty and Mr. Stephenson swung into action around a table, mapping a new strategy on the backside of a document.
At the design lab, IBM's team showed Ms. Rometty a demonstration on a large flat screen showing a real-time view of corporate hacking around the world. IBM is designing a security product, code-named "X-Force," in which businesses share intelligence on security threats. "Fellow CEOs," she told her team, "will see the values I do and want on this platform."
She dropped in on a group of young IBM developers, some with tattoos and piercings, who are responsible for IBM's new email offering, called Verse. A team leader promised to hit a year's-end rollout target.
At that, Ms. Rometty pivoted sharply on her high heels. "No, no, no! Too slow," she interjected. "What can I do to help you move faster?"
Speed is of the essence, she says later, because the industry is fast moving. But remaking a company IBM's size can be complex: "I have trained my life to fly a 747. That is way different than piloting a two-prop engine plane."
A Chicago native, Ms. Rometty graduated from Northwestern University with electrical-engineering and computer-science majors and joined IBM on the career ground floor as a systems engineer in 1981. She rose quickly, running IBM's consulting business and managing its purchase of PricewaterhouseCoopers's IT-consulting business in 2002.
As CEO, she followed Sam Palmisano, who himself had remade IBM, selling its PC business in 2005 and expanding into emerging markets.
In her first shareholder letter, in 2012, she described a model of "continuous transformation." It was soon clear IBM was late to some important trends in tech. The corporations that are IBM's main customers were seeking to let employees work from mobile devices and were moving processing and data off in-house computers, handling them through cloud computing.
But IBM was struggling in some of these markets. Just before Ms. Rometty became CEO, it launched "SmartCloud," a public cloud service. But sales were anemic, and in early 2013, IBM lost out to Amazon.com Inc. in the Central Intelligence Agency's cloud business -- an embarrassment, given IBM's history of federal contracts.
Desperate to jump-start SmartCloud, IBM's executive team asked Ms. Rometty for more money and time. She recalls pointing out the window and telling them: "The market is moving too fast. I can't give you more time."
Instead, she spent $2 billion on a cloud-technology company, SoftLayer, and made a $1.2 billion investment in additional data centers.
At the same time, IBM had what many considered a computer-science breakthrough in its analytics business: Watson, the artificial-intelligence computer known for winning "Jeopardy!" in 2011. Some clients were asking to "buy a Watson."
At an operations meeting, senior IBM executives debated how to commercialize Watson, says John Kelly, a senior vice president. Some suggested selling copies of the Watson hardware and software.
Ms. Rometty objected, arguing IBM should sell Watson as a cloud service. In an initial application of Watson analytics, IBM worked with Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center to personalize treatments. That would inspire the Watson health-care platform it unveiled last week.
By 2013, Ms. Rometty was writing checks for acquisitions. She has spent about $8 billion since her ascension buying about 30 companies in her target growth markets.
She has made four major divestitures, taking charges for laying off workers. Head count has shrunk 12% to 380,000 during her tenure.
Last year, she began talking to Apple's Mr. Cook about a broad partnership, starting with putting IBM business apps on Apple mobile devices. Some IBM executives, miffed at working with the sometime rival, called it "Project 30," referring to the 30 years since the 1984 television commercial in which Apple portrayed Big Blue as "Big Brother."
At a July 2014 announcement of the partnership at Apple headquarters, "there was a level of jaw dropping on both sides," Mr. Cook says. He says he is betting Ms. Rometty is on the right track. "It's not the same IBM."
Ms. Rometty has created partnerships with Twitter Inc. in data analytics -- allowing companies to analyze Twitter feeds for business clues -- and China's Tencent Holdings Ltd. to create cloud services for businesses there.
To redirect funds to new investments, in October 2014 she yanked IBM's longtime promise of $20-a-share profits by 2015 -- a commitment that forced IBM to buy back shares and cut costs as core-business revenues declined. IBM's share price fell 7.1% in a day. And in January, she unveiled IBM's most sweeping reorganization in three decades, moving it from units defined by hardware, software and services toward a structure of integrated businesses that focus on specific industries.
She's well aware of her Wall Street critics. Emerging from the elevator at IBM's recent investor day, she breezed past people vying for her attention and zeroed in on a tough critic, Bernstein Research analyst Toni Sacconaghi. Looking him in the eye from close range, smiling broadly, she grabbed his elbow and challenged his assertion that IBM had too many lifers in its top ranks.
"They have their backs against the wall," he says afterward. "IBM's future isn't clear."
Ms. Rometty is relentless in pushing staff. Jeff Smith, an IBM vice president, says he was at a Starbucks with his baseball cap pulled low on a recent Saturday morning and didn't think Ms. Rometty, who lives near him, would notice him.
She made a bee-line for him, tea in hand, lifted his cap and asked: "What are we doing to change the company?"

Generate image description

Credit: By Monica Langley
