Multiple offers. Bidding wars. All-cash deals hours after listings go live: This is all still happening in Seattle, the city that four weeks ago was considered an epicenter of the coronavirus epidemic, and since March 23 has been under a stay-at-home order barring all nonessential activity.
"We were hoping we could get a fair price for a home now," says Marcelo Garcia, 33, a senior program manager at e-commerce giant Amazon. He and his wife, Melissa Richmond, a 33-year-old who heads strategy operations at a nonprofit organization, have submitted written offers on four houses over the past three weeks in Bellevue, a suburb just east of the city. All their offers, around $1 million apiece, have been outbid or rejected, despite being close to the asking prices. Now, at night they go driving past homes for sale that they have only seen online. "It's a weird time," says Ms. Richmond.
Washington was the first state to report a novel coronavirus death. While the number of Covid-19 cases in the state continues to grow, the rate is slower than other states thanks in part to early restrictions. But what also distinguishes Seattle from many other major cities is its fast-growing tech sector. While many industries are struggling, some of the city's tech companies are getting a boost as millions of Americans comply with social-distancing orders throughout the country.
Amazon has hired 100,000 new workers in the U.S to deal with the crisis, while cloud-computing providers like Google and Microsoft, another Seattle-area giant, have experienced increased demand from workplace-collaboration software providers, streaming video service companies and online videogame makers.
At the same time, many potential sellers are staying out of the market due to anxiety about the future and fear of spreading the virus. (Open houses are barred, but private showings of homes are still allowed for two or fewer people exercising social distancing.) That has further reduced what was already a tight inventory, pushing the number of new listings down about 67% from last year at this time.
According to data from the Northwest Multiple Listing Service, the number of homes and condos sold in the first week of April were higher than in each of the past two years, following a 9.1% increase in March 2020 compared with sales in March 2019. "The market is still very active," says Dean Jones, principal and owner of Realogics Sotheby's International, adding that tech clients are making up a lot of the business for his agents. "While there's plenty of concern, there's a 'this too shall pass' perspective."
The action is particularly heated in Bellevue. In 2018, Seattle passed the so-called Amazon Tax, which slapped new payroll taxes on big business. Although the tax was subsequently repealed, it led some companies to look elsewhere. In April 2019, Amazon announced it plans to move thousands of employees from Seattle to Bellevue by 2023 because of the latter area's "business friendly environment."
Kim Morgan, 42, a senior product manager at Amazon, and her husband Randall Morgan, a 41-year-old CAT scan technologist, had been looking for a house for a year, and were getting outbid by all-cash offers as much as $100,000 over asking price. They have made five offers since November, including two in February and March, and were surprised that the competition remained so fierce.
On March 17, the couple finally made a successful offer of $45,000 over the $695,000 asking price and paid $740,000 for a three-bedroom, 1,320-square-foot Midcentury ranch in Bellevue, with a closing date of April 17. Although the house is smaller than they wanted, they feel lucky to have won out over five other offers. They signed what they call a "10-day Covid clause" in their offer that allows for closing delays if one of them falls ill.
Suresh Velagapudi, 59, and his wife Kalyani Velagapudi, 56, who both worked for Microsoft before starting an artificial intelligence-based surgical-care data company called Perimatics, had been looking for a house in Bellevue for over a year before the coronavirus crisis hit. In the second week of February, they offered slightly less than the $2.585 million asking price on a five-bedroom, six-bathroom, 4,210-square-foot house on an acre lot in Bellevue. The couple included an escalation clause, stating they would pay a certain amount of money above the highest offer the seller received.
Even though they thought the house was a little overpriced, there were multiple competing offers, and they worried inventory would continue to shrink as the crisis stretched on. "We were in the mindset that we should get it now," says Mr. Velagapudi. After their $2.3525 million offer was accepted, the couple says they couldn't prepare the house for move-in because the state's stay-at-home order bars such services as painting. Moving is technically allowed, but the couple is hauling most items themselves for safety reasons.
Mr. Velagapudi says they plan to aggressively price their current house in Woodinville, Wash., where they have lived for 20 years, when they list it for sale, but before that they need help prepping it -- also a difficult task in the current environment. They will do many of the tasks themselves but some will have to wait until the state lifts the essential work orders.
The Velagapudis are typical of how people are approaching the market now, says Ambili Sukesan, the real-estate agent who represented the couple. "They are all a little worried, but they are thinking it is temporary and we will get through this crisis." Another of her clients, Arun Kumar, a 38-year-old Amazon engineer, has made six unsuccessful offers on houses in Sammamish, Wash., a city about 20 miles east of Seattle. Mr. Kumar made his last offer a few weeks ago, on a house that was listed earlier the same day; it sold later that evening for $20,000 over the $790,000 asking price. "The tech people are fighting it out," says Mr. Kumar. He feels optimistic because he sees prices starting to drop slightly.
Real-estate agents say some people looking at homes in the Seattle area are planning on moving there from other states. Rebecca Robideau with Realogics-Sotheby's in Bainbridge Island says she got a call from an agent in Houston whose client is moving for a position at Microsoft, while Suzanne Wilson says she's working with a buyer from Washington, D.C., who was just hired by Amazon. "They seem kind of unfazed," she says.
Helen Pederslie, a broker in Bellevue, has a client who is closing on a $950,000 townhome in the Queen Anne neighborhood of Seattle later this month. Still in college in California, the buyer has an offer to work at Amazon that starts in August. Christina Roberts, an agent based in nearby Kirkland, is working with a doctor planning to move from Sacramento, Calif. "It's been busy," she says.
Developers are likely to be hit harder by the crisis, real-estate agents say, because they depend on sales and marketing events that are now not allowed. Several new developments that planned to launch in the spring will now defer. Those that remain active are changing the way business gets done by moving to appointments from retail open hours and increasing digital viewing options. One project continuing to sell through the pandemic, called Gridiron Condominiums, has sold 70% of its units, including 10 in the past three months based mainly on virtual tours. Prices (market and income restricted) for units range from the high $300,000s to mid $900,000s.
Mr. Garcia and Ms. Richmond are still trying to land a house in Bellevue. They listed their condo in downtown Seattle last week for $1.069 million and hope that if they sell it, their chances of getting an offer accepted will increase because they will no longer have any contingencies. Still, they worry about inventory falling further. Their agent, Jay Kipp of Realogics Sotheby's International Realty, guesses there are fewer than a dozen homes in the county that would fit their criteria.

Credit: By Nancy Keates
