GOOGLE
Company Road-Tests Cars
Without a Human Driver
Google Inc. on Saturday disclosed its ambitious effort to develop technology that lets cars drive themselves.
The company said on its blog that it believed the use of such technology could reduce traffic accident deaths world-wide by half, saving about 600,000 lives per year. Google hopes to reduce carbon emissions, too.
Sebastian Thrun, a Google engineer and a professor who leads a robotics and artificial intelligence research lab at Stanford University, said the company's automated cars already have driven a collective 140,000 miles, from the Golden Gate bridge to Los Angeles to Lake Tahoe.
"We think this is a first in robotics research," Mr. Thrun said.
The cars, which were manned by trained operators, used "video cameras, radar sensors and a laser range finder to 'see' other traffic, as well as detailed maps . . . to navigate the road ahead," he said. The software can recognize features like lane markers and traffic signs.
The data collected by the cars is processed by the company's data centers. Local police departments were briefed on the project, the company said.
Mr. Thrun's said the technology could allow Americans, who spend nearly an hour commuting each day, "to spend that time more productively.
-- Amir Efrati
---
BOEHRINGER INGELHEIM
German Drug Maker Halts
'Female Viagra' Production
German pharmaceutical company Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH said Friday it has stopped developing an oral pill designed to treat low-sex drive in women after failing to convince U.S authorities that the medicine works.
Originally studied as a possible antidepressant, flibanserin is the latest attempt by the drug industry to find a female equivalent to Viagra.
A panel of U.S. Food and Drug Administration experts however decided in June that flibanserin -- also known as "female viagra" or "pink viagra" -- doesn't provide enough benefits to outweigh the risks.
"The decision [to stop development] was not made lightly, considering the advanced stage of development," board Chairman Andreas Barner said in a statement.
-- Heide Oberhauser-Aslan
---
AMERICAN APPAREL
Former Blockbuster CFO
Named Acting President
American Apparel Inc. hired former Blockbuster Inc. Chief Financial Officer Tom Casey as acting president for the apparel maker and retailer, putting him in charge of leading the company as it embarks on a new strategy.
The announcement comes amid American Apparel's struggle to avoid being delisted by the New York Stock Exchange and to keep compliance with debt covenants.
The company said in August it expected to report a second-quarter loss on declining sales, warning at the time it was at risk of falling out of compliance with its debt covenants by the end of September. Mr. Casey was financial chief for the Dallas-based video-rental company for three years before departing ahead of last month's bankruptcy filing by Blockbuster.
-- Jodi Xu
---
FAST RETAILING
Uniqlo Parent Expects
Annual Profit to Slide
Fast Retailing Co., one of the few bright spots in Japan's moribund retail sector, dashed hopes on Friday by saying it expects its annual profit to decline for the first time in four business years, as faltering domestic sales hit its bottom line.
Revealing its pessimism about the weak start of autumn clothing sales at its Uniqlo domestic casual-clothing store chain, Japan's biggest apparel retailer by revenue expects a 17% fall in net profit to 51 billion yen ($621 million) for the fiscal year through August 2011. Despite an anticipated recovery in store sales in the second half as well as solid performance outside Japan, the company blamed worsening profit margins and a higher cost burden for downward pressure on its profitability.
-- Ayai Tomisawa and Hiroyuki Kachi
