STORM BAY, Tasmania -- At a salmon farm here is an experiment researchers hope can save an entire ecosystem from warming oceans. Beneath the waves, scientists are growing several types of giant kelp -- which in the wild can grow up to 175 feet tall -- on rope to track which ones can thrive in hotter conditions.
Rising water temperatures, more frequent marine heat waves and invasive sea urchins have destroyed some 95% of the giant kelp forests in Tasmania, scientists say. The island south of Australia's mainland is a global hot spot for ocean warming, with sea temperatures in the island's east rising faster than the global average, a dynamic that has wreaked havoc on some marine species in a place where fishing remains a key industry.
Now, financial support from environmental groups, philanthropic organizations and corporations -- including from Alphabet's Google -- is ramping up to save Tasmania's giant kelp, which can grow treelike canopies near the ocean surface, provides an important habitat for many commercially harvested species and can sequester carbon, much like forests on land. Giant kelp, a seaweed, is found all over the world, including off the coast of California, where a similar kelp species has also disappeared at an alarming rate.
The effort is part of a global race to make marine ecosystems more adaptable to climate change, which scientists say can lead to warmer water temperatures, ocean acidification and lower oxygen levels. Some researchers warn that without action, most coral reefs could disappear. Algal blooms, which block light from reaching below the ocean surface, could become more frequent and severe. Fish might change the range they inhabit, potentially reducing catches for commercial fisheries in some places, including the U.S. East Coast.
Just this week, Australian scientists reported severe coral bleaching in a section of the Great Barrier Reef and said water temperatures were well above the summer average.
"In the end, it may work out that there's nothing we can do," said Craig Johnson, a professor at the University of Tasmania's Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, who is overseeing some of the research into giant kelp. "But it's such an important species, it's worth having a crack," he said of the giant kelp.
In Tasmania, scientists are conducting experiments to identify heat-tolerant giant kelp, plan to use artificial intelligence and genetic analysis to better understand why some types fare better than others, and will then have to figure out a way to plant them in the wild without it costing a fortune. Eventually, they could use the genetic information to breed kelp to be even more heat tolerant.
But success is far from guaranteed. Running lab tests on kelp can be tricky, given the great size the plants can reach. Efforts to control the invasive long-spined sea urchins could fail. Marine heat waves could increase beyond the ability of any kelp to cope.
Scientists also still aren't sure to what extent genetic factors allow giant kelp to survive in warmer water, or whether environmental factors -- such as nutrient and light availability -- are more important. To find out, researchers including those from Australia's national science agency, known as CSIRO, now plan to use two AI tools from Google to help identify any genetic patterns that lead to heat resistance. Separately, years of satellite imagery will also be analyzed with Google AI to get a more accurate picture of where giant kelp in Australia continues to survive.
"What the Australians are doing is totally cool, and much needed," said Sergey Nuzhdin, a biological sciences professor at the University of Southern California who was part of a team that recently sequenced the genome of a giant kelp in the U.S.
Scientists around Tasmania have spent years collecting the giant kelp's reproductive fronds, which produce microscopic spores that eventually transform into the massive plants. Lab tests have identified some individuals that do better in warmer conditions when in the so-called microscopic stage, though it is unclear if that transfers to the large stage.
Many locals say they are concerned by the giant kelp's disappearance. In Fortescue Bay, on Tasmania's southeast coast, near towering sea cliffs and popular tourist walking trails, 57-year-old fisherman Anthony Klye said he used to set up his nets on the edge of the kelp forest because of all the fish that would be there. But after spending three hours one day recently diving for urchins in the bay, he didn't see a single strand of kelp.
"It was like a mat on the water," Klye said, recalling the extent of giant kelp that used to grow in the bay. "You could almost walk on it."
Credit: By Mike Cherney
