SINGAPORE -- Singapore Telecommunications Ltd. has agreed to buy stakes in the largest telecommunications companies in Thailand and India for 2.47 billion Singapore dollars (US$1.84 billion) from state investment company Temasek Holdings Pte. Ltd.
SingTel will acquire a 21% stake in Thailand's Intouch Holdings PCL, and will boost its stake in India's Bharti Telecom Ltd. by an additional 7.39%.
The move is part of Singtel's strategy to increase growth beyond its home market. In a filing to the Singapore Exchange, SingTel said that it would acquire these stakes through internal cash, short-term debt and from proceeds through a placement of new SingTel shares to Temasek, valued at S$1.61 billion (US$1.2 billion).
The placement of new shares to Temasek will see the Singapore state investment company's stake in SingTel rising to 52.27% from the current 51.12%.
A stake sale of Intouch as well as Bharti would give Temasek more cash to invest in technology and newer industries, such as artificial intelligence and life sciences.
"As an active investor, we rebalance our portfolio from time to time. We accepted the offer after careful evaluation, and believe the potential synergies gained from the acquisitions will be positive for all SingTel shareholders over the long term," said Ravi Lambah, head of telecommunications, media & technology at Temasek.
SingTel, Southeast Asia's largest telecom firm and the biggest company in Singapore by market capitalization, has chased growth across the globe to expand beyond its saturated local market. The company snapped up U.S. managed-security services specialist firm Trustwave for $810 million last year. In 2012, it bought Amobee, a digital advertising firm for $321 million. SingTel owns substantial stakes in several telecom companies across Asia, including India's Bharti Airtel and Telkomsel in Indonesia.
Emerging economies such as Thailand and India are experiencing a rising middle class and higher disposable incomes that offer growth opportunities for companies such as SingTel.
With the Intouch stake purchase, SingTel would increase its exposure to other telecom companies in Thailand. Intouch already owns a 40.6% stake in the country's largest mobile operator, Advanced Info Service. On its own, SingTel has a 23.3% stake in Advanced Info.
Bharti Telecom, owns Bharti Airtel, India's largest telecoms firm by number of subscribers, and now Singtel's stake in Bharti Airtel will rise to 47.2% from the current 39.8%
"The acquisitions are in line with the group's long-term strategy to increase its exposure to high-performing associates in its portfolio of leading telecom businesses in the region," said SingTel Chief Executive Chua Sock Koong.
Currently, earnings from overseas operations contribute more than 70% of Singtel's profit.
Credit: By P.R. Venkat
