President Biden hasn't often stood up to the left with his regulatory nominees, but he did in selecting respected cardiologist Robert Califf to run the Food and Drug Administration. Yet now the Administration is leaving its nominee out on a political limb.
A Senate committee this month backed Dr. Califf, 13-8. But five Democratic Senators, including West Virginia's Joe Manchin, have signaled opposition partly because of his work with pharmaceutical companies, which means he will need GOP votes to be confirmed. Pro-life groups are mobilizing against him too.
---
Dr. Califf doesn't deserve the abuse. In 2016 the Senate confirmed him as FDA Commissioner, 89-4, and he led the agency for 10 months without major controversy. The pandemic has shown how crucial it is to have competent FDA leadership, especially in this era of biotech innovation and therapeutic breakthroughs.
In 1996 he helped found the Duke Clinical Research Institute, which assists drug makers on clinical trials. He has also done consulting work for drug makers and is a health-policy adviser for Verify, Alphabet's life-sciences research subsidiary. Progressives say this means he can't fairly evaluate drugs. But he showed no favoritism as commissioner.
The FDA also needs someone who will resist the agency's bureaucratic culture of control. The FDA's caution often has impeded promising new therapies, including HIV drugs in the 1980s. In May 2014, Dr. Califf pointed out that government regulation can be a "barrier" to innovation.
The agency was rightly slammed for being too slow to approve Covid-19 private lab tests early in the pandemic. But then FDA staff moved quickly to slash bureaucracy and worked closely with drug companies on vaccine and therapy trials. This enabled authorization for emergency use in record time.
At his December confirmation hearing, Dr. Califf discussed how patient electronic medical records can be used to answer questions about drugs, though the agency has been slow to do so. Artificial intelligence and cloud computing can help collect real-time data to identify drugs that are more likely to work or cause side effects in particular patient populations.
Yet the progressive public-health crowd opposes making the FDA more flexible, efficient and responsive. They complain the FDA is approving too many expensive drugs using accelerated approval, including Sarepta Therapeutics' Duchenne muscular dystrophy drug in 2016 and Biogen's Alzheimer's treatment Aduhelm last year.
The charge is that drug makers didn't strictly adhere to a double-blind randomized controlled trial, and FDA leaders paid too much attention to patient desire for treatments. Acting Commissioner Janet Woodcock rightly signed off on both approvals, though this seems to have taken her out of the running for the Biden nomination.
Mr. Manchin blames drug companies for opioid deaths and is holding Dr. Califf guilty by association. The opioid epidemic has many causes, including lax prescribing practices. Yet heroin and fentanyl accounted for five times as many deaths last year as prescription opioids.
Pro-life criticisms of Dr. Califf also have little merit. The FDA recently eased its regulations to allow the abortion pill mifepristone to be mailed directly to women from pharmacies or healthcare providers, codifying a temporary change made last spring. Dr. Califf wasn't involved in the decision but said at his December hearing that he trusted "FDA staff to make good decisions" based on the latest data.
The FDA isn't an abortion regulator. It made the decision based on patient risk, and women must get a prescription. They face no greater medical risk if they receive the drug by mail than if they pick it up in person. The FDA didn't have a good medical reason to restrict how the medication is dispensed.
Pro-life groups worry the FDA's decision could make abortions more convenient and thus more common. But that's not a matter for the FDA, and states may impose stricter regulations than the FDA's. An FDA leader who supports innovation could usher in novel gene therapies that could cure congenital defects and reduce abortions.
Dr. Woodcock has shown heroic leadership during the pandemic as acting commissioner, but the agency needs a Senate-confirmed leader. Dr. Califf is well-qualified and deserves more White House political support.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: The Pro-Life Case Against Califf for the FDA" -- WSJ February 9, 2022)
