On Wednesday afternoon, in a modern office building in San Francisco, entrepreneur Daniel Raffel saw a news alert cross his phone: Facebook Inc. had just paid $19 billion for messaging startup WhatsApp.
The founder of mobile app Snapguide Inc. immediately interrupted a meeting to tell his co-workers. The news was so shocking that no one believed him, even in an industry where billion-dollar deals occur monthly. "No!" said one employee on the videoconference line.
"It's like being an Olympic athlete and getting a good time in your sport -- and then, out of left field, your trainer tells you there's this guy over in Russia, who has shaved another 30 seconds off that time. And it's just like, 'What?'" said Mr. Raffel.
Silicon Valley, which often feels like a small-town high school seeped in gossip and snark, was turned upside down by the largest acquisition of a startup in history.
The deal is a high-water mark, reminiscent of when an unprofitable Netscape soared on the day it went public in 1995, triggering a wave of dot-com investments, or when Facebook's initial public offering in 2012 raised the bar for a new wave of Internet companies.
At WhatsApp's headquarters in Mountain View, Calif., several employees celebrated with glasses of Cristal Champagne as co-founders Jan Koum and Brian Acton joined the ranks of newly minted tech billionaires.
Meanwhile, in artisanal coffee shops and glass conference rooms throughout the San Francisco Bay area, founders, investors and tech employees dissected the deal, expressing disbelief and envy as well as excitement and fear for what it might augur.
Many entrepreneurs and investors also saw the news as a coming-of-age moment for mobile apps -- proving both their value and international scale.
In roughly five years, the founders of WhatsApp built a service with nearly a half-billion users in global markets, including South America, Africa, Europe and Asia.
"It's kind of amazing how it just sucked the air out of most rooms around here because everyone wants to be them and to varying degrees feels super-jealous," said Mr. Raffel.
Aaron Levie, the head of Box Inc., an online storage company on the cusp of a multibillion-dollar IPO, said the megadeal caught him by surprise. As he was heading to lunch, one of his colleagues texted him: "WhatsApp, $19 Billion, Facebook."
"I thought, 'I don't know what those three things mean to each other, but there's no way that this means that Facebook bought WhatsApp for $19 billion'," he said.
Mr. Levie said he expects the deal to ratchet up the scale of acquisitions as incumbents like Facebook and Google Inc. battle by paying premiums for potentially disruptive startups.
"It makes you depressed if you're not selling at $20 billion," said Mr. Levie, whose company was recently valued at about $2 billion. "I have a lot more work to do."
In January alone, Google paid $3.2 billion for Nest Labs, a four-year-old tech hardware company, and then more than $500 million for DeepMind, a small artificial-intelligence company that was also coveted by Facebook, according to a person with knowledge of the matter.
Facebook, meanwhile, tried to acquire Snapchat, the ephemeral messaging app for about $3 billion last year and is spending roughly 10% of its market capitalization on WhatsApp.
As the billion-dollar acquisitions roll on, there is concern that such deals, will begin to warp the expectations and behavior of investors and entrepreneurs.
Sam Altman, a partner at Y Combinator, the best-known technology incubator in the Valley region, says he expects an uptick in entrepreneurs pitching their startups following the $19 billion deal. According to Mr. Altman, Y Combinator got 30% more applications for its program following the 2010 release of "The Social Network," Hollywood's film about Facebook's origin.
That kind of enthusiasm is both a curse and blessing for the industry, which benefits from a growing talent pool but can get bogged down by an influx of aspiring entrepreneurs focused on striking gold.
Mr. Altman doesn't believe the WhatsApp deal will influence the way he evaluates startups. He says it was a unique deal, and the price was driven by both the application's success and Facebook's particular needs. Jim Goetz, a partner at Sequoia Capital who led the venture-capital firm's investment in WhatsApp, called the deal "exceptional and rare."
But other venture capitalists say it is hard to ignore the shifting dynamics: Facebook might not make another acquisition of this size, but its willingness to make one is poignant enough. This line of thinking comes with an inherent risk, if investors and entrepreneurs weigh the likelihood of such a rich acquisition too heavily.
Not only can it prematurely inflate startup valuations -- which are already bubbling upward -- it can de-motivate founders to build a sustainable company and instead push for a quick flip. It can also compel investors to pour too much money into acquisition candidates.
"It's hard not to think that . . . it's a new vector, a new path to think about companies," says Ryan Sarver, a partner at Redpoint Ventures. "But if you only see companies as acquisition targets, you run into the danger of thinking too small."
Then again, for many in Silicon Valley, $19 billion is more than enough. Several entrepreneurs interviewed said they feel a sting of jealousy and frustration -- as if a new bar for success has been set.
"If that's success, it's hard not to look at what you're doing and feel so far away," said Snapguide's Mr. Raffel.
Credit: By Evelyn M. Rusli
