[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
When you are Advanced Micro Devices, sometimes you have to accept help from surprising places.
The chip maker got a boost from one of its largest rivals on Thursday. In a virtual event that replaced its annual developers conference, Nvidia announced a new line of its DGX servers that uses AMD's processors. Nvidia's DGX is a server designed for specialized artificial-intelligence needs in the data center and is mainly powered by the company's own graphics processors. But the central processing slot has typically gone to Intel Corp.'s Xeon family, which dominates the data-center market for CPUs. AMD's shares rose 4.5% on Thursday.
AMD has been working steadily to crack Intel's data-center dominance over the past few years and it has made progress, albeit not as quickly as some of the company's fans in the investment community have hoped. AMD's market value has more than doubled over the past 12 months -- outperforming its semiconductor peers as its sales have grown sharply. But the shares also have slipped since AMD's first-quarter report last month when the chip maker trimmed its outlook for the full year, blaming uncertainty in consumer demand for personal computers. At around 48 times forward earnings, AMD remains the most expensive stock on the PHLX Semiconductor Index, according to FactSet.
Nvidia's DGX server isn't a high-volume product, so AMD's inclusion in the system won't radically boost its sales. The move does serve as an important vote of confidence from a company not naturally inclined to give AMD a break, though. Nvidia and AMD compete fiercely in the market for graphics processors used in PCs, and AMD sells its graphics chips to data-center customers. The two also compete for capacity at Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing, which fabricates chips for both on its most advanced production lines.
But AMD these days is valued primarily on its ability to gain share from Intel. According to Mercury Research, the company's share in servers rose to 5.1% in the first quarter from 2.9% a year earlier. Mark Lipacis of Jefferies projects that AMD's share in servers will grow by an additional 8 percentage points over the next 12 to 18 months, which he adds "could prove conservative." Chipping in on Nvidia's new box certainly won't hurt.

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
