Tristan Harris walked out of a sushi lunch and switched his phone out of airplane mode when it practically vibrated out of his hand. Ex-colleagues at Google and other friends were frantically trying to reach him.
Google Chief Executive Sundar Pichai had just announced that the search giant was going to give customers tools to help them limit the time they spend on smartphones. The idea was to help promote their "digital well-being." In Silicon Valley, where keeping users online as long as possible has been the traditional path to greater profits, the notion that companies should curb screen time was heresy -- and it was Mr. Harris's idea. Not only that, but Mr. Pichai was using almost the exact same language Mr. Harris did when he proposed the concept five years ago as a disillusioned Google software engineer.
The message was largely ignored then. It isn't anymore.
Mr. Harris, 33, forms one-third of an unlikely triumvirate of Silicon Valley insiders who for more than a year have been cajoling executives and buttonholing lawmakers about the tech industry's at times reckless approach to privacy and seeming indifference toward its broader impact on society. The troika, which also includes maverick investor Roger McNamee and Bay Area power broker Jim Steyer, is taking on the industry's most powerful players, including Facebook Inc., Apple Inc. and Google parent Alphabet Inc.
"We will hold the industry accountable," Mr. Steyer says. "That means direct dialogue with all of the companies and, when necessary, shaming them."
The three men driving the coalition have contrasting personalities and motivations -- and sometimes conflicting tactics. But they are united against a precept that defined Silicon Valley for decades: that technological progress is by definition good for society. As scandals rocked technology firms ranging from Facebook to Uber Technologies Inc. through the fall and into this spring, the men pushed their agenda in private meetings with top executives including Alphabet Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat; Satya Nadella, chief executive of Microsoft; Marc Benioff, chief executive of software company Salesforce.com; and senior officials at Apple.
"Our entire industry is in a crisis of trust," says Mr. Benioff. "All of us are now recognizing they are prophets. . . . They saw it coming."
In addition to Mr. Pichai's announcement, Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg in January said in his blog that a big focus of 2018 would be "making sure the time we all spend on Facebook is time well spent" -- phrasing that echoed the previous name of Mr. Harris's nonprofit, Time Well Spent. (The organization is now called the Center for Humane Technology.) Facebook also has introduced measures designed to curb fake news and better monitor political advertising.
Apple in early June unveiled new controls designed to help curb the amount of time spent on the company's products.
Yet a central tenet of the campaign being run by Messrs. Harris, Steyer and McNamee is that the industry can no longer be trusted to police itself. They have pushed for tighter regulation in the U.S., seeking input on either side of the Atlantic from lawmakers and regulators, who have credited them with helping to clarify key issues and focus on potential fixes.
Mr. Harris has been covertly meeting with designers within tech firms to discuss ethical design solutions. He has turned his office into a refuge and planning zone for technologists and whistleblowers.
Mr. Steyer has been a behind-the-scenes ramrod behind a sweeping data privacy bill passed by the California state legislature and signed into law by the governor Thursday. The legislation will give Californians protections that could be stronger in some cases even than Europe's General Data Protection Regulation law, which went into effect in May, And it may spur Congress to consider federal privacy legislation over the next couple of years.
Mr. McNamee is a regular on business television railing that the industry hasn't yet learned the right lessons. "I give [Google] some credit for taking a first step," Mr. McNamee says of the search giant's recent digital well-being initiative. "And a thousand steps from here, we'll have this thing under control."
Those types of comments haven't always been well received around Silicon Valley. In January, Andrew Bosworth, a vice president and member of Facebook's management team, tweeted: "I've worked at Facebook for 12 years and I have to ask: Who the f*** is Roger McNamee?" He later took down the tweet.
Others fear their efforts, however well-intentioned, will lead to excessive government intervention. Regulation is "usually too late and not very effective -- it's almost always bolting the barn door after the horses have bolted," says Venky Ganesan, a partner at Menlo Ventures.
The notion that a Silicon Valley insurgency would be led by these three men is surprising in part because they are in many ways consummate insiders.
Messrs. Steyer and McNamee were classmates at Phillips Exeter Academy, the exclusive New Hampshire prep school where Mr. Zuckerberg decades later first encountered the student directory known on campus as "the facebook." Mr. McNamee was an early investor in Facebook. Mr. Steyer, the brother of billionaire environmentalist Tom Steyer, has spent 15 years building a network of lawyers, lawmakers, and business leaders though Common Sense Media, which provides parent-friendly reviews of movies and advocates for online privacy.
Mr. Harris, a generation younger than the other two men, brings street cred as the founder of a startup that was acquired by Google, where he then worked as a product manager.
At Google, Mr. Harris was working on the next generation of Gmail when he began to feel his colleagues were on the wrong track. He says they were asking how Gmail should look and emails should open rather than: "What if email is bad for people? What if email is stressing us out?" Email, he says, "taps into some of our deepest psychological vulnerabilities, namely social reciprocity -- the pressure to respond to other people." Disenchanted, he left Google in early 2016.
Although each had separately been critical of the tech industry, the men didn't join forces until about a year ago. Mr. McNamee had begun noticing abnormal patterns in Facebook traffic in early 2016. As a former tech analyst and manager of the Facebook fan page for his psychedelic rock band Moonalice, Mr. McNamee knew better than most what a normal organic growth curve looks like on the site. Yet it didn't occur to him at first that outside forces might be trying to interfere with U.S. elections. "What the hell was wrong with me? It was a massive failure of analysis," he says.
A self-described hippie who happens "to love capitalism," Mr. McNamee was already worried that the tech companies had become so big they were choking economic growth. By November, he was convinced their platforms had become propaganda tools for bad actors trying to undermine democracy. The mistake also stuck with him because he'd once been an adviser to Mr. Zuckerberg and even helped him hire Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg.
Yet he says he couldn't get them to take his concerns seriously.
In April 2017, Mr. McNamee saw Mr. Harris on "60 Minutes" discussing the potential that individuals can get hooked on smartphones as if they were slot machines -- the jackpot being "likes" rather than coins -- as part of a segment that mentioned Facebook. Recognizing a kindred spirit, he called up Mr. Harris. "Could you use a wing man?" he asked.
In search of organizational and political know-how, Mr. McNamee next called his old Phillips Exeter classmate Mr. Steyer. In a meeting at the Common Sense offices just south of downtown San Francisco, the 62-year-old Mr. McNamee showed up with Mr. Harris -- a clean-cut "whippersnapper," one staffer recalled -- who fed into Mr. Steyer's long-held concerns about the direction of social media.
"What this kid is saying is exactly what we've been talking about," Mr. Steyer told Common Sense staffers.
Mr. Steyer, also 62, doesn't intimidate easily. In 2012, he had written a book called "Talking Back to Facebook," which was focused on the impact of social media on children (he has four of his own). The book cautioned parents about an array of potential harms, including tech addiction, depression, eating disorders, cyberbullying and privacy. It cited the results of a study, released by Consumer Reports the prior year, that found 7.5 million children younger than 13 years old were on Facebook, despite federal law designed to keep them off until that age.
The book struck a nerve at Facebook headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif. Ms. Sandberg requested a meeting to discuss the book and other issues Common Sense was pressing. She asked that Mr. Steyer be excluded, recalls Bill Price, retired co-founder of private-equity firm TPG Capital and board chair at the time. At the meeting, Mr. Price recalls, Ms. Sandberg and Facebook Vice President Elliot Schrage conveyed that the book and the nonprofit were causing problems for Facebook "and they could cause problems too."
They weren't happy with the title of Mr. Steyer's book, Mr. Price says, or some of Common Sense's policy stands. Mr. Schrage "in particular tried to say 'we're big and important in Silicon Valley . . . Maybe you don't want to be on the board of Common Sense if you want to be doing business in Silicon Valley,'" Mr. Price recalls.
A spokeswoman for Ms. Sandberg confirmed she was at the meeting. Mr. Schrage relayed through a spokeswoman that he recalled the meeting from six years ago and the conversation about the book, but he denies making the comments attributed to him or any threatening statements.
Messrs. Harris, Steyer and McNamee are applying pressure on a number of fronts. Their visits to Congress last fall were instrumental in getting legislators to understand the role of social-media platforms in election interference. Sen. Mark Warner (D., Va.) found members of the group "invaluable on a range of tech policy issues," his spokeswoman said. That helped pave the way for November hearings which forced Facebook's 11th-hour disclosure that 126 million users had been exposed to propaganda, far more than it had let on.
Mr. Steyer says he and others in the group have had discussions about privacy violations with the attorneys general in California, North Carolina, Massachusetts and New York. The attorneys general from New York and Boston, Barbara Underwood and Maura Healey, are among those who have announced investigations into the reported misuse of Facebook user data by Cambridge Analytica in the 2016 presidential election, and of the data-sharing partnerships Facebook had with device makers and other corporations. Cambridge Analytica has denied wrongdoing in the Facebook incident.
Mr. Steyer and Mr. Harris are now in the midst of a year-long roadshow, which has taken them to New Orleans and Los Angeles.
At one such event at the home of a prominent San Francisco family in April, a group of about 50 business leaders and philanthropists gathered to hear Messrs. Steyer and Harris talk.
Mr. Steyer explained that he visits tech executives personally, delivering the following message: "This is about which side of history do you want to be on."
Mr. Harris explained how social-media sites keep kids glued to their smartphones. Take Snapstreaks, a popular Snapchat feature that assigns "a fireball and a number" next to every name in a child's contact list, counting the consecutive days the child has sent a snap to that friend. Skip a day and the streak disappears. "Sounds ridiculous, right? But kids are hooked on it," he said.
The feature appears to be based on a design trick Mr. Harris learned at Stanford University that can be used to influence behavior. This can be tailored to positive experiences -- like totaling up days of exercise -- or it can be used to get kids to waste time on an app. Mr. Harris said he wanted to force the industry to make more responsible design choices in product design, to accomplish more than just increasing time spent on devices.
Snap has de-emphasized the Snapstreak feature as part of a recent redesign. When asked why, a spokesman said the company regularly makes improvements but wouldn't elaborate.
At the April event, Nina Stanford, a media consultant and wife of Sherpa Capital co-founder, Scott Stanford, questioned how regulation would do any good against fast-learning artificial intelligence. "It's like we're ants in a hurricane," she told Mr. Steyer.
Her husband Scott, a former Goldman Sachs Group Inc. banker whose venture-capital firm was an early investor in Airbnb Inc., agreed that the tech industry needed to change, but questioned the need for regulation. After the session, he approached Mr. Harris, and said: Let me know what I can do to help.

Credit: By Betsy Morris
