[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Generative artificial intelligence may or may not ever be a huge business. But the massive checks being written to OpenAI most definitely mean big business for those supplying the picks and shovels for AI.
OpenAI formally announced Wednesday that it has raised $6.6 billion in a funding round that values the company at an eye-popping $157 billion. That would rank the company as the 65th largest on the S&P 500 in terms of market value just under Comcast -- which is projected to generate about $123 billion in revenue this year compared with the $3.7 billion OpenAI expects, according to The Wall Street Journal's reporting.
Clearly, OpenAI's investors are betting on much bigger things ahead. But to get there, OpenAI will need to secure a lot more computing power to continue building the large language models that power its business. That will likely be a major use of the new funding, which means a lot more orders ahead for the chip makers, server makers and other producers of key components of the AI infrastructure that OpenAI and its rivals require.
Chip makers also happened to be some of the few tech stocks to make notable gains Thursday. Nvidia jumped 3.4% while Advanced Micro Devices -- better known as AMD -- rose 1.9%. Those are the two key producers of GPU accelerators, which are the most vital systems required in AI computing. Other key players in AI infrastructure like Broadcom, Micron, Dell also all rose Thursday. The PHLX Semiconductor Index was up slightly while the Dow and S&P 500 finished the day's trading slightly lower.
Nvidia, which participated in OpenAI's funding round, will be the most outsize beneficiary, given its strong lead in AI chips and the software developers use to design AI applications. The company's data-center segment that houses its AI business is projected to generate revenue of nearly $110 billion for the fiscal year ending in January -- more than double the $47.5 billion that segment made the previous year and about eight times what AMD's data-center business is projected to hit this year.
"I suspect that a large part of the $6.6 billion raised this week will find its way into Nvidia's bank account, underlining yet again that it is the only rational way to invest in generative AI directly," analyst Richard Windsor of Radio Free Mobile wrote on Thursday. OpenAI's billions will keep the AI trade alive and well for a while longer.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
