Matthew Zames, the chief operating officer at J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. once thought to be a possible successor to Chief Executive James Dimon, is leaving the firm, the bank said Thursday.
The departure of Mr. Zames, 46 years old, will kick off a new round of speculation within the bank about possible heirs to Mr. Dimon. But it will also reinforce views that the longstanding chief of the biggest U.S. bank by assets isn't going anywhere soon.
Mr. Dimon, widely viewed as the most powerful executive on Wall Street and a statesman for the banking industry, has told people within the bank that he plans to stay in his role for another five years, executives said, though the number hasn't changed as the years pass.
Mr. Dimon sent a memo to employees Thursday detailing Mr. Zames's decision to leave, saying, "While I am sad to see him leave, I respect his decision and all he has done for J.P. Morgan Chase," according to a copy of the memo reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.
"Jamie has been public on numerous occasions he would like to be here another five years or so," Mr. Zames said in an interview. "I want to get back to . . . running a business."
Mr. Zames didn't want to stay since it was unlikely he would be named CEO of J.P. Morgan in the near future, or at all, people familiar with the situation said. What's more, people within the bank viewed Mr. Zames's chances to gain the top spot to have fallen within the past year or two, according to employees and executives.
A bank spokesman said that while Mr. Zames wants to run a business now, the J.P. Morgan CEO job "is unlikely to open up in the next several years."
The decision for Mr. Zames to leave in the coming weeks was amicable and was Mr. Zames's decision, the spokesman for the bank said.
While he aspires to be a CEO at another company, it won't necessarily be in finance, Mr. Zames said. He added that he is leaving the bank without another job lined up because he wants to "take time and make the right decision for me."
In departing, Mr. Zames becomes the latest in a string of potential successors to Mr. Dimon who have either chosen to leave rather than wait, or been pushed out. Such executives have included Jes Staley, who is now CEO of Barclays PLC; Bill Winters, currently CEO of Standard Chartered PLC, and Charles Scharf, who until recently was CEO of Visa Inc., among others.
With Mr. Zames now out of the running, current executives viewed as potential CEO-successor candidates include: Gordon Smith, head of the consumer-banking business; Daniel Pinto, head of the firm's corporate and investment-banking business; Mary Callahan Erdoes, head of its asset-management business, and Marianne Lake, the bank's chief financial officer.
Mr. Zames was elevated to his current role of chief operating officer in the wake of the "London Whale" trading scandal that cost the bank around $6 billion. The former head of the bank's fixed-income business, he was widely credited with helping to sort out the fiasco within the bank's chief investment office.
He is known throughout the bank as someone with a trader's personality, who is blunt and passionate about his work. He was said to have led the bank's cost-cutting efforts a few years ago with an iron fist, which frustrated some executives and employees.
There are also "Zames guys," or employees who have worked alongside him and respect his work, especially in the corporate and investment bank. Some employees who had worked with Mr. Zames said they were surprised and disappointed in his decision to leave.
In his current role, Mr. Zames oversaw a number of groups across the bank, including cybersecurity, technology, real estate and other functions. Earlier, he held roles across the investment-banking and trading businesses.
His role became more important in recent years as J.P. Morgan and other banks were tested by cyberthreats and upstart fintech companies. J.P. Morgan responded by boosting its tech budget to $9.5 billion annually, according to a letter Mr. Zames wrote for the company's annual report in April that also highlighted the bank's hiring of outside programmers and its push into robotics and machine learning. "I have never been more excited about the opportunities ahead," Mr. Zames wrote at the time.
Executives on the bank's operating committee will take on Mr. Zames's responsibilities, a spokesman said.
Mr. Zames was one of the bank's most highly paid executives. According to J.P. Morgan's most recent proxy statement, Mr. Zames was awarded total pay of $19 million in 2016, up from $18.5 million the prior year and $17 million for 2014.
According to a regulatory filing by the bank Thursday, Mr. Zames will be entitled to a future severance payment of $900,000, plus discretionary payments of $4.625 million in February 2018 and $4.5 million in February 2019.
Credit: By Emily Glazer
