WASHINGTON -- A House Intelligence Committee report concludes that U.S. spy agencies are failing to meet the multipronged challenge posed by China and calls for changes to focus on pandemics, trade and other issues often given less attention by intelligence professionals.
The report, most of which is classified, portrays the $85 billion-a-year U.S. intelligence community as overly focused on traditional targets such as terrorism and adversaries' militaries. Pandemics, as evidenced by the coronavirus, and China's technological prowess in areas such as artificial intelligence present an equal threat, according to a summary of the report released Wednesday.
The report recommends fundamental changes in the way intelligence agencies operate, including providing greater support to the Commerce Department, the National Science Foundation, public-health organizations and other agencies outside the usual national-security bureaucracy.
"Absent a significant and immediate reprioritization and realignment of resources, we will be ill-prepared to compete with China -- diplomatically, economically, and militarily -- on the global stage for decades to come," said the committee's chairman, Rep. Adam Schiff (D., Calif.).
John Ratcliffe, the director of national intelligence, said: "I'm glad to see that there's congressional recognition of what I've been saying since my confirmation: China poses a greater national security threat to the U.S. than any other nation."
The House report and two others published this week are part of a growing consensus on Capitol Hill that new thinking and bipartisan support are required to address Beijing's challenge to U.S. global primacy. The reports and their findings suggest that harder-line China policies are likely to prevail in the coming years, whether in a second Trump term or in a Biden administration.
The China Task Force, a group of 15 Republican members of Congress, in its own report calls China the "greatest national and economic security challenge of this generation." It offers more than 400 recommendations, ranging from providing safe harbor to people fleeing China's democracy crackdown in Hong Kong to working on a trade agreement with Taiwan.
The task force, headed by Rep. Michael McCaul of Texas, said it gave priority to recommendations with bipartisan support, many of which have been included in legislation that has been passed by either the House or the Senate.
The Chinese Embassy in Washington didn't comment on the reports. Beijing has said China's development benefits world peace and prosperity. "We don't intend to and will not pose any threat to other countries," a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said this week.

Credit: By Warren P. Strobel and Kate O'Keeffe
