Shalev Hulio, former chief executive of the company behind the controversial Pegasus spyware, has raised a $33.6 million second round of funding for his startup, Tel Aviv-based Dream Security, amid the Israel-Hamas war.
"Israel is resilient," said Michael Eisenberg, co-founder and general partner at venture firm Aleph, who co-led the deal with Dovi Frances, founder of Los Angeles-based Group 11. Dream uses artificial-intelligence tools to provide cybersecurity services for critical infrastructure.
Dream Security was valued at $200 million in the financing, Hulio said. Its other co-founders are Sebastian Kurz, a former chancellor of Austria, and Gil Dolev, whose cyberintelligence company Wayout was acquired by NSO Group, developer of Pegasus.
The investment was signed Nov. 7 near the Gaza border where Hamas attackers had invaded Israel a month earlier. The location and date were chosen for symbolic reasons. In Jewish tradition, 30 days is the period after which mourners start to re-emerge to normal life, Eisenberg said.
Dream has remained operational even as about 10% of the 70-person team, including Hulio, have been deployed with the Israel Defense Forces. Hulio came to the deal signing from an army base.
The deal brings the company funding to almost $55 million. Dream launched a year ago with a $21 million pre-seed investment from Group 11 and Aleph, as well as several individual investors.
Dream has developed proprietary large language models -- the basis of its AI tools -- trained on cybersecurity data and documented incidents. One tool can take a few files about the configuration of a customer network and produce an interactive map that shows connections, switches, routers, ports and identities of network users. Another tool assesses potential attack paths and suggests ways to reduce the likelihood of successful cyberattacks.
The company has customers in Israel and Europe, Hulio said. European governments and critical-infrastructure custodians have seen increased cyber risk since Russia invaded Ukraine. Similarly, Israel has suffered a rise in cyberattacks since the Hamas invasion on Oct. 7.
During the war, the company has provided services free of charge to several organizations in Israel, including fund managers, a major port and government ministries. A hospital used Dream to scan for vulnerabilities. Dream also said it identified a server at an Israeli oil and gas facility that was exposed to the internet and running software with a known bug. The Dream tool detected suspicious activity against the server from outside Israel attempting to exploit the bug. The customer addressed the situation.
Hulio said that the team's background in offensive cyber is helpful in its defensive role. He said he is no longer involved in NSO and has sold all of his shares. The Biden administration in 2021 put NSO on a list restricting it from obtaining some U.S. technology, citing malicious use of NSO's spyware by governments.
Hulio said that Pegasus has helped prevent terrorist attacks and infiltrate criminal networks, and continues to be in use in Israel's efforts to recover hostages held in Gaza.
Dream's co-founder Kurz, who is the company's president, is on trial for perjury in Austria over statements to a parliamentary committee. Kurz has denied the charges.
Eisenberg dismissed the controversy around Dream's founders. as "politically manufactured."
Credit: By Yuliya Chernova
