[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The global electronics sector is still deep in its post-Covid swoon. Cellphone shipments were down 8% on the year in the second quarter of 2023, according to Counterpoint Research, their eighth consecutive quarter of decline. It might seem like an odd time to buy the world's largest contract electronics maker and a key Apple supplier.
But Taiwan's Hon Hai Precision Industry, known as Foxconn, finds itself in an interesting position. That is in part due to global political and economic shifts under way.
Its shares are pretty cheap: about 10 times the next 12 months' expected earnings, according to FactSet, compared with around 19 times for the S&P 500. Cyclically, the second half of 2023 is likely to be rough, but there are signs that 2024 could be considerably better. The global electronics inventory overhang from the end of the pandemic boom appears to be eroding. Electronics and machinery inventories are trending down in China, relative to sales, according to consulting firm Gavekal Dragonomics, while chip inventories appear to have peaked at Samsung and SK Hynix.
Moreover, if the U.S. manages to avoid recession and stick its "soft landing" while China's labor market remains deep in the doldrums, Foxconn would be well placed. North America is its single-biggest revenue driver, accounting for about 30% to 40% of sales, according to Morgan Stanley. Mainland China is its key labor source but a relatively small revenue driver, accounting for 10% of sales or less, according to the bank.
That means if the Chinese labor market remains ugly while the U.S. consumer prospers, Foxconn could see strong revenue growth and lower-than-expected cost pressure. A strong dollar and weaker yuan, which seems likely, would magnify the effect. And Foxconn has no net debt on its balance sheet. Should global interest rates remain higher for longer, that would add up to an important advantage compared with other manufacturers.
Despite the gloomy news in the PC sector, Foxconn has some emerging structural tailwinds. Although it won't benefit as directly from the artificial-intelligence boom as chip firms, higher demand for servers and other electronic architecture will be an important fillip. The firm is moving aggressively into the electric-vehicle supply chain: It aims to produce both components, including batteries, and EVs themselves. Revenue from EV components was 20 billion New Taiwan dollars, equivalent to about $630 million, in 2022, and the firm plans to invest in plants in the U.S. and globally.
Other than a slower-than-expected rebound in phone shipments, the main risk for the company is margin pressure as it ramps up new plants to enter new EV-related business lines and diversify its China-focused phone assembly ecosystem.
Foxconn's capital expenditures in 2022 and 2021 were 105 billion and 110 billion New Taiwan dollars respectively according to FactSet: each roughly 60% more than the average from 2015 to 2020. Its heavy new investments in India will take time to bear fruit. Goldman Sachs notes it took four years for Foxconn's Vietnam operating profit margin to turn positive after it entered the country. The company's big investments in India in 2021 and 2022, with more probably on the way, will take a while to boost profitability. Goldman reckons the firm's operating profit margin in India in 2021 was about negative 1%.
Another risk is geopolitical. If tensions in the Taiwan Strait or between the U.S. and China were to escalate uncontrollably, Foxconn's position straddling all three geographies would put it in a tricky situation. Many, if not most other major global electronics assemblers would be in a similar position, though. And the good news is that, by heeding Apple's guidance to boost production capacity outside China, Foxconn will be in a good position to secure future orders and capture the Indian government's own not-insubstantial manufacturing subsidies.
Foxconn, along with the global electronics supply chain, is in a period of transition, presenting both costs and opportunities. But if the global cellphone cycle turns next year and the U.S. dodges recession, low and stable costs in China could help offset margin pressure from new investments while revenue grows robustly. With a cheap stock price and good long-term prospects, Foxconn is worth a look.
Credit: By Nathaniel Taplin
