RITE AID
RADCQ -66%
Rite Aid filed for bankruptcy following years of losses, failed mergers and opioid litigation. The beleaguered drugstore chain was unable to find the money to settle hundreds of federal, state and private lawsuits alleging it played a role in the opioid crisis by oversupplying prescription painkillers. Filing for bankruptcy puts all pending litigation against the company on hold. Rite Aid will close more of its 2,100 stores and name a new chief executive as part of the restructuring. Its shares were halted on the New York Stock Exchange Monday, and Rite Aid's stock plummeted 66% Tuesday.
NVIDIA
NVDA -4.7%
The Biden administration is cracking down on AI chip exports to China. The Commerce Department announced new rules on Tuesday that will make it tougher for U.S. companies like Nvidia and Intel to sell advanced semiconductors to the vast Chinese market. The goal is to limit China's access to such chips "that could fuel breakthroughs in artificial intelligence and sophisticated computers," Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo said. Nvidia was the second-worst performer on the S&P 500 Tuesday, with its shares losing 4.7%.
NETFLIX
NFLX +16%
Netflix premiered a big subscriber jump as it cracked down on password sharing. The streaming giant on Wednesday said it added 8.8 million subscribers in the third quarter. The company also said it would raise U.S. prices, increasing the cost of its basic plan in the U.S. to $11.99 from $9.99 and upping the cost of its premium plan to $22.99 from $19.99. Netflix stock was the biggest gainer in S&P 500 Thursday, with shares leaping 16% to their highest close in more than a month.
UNITED AIRLINES
UAL -9.7%
Airline stocks lost some air during the week. United Airlines on Tuesday cut its fourth-quarter forecast, reflecting the Israel-Hamas war and higher fuel costs. Rising energy prices have already dragged on carriers' profit outlooks. Since war in Israel broke out earlier this month, United and its peers also face the possibility of flights to Tel Aviv being suspended through the end of 2023.Many major airlines have stopped operating flights to Israel, including United, Delta Air Lines, and American Airlines, plus a raft of European and Asian carriers. United shares tumbled 9.7% Wednesday.
WYNDHAM HOTELS AND RESORTS
WH +9%
A bid to unite two budget hotel giants has hit a snag. Choice Hotels on Tuesday made public its $7.8 billion cash-and-stock offer to buy Wyndham, after Choice said Wyndham disengaged after nearly six months of talks. Choice offered Wyndham $80 a share in April and its latest proposal at $90 a share -- a 30% premium to its $69.10 closing price Monday. Wyndham later Tuesday rejected the takeover bid as too risky and too low. Wyndham shares jumped 9% Tuesday, while Choice Hotels shares declined 6.8%.
TESLA
TSLA -9.3%
Tesla's profitability is stalling. The electric-car maker posted a 44% drop in its quarterly profit, stemming from price cuts and discounts aimed at refreshing demand for its aging models. Chief Executive Elon Musk on Wednesday warned that Tesla would face "enormous challenges" scaling up factory production of its long-delayed Cybertruck. The truck was first unveiled in 2019 and has faced cost overruns and design changes. Tesla plans to start delivering the truck to customers at the end of November. Tesla shares slid 9.3% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
