WASHINGTON -- The Senate delayed a vote on legislation aimed at helping the U.S. maintain its lead in technology, after several Republicans argued that the bill was being rushed through without full debate.
The final vote on the bill, aimed at addressing rising competition from China and other nations, is now scheduled for June 8, after lawmakers return from their Memorial Day recess.
The legislation has emerged as one of the few big bipartisan legislative efforts so far this year and appeared headed for approval late Thursday.
But several Republicans staged a lengthy protest into the early hours of Friday morning, contending that the bill was too expensive, and that a series of amendments required more time to review.
"There's not one person in this entire place who could possibly comprehend everything that's in this legislation in its current form, as it existed as of very, very late last night," said Sen. Mike Lee (R. Utah).
Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.), who spearheaded the legislation known as the U.S. Innovation and Competition Act, announced the rescheduling of the vote until next month as part of a deal that also included a vote Friday on a commission to probe the Jan. 6 riots by a pro-Trump mob at the U.S. Capitol, which Republicans blocked.
The innovation legislation still faces challenges reaching a final deal with the House, although sponsors expressed optimism that the House version of the legislation will become more similar to the Senate bill.
The bill is aimed at halting what Mr. Schumer called a gradual decline by the U.S. as the world's leader in scientific research and innovation "and lay the foundation, instead, for another American century."
Senate GOP leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) on Thursday said that "there's broad bipartisan agreement that America needs to upgrade our competitiveness with China," even as he urged Democrats to allow more amendments to the bill before the Senate approved it.
The bill aims to overhaul U.S. government support for science by significantly expanding the government's role in technological research, including through the National Science Foundation. It would authorize about $190 billion in spending to strengthen U.S. advanced technologies to better compete globally, according to a recent Congressional Budget Office analysis, although not all of that money would represent new spending.
The bill also has become a vehicle for a number of other tech-related initiatives. One would authorize about $52 billion for encouraging more semiconductor production in the U.S.
Another provision would ban downloads of the Chinese-owned social-media app TikTok on all government phones. Previous bans included military and Homeland Security devices. The U.S. says TikTok data could be shared with China's authoritarian government. TikTok has said it would never do so.
As originally envisioned, the bill would have provided $100 billion over five years for research at the NSF into artificial intelligence and machine learning, robotics, high-performance computing and other advanced technologies.
An additional $10 billion would have been authorized for the Commerce Department to designate at least 10 regional technology hubs for research, development and manufacturing of key technologies.
But some lawmakers -- skeptical about the bill's focus on the NSF -- succeeded in shifting part of the money to the Energy Department, which oversees 17 national laboratories that date to World War II and explore a range of scientific topics.
Credit: By John D. McKinnon and Eliza Collins
