[The trusted advisers of top business leaders]
Alfred Lin became one of Silicon Valley's most sought-after venture capitalists after his early bets on companies like Airbnb and DoorDash. Now, he is guiding Sequoia Capital through another tech transformation, artificial intelligence.
Lin co-leads Sequoia's team of partners who invest in early-stage startups. In 2021, he helped make an investment in OpenAI when the ChatGPT maker was valued at around $20 billion. Today it's worth $157 billion. He recently backed a pair of AI robotics startups, Cobot and Physical Intelligence.
Lin, 52 years old, grew up in New York City as the son of Taiwanese immigrants. He took an early interest in business, starting a lawn-mowing service in junior high school. He subcontracted work to his classmates in Queens. After graduating from Harvard University in 1994, he moved to California to pursue a Ph.D. in statistics at Stanford. He dropped out to work for LinkExchange, an advertising startup co-founded by his college friend Tony Hsieh, who later helped start the online shoe seller Zappos.
Lin joined Sequoia in 2010, after working at a series of other companies including Zappos, in which the venture-capital firm was an investor. When Lin showed his wife the offer letter, his wife handed him a positive pregnancy test.
Lin got a quick start, convincing the partnership to back five companies in his first year. Sequoia's investments in Airbnb and DoorDash netted the firm over $20 billion when they both went public in December 2020.
Lin lives in San Francisco with his wife and 14-year-old son, and currently sits on the boards of 13 companies, including Airbnb, DoorDash and Citadel Securities.
Here are four of his most trusted advisers.
Luciana Lixandru
Partner at Sequoia Capital
Lin met Lixandru while searching for a partner to lead Sequoia's new London office. Her name kept popping up as one of the best up-and-coming investors in Europe, prompting him to take a meeting. In 2021, Lixandru was promoted to co-lead Sequoia's early-stage investment business with Lin. The two talk almost every day. Lin leans on Lixandru for her ability to drill a business down into its component parts: What is the business, why is it going to be valuable, and why is it going to matter in 10 years? "She's very, very focused on what the business will become," he said.
Tony Xu
CEO of DoorDash
Lin met Xu when the then 29-year-old pitched him on DoorDash. Lin initially passed on the investment, before changing his mind and making a $15 million investment for Sequoia in 2014. Lin turns to Xu when evaluating new founders, crediting him with helping Sequoia make a recent investment in an AI startup. Xu is also a source of inspiration for Lin outside of work. Xu told Lin that jujitsu lessons taught him when and how to make tactical business decisions. The conversation encouraged Lin to start something new himself: writing a blog now called Outlier's Path.
Brian Chesky
CEO of Airbnb
When Chesky was invited to Allen & Co.'s Sun Valley Conference as a young entrepreneur, he returned with 16 pages of notes from meetings with some of America's best-known executives. At one point, he got a face-to-face meeting with Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos after spotting him at a duck pond. Lin, who has known Chesky for over a decade, thinks back to this anecdote often. Chesky's hustle was on Lin's mind when he reached out cold to Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang a few years ago. The resulting Zoom meeting helped Lin establish a new relationship between Sequoia and Nvidia.
Hadi Partovi
CEO of Code.org,
Lin first bumped into Partovi while they were students at Harvard and grew closer while working together at a startup called Tellme Networks. At the time, Partovi had a piece of advice for Lin as his friend prepared a slide deck for board directors. "He's always there to remind me of: You're thinking from your perspective. Think from the other person's perspective and you'll get along a lot better," Lin said. In 2019, Lin heard Partovi speak about his nonprofit Code.org, which teaches kids how to code. The talk encouraged Lin to donate to Code.org and also join its board of directors.
Credit: By Berber Jin
