With tech giants and artificial-intelligence businesses snapping up the advanced computer chips that power AI, companies are looking to new techniques to wrest more out of the AI chips at their disposal.
Some companies are conserving the use of AI chips or turning to software that can squeeze more performance out of available chips and help reduce costs.
Training generative AI models requires as many as tens of thousands of graphics chips, say experts. Most of these graphics processing units, or GPUs, are produced by chip maker Nvidia, which has said it is securing more supply to meet outsize demand.
"If you go down the path of training AI models from scratch, it will require a tremendous amount of [computing power]," said Anant Adya, executive vice president of IT consulting and outsourcing services firm Infosys. "Even if you manage to find compute, it will be cost prohibitive."
The world's largest technology companies and cutting-edge startups may have the edge in securing access to those GPUs, forcing even well-connected startups to use back channels to find spare processing power.
Mike Anderson, chief digital and information officer of Santa Clara, Calif.-based Netskope, said the cloud security company has over 100 AI models it has built to do things such as detect cybersecurity threats and help improve network performance. While the company trains those models using its own GPUs, Anderson said it aims to train multiple models at once. "Training does not happen that often," eliminating the need to constantly run its GPUs in a "real-time manner," he said.
Another aspect of processing called inference -- where the AI model is put to work producing an output like text or code -- also requires processing power but generally less than what is required for training. For Netskope's inferencing, Anderson said the company is using central processing units, or CPUs, which are less powerful than specialized graphics processors and more readily available.
Those CPUs are tuned with open-source software tools to get more performance out of them, he said, helping the company meet its processing demands for real-time model outputs.
Like Netskope, digital operations company PagerDuty is considering open-source solutions and running its own AI infrastructure, said Chief Technology Officer Tim Armandpour. Those bespoke tools could be used down the line when the San Francisco-based company's use of generative AI solidifies further, he said.
Other companies are turning to third-party software to get more performance out of their own GPUs.
Run:ai, a Tel Aviv-based startup, installs its optimization software directly on its customers' GPUs, the startup's co-founder and Chief Executive Omri Geller said. The software can automatically put idle computing power to use to gain better processing efficiency, according to Geller, and its customers typically have hundreds to thousands of GPUs for AI training.
OctoML, a startup based in Seattle, similarly helps businesses get more performance out of AI hardware but offers its service on top of the cloud, said co-founder and Chief Executive Luis Ceze. The startup is betting that most businesses won't want to deal with owning and managing an array of AI hardware, Ceze said, so it rents out access to processing power from cloud providers that it speeds up on customers' behalf. Most of OctoML's customers are companies with AI-based products that require large amounts of computing power, he said.
VMware, the software giant that has long focused on virtualization for enterprises -- where software is used as an alternative to hardware -- also is aiming to help customers manage their use of multiple cloud platforms or data centers for AI processing. The Palo Alto, Calif.-based company is tailoring its virtualization service for AI inference and fine-tuning models, Chief Executive Raghu Raghuram said.
VMware announced an update to its partnership with Nvidia in August that will give joint customers access to new Nvidia servers with smaller numbers of GPUs that Raghuram said are sufficient for fine-tuning. The goal is to help companies avoid getting blocked from using large language models because they don't have enough processing power, he said, and to offer them a price that is competitive with what cloud providers charge for GPU use per hour.
To be sure, cloud providers such as Amazon, Microsoft and Google also can provide access to the processing power companies need by renting it out as they do with computer servers, said Gartner analyst Chirag Dekate.
The cloud companies also are developing their own silicon accelerators to speed up chip processing and lower costs, but they too are restricting the processing they can offer to their most power-hungry customers. For instance, Amazon Web Services' Inferentia2 accelerator is 50% cheaper than the company's standard computing service for training AI models, said Swami Sivasubramanian, AWS's vice president of data and machine learning.
Credit: By Belle Lin
