Marketer budgets fell to 7.7% of overall company revenue in 2024, down from an average of 11% over the four years preceding the pandemic and a new low since 2021, according to a survey of marketing leaders from research firm Gartner. The figure is below the average of 8.2% in the four years since 2020.
The survey included nearly 400 chief marketing officers and marketing leaders in North America and Northern and Western Europe, most at companies with annual revenue of over $1 billion. The firm found marketer budgets in 2021 were 6.4% of total revenue but considers that to be a year still heavily affected by the pandemic. The survey in 2020 was conducted early in the year before lockdown budget cuts began, the firm said.
"The new normal is that we just simply have less funding in marketing now," said Ewan McIntyre, a vice president analyst and chief of research at Gartner for Marketers.
Those decreased budgets are coming as chief executives are asking for marketers to achieve growth and profitability at heightened levels. According to Gartner's research, 73% of surveyed marketers said they were being asked to do more with less and 64% said they don't have sufficient budgets to execute their outlined strategy.
Even small changes in the marketing budget expressed as a proportion of revenue can mean a major difference in dollar terms. "The difference between 11% and 8.2% is pretty bad," McIntyre said. "If you're an enterprise with annual revenue of $500 million, this is going to be a decrease of $14 million per annum in your marketing budgets."
The shrinking of CMO budgets comes as ad spending in the U.S. appears poised for strength in 2024.
Media budgets continue to hover around 2% of company revenue in 2024, in line with the average over the past three years, according to Gartner. But companies are reducing their spending in other areas of marketing such as labor, agency work and marketing technology.
The declines are likely to result in marketers looking even more to artificial intelligence to improve productivity and efficiency, Gartner said.
It makes sense that some marketing budgets at strong companies would capture a lower proportion of revenue in a time of growth because marketing at these businesses is effective enough to keep driving returns even at a lower level, said Michael Duda, managing partner at consumer venture-capital and marketing consulting firm Bullish. But he said he believes advertisers will boost spending this year as they try to win back consumers who have been spending more selectively amid inflated prices.
Generate image description

Credit: By Megan Graham
