PARIS -- The U.S. is moving to rejoin Unesco -- with plans to pay hundreds of millions of dollars in membership fees -- in a bid to counter the growing influence of China and other adversaries at the United Nations culture and heritage organization.
On Thursday, a delegation of U.S. diplomats delivered a letter to Unesco Director-General Audrey Azoulay seeking readmission in July to the Paris-based organization. In the letter, which was viewed by The Wall Street Journal, a senior State Department official said the Biden administration plans to request an appropriation of $150 million from Congress for fiscal 2024 to pay Unesco, adding that similar contributions would be made in ensuing years until the country's membership arrears are fully repaid. The U.S. currently owes Unesco $619 million, according to the organization.
The move aims to reverse the Trump administration's decision to withdraw from the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in 2017, when it cited a need for overhauls at the organization as well as its "continuing anti-Israel bias." Since then, China has become one of Unesco's largest donors. The organization's No. 2 official is now Chinese, positioning Beijing to help steer discussions at the organization on issues ranging from press freedom to education in Ukraine and other war-torn countries.
In an interview, Azoulay said the U.S. was eager to re-establish its influence at an organization that -- in addition to designating heritage sites around the world -- is at the forefront of global efforts to develop guidelines for artificial intelligence and other sensitive technologies.
"The U.S. are coming back because Unesco has grown stronger, and because it is dealing with issues that concern them," she added.
In its letter, the State Department said the Biden administration planned to work with Congress to provide additional funding of $10 million in support of certain Unesco programs, including the preservation of cultural heritage in Ukraine and education about the Holocaust.
A spokeswoman for the State Department said rejoining Unesco "would address a critical gap in American global leadership, where our competitors are finding new and worrying opportunities to erode the values that underpin the international system."
On Monday, Azoulay summoned ambassadors from Unesco's 193 member states to a closed-door meeting in Paris to discuss the U.S.'s return. In the interview, she said she planned to hold a vote this month on the matter. The U.S. needs the support from a majority of member states.
The vote is likely to pass, officials say, because the Biden administration is planning to replenish Unesco's coffers.
The $619 million the U.S. owes, Azoulay said, covers missed contributions that date back to 2011. That is when the Obama administration began withholding funds after Unesco conferred membership on the Palestinian territories. U.S. legislation prohibits funding to any U.N. agency that recognizes Palestinian territories as a full member.
The loss of U.S. funding had a crippling impact on Unesco, which at the time counted on the U.S. for 22% of its $500 million budget.
Credit: By Noemie Bisserbe and Stacy Meichtry
