Delta Air Lines Inc. is suing an artificial-intelligence company that powered a chatbot on the carrier's website, accusing it of lax cybersecurity that caused a 2017 data breach. The unusual lawsuit highlights the sensitive relations between companies that have been hacked and their business partners.
Companies rarely sue technology providers over data breaches because their contracts generally specify the level of third-party suppliers' liability and because the two partner firms typically end up settling out of court, cybersecurity lawyers said.
Delta's lawsuit, filed last week in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York, alleges that chatbot provider [24]7.ai Inc. lacked basic cybersecurity safeguards while running the AI-powered service on Delta's website in 2017 and 2018. The suit also says [24]7 waited more than five months to inform the airline of the breach instead of telling it immediately, and did so using LinkedIn instead of official channels -- potentially violating the companies' contract.
William Bose, [24]7's senior vice president and acting general counsel, said the chatbot company intends to defend itself vigorously.
"This has been an ongoing issue between the companies and nothing new has arisen, except that Delta has chosen to litigate this matter," he said in an email through a spokesman. They declined to address specific allegations. Delta and a lawyer representing it declined to comment.
The airline disclosed the incident last year and said credit-card details and other personal information from up to 825,000 customers were exposed.
Delta is seeking reimbursement from [24]7 for all costs related to the breach, totaling millions of dollars, according to the suit. The airline hasn't disclosed expenses from the incident in its financial filings.
Privately held [24]7, founded in 2000 and based in San Jose, Calif., uses artificial intelligence to create customer-assistance products such as chatbots, consumer-analytics programs and digital advertising services, according to its website.
The bot on Delta's website allowed customers to get information about purchasing tickets, changing itineraries and other requests, the lawsuit said. Hackers accessed [24]7's systems and modified source code, letting them scrape Delta customers' personal data and payment-card details from the airline's website, according to the suit.
The airline accuses 24[7] of failing to implement basic security controls such as requiring multifactor authentication for employees accessing source code and forbidding staff members from using the same login credentials, according to the complaint. Hackers modified the chatbot's source code using compromised credentials, then monitored activity on Delta's website and captured data that visitors entered there.
The breach wouldn't have happened if [24]7 had implemented "even basic access restrictions," the lawsuit said.
Companies' relationships with technology providers can come under scrutiny after a data breach. As Capital One Financial Corp. announced a breach in late July, it specified the problem wasn't caused by any security flaw in the cloud technology it uses. The bank has moved significant bank operations to Amazon.com Inc.'s cloud services over the past several years.
Some contracts state that technology suppliers must implement strong cybersecurity measures and have unlimited liability for breaches, said Ieuan Jolly, co-chairman of the privacy, security and data innovations practice at law firm Loeb & Loeb LLP.

Credit: By Catherine Stupp
