For many investors, it is like 2022 never happened.
Tech stocks are rising manically, spilling into meme stocks. The cryptoverse is enjoying a resurgence. Bullishness is hitting a fever pitch in the options market. In short, risk-on investments are the most popular they have been since late 2021 -- right before stocks entered the longest bear market in decades.
Shades of meme-stock mania are cropping up. The Meme ETF -- tied to the Solactive Roundhill Meme Stock Index -- has risen 67% this year to its highest level since May 2022.
Its top holdings as of Monday included bitcoin miner Riot Platforms (up 458% this year), artificial-intelligence lending platform Upstart Holdings (up 342%), Coinbase Global (up 211%), electric-car maker Rivian Automotive (up 35%), and Carvana (up 1,077%). The fervor has driven record-high options trading tied to many of those companies' shares.
And against all odds, bitcoin has climbed 81% in 2023.
Retail traders are all-in. Bullish sentiment -- represented as the expectation that stocks will rise in the next six months -- this month hit its highest level since 2021, according to surveys by the American Association of Individual Investors.
The bull-bear spread, the difference between investors who see the stock market trotting higher versus those expecting a rout, has been positive for six consecutive weeks. That is the longest stretch since November 2021.
Americans are also growing more confident about the economy as a whole. Consumer sentiment, measured by the University of Michigan's survey, jumped to 72.6 in July from 64.4 the prior month. That is the highest reading since September 2021 and the biggest increase since 2005.
Since the Federal Reserve rescued the banking system in March, investors have had less to worry about, according to David Wagner, a portfolio manager at Aptus Capital Advisors. "The only thing that can stop this rally is if a big time risk is put back on the table," he said.
Rather than scoop up options that would protect portfolios' gains if stocks fell, investors are reaching for bets that would pay out if the rally continued. The put-call ratio -- a measure of fear in the options market -- has fallen to its lowest levels since January 2022, according to Cboe Global Markets data.
The Cboe Volatility Index, or the VIX, is trading below 14. The index is commonly referred to as Wall Street's fear gauge as it measures prices of options used to protect against market declines. Anything below 20 is associated with little demand for insurance.
One reason why investors look complacent to many in the market is that stocks are quietly marching higher. The S&P 500's daily swings haven't been this small since late 2021, according to a Cboe measure.
Market contrarians say the perfect storm is brewing for a crash.
Retail investors were similarly euphoric in late 2021. They showed few signs of unnerve: The put-call ratio was low, as was the VIX. But by early January 2022, all three major stock indexes had peaked, and the S&P 500 went on to lose 19% that year.
"The FOMO [fear of missing out] becomes so great that retail investors come clamoring in at the end, the last hurrah, just in time for the market bottom to fall out," said Amanda Agati, chief investment officer of PNC Asset Management Group.
It isn't just the exuberance that is giving some cause for concern. Higher borrowing costs threaten to slow down the economy, choking off credit for businesses and making it harder for companies and households to get loans. Over the past year or so, rates on auto loans and mortgages have jumped around 3 percentage points. Interest on credit cards is up to 22% from 16%, Federal Reserve data show.
While inflation has eased, hitting 3% in June, it is still above the Fed's target rate of 2%. And Fed officials are likely concerned about Americans getting used to elevated inflation. "If we get stagflation, rates will have to continue rising," said Jason Bloom, head of fixed income and alternatives ETF strategy for Invesco. "That's not a great recipe for investors."
Credit: By Eric Wallerstein
