For companies trying to ride the ChatGPT wave, there is an added layer of headaches if their chatbots are in China: how to weed out talk of politics.
Since its release in November, the artificial-intelligence chatbot developed by San Francisco-based OpenAI generated excitement but raised concern about misinformation or disturbing AI-produced responses.
This week, the Chinese search-engine company Baidu Inc. is set to release Ernie Bot, its answer to ChatGPT, driving attention to China's chatbots, as well as their capability to ensure politically kosher dialogues.
In a country that built digital borders, censors learned to adapt to new forms of content. Controlling responses from a chatbot presents a new challenge that might prove more complex than policing search and social media, Chinese tech executives, engineers and AI experts say.
Chinese chatbots face limits similar to those for searches on China's web. Users hit a wall each time a prompt contains politically touchy keywords, leading some internet users to collectively refer to anticipated Chinese ChatGPT-like services as "ChatCCP" -- a play on the abbreviation for the Chinese Communist Party.
Unlike Ernie, which will be the first Chinese ChatGPT equivalent, the four products The Wall Street Journal tested all use earlier generations of the technology underpinning ChatGPT. The Journal tested four Chinese chatbot products. The output said content moderation was provided by Baidu. Baidu declined to comment on questions for this article.
The chatbot that could best carry a conversation -- even though it was reluctant to discuss politics -- was Gipi Talk, an AI bot developed by a group of engineers in the southern tech hub of Shenzhen.A question asking whether Xi Jinping is a good leader prompted a response that the input "couldn't pass a safety review." The chatbot then tried to steer the conversation in a different direction.
Under Mr. Xi, Beijing has expanded ways to muzzle discussion, including with new laws limiting online speech and fines and suspensions of social-media companies for inadequate content policing.
In a country where internet users can easily step on political land mines, chatbots will likely "just be super boring," said Pascale Fung, the director of the Center for Artificial Intelligence Research at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Some early versions of chatbots strictly filter questions touching on politics, even simple references to the country's leaders. On Monday, a question about what the country's new premier, Li Qiang, had said in his first press conference caused two services to freeze and stop engaging.
Credit: By Shen Lu
