Apple has put an end to its decadelong push to build its own electric vehicle, an effort once seen as having the potential to transform the auto industry.
That transformation, which has been under way for years without Apple, continuously increased the level of difficulty Apple faced as it spent billions trying to catch or exceed the capabilities made available during a revolution led by Tesla.
The secret group inside the iPhone giant -- known internally as Project Titan -- has been informed that Apple would be shutting down its efforts in building a car while the company ramps up investments in the area of generative artificial intelligence, a person familiar with the situation said.
Some of the employees inside the group will be shifting to Apple's AI group, while other employees working on car hardware will likely face layoffs. Bloomberg News earlier reported the plans.
Apple has spent billions of dollars on research and development on the car project. The car group inside Apple was the subject of several rounds of restructuring and shifting strategies over the years as Apple struggled to figure out a path forward, people who worked on the project said. Some executives pitched deep partnerships with automakers or even outright buying an automaker, but none of that materialized, the people said.
Since the mid-2010s, the specter of Apple introducing a car had rattled auto executives. Cars were becoming computers on wheels, with updateable features and touch screens -- morphing into a sort of device that seemed to play right into Apple's strengths.
"Apple had such an aura of being able to create really innovative, easy-to-use stuff," said Phil Abram, a former General Motors executive who ran the company's infotainment division before retiring in 2017. "There was a view that if they ever did put out a car, that would be tough to compete with."
Still, an Apple vehicle was seen as a distant threat, he said, "because everybody knew how hard it was to build cars."
Eventually, automakers invited Apple inside with their CarPlay feature, an app that allows users to project their phone on the car's center display.
As Apple's car project progressed, the company's goals around autonomous-driving capabilities wavered. When the effort kicked off around 2014, the company imagined a fully autonomous vehicle. Over time, Apple scaled back those ambitions to semiautonomous.
With these strategic changes, leadership was also in near constant flux. Doug Field, a former Tesla executive, led the project between 2018 and 2021 before departing for Ford. Kevin Lynch, who previously was responsible for the Apple Watch, had been leading Titan up until its cancellation.
"Apple canceling this project is a sigh of relief for us," said Dan Morgan, a senior portfolio manager at Apple shareholder Synovus Trust. "When you looked at Apple's future initiatives, the car project was always the most far-fetched for Apple. This just isn't in their wheelhouse."
---
Miles Kruppa contributed to this article.
Credit: By Aaron Tilley and Mike Colias
