ARLINGTON, Va. -- It was only a matter of time. Alexa is getting generative AI.
Amazon.com jumped on the advanced artificial-intelligence bandwagon with an elaborate demonstration Wednesday at its "HQ2" offices in Arlington, Va. In one demo, Dave Limp, the exiting head of Amazon's device business, carried on a chatty, back-and-forth conversation with the voice assistant without repeating the wake word, "Alexa."
Later demos showed the assistant recommending movies and carrying out smart-home routines after hearing natural requests from users, instead of the scripted command phrases that can make voice assistants frustrating to use. The responses from the bot sounded more natural, too -- fresh, off-the-cuff phrasing rather than the canned jokes and replies users have heard for years.
Previews of the new capabilities are coming this fall to homes with existing Echo and Fire TV products.
The tech giant's push into generative AI isn't a cute test like it might be for some companies. It is an attempt to engage consumers in a fresh way at a key entry point into its business empire.
Alexa-powered Echo devices have long been the most-popular smart speakers globally. The smart assistant introduced many people to AI chatbots that could turn on their lights or play music with just a few spoken words. Consumers have purchased or connected nearly a billion devices to Alexa, said Limp.
But Alexa now faces a new threat from the supersmart generative AI built by companies such as OpenAI. Rather than answering simple queries with set responses, the new chatbots are more conversational and capable of responding to complex requests. Meanwhile, rivals have chipped away at Amazon's core operations, and the company's hardware business has lost billions of dollars in recent years, The Wall Street Journal reported.
Amazon set out over 10 years ago to build a "superhuman assistant," said Limp, who plans to retire soon. "With generative AI, it's now within reach."
In one Fire TV demo, Daniel Rausch, Amazon's vice president of Alexa and Fire TV, asked the assistant to "find some action movies for me," then he followed up with, "Show me the ones I don't have to pay for." It produced a list of movies in services of which he was already a subscriber.
One big technical hurdle is speed. When people type queries into ChatGPT or Microsoft's Bing Chat, there is a lag before the replies begin to flow. Amazon said it worked hard to reduce lag, also known as latency.
Amazon said it designed the new generative-AI functionality to stay focused on the core tasks that Alexa already addresses -- real-time news and information, smart-home controls and home entertainment.
Credit: By Wilson Rothman and Dalvin Brown
