Atlanta prided itself in the 1960s on being "the city too busy to hate." In the 2020s, America must become the country too prosperous to hate.
The Trump administration spent its first three years fulfilling that vision. With fair trade, energy dominance, deregulation and targeted tax cuts, President Trump built one of the strongest economies in American history. It was a striver's comeback, as lower-income African-Americans and Hispanics enjoyed a disproportionate rise in wages and the lowest unemployment in history. Peace and racial harmony through prosperity seemed within reach.
Then the Chinese Communist Party brought the economy to a screeching pandemic halt. Beijing hid the truth about human-to-human transmission and community spread of the novel coronavirus, with help from a politically compromised World Health Organization. China halted domestic travel in January to contain the virus but kept allowing Chinese nationals to travel internationally through the end of March, spreading the virus around the globe.
More than 100,000 Americans have died. More than 40 million are out of work, and those in inner cities and minority communities have borne much of the brunt. What is perhaps most stunning about this biological Chernobyl is the passivity with which many Americans have responded. Rather than an entire nation rising up in loud protest against China's actions -- or its snuffing out of freedom in Hong Kong -- arsonists, looters, anarchists and hate merchants are savaging cities across America under the false flag of social justice.
It's true that Minneapolis police officers, in extinguishing the life of George Floyd, dishonored the uniform and tore the fabric of American society. Those responsible should swiftly face trial and, if convicted, suffer the full consequences of their actions. It's also true that this is the time to be opening businesses, not looting and burning them. Those who have chosen senseless violent rage over righteous peaceful indignation should also feel the full force of justice.
Meantime, if we have learned anything from the pandemic, it is something the president has understood for more than three decades: To be both prosperous and secure, America must bring its manufacturing and supply chains home, particularly from countries that mean to do us harm. That's how we become too prosperous to hate.
It's also why the most important event this past week wasn't the burning and looting of America's cities. It was Saturday's launch of the Falcon 9 rocket, the first manned U.S. space mission in almost a decade. The SpaceX launch is an example of the technological and industrial revolution America needs -- of investment in America working for American workers.
The new "Made in the USA frontier" will feature a gleaming, high-tech factory floor. American workers will stand shoulder-to-shoulder with 3-D printers, best-in-class robots and all the other tools of the digital age. This will be a factory engaged in high-value-added manufacturing guided by artificial intelligence and the Internet of Things. It will deliver unparalleled productivity and the real wage gains and rising incomes that come with it.
If the protesters of today don't find gainful employment in America's high-tech factories of tomorrow, the 21st-century American Dream will turn into a nightmare of racial division and class warfare. In that future, we will fall prey to an authoritarian and increasingly powerful predator intent on world domination.
It is time for the American people to understand the broader international environment and strategic competition that threatens to erode their freedoms and destroy upward mobility. Together, we must succeed in becoming too prosperous to hate. With such success, the strength of our democracy and economy will remain beacons to the world.
---
Mr. Navarro is an assistant to the president and director of the Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Navarro's Strong Optimism Faces Strong Headwinds" -- WSJ June 10, 2020)

Credit: By Peter Navarro
