By the end of this weekend, tens of millions of Americans will already have cast early votes for president by mail or in person. On Tuesday, tens of millions more will pour into polling places, where many of them are likely to face crowds and long lines.
Whenever and wherever they vote this election season, Americans will cast their ballots using antiquated devices and procedures that are time-consuming, inconvenient and unreliable. We deserve a better election system, and it isn't hard to imagine what that might look like by, say, the election of 2028, if we follow a sustained path of improvement.
By 2028, I expect that citizens eligible to vote will be registered automatically when they receive or renew their driver's license. If they move, their address will be automatically updated. This will put more eligible citizens on the voting rolls and produce more accurate registration data.
Engaging, interactive voter-information apps will make it possible for more voters to receive voting materials from election officials. This should increase voter awareness and possibly stimulate turnout.
A photograph, signature and address from the Department of Motor Vehicles will be available for each voter -- electronically and in real time -- and can be used to identify voters accurately when they show up to vote or request their ballot. Paper poll books will be a thing of the past, and voting locations will be able to check voter rolls instantly.
These records will make it possible for most counties to offer a range of convenient voting locations, open for a week or two before the election -- from early morning to early evening, seven days a week, with easy accessibility and ample parking. Voters will no longer be assigned to a particular polling place. Anytime, anyplace voting will be the norm.
A vast army of volunteer poll workers will no longer be needed. Polls will be staffed instead by paid, well-trained election workers, who can confirm eligibility and provide the correct ballot. These locations will have up-to-date voting equipment that will be easy and secure to use and will prevent simple mistakes that now spoil many ballots.
If for some reason a citizen isn't in the registration database, election officials can enroll him or her on the spot. They can enter the voter's information into the electronic registration system, confirm eligibility quickly and record all necessary identifying information to permanently register each new voter (even taking a photo if necessary). If the election officials can't confirm the citizen's eligibility on the spot, there will be fail-safe provisional voting.
Options for remote voting will improve, too. Voters can request their ballot using an online tool, and it can be sent by mail or picked up at a voting location. The completed ballot can be dropped back at a voting location, where it will go into a secure ballot box.
It will be possible to track remote ballots electronically, using apps to confirm their whereabouts in the system. This will allow voters to learn about errors (like a missing signature) quickly and fix them, so that their vote can be counted.
By 2028, the electronic transmission of ballots could be an option for voters who are unable to reach a polling place. Their identity and eligibility could be confirmed by asking for a combination of, say, a password, a secure code generated by an app and a biometric marker like a fingerprint, read by a smart device.
As for doing the same with their actual votes, the great risk today is hacking. But technologies in development could make it possible to transmit completed ballots with confidence. Google Brain, for instance, is working on encryption based on artificial intelligence that could greatly strengthen internet security.
Some of these reforms are already happening in parts of the U.S. Implementing them nationally will require a coordinated and sustained research effort to create the key technologies.
It will also demand the assistance of state and local governments and funds from the federal government, especially for developing a more secure election infrastructure. With more cooperation across levels of government, we can look forward -- perhaps as early as 2028 -- to an electoral process that is much more participatory, convenient and resistant to fraud.
Americans vote for president only every four years, which is one reason that fixing our outdated electoral process hasn't been a priority. But what we have now is far from ideal. The U.S. deserves an election system that is a model for other democracies.
---
Dr. Alvarez is a professor of political science at Caltech and co-director of the Caltech/MIT Voting Technology Project.
Credit: By R. Michael Alvarez
