Faded baby photos. Cracked wedding pictures. Water-damaged graduation shots. Old family photos don't always survive the test of time. AI can help revive them.
In the past, photo restoration was complicated and costly, often requiring an artist to fix the images by hand. Adobe Photoshop and other advanced graphic-design tools shifted the work to computers, but such programs can be too complicated for the average person.
The prevalence of new artificial-intelligence services has made this all easier. They can fix minor flaws, animate stills, add color to black-and-white images and repair photos with significant damage. Some are free, but most charge for more advanced features.
We tested out tools for some of the most common photo-restoration issues. Some worked, some didn't. The ones we have below are the ones that did, and you'll see photos of us and our families to demonstrate the results.
The results can seem like magic. But remember: AI isn't perfect. The generated color and facial features can be off, and AI sometimes guesses what should be in the image, altering reality.
Color correction and retouching
Older photos kept in albums or hung on the wall typically don't have dramatic damage, making them easier for AI services to fix. Photo Scan by Photomyne (not to be confused with Google's PhotoScan) and MyHeritage have tools that can salvage lightly damaged, discolored and unfocused photos with just a few taps.
MyHeritage, best known for its genealogy platform, offers Photo Repair on its website and mobile app. Upload the photo and hit the Repair button in the bottom right to remove scratches, tears and stains. If the algorithm detects damage, the imperfections will be removed automatically. Hit the Enhance button at the bottom left to sharpen things up. The features are included with MyHeritage's $299 annual genealogy plan. If you only want the photo abilities, you can download the Reimagine app and pay $50 a year or $8 a month.
Photo Scan by Photomyne isn't designed to fix scratches, but it does do a great job restoring color and sharpening faces.
If you want to sharpen the rest of the photo, you'll have to use the web version. The web version requires a paid subscription that starts at $40 a year and allows you to remove glare in photos. Though if it's glare you're looking to fix, Google's free PhotoScan app removes it automatically.
From black-and-white to color
Photomyne's Photo Scan and MyHeritage both have tools that can colorize black-and-white photos.
Open a photo in the MyHeritage app and tap Colorize in the bottom left corner. Much like the color wheel in Photo Scan, it will either improve the color balance or guess what the colors should be if the original is black and white.
Fixing heavily damaged photos
The only thing Margery Albertini remembers about second-grade picture day is how beautiful she felt in her bright green dress. Now that she's 59 years old, the photo that captured that memory is ruined. She thinks it might've been due to water damage.
Most apps we tested couldn't fix the photo because they couldn't automatically recognize young Albertini's face.
But Adobe Firefly's Generative Fill feature tidied up the image and filled in the blanks for what it thought the picture should be. When Albertini saw the image, she gasped, "Oh, that's me!"
To fix an image like the one above, you can highlight the undamaged parts of the image using the Lasso or Insert tool and hit the Invert button, then Generate, says Howard Pinsky, senior design evangelist at Adobe. The AI will then revamp the rest of the image using the highlighted selections as points of reference.
Fixing images like this isn't a one-click move, but it isn't hard. You get 25 free credits a month, and use one per generated image. You'll get more if you subscribe to the Firefly Premium plan, which costs $50 a year.
Bending reality
Generative-AI tools, which are still fairly new, can be used to bend reality. Just be prepared for some surprising results, such as images that don't look like the actual people featured.
Firefly's Generative Fill can fix heavily damaged photos and make unwanted relatives -- say, an ex-spouse -- disappear without a trace. (The Google Photos app also has a Magic Eraser feature for all users who pay for Google storage.)
In September, Photo Scan launched AI Couples Portrait, a feature designed to create portraits of two people who otherwise wouldn't have met before, such as a late grandmother and her grandchild.
Users upload at least three photos of each person, then specify each person's name, gender and age range.
After a few minutes, you'll have several photos of the two people together in various settings and styles, though at times the skin and hair texture may be off.
Animating stills
The AI features keep coming: MyHeritage and Photo Scan have other fun AI tools that help you experience your family photos in new ways.
Both have animation capabilities that make a person appear to blink, laugh or make other facial expressions.
Yes, it can look creepy sometimes.
For MyHeritage, select a photo and tap the Animate button at the bottom of the screen. Then tap the drop down arrow at the top of the screen to select different expressions.
You can animate photos with the Live Portrait feature in Photo Scan, but it's a $5, one-time payment not included in subscriptions.
Privacy risks and reality woes
The advanced tools come at a time when there's a lot of excitement about generative AI, but not everyone reads the fine print.
Even if you trust the companies you're feeding your family photos into, you should know that the rules about how the data is used can change unexpectedly with new leadership or bankruptcy, says Emily Bell, founding director of the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia University.
And as AI rewrites history by re-creating photos with its artificial predictions, it raises the question of how real or fake memories are.
"All of those things lie underneath the fun," Bell says.
Credit: By Cordilia James
