Me: Siri, how are you tonight?
Siri: I'm happy to be alive!
Me: Me too. So, I'm thinking ramen for dinner.
Siri: OK, one option I see is Totto Ramen, which averages 4 stars and is moderately priced.
Me: Great. Looks like I'm going to be needing a Lyft.
Siri: Lyft can be there in 6 minutes. Do you want to request it?
Me: Yes. Great work!
Siri: Aw, shucks.
This isn't a passage from my new science-fiction romance script. It's the conversation I had with Siri on Saturday night while putting on my makeup, with Apple's microphone-equipped wireless AirPods in my ears. Like your Saturday night was any more exciting.
Buried in this fall's news of an iPhone 7 with a missing headphone port and iOS 10 messaging fun was something bigger: Apple's longtime nuisance of a personal assistant is finally joining the future of conversational computing. After years of hurling expletives at it, I suddenly find Siri far more capable, in far more situations.
With the new iOS 10, Siri can control third-party apps, like Uber and WhatsApp. With the release of MacOS Sierra on Tuesday, Siri finally lands on the desktop, where it can take care of basic operating system tasks, send emails and more. With WatchOS 3 and the new Apple Watch, Siri is finally faster on the wrist. And with Apple's Q-tip-looking AirPods arriving in October, Siri can whisper sweet nothings in your inner ear with unprecedented wireless freedom.
The groundwork is laid for an AI assistant to stake a major claim in your life, and finally save you time by doing menial tasks. But the smarter Siri becomes in some places, the dumber it seems in others -- specifically compared with Google's and Amazon's voice assistants. If I hear "I'm sorry, Joanna, I'm afraid I can't answer that" one more time. . .
The App Commander
I used to count on Siri for one thing and one thing only: setting my morning alarm. Siri accomplishes the task in a second, compared with multiple steps when you're bleary eyed. Now, Siri can perform similar shortcuts to multistep processes in other, non-Apple apps, too. And it's powerful.
"Siri, get me an Uber" summons the ride-sharing service without having to tap on the app, then go through the various menus. "Siri, tell Jarrard on WhatsApp that I want to go to the Cuban place for lunch at 2 p.m.," quickly sends the message through the Facebook-owned messaging service, surprisingly without typos. "Send $10 to Jarrard for my half of lunch," sends money via Venmo or Square Cash, depending on which one you've set up.
Many of my most-used apps, however, aren't Siri-controllable yet -- and may not be because of Apple's restrictions. Music services, to-do lists and other email apps aren't supported by the developer tools Apple provides. Apple says this is just the beginning of how it envisions Siri being used across iOS. Amazon's Alexa not only lets you use all sorts of third-party apps; it allows you to set them as your defaults.
Most of Siri's third-party integration has been so reliable and accurate that it's spurred me to start talking to it more and more. In some cases, I've been impressed with how much Siri has learned about how we speak. She understands and responds to casual phrases like, "Shoot an email to Geoff" or "What's up with the weather today?"
Sometimes, though, I have to carefully phrase the question. "When's the next train coming?" pulls up the definition of "train" on Wikipedia. "Show me transit directions," however, shows me the latest train schedule.
And when it comes to general knowledge, Siri comes in third place behind Google's and Amazon's assistants.
In a round of what we like to call AI Jeopardy, I asked: "When is the first 2016 presidential debate?" Google knew the answer: Monday, Sept. 26 at 9 p.m. ET. Alexa got the date right -- but the time wrong. Siri's response? "Here's what I found on the web for 'When is the first 2016 presidential debate?' "
Apple says Siri is updated every other week with new information.
The New Cursor
On the Mac, Siri doesn't replace the mouse or trackpad, but it complements them in a big way. In fact, Siri is a multitasking dream on the bigger screen -- once you get the hang of delegating tasks to it.
Asking Siri to set reminders or create calendar appointments takes half the time of opening the apps and manually typing in the information. Unfortunately, you'll have to use Apple's own apps. Other than Facebook and Twitter, there's no third-party app control on the Mac yet.
Another useful trick? You can have it take care of system-related tasks, like adjusting the volume or locating files. I have a very messy desktop, so "Show me the images on my desktop" is a lifesaver.
Siri's biggest shortcoming on the Mac is how you get its attention. You can't simply say "Hey Siri." Instead, you press and hold Command and Space bar, or click on the Siri icon in the dock. One of the best aspects of Amazon's Echo and
Microsoft's Cortana on Windows PCs -- albeit one that stokes a lot of privacy fears -- has been that they listen for you, even if you're on the other side of the room. Even if your newer iPhone responds to "Hey Siri," Alexa consistently answers faster.
The Future Best Friend
After you've used Apple's AirPods, you really wish for more reasons to chat up Siri -- whether you're at home, at work or even in a car.
Double-tap on one of the white pods and you hear a chime to let you know that Siri's all ears. The mics are extremely impressive. Siri had no problem skipping a song while I was on the subway platform or giving me a weather report while I washed dishes. It feels like the wireless future we've been waiting for: artificial intelligence that's always there to lend a hand.
We aren't living in the future, however. AirPods are a great prop for my sci-fi script, but that's all they are right now. When I try to keep up a conversation with Siri -- or any other virtual assistant -- things fall apart within seconds. When I asked Siri to schedule a meeting with Tim Cook and then find out more information about "him," the assistant had no idea what "him" I was referring to.
The way Google's assistant does context requires collecting and storing a lot of information about you -- something Apple has vowed not to do. Apple's made baby steps forward in predictive intelligence, but it's still hard to see how it can compete when people willingly give their data to its rivals.
Credit: By Joanna Stern
