All three major U.S. stock indexes rose to records Wednesday after a batch of better-than-expected tech earnings bolstered investor confidence.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed above 45000 for the first time, a milestone that appeared implausible a little more than two years ago. The Dow, S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite logged highs on the same day for the seventh time this year.
The S&P 500 gained 0.6% to 6086.49, the Dow rose 0.7% to 45014.04, and the tech-heavy Nasdaq climbed 1.3% to 19735.12.
The Dow's milestone came 16 trading days after it closed above 44000 for the first time, according to Dow Jones Market Data. It was the third fastest 1,000-point milestone on record and the eighth in 2024.
Some investors view the broad-based gains as a sign that the bull market is healthy and still has room to run.
"For most of the year, the narrative has been around a small set of stocks leading the rest of the market higher, and that's just not the case anymore," said Callie Cox, chief market strategist at Ritholtz Wealth Management. "The rally in the stock market has really broadened out over the past few months. This day of records reflects that."
Technology stocks led the gains. Shares of Salesforce, Okta, chip maker Marvell Technology and data-storage provider Pure Storage soared after each reported results that were ahead of Wall Street's expectations. Some cited strong artificial-intelligence demand.
On the economic front, Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell said Wednesday that the economy looks better now than it did when the central bank began cutting interest rates in September, which means the Fed can take a more cautious approach to reducing borrowing costs. Investors see a roughly three-quarters chance the Fed cuts interest rates this month, according to CME Group data.
The 10-year Treasury yield inched lower, settling at 4.18%.
French assets were stable before the country's National Assembly voted to oust its prime minister from office. The country's government bond yields edged lower. The CAC 40 stock index rose 0.7%. The euro weakened slightly.
Credit: By Vicky Ge Huang and Chelsey Dulaney
