AXIOS
Software Business
Raises Cash for AI
Axios's software business raised $20 million from investors that it plans to use to build new artificial-intelligence-powered communication tools with the help of ChatGPT creator OpenAI, the company's chief executive said.
Axios HQ, which was spun off from Axios last year when the digital publisher was sold to Cox Enterprises Inc., makes software that helps businesses communicate with employees and investors in a concise way that was championed by Axios -- snippets that break down the main points of an article and explain why it matters.
Its software, which already was powered by homegrown artificial intelligence based on years of findings from Axios's editorial content, started paying for access to OpenAI in November, according to Roy Schwartz, Axios HQ's chief executive and a co-founder of Axios. OpenAI, which is backed by Microsoft Corp., has generated buzz since its humanlike chatbot, ChatGPT, was launched late last year.
"We've raised the money so we can keep expanding on the generative AI that we've already built," Mr. Schwartz said.
The $20 million cash infusion, which was led by Glade Brook Capital Partners and Greycroft Partners -- two former Axios investors -- values the software business at close to $100 million, according to people familiar with the matter.
Mr. Schwartz said Axios HQ noticed its clients were increasingly using its own OpenAI-powered features, such as automated headlines for email updates. Those observations led the company to decide to raise more money sooner to fund its AI expansion, he said.
-- Alexandra Bruell
---
AMERICAN
Airline Cuts Flights,
Cites Boeing Delay
Boeing Co.'s delays in delivering 787 Dreamliners are again rippling into American Airlines Group Inc.'s flying schedule.
The Fort Worth, Texas-based carrier said Friday it would suspend its Philadelphia-Madrid route for a few weeks in May and early June, citing delivery delays for the jets.
American said it was cutting the flights now to ensure it could help customers arrange different travel plans.
"We remain committed to our customers and team members and mitigating the impact of the 787 delivery delays while continuing to offer a robust international network this summer," an American Airlines spokesman said.
A Boeing spokeswoman said the plane maker remains focused on stability in its production system as it works with its suppliers.
"We continue to work with our customers, including American Airlines, on delivery timing and deeply regret the impact to their operations," she said.
American's move marked at least the second consecutive year that Boeing Dreamliner delays have affected the airline's flying schedule.
In 2022, American trimmed its summer flying schedule more extensively in the midst of a protracted halt in Dreamliner deliveries while Boeing dealt with various manufacturing and regulatory problems. Deliveries resumed in August of last year.
Earlier this year they were briefly halted again due to what the Federal Aviation Administration said was a documentation issue, before the regulator allowed them to resume earlier this month.
American is slated to receive three more 787 Dreamliners this year. One of the planes has a contractual delivery date stretching back to April 2021, and a revised delivery date of March 2022, according to the airline.
-- Andrew Tangel
---
TWITTER
Twitter to Remove
Legacy Blue Checks
Twitter Inc. said it would start taking away legacy blue check marks on April 1 for users whose accounts were verified before Elon Musk took over the platform.
Mr. Musk has said he wanted to end the legacy verifications since he bought Twitter in October. Twitter verified accounts free of charge under its former leadership that it deemed notable and trustworthy, including those belonging to politicians, journalists, entertainers and others. The company placed a blue check next to those users' names.
The legacy marks have coexisted since November with accounts verified through Twitter Blue, a subscription service Mr. Musk has championed. Any user can pay as little as $7 a month to be verified through Twitter Blue.
Twitter said Thursday that users with legacy verifications can pay for a Twitter Blue subscription to keep their check marks. Organizations, including businesses, nonprofits and government agencies, can pay at least $1,000 a month to verify their accounts. Associated accounts will receive a so-called affiliate badge next to their check marks, Twitter said. Mr. Musk said on Friday that users affiliated with a verified organization would automatically be verified.
-- Alyssa Lukpat
---
WWE
McMahon Pays Cost
Of Misconduct Probe
Vince McMahon, World Wrestling Entertainment Inc.'s executive chairman, has repaid the company $17.4 million to cover costs related to a sexual misconduct probe.
Mr. McMahon made the payment on Thursday, WWE disclosed in a securities filing late Friday, to reimburse the company for investigation-related costs assumed by the company through Jan. 31. He has also agreed to pay back any potential additional costs associated with the probe.
A special committee of WWE's board of directors conducted the investigation, which included revising the company's financial statements for 2019, 2020, and 2021, and the first quarter of 2022, it said.
Mr. McMahon abruptly departed from WWE in July 2022 following disclosures by The Wall Street Journal of multiple payouts to women who had alleged sexual misconduct and infidelity. The Journal reported that he had agreed to pay more than $12 million in secret settlements since 2006 to his accusers. WWE's board ultimately found that the payments, though made by Mr. McMahon personally, should have been booked as WWE expenses because they benefited the company. Mr. McMahon returned in January as executive chairman.
-- Sabela Ojea
