Some people express their passion for "Game of Thrones" by binge watching the HBO series, posting plot theories online or perhaps dressing up as mother of dragons Daenerys Targaryen. Others write code.
Joakim Skoog built an application programming interface using quantified and structured data for every character and clan in that fictional world. His "API of Ice and Fire" is designed to help other programmers translate the sea of information about the series into "Game of Thrones" apps of their own invention.
Inspired by a similar project someone created for the "Star Wars" universe, Mr. Skoog, of Boras, Sweden, spent two weeks cleaning and organizing the data he pulled from various encyclopedic sites. The 26-year-old "Game of Thrones" obsessive wanted to contribute to the fan community and try out new technology. As a bonus, the project also helped in the interview for his current job as a software engineer for an online fashion retailer, Nelly.com.
Based on novels by George R.R. Martin, "Game of Thrones" starts its seventh (and second-to-last) season on HBO Sunday as one of TV's most popular, most-discussed, and most-pirated series. It is also the most exhaustively analyzed by a subset of international fans who crunch statistics from the fantasy series with the rigor of baseball nerds tracking hits, strikeouts and stolen bases.
Among their many efforts: Charting the hundreds of deaths depicted in the series by time, location, method, and perpetrator; logging screen time for every character and using it to study gender balance; mapping relationships between characters based on dialogue; graphing betrayals; charting character connections as a social network; creating statistical analyses of major battles; and using machine learning tools to predict which characters will die.
In the spirit of such fantasy analytics, picture a Venn diagram with a circle representing lovers of "Game of Thrones" and data science, respectively.
"I think there's quite a healthy intersect between the two. The books and the show are really popular, and especially popular among the people who like to do statistics for fun," says Myles O'Neill, a designer at Kaggle, an online community for data analysis that was recently acquired by Google.
Mr. O'Neill uploaded several "Game of Thrones" data sets that he discovered on the web, including a compendium of character deaths. Dozens of Kaggle members have used them as grist for coding projects.
Unlike sports, politics and other worlds where hard statistics are widely available, narrative fiction is a challenging realm for data jockeys. But the epic scale and complexity of "Game of Thrones" calls out for a census. So far, the story spans 60 episodes of television, with details that have increasingly diverged from Mr. Martin's "A Song of Ice and Fire" book series, which itself fills five hefty novels (with at least two more to come, fans pray). There are deep family dynasties, far-flung kingdoms, shifting alliances and double-crossing, historic wars and many, many characters, not all of them human.
For casual readers and viewers, it is a challenge to keep it all straight. For data geeks, it is an opportunity for tools used to better understand the real world.
Sometimes that involves writing programs to automatically scrape raw information from the user-generated wiki sites where fans compile character bios and other facts from the books and TV series. In other cases, the data mining is more labor intensive. One anonymous grunt (identified only as "ninewheels0") used an iPhone stopwatch to log how much time characters in the TV series (195 of them and counting) appear on screen, then uploaded the findings, and encouraged others to crunch the stats as they wish.
"It's rare that you find a fictional world that can stand up to this level of scrutiny," says Daniel Mintz, whose title is Chief Data Evangelist at Looker, an analytics company that helps companies like BuzzFeed make sense of audience activity.
In the run-up to "Game of Thrones" season 7, Looker used ninewheels0's screen time stats and other data sets to create charts on factors ranging from character popularity to body count per episode. (Season finales have grown increasingly bloody.)
As it turns out, "Game of Thrones" data doubles as a popular tool for marketing. Companies like Looker use it to make charts, infographics and videos to grab some of the attention that cool stuff related to the series reliably gets online.
Not every stat cruncher is a super fan. Shail Deliwala, a 27-year-old data scientist at an artificial intelligence consulting firm in Ahmedabad, India, had never read Mr. Martin's books or watched the HBO show before diving into an analysis. That gave him an unbiased view of the facts from the fantasy world, he says. He found an inverse correlation between the size of an attacker's army and its odds of victory in battle, and discovered that characters with lots of dead relatives are less likely to survive.
Mr. Deliwala used this work as the basis for a paper featured at a recent conference, titled "Exploratory and Predictive Data Analysis Using Machine Learning Tools and Techniques." He has since embarked on season 1 of the HBO series, but is having second thoughts: "I'm afraid I'm going to get addicted."

Credit: By John Jurgensen
