SPOTIFY TECHNOLOGY
SPOT +7.5%
Spotify is ending 2023 with a third round of layoffs. The audio streaming company on Monday announced its plans to cut 17% of its workforce -- about 1,500 jobs -- as it continues its push toward profitability. After growing in size and scope earlier in the pandemic, Spotify is now focusing on cutting costs. The company has scaled back its $1 billion bet on podcasting, and over the summer it raised its subscription price in the U.S. and other major markets. Spotify shares rose 7.5% Monday.
HAWAIIAN HOLDINGS
HA +193%
Two more U.S. airlines are joining forces. Alaska Air reached a deal to pay roughly $1 billion in cash to buy rival Hawaiian Airlines. The merger would unite carriers that largely serve destinations in the Pacific region and operate competing flights to Hawaii. The airlines will retain their separate brands. The deal will be subject to scrutiny by antitrust authorities, which have also targeted JetBlue Airways' merger with Spirit Airlines and JetBlue's partnership with American Airlines. Hawaiian shares surged 193% Monday.
CVS HEALTH
CVS +3.7%
CVS is shaking up the drug-pricing status quo. The nation's largest drugstore chain on Tuesday announced CostVantage, a new payment model the company said is simpler and more transparent. Under CostVantage, CVS pharmacies will be reimbursed based on the amount that CVS paid for the drugs, in addition to a limited markup and a flat fee for its handling and dispensing services. CVS shares climbed 3.7% Tuesday.
ALPHABET
GOOG +5.3%
Alphabet unit Google on Wednesday announced Gemini, its new artificial-intelligence system that the company said is more powerful than any others currently on the market. Google's announcement coincides with recent turmoil at OpenAI, the creator of ChatGPT, and advances Alphabet in the race to dominate the field. The search giant said its algorithm wouldn't be widely available until early next year, citing a need for more extensive safety testing. Alphabet shares gained 5.3% Thursday.
GAMESTOP
GME +10%
GameStop is continuing its turnaround efforts. The meme-stock and videogame retailer on Wednesday reported a 9% drop in quarterly sales, along with narrowing losses. GameStop also announced the company's new investment policy, which will allow it to use cash to invest in stocks. Chairman and CEO Ryan Cohen will have the authority to manage the investment portfolio. The one-time meme stock is worth a fraction of its peak valuation from 2021. GameStop shares jumped 10% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
