A leaked National Security Council memo proposing to nationalize the embryonic 5G wireless network has generated a public outcry, and the quarter-baked idea shows that government folly knows no party.
The Axios news site reported Sunday that a senior National Security Council official has advocated that the U.S. government take over development of an ultra-high-speed 5G network. Access to the government network would then be leased to private carriers like AT&T and Verizon. The White House said Monday the memo was out of date and it had no plans for a federal internet, but this is a bad enough idea that it needs to be pre-emptively strangled lest it reappear.
The impetus for a centralized network, according to the NSC memo, is China's "dominant position in the manufacture and operation of network infrastructure" and cyber-warfare. There's little doubt that China is aggressively trying to penetrate U.S. information systems, and a strong, secure and fast wireless network is needed for self-driving cars and other artificial intelligence. Without strong firewalls, malicious actors could hack wireless networks and do great harm.
But federal government networks are hardly impenetrable. In 2014 Chinese hackers broke into the Office of Personnel Management and stole the records of some 22.1 million government workers, contractors and job applicants. The Securities and Exchange Commission reported last summer that its corporate-filing database had been breached.
Building a network from scratch would be expensive, and there's no better recipe for cost overruns than putting the government in charge. Consider the federal proprietary FirstNet network for first-responders during emergencies. That project, started in 2012, likely won't be complete for more than a decade and will cost tens of billions of dollars. The Commerce Department Inspector General noted in 2015 that FirstNet "encountered difficulties in hiring and maintaining staff for key technical positions." Its procurement rules also favored AT&T.
Federal Communications Commission chairman Ajit Pai and his fellow commissioners were quick to shoot down a government 5G takeover. "The main lesson to draw from the wireless sector's development over the past three decades -- including American leadership in 4G -- is that the market, not government, is best positioned to drive innovation and investment," Mr. Pai said, adding that "any federal effort to construct a nationalized 5G network would be a costly and counterproductive distraction."
He's right on all scores. Private carriers have already invested billions in 5G networks, and AT&T said this month that it will introduce 5G mobile service in a dozen markets this year. The government can accelerate 5G development by providing regulatory certainty and promoting innovation. Broadband providers have increased investment since Mr. Pai in December rolled back the Obama-era "net neutrality" rules that converted the Internet into a public utility subject to the whims of regulators.
Liberals who have denounced Mr. Pai's act of web liberation are now assailing the Trump Administration memo on socializing the internet. We're glad they realize the dangers of government control, but perhaps they could reflect on their cognitive dissonance.
