One of Statoil ASA's newest employees, Roberta, spends her days in the energy firm's treasury department searching for missing payment information and sending out reminders.
Her boss, Tor Stian Kjollesdal, said Roberta's heavy workload would improve overall efficiency in the group.
Roberta doesn't have a last name, a face, or arms. She is the first piece of robotic software to work in the Norwegian company's treasury department, part of Statoil's push toward automation, robotics and artificial intelligence, said Mr. Kjollesdal, acting head of internal treasury.
Finance executives at companies including Nokia Corp., Royal Dutch Shell PLC and Orange SA are developing their own Robertas. Two-thirds of large global companies expect to automate some or most of their finance-department tasks over the next two to three years, according to new research by Hackett Group Inc. Hackett's report is based on benchmark and performance studies at hundreds of large global companies.
These new technologies are designed to cut costs, liberate workers from time-consuming, repetitive tasks, and in many cases reduce finance- and treasury-department employee numbers. "We will be running the treasury with less people in a couple of years," Statoil's Mr. Kjollesdal said.
Finland's Nokia also expects to shed jobs as part of the transition toward a more automated finance department. Forecasting business performance is one area where humans can be replaced by an algorithm,said Chief Financial Officer Kristian Pullola.
Finance departments are seeing results from the increased sophistication of robotics and automation tools: Digital transformation can cut labor and outsourcing costs by 20% to 35%, according to Hackett.
French building materials maker Compagnie de Saint-Gobain SA wants a more efficient unit. Currently, some of the company's 6,000 finance employees spend part of their day scanning invoices and transferring figures from one software program to another, said finance chief Guillaume Texier. Some of these tasks, which can take up to 10 clicks per number transferred, are repeated hundreds of times a day, he said.
"It does not make sense to pay a human to do that," Mr. Texier said. "The next step is to get rid of repetitive tasks that are not adding value."
French information-technology services firm Atos SE is planning to hand over its reporting tasks -- for example, collecting and assembling data for monthly and quarterly reports, as well as calculating results -- to robots. The work is currently done by a team of finance professionals in Chennai, India. Atos's 1,800 finance-department employees will be asked to do more complex, decision-making work, said finance chief Elie Girard.
"Because of robotization, finance jobs will evolve quickly," Mr. Girard said.
Ramon Fernandez, finance chief at Orange, a French telecommunications company, expects his employees to do higher-value work as the company automates more basic tasks. "You will have less people in charge of extremely basic functions," he said.
---
Tatyana Shumsky contributed to this article.

Credit: By Nina Trentmann
