VERTEX
Cystic-Fibrosis Drugs
Get Positive Data
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc. said three of its newest cystic-fibrosis drugs in development showed promise in early clinical trials treating the progressive lung disorder, raising hopes for patients who currently lack good treatment.
Based on the results, Vertex said Tuesday that it was accelerating development of the new agents. Patients won't see a new treatment soon, however. Vertex said it would wait until the first half of next year, when it has more clinical-trial data to review, to pick the one or two drugs it will put into the pivotal phase 3 studies required for approval.
Shares of Vertex were up 23% to $161.85 in late-morning trading Wednesday, following the company's disclosure after the close of trading Tuesday.
Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disease, resulting from a defective gene known as CFTR, that causes the body to produce a thick, sticky mucus that builds up in the lungs and other organs. Patients develop trouble breathing.
Vertex already sells two drugs, called Kalydeco and Orkambi, but they work in only about half of the 75,000 cystic-fibrosis patients world-wide. Another 10% of patients could be treated by a two-drug combination from Vertex that is up for approval in the U.S., the company said. By adding a third agent to that two-drug combination, the Boston-based company said it hopes to be able to treat as many as 90% of patients.
-- Jonathan D. Rockoff
---
IBM
Firm Posts Declines
In Profit and Sales
International Business Machines Corp. on Tuesday reported falling quarterly profit and sales, adding to doubts about Chief Executive Ginni Rometty's lengthy effort to reinvent the 106-year-old technology company.
The 4.7% drop in second-quarter revenue, to $19.3 billion, marked the 21st consecutive quarter of declining sales at IBM. Profit margins also narrowed across all business units, including the divisions for theh company's main cloud-computing and Watson artificial-intelligence operations -- two areas Ms. Rometty is counting on to propel the company's turnaround. Profit fell 6.9% from a year earlier.
Earnings results exceeded analysts' expectations. Still, revenue came in below forecasts.
-- Ted Greenwald
---
UNITED
New Fares and Fees
Push Revenue Higher
United Continental Holdings Inc. said profit and revenue rose in the second quarter, the latest airline to find success offering a wider range of fare categories and fees.
The U.S.'s No. 3 airline by traffic said Tuesday that despite higher fuel and labor costs, its net income rose 39% from a year earlier. Excluding items, United earned $846 million on a strong 6.4% gain in revenue.
United's unit revenue was up 2.1% in the June quarter year over year.
-- Susan Carey
