CAPE MAY, N.J. -- It's boaters versus environmentalists on the East Coast, where endangered whales are having deadly encounters with vessels traveling in the chilly Atlantic.
The sides are duking it out in court and on Capitol Hill -- and a political deadline is looming.
Environmentalists want yachts popular for fishing and day trips to go no more than 10 knots (11.5 miles an hour) at certain times of the year. The goal is to prevent the kind of collisions that have killed three whales this year. Boat captains say a speed limit will ruin their business -- and their fun.
"People aren't going to put up with these long travel times," said Tom Daffin, who operates a 38-foot charter boat out of Cape May, N.J. His vessel runs at about 20 knots to reach game fish that arrive each spring about 40 miles off the coast. With the lower speed limit, that trip would take around 3 1/2 hours each way.
"With those restrictions, the entire industry is dead," said Bill Roohan, a real-estate agent from Towson, Md., who takes his family out on a 41-foot sportfishing boat.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, charged with protecting endangered and threatened marine animals, proposed the rule after four environmental groups sued the agency to demand the change. The proposal drew more than 90,000 comments, many opposing the plan. Some commenters said they have canceled plans to buy a yacht. Boating and sportfishing groups have been lobbying Congress to block the rule.
Environmental groups say the rule is a minor inconvenience that will protect an animal at the brink of extinction. The number of North Atlantic right whales has shrunk to under 360, from 509 in 2011. Fewer than 70 are reproductive females.
"The new rule is not a shutdown, it's a slowdown," said Gib Brogan, campaign director at Oceana, a Washington-based environmental group lobbying for the new rule.
The dispute, percolating for 18 months, has intensified since three right whales died this year after being hit by boats. In February NOAA officials sent a final version of the regulation to the Office of Management and Budget, which must approve the rule.
Typically, OMB reviews can take several months, and environmental groups worry that if the Biden administration doesn't issue the rule before the end of May, it risks being overturned. The Congressional Review Act allows a new Congress to reverse regulations enacted during a prior administration's last few months.
"I will do everything to stop it, including introducing a Congressional Review Act resolution to overturn it if finalized," Rep. Greg Murphy (R., N.C.) said of the NOAA proposal. Murphy and a half-dozen other members of Congress have said the lower speed limit would financially devastate their constituents.
OMB officials declined to comment.
Right whales are vulnerable because they spend most of their time feeding at the surface. Since 2017, 15 have been killed by vessels and two others seriously injured, according to NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service.
"The loss of even one North Atlantic right whale is very concerning given the small population size, and the loss of a reproductive female is especially devastating," said Janet Coit, assistant administrator for NOAA Fisheries.
The whales killed this year -- an adult and two calves -- were female. One calf was killed by a vessel estimated to be between 37 and 54 feet long. NOAA couldn't determine the size of the vessels that killed the others. The new speed limit would apply to vessels at least 35 feet long.
Fishing and boating industry representatives argue that right whales can be protected with technology. Viking Yacht, a boat manufacturer in New Gretna, N.J., is working with partners to develop a system combining standard video, infrared cameras, marine radar and sonar imagery with artificial-intelligence software to identify whales that break the surface or spout.
"These [infrared] cameras have always had the ability to pick up anything in the water, even really small things," said John DePersenaire, Viking's director of government affairs and sustainability. "Now, what folks have been working on is driving AI to be trained so it can clearly classify a marine mammal."
Marine scientists say it isn't clear whale-tracking technology -- which boaters aren't required to use -- would provide adequate protection.
"You have whales that are just below the surface that the [infrared] system can't detect," according to Jessica Redfern, associate vice president for ocean conservation science at the New England Aquarium in Boston. "So you're going to miss those whales."
Credit: By Eric Niiler
