Broadband demand is surging as more Americans use the internet during the pandemic to shop, stream video, work remotely and consult teladocs. The good news is that the internet is holding up well, and now Federal Communications Commission Chairman Ajit Pai is taking steps to boost Wi-Fi across the country.
Mr. Pai on Wednesday proposed to make 1,200 megahertz of the 6 GHz mid-band spectrum available for unlicensed use. This will effectively increase Wi-Fi spectrum capacity by a factor of five, enabling more inter-operable 5G devices such as smart appliances not to mention faster speeds so Americans can do more things online.
Cisco has projected that nearly 60% of global mobile data traffic will be off-loaded to Wi-Fi by 2022. AT&T CEO Randall Stephenson recently noted that mobile voice calls had increased 40% during the coronavirus shutdown while Wi-Fi calls had doubled.
Thanks to technological advances, the FCC has now found a way to repurpose 6 GHz spectrum that was licensed to government agencies and utilities for safety purposes without interfering with or limiting their services. Wireless companies wanted the FCC to auction off licenses to 6 GHz spectrum so they could expand 5G service.
This idea has some merit, but Mr. Pai's plan will boost 5G for Americans regardless of their wireless provider. Mr. Pai earlier this year also moved to repurpose vast chunks of C-Band spectrum from satellite operators for wireless providers. This mid-band spectrum provides coverage similar to the 6 GHz band.
In other non-coronavirus news, the T-Mobile-Sprint merger closed on Wednesday following two years of political interference from state Attorneys General and the Justice Department. The deal will increase wireless competition and accelerate 5G, enabling more artificial intelligence, distance education, telemedicine and even remote surgery.
One point of irony is that the Justice Department required T-Mobile to give Dish Network access to its network in order to jerry-rig a fourth competitor. Yet during the pandemic the FCC is letting T-Mobile temporarily use Dish's hoarded spectrum licenses to ensure uninterrupted service to its customers.
Americans perhaps take for granted that their internet hasn't slowed during the coronavirus pandemic, unlike in Europe where speeds and streaming quality have been reduced so networks don't collapse. Credit America's larger private business investment and lighter regulation. Europe regulates broadband providers like public utilities similar to the Obama-era net neutrality rule that Mr. Pai rescinded. Americans working at home would be in a much worse position in this pandemic if the Obama rules were still in place.
