The chairman of Barrick Gold Corp. made a bold prediction late last year: With the help of artificial intelligence and other digital tools, the world's largest gold miner would become a technology company that just happened to be in mining.
A year later, Barrick has parted ways with its chief innovation officer, chief digital officer and many of the team tasked with making this transformation a reality, people familiar with the matter said.
The revolution in machine learning, as predicted by Barrick Chairman John Thornton and other mining executives, has yet to come. Miners have said digital technologies like artificial intelligence, or AI, will revolutionize one of the world's oldest industries in the same way it has changed other businesses.
Some experts say the promise of AI in mining has been hyped and progress has been slow. Companies, including Barrick and giants such as Rio Tinto PLC and BHP Group Ltd., are running some AI-led projects. But implementation at some companies has hit cultural hurdles. Executives haven't always engaged, projects have taken longer than expected and companies have turned to other ways to modernize operations.
"There has been an awful lot of posturing" on AI, said Denis Laviolette, chief executive of Goldspot Discoveries Inc., which helps miners use machine learning to find mineral deposits. "They say they are working on this internally, then you find out they haven't got anywhere."
Digital technologies have a number of potential applications in mining. By collecting constant data through sensors placed around a mine and on equipment, for instance, AI can supply estimates on when machinery might break or suggest ways to make work more efficient. It also can sift through troves of data and pinpoint places where conditions are ripe for ore deposits.
Accenture estimates that innovative technologies, including robotics and automation, can unlock some $321 billion of value over the next decade in metals and mining, the equivalent of 3% to 4% of expected revenue. But only $11 billion of that will come from what Accenture calls advanced analytics, which includes AI.
Miners are behind other industries in applying AI and other digital technologies, say consultants and specialists.
"Oil and gas is way ahead," said Peter Bryant, partner at Clareo, a consulting firm.
Mining companies invest less in research and development in general. The sector puts around 0.9% of revenue a year toward R&D, compared with 3% to 5% for oil-and-gas companies, according to data from Chicago-based Clareo.
In a speech last year, Michelle Ash, Barrick's chief of innovation at the time, described mining as the world's least digitized industry. Because of this lack of invention, "you would think my job security is reasonable," she said.
But in September, Barrick said it was letting go of Ms. Ash, who was hired in 2016 to find ways to increase productivity. People working on Barrick's digitization program said it lacked consistent support at the boardroom level and funding was soon cut, according to one of the people familiar with the matter.
A spokesman said that as the company completes its acquisition of rival Randgold Resources Ltd., it will continue flattening its corporate and management structure. Technology will continue to be a key driver, he said.
Some mining companies are pressing ahead with AI projects. In September, Goldcorp Inc. drilled holes in places pinpointed by an AI program developed with International Business Machines Corp. that sifted through 80 years of the miner's geological data.
The technology helped Goldcorp find gold, but the company's biggest challenge in its AI drive has been recruiting.
"The people who are experts are in high demand, and for this kind of career, mining is not a typical career path," said Luis Canepari, Goldcorp's vice president of technology.
But smaller miners aren't getting as involved in AI.
Despite seeing AI as critical for the future of mining, Cristiano Veloso said his Brazilian potash miner Verde AgriTech PLC isn't yet using it. "It is too expensive," said Mr. Veloso, who added that there are few companies offering AI technology and services to mining.

Credit: By Alistair MacDonald and Rhiannon Hoyle
