When Microsoft unveiled an AI-powered version of Bing in February, the company said it could add $2 billion of revenue if the revamped search engine could pry away even a single point of market share from Google.
Six months later, it looks as if even 1 percentage point could be a tough target, with some new data showing Bing's place in search has barely budged -- partly because of how Microsoft handled its high-profile rollout.
In July, Bing had 3% market share worldwide, according to analytics firm StatCounter. That is the same share it had in January, the month before the launch of the new Bing. Another report, from analytics firm Similarweb, shows Bing had around 1% of Google's monthly visitors in July, around the same it had in January.
Microsoft is calling the new Bing a success. It disputed outside data, saying third-party data companies aren't measuring all the people who are going directly to Bing's chat page.
With generative AI chat, Bing can give people direct, conversational answers to queries instead of long lists of links. It has put the often overlooked engine at the forefront of the hot new technology. Still, the habits of those using internet-search engines are firmly entrenched, overwhelmingly with Alphabet's Google, which fended off prior attempts to dent its dominance.
A chat interface is an unusual way for people to try to find information online, said Daniel Tunkelang, a search consultant who has worked with Google and LinkedIn, now owned by Microsoft.
The new Bing is "cute, but not a game changer," he said.
The addition of AI helped boost Bing's user base by 10% to 98 million in the months from its February launch through June, according to measurements from analytics firm YipitData. Even with the growth, Bing's user tally is still tiny compared with Google's 1.12 billion.
Yusuf Mehdi, Microsoft's chief marketing officer for consumer products, said the company's internal data show Bing gaining market share against Google. The company has seen increases in its mobile searches and Edge browser, Mehdi said.
"We've made more progress in the last six months than we have in the previous decade or two combined," he said. "We're delighted with our start."
Microsoft declined to share its data. YipitData, Similarweb and StatCounter said their data does take traffic to and from Bing's chat into account.
Google followed Microsoft with its own generative AI features, setting up an AI-powered search war and one of the first big public tests of the much-hyped technology.
Search has never been a major part of Microsoft's business. It is hoping a revamped Bing could change that. Revenue growth so far suggests the new Bing hasn't changed the trajectory of its advertising sales. Microsoft's ad business, which accounts for less than 6% of revenue and is largely from Bing, was up 3% in the most recent quarter compared with last year -- the same as the previous quarter and slower than the pace it had before it launched Bing.
One of the barriers to Microsoft gaining more market share despite being the first to add AI chat to its search engine, analysts said, was that it was initially only available for people who log in with a Microsoft ID on Microsoft's Edge browser. Microsoft says it is soon making Bing's full AI chat features available on Google Chrome and Apple's Safari browsers.
Credit: By Tom Dotan
