Nvidia Corp.'s profit fell 68% in the latest period, but the decline wasn't as steep as Wall Street had expected, and the company said its gaming- graphics business returned to growth.
The Santa Clara, Calif., chipmaker reported a fiscal first-quarter profit of $394 million, or 64 cents a share. Excluding one-time expenses, the company reported adjusted earnings of 88 cents a share. Analysts were expecting earnings of 81 cents a share on an adjusted basis.
Nvidia's revenue fell 31% to $2.22 billion. Analysts polled by FactSet had expected $2.2 billion.
For its current quarter, the company said it expects about $2.55 billion in revenue, slightly above what analysts were expecting.
Gaming revenue for the first quarter was $1.05 billion, down 39% from a year ago but up 11% from the company's fourth quarter.
"Nvidia is back on an upward trajectory," Chief Executive Jensen Huang said in a statement.
Shares rose 6.3% to $170.40 in after-hours trading.
The stock has fallen 35% over the past year, compared with a nearly 6% gain in the S&P 500.
Nvidia's chips, designed for advanced graphics in videogames, are widely used in high-performance computing and cloud infrastructure by companies such as Amazon.com Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google.
Cryptocurrency mining and artificial-intelligence applications propelled the company's sales in recent years, but sales reversed last year as cryptocurrency prices fell sharply and mining became unprofitable.
During the quarter that ended April 28, Nvidia agreed to acquire networking firm Mellanox Technologies Ltd. for about $6.9 billion, its largest deal by far as it bolsters its bet on cloud computing after suffering a stinging drop in its core graphics-chips business late last year. The deal is expected to close by the end of this year.
Mellanox makes Ethernet switches and adapters that connect computers to each other. The acquisition is Nvidia's latest move into a market beyond chips known as graphics processing units.

Credit: By Patrick Thomas
