On Tuesday, the New York Times and The Wall Street Journal put out alerts saying a blast at a Gaza hospital was caused by an Israeli airstrike, killing more than 500 people, citing Palestinian officials.
It soon became clear the story wasn't going to end there. Israel denied it was responsible. Over the hours, headlines were tweaked, new alerts went out, and by Wednesday, both news organizations were reporting that Israel and the U.S. government said evidence suggested the blast was caused by a Palestinian group.
Reporting during wartime is always challenging. The confusion in newsrooms over the blast at the Gaza hospital, which journalists couldn't access, was a prime example of the challenge.
"During any breaking news event, we report what we know as we learn it," a Times spokesman said. "And as the facts on the ground become more clear, we continue reporting. Our extensive and continued reporting on the hospital in Gaza makes explicit the murkiness surrounding the events there."
A spokeswoman for the Journal had no comment on the Gaza hospital-blast coverage.
Other major news organizations also attributed the blast to an Israeli airstrike in their initial reporting, citing Palestinian officials. It is difficult for news organizations to verify information in a war zone.
Washington Post International Editor Douglas Jehl said the Post has been cautious regarding assertions from either side of the war, partly because of the extraordinary velocity of the story.
We "take steps to remind our reporters that the first reports in a war are often wrong, and we need to take a pause to make sure we're not jumping to conclusions," he said.
Jehl also said the ease with which misinformation can be spread on social media and the rise of artificial intelligence that can create realistic-looking footage have made fact-checking even more challenging.
The Post is leaning heavily on a visual forensics team to validate videos and other information, Jehl said. "We're very aware of disinformation and manipulated images from AI."
Bill Grueskin, a professor at Columbia Journalism School and a former Journal editor, said one challenge news organizations face is the lack of resources on the ground in Gaza, where the hospital was hit.
"Imagine if someone was on the ground an hour after the blast, shooting live video, someone from a credible news source," he said. "That would have had a lot of power."
Grueskin said explainers and "how we know what we know" sidebars can be used to explain the reporting process to readers and build trust.
Getting the facts straight isn't the only challenge. News organizations are paying close attention to their language in describing the conflict and the parties involved, mindful that many readers and viewers are sensitive about how the war is portrayed.
Hamas in particular is a complicated organization to describe, senior news employees say. A CNN employee said it is complex to find the right words to describe Hamas, and many other aspects of the conflict.
The Journal doesn't refer to Hamas as a terrorist group in its own voice, but says the U.S. characterizes the organization that way. A note to senior editors clarified that and other aspects of war coverage.
Credit: By Alexandra Bruell
