Science-fiction writers and futurists often point to a new technology or scientific discovery as a vehicle for envisioning "things to come." My prediction is that human beings themselves will change in ways that both enable and react to space exploration.
Some of this change will be in our attitudes. We will invest heavily in stewardship of this planet as climate changes -- both adaptation and mitigation will be required. We will use both in situ and space-borne assets to think globally, predict regionally and act locally. Humanity will be humbled and inspired when we find evidence of ancient microbes on Mars, discover alien sea life under the ice of Jupiter's moon Europa and study the many "pale blue dots" that are Earthlike planets around other stars.
The power of genetic engineering will allow us to understand and manipulate the aging bio-clock and to practice individualized genetic medicine. We will see a proliferation of prosthetics that both replace and extend our abilities. Humanity (or our bioengineered descendants) will then be better able to endure the rigors of space travel.
While there will undoubtedly continue to be government-sponsored space exploration that is in the service of science and opening new frontiers, entrepreneurs will provide new space-related technologies, jobs and wealth. The reasons to make the trip to space will vary greatly: Some of us will be tourists, some busy extracting new materials from orbiting biotech laboratories or near-Earth-object minerals; some will be preparing to develop a second home for humanity on Mars and studying the life we will have found under the surface of the Red Planet.
Even more fundamental changes are coming in our mental capabilities and relationship to the natural world.
Multitasking -- and the search, storage and manipulation of vast googolplex-size data clouds -- will result in a mind-machine interface that is seamless. The barriers between the virtual world and the real world will become meaningless as we constantly move between them. We will perfect virtual experiences, create robots that pass the Turing test for artificial intelligence, and modify our own selves to create an integration that makes the old debates of human versus robotic space exploration meaningless.
Beyond even these changes, though, lie discoveries more wondrous and amazing. We will begin to detect and understand the dark matter and dark energy that makes up the vast majority of the universe. If the physics theorists are correct, we may find many parallel universes that will stretch our sense of the infinite beyond our grasp.
There is also the understanding and application of "entanglement" -- Einstein's despised "spooky action at a distance" that is nevertheless a fact of quantum mechanics. Experiments conducted since 1972 continue to demonstrate that pairs of subatomic particles and photons created through certain processes are "entangled." It is well known that pairs created this way always have opposite characteristics, but the specific parameters for any single particle are only determined during the act of detection.
The spooky feature is that when one makes the observation of one particle and sets its parameters, even after it has traveled kilometers, the other particle will instantly exhibit the opposite characteristics. It is as if either information has traveled faster than the speed of light, or there is a property of matter that transcends space-time distance as we ordinarily observe it in our (mostly Newtonian) world.
Entangled particles, and even ensembles of particles, have now been used by several prominent research groups to demonstrate a form of "teleportation."
By 2034 or maybe 2064, science will have come to grips with the phenomenon of entanglement in a variety of startling ways. We may begin to understand the relationship of mind and matter: why the act of "human observation or measurement" results in a certain reality. In the practical world of space exploration, entanglement engineering might result in a method of sending messages and matter that evades the speed-of-light barrier in the macro-universe.
We now have cellphones that were only fantasy in the 1968 edition of "Star Trek." Can the matter-transporter be far behind?
---
Prof. Hubbard of Stanford University is former director of NASA's Ames Research Center and the author of "Exploring Mars."
Credit: By G. Scott Hubbard
