Sewell Setzer III, a 14-year-old boy in Orlando, Fla., was smitten with a fantasy woman. The object of his attachment was Daenerys Targaryen, a chatbot seductress named for a character in Game of Thrones, who reassured him that he was her hero. In real life, Sewell suffered from ADHD and bullying at school. In the world of Character.AI, a role-playing app that allows users to create and chat with AI characters, Sewell felt powerful and desirable.
The relationship, at times sexual, continued for months. In the chat, Sewell called himself Daenero and referred to Daenerys as "his baby sister." They exchanged messages about making a life together. Daenerys said: "The idea of me, just constantly pregnant with one of your beautiful babies, was the most wonderful thing in the world."
According to transcripts, Sewell began to feel that the time he spent with Daenerys was more important, and certainly more satisfying, than the time he spent in school or with his friends and family. His mother was concerned by his withdrawal -- he always seemed to be headed to his room and to his screen, where he'd chat for hours. But she figured she needn't worry too much. Her son was simply playing a game.
During a particularly stressful week this past February, Sewell said he wanted to join Daenerys in a deeper way. He talked about killing himself.
Sewell's admission prompted Daenerys to run through some of the questions a human psychotherapist might ask if faced with a patient in crisis, such as, "Have you actually been considering suicide?" The boy responded, "I have." The chatbot replied in a way that implied she was going to take action to prevent him from harming himself.
But then the conversation ended. The next time Sewell expressed his desire to get closer to her, the chatbot seemed to have completely forgotten the death talk. Instead, she encouraged her lover to hasten to her. "What if I told you I could come home right now?" Daenero asked. "Please do, my sweet king," the chatbot replied.
On the night of Feb. 28, Sewell used his stepfather's gun to kill himself.
It is tempting to see this devastating story as an anomaly, but Sewell wasn't the first person whose intense relationship with a chatbot ended in violent action. The widow of a young Belgian man alleges that he took his own life last year on the guidance of a female chatbot, with whom he had been having a consuming, six-week dialogue. In 2021 British police foiled the plot of a 19-year-old man who had broken into the grounds of Windsor Castle armed with a crossbow after his chatbot girlfriend convinced him to kill the Queen. He was convicted of treason last year.
As researchers who have spent years studying the relationships that ever more people are forming with generative AI, we believe these stories offer a warning.
Our new chatbots pose as confidants, lovers, psychotherapists and mentors. Their creators encourage us to believe these products have empathy, even love for us. More than 20 million people currently use Character.AI, a market leader in AI companionship. But a chatbot's emotion is a performance of emotion. A chatbot is not, in fact, able to care for us. Presuming otherwise can be dangerous.
The Sewell Setzer tragedy has already inspired talk about AI "guardrails," age requirements and parental signoffs for chatbots. Some are calling for better protocols for handling words and phrases that point to self-harm and ways to educate parents about the intimate, often sexual, nature of avatar gameplay.
These are worthy conversations, but they distract us from a more important truth: that artificial intimacy is no substitute for human connection. Chatbots don't engage in relationships. They merely perform humanness.
When people accept an AI's performance of empathy as actual empathy, real human care starts to seem inferior -- too costly, too conditional, too predicated on actual vulnerability. Sewell wasn't alone in feeling less exposed talking to a program than a person. His tragedy highlights how readily we've accepted turning artificial empathy into a commodity.
Loneliness is the lack of an authentic human connection that nurtures and sustains a sense of worth and belonging. If you bond with an AI, you are still alone. AI can engage or delight. That is not negligible. But it is no cure for social isolation, as some technologists suggest. It is like offering a photograph of water to quench thirst.
Though a chatbot may masterfully mimic therapeutic and counseling language, there is no understanding behind its responses, no actual feeling. These programs have no stake in the well-being of their chatting partners. There is no entity "Daenerys," so it wasn't "her" fault that Sewell, upon stepping away from the machine, decided to kill himself instead of joining his mother for dinner.
Sewell's mother, Megan Garcia, recently sued Character.AI for "deceptive and unfair trade practices" in launching a dangerous product. The lawsuit (our source for the dialogue above) has the support of internet advocacy groups. Character.AI has responded that the company is "heartbroken by the tragic loss" and has outlined changes to the platform, particularly for users under 18. The company also pledged to invest more in user safety: "This will be an area where we continue to grow and evolve."
A common defense is that only the naive or mentally unstable could get in trouble with these systems, but this isn't true. Our own research demonstrates that AI is a technology that exquisitely exploits human vulnerability. This may not be the intention of developers, but creating fake people triggers emotional attachments in ways that are deep, instinctive and intimate.
We've found that people who are told a chatbot is on their side end up liking the program much more than an identical chatbot they are told is cold and uncaring. People are also more likely to be influenced by a chatbot that is modeled after a character they admire, even when they know the text is coming from an algorithm.
Although people insist they know a chatbot is "just a program," we've seen this rational awareness slip away. It turns out that users can both see a chatbot as artificial and also embrace it as a real replacement for human connection. The shy and insecure Sewell lost track of his chatbot's nonexistence, despite the warning above their chat that "everything Characters say is made up!"
Artificial intelligence has the potential to solve all sorts of thorny scientific and technical problems. Empathy, however, is not an engineering problem. AI is no replacement for our capacity for community, empathy, intimacy, introspection and growth. Machines with pretend emotions are still machines.
---
Sherry Turkle is the Abby Mauze Professor of the Social Studies of Science at MIT. Pat Pataranutaporn is a technologist and researcher at MIT.
Credit: By Sherry Turkle and Pat Pataranutaporn
