Superhero stories reflect the political and cultural debates of their time. A famous comic-book cover from 1941 has Captain America punching Adolf Hitler in the face. On a radio program a few years later, Superman took on the Ku Klux Klan. The themes of persecution and societal rejection in the X-Men comics came from the unrest of the 1960s and the Civil Rights era. A Black Panther story arc for Marvel Comics, written by National Book Award winner Ta-Nehisi Coates, is set to debut in April.
Superhero movies also often have a political subtext. Here are a number of comic-book films, including new release, "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice," that go beyond high-tech battles and highflying rescues.
The "X-Men" films (2000-present)
Bryan Singer's X-Men movies -- he has produced or directed five, including "Apocalypse," coming in May -- built on the comics' reputation for mirroring civil rights debates by incorporating themes from the struggle for gay rights and how young people who are gay find their place in the world. A scene from "X-Men 2" has a young person "coming out" as a mutant to his parents. In "X-Men: First Class" the character Beast (Nicholas Hoult) tries to hide his true nature. Actor and activist Ian McKellen, who stars in the films, told BuzzFeed in 2014 that the dilemma for mutants -- either assimilate while remaining proud or assert your rights by any means necessary -- is similar to one in the gay-rights movement.
"Avengers: Age of Ultron" (2015)
A vision of doom compels Tony Stark/Iron Man (Robert Downey Jr.) to create an artificially intelligent security system called Ultron to protect the world from the kind of alien attack seen in 2012's "The Avengers." However, Ultron (James Spader) takes the form of an evil robot who gathers all the world's information and works to destroy humanity. In an interview last year with the WSJ, star Mark Ruffalo noted that the film came along just as paranoia about the government's data collection was rampant and thinkers such as Stephen Hawking were warning about the dangers of artificial intelligence. "I don't see it as a coincidence," Mr. Ruffalo said.
"The Dark Knight" (2008)
Christopher Nolan's second Batman movie is a pop-culture touchstone from the War on Terror era. Batman (Christian Bale) uses rendition to capture a fugitive, tortures the Joker (Heath Ledger) during an interrogation and turns Gotham City's cellphone network into a spy apparatus. "Like W [President Bush], Batman sometimes has to push the boundaries of civil rights to deal with an emergency, certain that he will re-establish those boundaries when the emergency is past," author Andrew Klavan wrote in The Wall Street Journal. A recent article in the Atlantic has President Barack Obama comparing the Joker to the terrorist group Islamic State: "It has the capacity to set the whole region on fire."
"Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice" (2016)
The movie, which opens Friday, debates a world power's responsibility during crises. The heroes come to blows, in part because Batman (Ben Affleck) doesn't like how Superman (Henry Cavill) can freely exercise his unlimited power, even if it is with the best intentions. Questions about Superman's power echo the debate about the influence of the U.S. "That's a reality you have to grapple with," director Zack Snyder says. "The Internet is going to have that conversation about the politics of Superman."
"Captain America: Civil War" (2016)
In May, Marvel Studios will unveil its own kind of superhero brawl. In the film, the Avengers split and duke it out for reasons such as the government's effort to better regulate superheroes' activities. In "Civil War" trailers, Iron Man (Mr. Downey) argues for more oversight while Captain America (Chris Evans) resists. Directors Joe and Anthony Russo have said this film will be even darker than their 2014 one, "Captain America: The Winter Soldier," which was as much a political conspiracy thriller as a superhero action film.
Credit: By Michael Calia
