Facebook Inc. has classified a large segment of the boogaloo movement as a dangerous organization and banned it from its network, in the tech company's broadest move yet against the group.
The company said in a blog post it removed more than 300 Facebook and Instagram accounts and 106 groups tied to a boogaloo-affiliated network "that actively seeks to commit violence." The removals came alongside an additional takedown of 400 groups and 100 pages that hosted content broadly supportive of the boogaloo movement.
The large segment "is actively promoting violence against civilians, law enforcement and government officials and institutions," Facebook said in the blog post, adding that "members of this network seek to recruit others within the broader boogaloo movement."
Composed mostly of young white males who often call themselves "boogaloo bois," the loose-knit movement grew its ranks in recent years on social media, mainly Facebook.
Its adherents views' are wide-ranging, with a focus on overturning authority, according to researchers who track extremist organizations. Some have supported antiracism protests against police brutality in recent months, but others are white supremacists who hold antigovernment views, believe strongly in gun rights and traffic in conspiracy theories, researchers said.
Facebook's ban on Tuesday comes after some employees staged a virtual walkout in early June over the decision to leave up a post about nationwide demonstrations by President Trump that said, "When the looting starts, the shooting starts." Civil-rights groups have since criticized Facebook over its approach to hate speech, while several corporations, including Verizon Communications Inc. and Coca-Cola Co., pulled advertising from the platform in protest.
Facebook removed the boogaloo accounts after a targeted investigation by human analysts, officials said. The social-media giant has increasingly turned to the tactic to assess networks that actively try to avoid its automated tools to monitor content. Those systems rely on "hashes," or digital fingerprints that identify extremist propaganda and artificial intelligence-based "classifiers" trained to evaluate content like a human reviewer. They proved effective at minimizing jihadist groups such as Islamic State on the platform in recent years.
But human-led takedowns could be more important for far-right or white supremacist groups, company officials said. Such content tends to be more decentralized and often share hard-to-decipher content laced with irony and sarcasm, the company officials added. Such a targeted investigation in March removed the Northwest Front, a white supremacist group that advocates for a white ethnostate in the Pacific Northwest.
Facebook's move doesn't ban boogaloo content altogether. The company said it sought to ban a wide-ranging boogaloo network that is nonetheless "distinct from the broader and loosely-affiliated boogaloo movement because it actively seeks to commit violence."
Facebook expects many of the boogaloo users to move their discussions to other companies' platforms but is limiting its help to other companies, said a Facebook official familiar with the operation. The official didn't elaborate on why the company isn't sharing its intelligence.
The company also hasn't shared that information with the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism, a private-public consortium designed to prevent extremists from exploiting tech platforms, because it focuses on individuals and groups designated on the United Nations' consolidated sanctions list. The consortium shares information among members and aids smaller tech companies with fewer security resources to police their platforms.

Credit: By David Uberti and Rachael Levy
