SoftBank Group Corp.'s Vision Fund has led a $165 million investment in Karius Inc., a startup that uses blood testing incorporating genomics and artificial intelligence to identify infectious diseases.
SoftBank is investing through its second Vision Fund, which it is still fundraising and is likely to fall short of its $108 billion fundraising goal, according to previous reporting in The Wall Street Journal.
General Catalyst, Khosla Ventures and Lightspeed Venture Partners also participated in the latest funding round for Karius.
Karius, of Redwood City, Calif., helps hospitals identify bacterial and fungal infections by performing tests on blood samples shipped to its labs. Karius's tests identify DNA traces of microbes left in the blood, which the company says is a more efficient alternative to taking biopsies from the brain, heart or lungs.
Karius is one of a group of companies seeking to speed the diagnosis of infectious diseases so that patients can be treated more rapidly and with the best drug for their illness.
Their work comes against a backdrop of rising resistance to existing antibiotics. More than 35,000 Americans die annually from drug-resistant bacterial and fungal infections, according to a November report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Karius says it can identify microbes directly from blood without the need to grow, or culture, them first. By sequencing cell-free DNA from bacteria and other microorganisms in blood, Karius aims to quickly pinpoint microbes from a blood draw and provide results back within a day. The company also uses machine- learning algorithms to analyze the genomic data.
Others startups raising venture capital recently to improve diagnosis of infectious diseases include SeLux Diagnostics Inc. and Day Zero Diagnostics Inc.
Although Karius focuses on different types of infections than those spread by the coronavirus, the company's chief executive, Mickey Kertesz, said the epidemic illustrates that "humanity has not figured out infectious diseases."
He added that Karius is working on testing that could prevent future pandemics. "When a novel pathogen is emerging, we can see that."
The new funding for Karius will be used for clinical studies and technology development, Mr. Kertesz said.
Softbank's Vision Fund has come under fire for investments such as WeWork parent We Co. and Uber Technologies Inc., in which the firm valued the companies higher than where public investors wanted to invest.
Mr. Kertesz said he is enthusiastic about working with SoftBank because he believes its health-care team has the right expertise for working with such businesses.
Softbank's investments in two health startups that went public -- 10X Genomics Inc. and Guardant Health Inc. -- also inspired confidence in the firm for Mr. Kertesz.
"We found them to be very knowledgeable, [to have] a lot of experience and a very relevant network," he said.
Previously, Karius raised more than $50 million in equity financing and about $25 million in debt, according to PitchBook Data Inc. Prior investors include Tencent Holdings Ltd. and Data Collective.
This is the second investment to be announced by Vision Fund 2.
In an interview last fall, Vision Fund Chief Financial Officer Navneet Govil said that, unlike its first fund, its second fund will limit the amount of capital it invests in a particular company or industry.

Credit: By Katie Roof and Brian Gormley
