CHICAGO -- Despite deep concerns about the safety of artificial intelligence, efforts to pass legislation to address its risks have been elusive, though lawmakers at the Democratic National Convention say they continue to push for an election year breakthrough.
"We're going to get a great AI package which keeps innovation as our North Star, hopefully through the Congress by the end of the year. We have great prospects," said Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.).
In July, the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee advanced a group of AI bills, including a bipartisan Future of Artificial Intelligence Innovation Act, designed to maintain U.S. global leadership in AI and other emerging technologies.
But some remain skeptical. Regulation in the U.S. has been slow moving, and could be even more so with both parties focused on the impending presidential election.
Washington has a poor record of moving quickly on tech, and the U.S., unlike the European Union, lacks a comprehensive set of rules like the bloc's Artificial Intelligence Act, which took effect in August. In the U.S., the closest most comprehensive federal guidelines may be found in the Biden administration's 2023 executive order on safe, secure and trustworthy AI.
When it comes to actual legislation, much momentum has shifted to individual states, including Colorado and California -- a phenomenon that could result in varying regulations and requirements that differ from state to state.
One of the most significant state bills thus far is California's Senate Bill 1047. The state's Appropriations Committee last week passed the bill, which requires that developers of large AI models conduct safety tests to reduce the risks of "catastrophic harm" from their technology. The bill defines such harm as cyberattacks that cause at least $500 million in damage or mass casualties. The developers also must ensure their AI can be shut down by a human if it starts behaving dangerously.
But the bill's future is uncertain. Former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, whose San Francisco district includes much of the AI industry, has called the bill "well-intentioned but ill informed."
Part of the challenge is that few lawmakers have the expertise to establish rules governing what AI developers can and cannot do.
"Policymakers have paid attention to AI issues but I don't think they've come away with an understanding of where the technology is going," said Daniel Colson, executive director of the Artificial Intelligence Policy Institute, a Nevada-based research and advocacy nonprofit.
But that lack of expertise need not stand in the way of legislation. Instead of writing rules for a complex and constantly evolving technology, lawmakers could focus on changing the incentive structure of AI developers, according to Assemblyman Alex Bores, who represents New York's 73rd district, including parts of Manhattan.
"Government probably is not going to move as fast as the AI companies and legislation itself is a slow process," Bores said.
He wants lawmakers to focus on creating an incentive model in which companies bear some of the risk if AI causes harm, thereby compelling them to develop AI in a safe manner.
"To take a very old-timey reference . . . the standard in most states is, you're the dynamite operator. You know how to make it safe. If you blow up a rock and it destroys someone's house, you're liable. We don't care if you're like, 'No, I took the right precautions.' You're the expert," Bores said.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette and Steven Rosenbush
