Hyland Software, a business-software company based in Ohio, relied on Credit Suisse for years to arrange billions of dollars in loans. After the Swiss bank collapsed in March, Hyland switched tracks and borrowed $3.4 billion from a little-known investment firm, Golub Capital, and others that specialize in a Wall Street craze known as "private credit."
High interest rates are shaking up how corporate loans get done. Soaring rates brought down banks such as Credit Suisse and Silicon Valley Bank and forced others to reduce lending. As those lenders stepped back, private-credit fund managers stepped up, financing one jumbo loan for American corporations after another.
This shift is accelerating a trend more than a decade in the making. Hedge funds, private-equity funds and other alternative-investment firms have been siphoning away money and talent from banks since a regulatory crackdown after the 2008-09 financial crisis. Lately, many on Wall Street say the balance of power -- and risk -- has hit a tipping point.
"There's been a steady progression, but since Covid and the banking crisis this year we've really seen the banks rein in risk," said David Snyderman, head of alternative credit and fixed income at Magnetar Capital.
Magnetar, a hedge fund once known for bets against subprime mortgages, recently arranged a $2.3 billion loan for CoreWeave, a red-hot cloud-computing operator for artificial intelligence. It was Magnetar's biggest private loan yet.
The loans are expensive, but for many companies they are the only option. Next, private-credit firms are coming for the rest of the credit market, bankrolling asset-backed debt for real estate, consumer loans and infrastructure projects.
Private-equity firms use revenue from most of the loans to make leveraged buyouts, saddling the companies they acquire with expensive debt. Ultimately, more companies could end up under their control.
Regulators, concerned that so much money is going behind closed doors, are rushing to catch up with new rules for private fund managers and their dealings with the insurance industry.
The firms have money to spend from clients such as pensions, insurers and, increasingly, individuals. Those investors piled in because returns were high compared with other debt investments in a low-yield world. Private lenders delivered average returns of 9% over the past decade on loans made mostly to midsize businesses, according to data provider Cliffwater.
Revenue from new corporate loans has shrunk for banks and credit-ratings firms. Their stocks lagged behind those of private-credit managers over the past three years. Last month, Blackstone became the first alternative fund manager included in the S&P 500, boosted significantly by its credit business.
Some analysts are concerned about private credit taking over the loan market.
The shift "has concentrated a larger segment of economic activity into the hands of a fairly small number of large, opaque asset managers," credit-ratings firm Moody's Investors Service said in a September report. "Lack of visibility will make it difficult to see where risk bubbles may be building."
There are risks to investors. High rates are making corporate borrowers more likely to default on the loans. Some managers are concentrating their exposure by making bigger loans backing multibillion-dollar deals.
"The music's been playing and everyone's been having a good time, but now the music is winding down and things are getting harder for businesses and lenders," said Philip Tseng, co-head of U.S. direct lending at BlackRock. "That's going to demonstrate how much experience matters."
If private lenders keep refinancing debt from large companies that struggle to borrow in the bank market, that could lower the average quality of their investments. About half of the $190 billion of below-investment-grade bank loans coming due in 2024 and 2025 are rated B-minus or below.
Private-credit assets under management globally rose to about $1.5 trillion in 2022 from $726 billion in 2018, according to data provider Preqin.
A handful of the fund managers control about $1 trillion combined, according to research by The Wall Street Journal. Some -- such as Apollo Global Management, Ares Management, Blackstone and KKR -- started out in private equity and distressed-debt trading and expanded into private lending. Others -- such as Blue Owl Capital, HPS Investment Partners and Sixth Street Partners -- are relatively new firms set up to provide private capital.
While big funds have gotten bigger, the field of private credit is getting broader, including traditional investment companies and alternative-asset managers. Shoe retailer Cole Haan borrowed in recent months from mutual-fund giant BlackRock and hedge-fund manager Fortress Investment Group to repay a $290 million loan from JPMorgan Chase.
"It's kind of nuts that there used to be just three or four of these [lenders] out there and now you can have 30," said Erwin Mock, head of capital markets for Thoma Bravo, the private-equity firm that owns Hyland and negotiated its loan.
Companies are using private debt to retire bank debt at unprecedented levels. Financial software maker Finastra borrowed $4.8 billion from Blue Owl, Oak Hill Capital and others in August to refinance a loan arranged by Morgan Stanley. It was the largest private loan on record.
Asset managers are able to handle these monster loans, the size previously reserved for banks because the firms are tapping deeper pools of capital.
Apollo, KKR and others built, purchased or teamed up with insurers that have hundreds of billions of dollars they need to invest. Much of the insurance money must go into investment-grade debt, so the firms are branching into asset-backed debt that is higher rated than most corporate loans.
Apollo financed an almost $2 billion debt dealin December to music publisher Concord. The debt is backed by royalties from songs including works by Daft Punk, Little Richard and Pink Floyd. The firm bought Credit Suisse's asset-backed business.
Others see potential selling to much smaller investors.
"Individual investing in [alternatives] is still in its infancy," said Ares Chief Executive Michael Arougheti. "We believe it is a trillion-dollar end market, and the only question will be how rapidly it grows."
Some fund managers, such as Golub, have grown adept at using collateralized loan obligations, or CLOs, to borrow more money, then lend it out.
Private-credit funds don't require borrowers to get credit ratings, and they guarantee completion of buyout loans. Banks might back out when markets turned rocky. But private-credit loans have tougher covenants, prohibiting borrowers from selling assets or raising new debt to get cash. Private loans charged average interest rates 5 percentage points higher than comparable debt in the bank market over the past 10 years, according to an index operated by Cliffwater.
Private-credit investors may fare better than bank-loan holders in the long term because of their better covenants, Goldman Sachs analysts wrote in a September research report. They are also owned by just a few lenders. That enables private creditors to intervene faster in times of financial stress and to recover more if a borrower defaults, the analysts said.
---
Peter Santilli contributed to this article.
Credit: By Matt Wirz
