Amazon has disrupted businesses from book stores to supermarkets -- RIP Borders. Now CEO Jeff Bezos is gunning for the higher-education-government complex by paying for advanced technical and vocational education for Amazon's U.S. employees.
The Seattle-based retailer on Thursday rolled out a plan to retrain a third of its U.S. workforce by 2025, or about 100,000 employees. That's more than most state universities enroll in a year, let alone graduate. Amazon has pioneered one-day delivery enabled by vast fulfillment centers equipped with robots and is moving to drone delivery in some areas.
The company thus knows better than most that many jobs today probably won't exist within a few years, and America doesn't have enough workers equipped with skills for jobs that will soon be in high demand such as drone operators. A worker shortage -- sometimes described as a skills gaps -- is hampering growth in many industries, and Amazon doesn't want to be caught flat-footed.
The company is proposing to spend $700 million on educational programs and pay up to $12,000 for warehouse workers to earn certificates or degrees in "high-demand occupations," as defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Workers will be able to take classes on site, and the programs don't have to relate to their current employment. Workers also won't have to indenture themselves to Amazon.
Put simply, this is job retraining subsidized by Amazon. Even if Amazon eventually eliminates their positions, employees who take advantage will be better able to find work in another role at the company or with another employer. This will be far superior to the federal job-training programs that are often run by labor unions with little connection to the real future needs of employers.
Amazon will also fund graduate-level education for its software engineers at its Machine Learning University. A master's degree in computer science typically costs about $40,000. The engineers won't have to go back to school and take out tens of thousands of dollars in loans as so many Americans did during the recession -- one reason student debt ballooned.
This isn't charity. Amazon is acting in its self-interest by providing these educational benefits to attract and retain workers to stay ahead of competitors in a tight labor market. But if other companies follow, America could get a better-educated workforce with much less debt. And dare to dream, maybe colleges will cut their prices to compete with Amazon U.
Jeff Bezos and Amazon are favorite whipping boys of Bernie Sanders, but here the free market is promising free college and graduate school for workers at no cost to taxpayers. You might call this lifetime learning in capitalism for progressives.
