The Cold War began with the end in mind. As early as 1947 George Kennan stated explicitly that U.S. policy should aim to "increase enormously the strains under which Soviet policy must operate . . . which must eventually find their outlet in either the break-up or the gradual mellowing of Soviet power." Americans still had bitter arguments over our approach to the Soviet Union -- the 1952 Republican platform, for example, rejected President Harry S. Truman's "futile and immoral" policy of containment. The ensuing debate, however, focused on the means of containment rather than whether containment itself was the proper end for American strategy. Historian John Lewis Gaddis argues that over the decades that followed there was an "implicit agreement" among the foreign-policy establishment on containment's purposes that never wavered.
Contrast that with the present day: The cold war with China has begun without an end in mind. American strategy lacks a guiding objective. We have an emerging bipartisan consensus on the short-term means of U.S. grand strategy. Republicans and Democrats increasingly agree on the need to arm Taiwan to deter a Chinese communist invasion and reduce U.S. economic dependency on China. But there is little discussion, let alone consensus, on the long-term ends of U.S. grand strategy.
The Biden administration briefly appeared willing to accept the reality of a new cold war and offer something approximating a long-term objective. The White House's 2022 Indo-Pacific Strategy called for "building a balance of influence in the world that is maximally favorable to United States [and] our allies and partners." In essence, the administration sought constrainment -- to constrain Beijing's operating environment. Thirteen days later, Russia invaded Ukraine. As the Biden team's focus moved to the conflict in Europe (and later the Middle East), its approach to China softened significantly.
Now the only stated end of American strategy toward China seems to be to avoid at all costs a cold war that could erupt into a major crisis. Thus, President Biden launched an "all hands on deck effort" to intensify "detailed, dogged diplomacy" with China. While in Asia last year, Mr. Biden repeatedly reassured regional leaders that he isn't trying to contain or hurt China. The priority, according to national security adviser Jake Sullivan, is to "manage competition [with China] to reduce tensions and find a way forward on shared challenges" such as climate change, public health and the risks of artificial intelligence. The administration seeks to "outcompete" rather than contain or constrain China. Mr. Sullivan disavows any expectation -- or even aspiration -- for a "transformative end state like the one that resulted from the collapse of the Soviet Union."
Many in the Biden administration have framed the resulting lack of clarity on China as strategic wisdom. Deputy Secretary of State Kurt Campbell believes a confrontational approach is "reckless" and "unproductive." He previously criticized what he calls a "neo-containment policy." Rush Doshi, a former leading China strategist in the Biden White House, concedes that "managed competition" is unlikely to resolve any "fundamental disagreements," and he fears that seeking victory would "turn the U.S.-Chinese rivalry into an existential one for China's leadership," giving them "little reason to exercise restraint." The best we can achieve is a stable but uneasy balance of power, in which the U.S.-led coalition denies Beijing regional hegemony.
There are at least two problems with the Biden approach. First, the Chinese Communist Party -- which is pursuing global hegemony and openly talks about the struggle with the U.S. in existential terms -- is unlikely to settle for a stable regional balance of power. This is especially true if American policymakers continue to let the ghost of the Cold War spook them even from uttering the word containment -- let alone aggressively pursuing it or constrainment as a long-term goal. We are creating a permissive environment that feeds Xi Jinping's appetite for conquest and invites war.
Consider that the Biden administration, along with allies in the Group of Seven, recently called out China for fueling the Russian war machine, conducting persistent cyberattacks, engaging in aggressive military activity in the South China Sea, employing forced labor in Xinjiang, and undermining our democratic institutions (a nonexhaustive list). Does that sound like the behavior of a nation exercising restraint in response to Mr. Biden's skillfully managed competition and detailed, dogged diplomacy?
Second, strategic competition with China will be difficult and expensive. There is no easy or cheap way to rebuild and modernize the U.S. military to prevent World War III or undo two decades of Chinese integration into the global economy. American leaders must convince their constituents to sacrifice, and nobody wants to sacrifice much in pursuit of "managed competition" or "a stable balance of power" or some fragile equilibrium in which the U.S. constantly exercises restraint as China salami-slices its way to regional and global dominance.
Better to level with the American people, mobilizing their patriotism and creativity in pursuit of cold war victory. This means constantly highlighting Beijing's malevolent campaign to destroy the free world. It means stating plainly that America doesn't merely want to deter China's designs on Taiwan and the Indo-Pacific. It means containing the Communist Party's attempts to export its techno-totalitarian model of governance and rolling back its control of the commanding heights of critical technology.
Even without a president effectively using the bully pulpit and aggressively making the case for how we win the new cold war, recent polling suggests Americans are starting to understand the stakes. Perhaps this is because the people are often smarter than their political leaders. They have seen Beijing's deliberate subsidization of illicit fentanyl precursor exports kill 200 Americans a day and more a year than died in the Vietnam War. They have seen a virus that likely escaped from a Chinese lab kill even more and upend the lives of everyone on the planet.
At a minimum, as we near the end of the beginning of the new cold war, we need to begin a debate about its end.
---
Mr. Gallagher, a Journal contributor, is head of defense for Palantir Technologies and a distinguished fellow at the Hudson Institute. He represented Wisconsin's Eighth Congressional District (2017-24) and was chairman of the Select Committee on the Chinese Communist Party.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Wanted: Grand Strategy for More Than China" -- WSJ Aug. 29, 2024)
Credit: By Mike Gallagher
