You might know Echo as an Amazon Inc. talking speaker that answers to the name "Alexa." This fall, it is also becoming an alarm clock, a TV remote, a speakerphone, a smart-home hub, a kitchen intercom -- even an interactive buzzer for family game night.
At its Seattle headquarters Wednesday, Amazon let 10,000 Echos bloom, introducing a half-dozen new products to persuade families to put Alexa in a lot more places throughout the home (and even beyond it).
For Amazon, the mission isn't just to win over Echo holdouts with new uses for its talking artificial intelligence, but also convince the millions of people who already bought in that one Echo isn't enough. It's the most aggressive effort I've seen from any tech giant to colonize the home, the biggest part of our lives not already dominated by smartphones. Amazon is signaling that its Alexa strategy goes beyond letting you reorder Cheerios and toilet paper, toward hooking you into more of its own services.
It's also using its early lead in the smart-speaker space to ratchet up competition against Apple and Google going into the high spending season that starts in September and cools back down after Christmas.
The Alexa onslaught begins in the bedroom with the $130 Echo Spot, a spherical alarm clock that displays information, streams video and lets you command Alexa from beneath the covers. Then there's the $35 Echo Connect, which turns an existing phone line into a much smarter speakerphone. (Say, "Alexa, call Stanley," and she'll dial for you from your existing home number.)
A new version of Amazon's Fire TV streaming box packs in the latest Wi-Fi and picture enhancements (4K and HDR) with a remote for $70. For $10 more, it comes bundled with a small Echo Dot speaker that lets it take commands from Alexa. You can already reach Alexa via the remote, but perhaps Amazon thought pressing a button was too much effort. (Can an Echo recliner be far off?)
The Fire TV's price is particularly noteworthy compared with Apple's newly released Apple TV 4K, which matches most features -- but starts at $180.
Amazon also split its original Echo speaker into two versions. The flagship Echo, now $100, is bit more squat and -- in a brief test -- seems to sound better than its predecessor. The $150 Echo Plus, which resembles the original, incorporates gear you'd need to control a smart home. It ships with a white Philips Hue bulb (ordinarily $15) to get you started. Both new speakers ship in October, ahead of Apple's $350 HomePod Siri-powered speaker, due in December.
But that wasn't all: Alexa's coming to BMW cars next year. And Amazon made colorful light-up Echo Buttons (yes, buttons) that connect wirelessly with an Echo speaker to let you play buzz-in style games -- two for $20. "Can I have 'Amazon Everywhere' for $200, Alex?"
The launch event felt as though Amazon execs held a massive brainstorm about every place they could stick Alexa, then greenlit every idea. David Limp, Amazon's senior vice president of devices, assured me he'd actually said no to a lot.
Yet a spray-and-pray approach also reflects the unique challenges Amazon faces in its push into the home. Many of these devices introduce microphones, cameras and screens into intimate places like the bedroom. The products could fail if they get the details wrong. The otherwise adorable-looking Echo Spot, for example, doesn't have a mode that lets it perpetually show the time. (At least, it doesn't yet.) Instead, it displays news and "tips" from Amazon. Who wants an Amazon billboard by their bed? There's also a camera built in for video chats -- but do you have to remember to "mute" your Spot every night before bed?
And the usefulness of Alexa in the home ultimately depends on people upgrading all sorts of appliances, locks and lights with "smart home" internet connectivity. Until now, that's appealed mostly to geeks willing to put up with complexity, annoying installation and the risk of hacking.
Alexa works with 1,100 devices, according to Amazon, and the Echo Plus is designed to ease people into the smart-home world. Mr. Limp told me Amazon put a lot of effort into simplifying the set-up experience. Ask Alexa "discover my devices," and she'll do the rest. She's not just a member of the family -- she's also a personal shopper, a DJ, a video store clerk. . .and, now, a handyman.

Credit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler
