Hollywood is betting on fear.
Producers and studio chiefs say we're headed into a horror-movie boom, as they rush to sign big-ticket deals with top writers and directors in the genre and load their theatrical slates with scary thrillers.
Major studios including Paramount Pictures, Warner Bros. Pictures' New Line Cinema and Universal Pictures have recently poached A-list horror writers and directors and launched new divisions to bolster their spooky offerings.
Horror films -- which are typically made with much lower production budgets than superhero epics or science-fiction sagas -- have long operated on a boom-and-bust cycle. When a scary movie becomes an unlikely hit, studios will try to replicate that success by making a flurry of similar titles. Then comes the bust: Quality inevitably suffers and audiences get fatigued by how many mediocre scary movies are coming out, leading studios to pull back.
It happened after 2013's "The Conjuring" -- an exorcism thriller -- sold $320 million in tickets globally. Then it happened again with "Get Out," a supernatural commentary on racism, which did $256 million at the global box office in 2017, the same year that the demonic doll tale "Annabelle: Creation" did $307 million and creepy clown thriller "It" sold $705 million in tickets worldwide.
This year, horror is off to a strong start with "M3GAN," about a murderous doll animated by artificial intelligence. It was produced by Blumhouse Productions, a pioneer in taking low-budget horror movies and developing them into profitable franchises, including "Paranormal Activity," "Insidious," and "The Purge," and distributed by Universal Pictures.
The film has grossed $175 million worldwide since its Jan. 6 release, while "Scream VI," produced by Spyglass and Paramount, debuted in March to a franchise-high $44.5 million in domestic ticket sales for its opening weekend. Blumhouse founder and chief executive Jason Blum and James Wan, a horror director whose credits include "M3GAN" and "The Conjuring," both have first-look deals with Universal.
Studios plan to keep the momentum going with 29 more horror movies scheduled for release before the end of 2023, according to movie-industry tracker Comscore, although many of those will receive only limited or moderate release, meaning they will be shown in at most a few hundred theaters. During relatively quiet years, studios might give wide release to only one horror movie every few months.
"Every few years, an anonymous, obscure, cheap horror movie will come out of nowhere and overperform massively, and suddenly everyone jumps in," said Mr. Blum.
This past year, that sleeper appears to be "Smile," a spooky psychological thriller from first time writer-director Parker Finn about a doctor whose patients keep committing suicide after falling victim to a curse that contorts their faces into creepy grins. Paramount Pictures, which had initially planned to release it as a streaming-only title, decided at the last minute to put it in theaters, where it earned $217 million on a production budget of just $17 million, making it one of the studio's most profitable releases last year.
Paramount rewarded Mr. Finn, age 36, with a multiyear first-look production deal that was signed last month and includes a sequel that Mr. Finn is writing now. The filmmaker had toiled in Hollywood obscurity for about eight years before making the self-financed, festival-darling short film that would eventually become "Smile." Mr. Finn, whose father sold home-theater equipment in Ohio and brought home a steady stream of VHS tapes, has been a cinephile since a young age.
Since the success of "Smile," the studio has doubled down on horror even further, giving Walter Hamada, the former head of the DC Films superhero franchise at Warner Bros. Discovery Inc., a contract to make horror movies exclusively for Paramount under his 18hz production company.
Mr. Hamada said his goal is to make between two and four horror movies per year, each with a budget of between $15 million and $25 million. By contrast, Paramount has only given wide release to one or two horror films per year over the last decade.
"Horror movies tend to be kind of pure," Mr. Hamada said. Many directors are in the early parts of their careers and the genre doesn't generally rely on A-list actors, in part because stars' fame factormakes it harder for audiences to imagine themselves in the same scary situations the actors encounter, he said.
With the film exhibition business in a multiyear slump that was accelerated by the pandemic's cinema closures, producers want to make movies that audiences have more of an incentive to watch in theaters. Horror is one of a few genres that industry veterans say are custom-made to be watched on the big screen with a thumping sound system. Audiences prefer to be spooked in big groups, with adrenaline pumping, screams echoing, popcorn flying and couples clutching each other for safety.
"Horror can come in and out of vogue," said Donna Langley, chairwoman of Universal Pictures. "But the genre will continue to be a key part of the studio's slate strategy."
The genre generated $676 million in domestic ticket sales last year, or 9% of the North American box office, and $586 million, or 12.8% of the domestic box office in 2021, according to Comscore. A decade ago, horror movies represented just 5.8% of the domestic total, while in some recent years, that figure has fallen below 4%.
"There's a desire for escaping into a communal experience," said Mike De Luca, co-chair of Warner Bros. Pictures and a horror movie buff himself. "The bar for originality is just higher today."
Today's audiences demand smarter horror movies, he said, with innovative plots and richly developed characters, rather than the slasher gross-outs of the 1980s like "Blood Diner" or "The Slumber Party Massacre," or the endless remakes of classic tales like "Dracula" that seem to show up every few years.
If today's horror boom gives way to another bust, it might look something like the late 2000s, when Hollywood produced such bombs as "The Wolfman," from Universal. The 2010 film cost around $150 million to make, grossed $140 million and was widely panned by both critics and audiences for its over-the-top computer generated graphics. Some box office flops from that era, like 2006's "Slither," director James Gunn's homage to the low-budget zombie gross-outs, were well-reviewed and later became cult classics.
So what makes a good horror flick these days, anyway?
Directors, writers and producers insist that the scares are mostly the same as they ever were -- sadistic murderers, darkly lit hallways, dolls that move on their own, killers wearing hockey masks, shattered mirrors and spontaneous fires among them. But audiences demand more sophisticated writing and some connection to the social issues of the day.
One of 2022's critical darlings was "Barbarian," written and directed by sketch-comedy writer Zach Cregger and released by Walt Disney Co.'s 20th Century Studios, which was made for less than $5 million but went on to gross $45 million at the box office. The movie follows Tess Marshall, played by relatively unknown British actress Georgina Campbell, as she arrives in a rough corner of Detroit for a job interview.
Her Airbnb is double-booked, and she is wary of the man staying there. The plot takes a sudden turn in the second act, as the Airbnb's owner, a television actor accused of sexual assault, arrives to prepare the house for sale and discovers its lurid, mysterious past.
Richard Brener, president and chief creative officer of Warner Bros.' New Line Cinema, said the most dreaded word a studio can hear these days from audiences in a horror-movie test screening is "cheesy." The term -- which replaced "corny," the diss of choice from previous decades -- is shorthand for artificial, not scary or any other situation that feels unrealistic.
Mr. Brener said he loved "Barbarian" so much that he watched it six times. "'Barbarian' really kept you on your toes. It had this really smart lead character, and through her, Zach told the audience, 'I know what you're thinking, but I'm not going to put another dumb character in the basement,'" Mr. Brener said.
Mr. Cregger told Mr. Brener in a meeting that women have to be on the lookout for red flags that men don't always see, and that female perspective was an idea he tried to develop as a major source of terror in the movie.
The studio paid Mr. Cregger around $10 million, people familiar with the matter say, for the right to distribute his next movie -- titled "Weapons" -- and signed him up to produce two additional films for the studio after that. Mr. Cregger declined to comment through his talent agent.
Ms. Campbell, who played the lead role in "Barbarian," said she believes the movie was successful in large part because it doesn't rely too heavily on computer-generated effects.
For example, when one character is killed by having his head bashed against a wall, the shoot called for three separate life-size models of his head in various states of bloodiness. In another scene that was eventually cut from the movie, the actor playing a deformed, inbred character known as "Mother" force-feeds co-star Justin Long bits of chewed up prosciutto from his mouth, imitating the flesh of a rat. Ms. Campbell said the shoot was a lot of fun.
The scariest movie of all time, according to a study conducted last year by the British internet service ratings firm Broadband Choices, is three-year-old indie film "Host," which was filmed entirely using Zoom videoconferencing software during the Covid-19 lockdowns.
While watching, viewers' average resting heart rate rose from 64 beats per minute to 88. During its scariest moments, involving attacks by evil spirits summoned by a medium during a Zoom call, audience heart rates spiked to 130 beats per minute. The fastest heart rates recorded by the study were 133 beats per minute, which happened when viewers saw the scary scenes in 2010's haunted-house thriller "Insidious."
Horror audiences are becoming smarter and more demanding in part because they are growing to include more general-interest moviegoers and more women, said Alison Peirse, a film studies professor at the University of Northumbria in Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.
Historians of scary films have identified the trope of the "Final Girl" -- the one female character who lives to tell the movie's terrifying story by either thwarting the killer or being saved by a male authority figure. For much of the genre's history, final girls have been virginal, sober and well-behaved -- which critics of the genre say suggests that promiscuity, drug and alcohol use and unconventional behavior lead to death.
Some surveys still show that the genre leans male, but Comscore has found that for the last decade, horror audiences have split by gender roughly 50-50. Older audiences have grown significantly: Horror viewers aged 25 and up went from 41% of the market in 2012 to 57% last year, and over-30s went from 28% to 38% over the same period.
"I love those slasher films from the 1980s and my middle-aged female friends and I watch them and howl with laughter, but there is a nagging sense that a girl isn't just a wife or a sexy girlfriend anymore, and that it isn't OK anymore to just have topless girls who get stabbed to death," Ms. Peirse said.
The highest-grossing horror movie of 2022, "Smile," almost didn't show in theaters at all.
The movie was slated to be released on the nascent streaming service Paramount+, but a corporate reshuffling at Paramount in the spring of 2022 left the movie without a champion at the studio.
The new leaders of Paramount Players, the division producing "Smile," decided to do a test screening. Audiences loved it, so the film was sent to studio chief Brian Robbins, who watched it at his home alone on a Saturday morning.
"It scared the daylights out of me," Mr. Robbins said.
Paramount hastily ordered up another test screening, then decided to pull the movie out of the direct-to-streaming pipeline. The studio launched an all-out marketing campaign that included strategically placing the movie's stars behind home plate during several nationally televised baseball games with their trademark psychotic smiles plastered on their faces.
Mr. Finn, the writer-director, said that his goal in making the film was to use tension and fear to provoke a physical reaction in audiences.
"When you suddenly find marionette strings attached to you, and the movie is jerking those strings . . . that, to me, is when a horror movie is truly successful," he said.
Mr. Blum, with partner company Morgan Creek, closed a $400 million deal in 2021 to produce three movies based on the same story behind the 1973 chiller "The Exorcist" for Universal, the first of which comes out in October. He said he expects that consumers will see a "huge increase" in the next two years in the volume of wide-release horror movies, but that most of them will be low quality.
During horror boom cycles, he said, studios make too many films and rush them to market.
"If it were easy to make a commercially successful, wide-release horror movie," Mr. Blum said. "I would make more than four a year."
---
Scared Ya
Producer Jason Blum's list of the top 11 classic horror film scares that moviemakers today still use.
-- A door opening or closing on its own shows paranormal activity.
-- Anything hitting a car.
-- Inanimate objects that move on their own, such as furniture or children's toys, like Chucky in 'Child's Play.'
-- Birds hitting a window of a house symbolize bad luck.
-- Lights that go out or flicker set the scene for a big scare or signify death.
-- Mirrors breaking reveal invisible demonic forces and foreshadow violence.
-- Fire starting on its own.
-- Dark hallways beckon a victim to passageways of terror.
-- Masked killers highlight the contrast between childish face-paint and violence.
-- Someone hiding in a closet, like in 'Carrie.'
-- Possession, or the idea a spirit or curse can control a person.
Credit: By Robbie Whelan
