Did I see climate warrior Greta Thunberg wearing a kaffiyeh? Sure enough, there she was last month in a mob screaming "Shame on you!" outside the Eurovision Song Contest, where an Israeli performer competed. Welcome to the Omnicause. If you protest one thing, you protest everything -- intersectional inanity. Like Queers for Palestine, which makes as much sense as "Chickens for KFC." Fortunately, the Omnicause is beginning to collapse under the weight of its logical fallacies.
Viewed through the lens of oppression, every cause is linked, summing up the stupidity of all the Kaffiyeh Karens and Activist Aidans at campus protests. Protesters spraypainted "F--- Amerikkka" at Stanford University this month. The oppression-studies majors can't even spell.
Antiwar is one thing, but the colonizer claptrap is unbearable. Segments of the Omnicause are usually anticapitalism, antigrowth or pro-world-government. Climate hysteria scores a perfect trifecta. Using twisted logic, socialism is apparently the cure for racism. But the backlash is enabling a political move to the right in Europe, South America and, if polls are to be believed, the U.S.
So why the Omnicause? My theory is that society is afflicted with a bad case of affluenza. Life has become too easy. We google and use artificial intelligence instead of thinking, shoot up Ozempic instead of exercising, and rely on ObamaCare instead of working. Even the well-off need to complain about something, so they complain about everything.
Many of these protester layabouts are entitled -- dare I say spoiled -- and don't bother to understand what they are protesting. They demand student-loan forgiveness and a universal basic income, which many already receive from their parents. You see it everywhere: Johnny not working, Janie in a daddy-funded apartment trying to become an influencer. Plenty of time for protests.
And really, why work and improve the world by delivering goods and services people want? Protests are much more fun. It's a form of "me time" -- feed your head. Work is so, you know, capitalist. Protests are something to do.
But here's an inconvenient truth. These causes aren't always that tightly connected. On June 2, Free Palestine protesters blocked the Philadelphia Pride March, whose participants probably wouldn't entertain a semester abroad in Riyadh or Tehran, much less Gaza. Like the Jacobins, progressives are eating their own. It's a crash at the intersection.
Sure enough, the Omnicause is beginning to unravel as hidden agendas are revealed. With few exceptions, you don't see many left-leaning Jews at pro-Hamas rallies waving "From the River to the Sea" or "This is Genocide" flags. I visited Auschwitz last fall and walked along the train tracks leading to the ruins of the gas chambers. Rwanda saw genocide in 1994. Killing human-shielding terrorists after dropping leaflets to warn civilians isn't genocide. But that doesn't stop purple-haired Penelope Protester from parroting colonial oppressor Marxist drivel -- a patsy in someone else's political power play.
Then there are the genocidal-adjacent types. A National Park Service biologist wrote that humans "have become a plague upon ourselves and upon the Earth." Climate scientist Bill McGuire tweeted (and then deleted): "The only realistic way I see emissions falling as fast as they need to, to avoid catastrophic climate breakdown, is the culling of the human population by a pandemic with a very high fatality rate." Always remember this saying: "You are the carbon they wish to eliminate."
Anticapitalism is best expressed by the "diversity, equity and inclusion" movement, which is in a long-overdue decline. Adam B. Coleman wrote last year in the New York Post that DEI was "an employment opportunity for ideological and mediocre college graduates with undesirable degrees, a career avenue for wanderlust executive types and a ploy to siphon money from corporate budgets while producing nothing of substance." These are the jobs all the underskilled Omnicause protesters aspire to fill.
Too late. Zoom and Snap are the latest to cut DEI jobs. Harvard's Faculty of Arts and Sciences no longer requires DEI statements from prospective employees. The trustees of the University of North Carolina have closed DEI departments across 17 campuses, affecting 686 workers and a $90 million budget. UNC-Chapel Hill gave $2.3 million of the savings to campus police.
It's eight weeks until the Democratic National Convention in Chicago, where the tear gas from 1968 is a distant memory revived through black-and-white footage. We've heard the revolution will not be televised, but it will certainly be TikToked. Chicago 2024 will bring out all the green-preening, capitalist-hating, oppression-obsessed, paper-straw-sipping, police-defunding, meat-shaming, parent-enabled, underemployed Marxist Omnicausers. If you fall for their nonsense (if I may steal from Greta and friends), shame on you.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: What the Flight 93 Memorial Can Teach Us" -- WSJ July 2, 2024)
Credit: By Andy Kessler
