TOKYO -- Stacks of cardboard boxes serve as makeshift partitions at Mistletoe Inc.'s new office in Tokyo's posh Aoyama district, where startups gather to work on their latest projects.
The do-it-yourself vibe -- a far cry from the stuffiness typical of Japanese corporate offices -- is something founder Taizo Son, serial entrepreneur and youngest brother of SoftBank Group Corp. founder Masayoshi Son, wants to see more of.
"Japan has the talent and funds but lacks the necessary ecosystem to create its own Silicon Valley, so that's what we're trying to provide," said Mr. Son, 43, who describes Mistletoe as a program to cofound new businesses.
The nation that created the Walkman and the bullet train now finds its once-dominant technology industry struggling, and Japan is counting on entrepreneurs to rekindle its hobbling economy and catch up with innovation in other parts of the world.
The government is pledging to fund startups, top universities have launched incubators and venture funds to promote innovation and even Japan's oldest and largest conglomerates, such as the Mitsubishi and Mitsui groups, are looking to nurture entrepreneurs.
Some startups have reached prominence in recent years. Euglena Co., a producer of microalgae with food and environmental applications that launched in 2005 and went public in 2012, has a market capitalization of more than $1 billion.
Mercari Inc., operator of a peer-to-peer shopping app launched in 2013, raised around $75 million, valuing it at over $1 billion.
But venture-capital investments in Japan last year totaled just $629 million, according to AVCJ Research, compared with $59.1 billion in the U.S., according to the National Venture Capital Association.
Many Japanese prefer to work as salaried employees at a company, resulting in fewer people choosing to become entrepreneurs, those in the tech industry say. Even as the travails of giants like Toshiba Corp. and Sharp Corp. show there is no security in size, there remains a deeply ingrained cultural reverence toward large companies.
Take Yoshiyuki Taguchi, a 22-year-old intern at Slush Asia, an offshoot of a popular Finnish event that brings together entrepreneurs, tech talent and investors.
While he wanted to continue with Slush after graduation, his family insisted he join a "listed, famous" company. After arguing for a month, he took a job with a large human resources firm.
Antti Sonninen, chief executive of Slush Asia, said Japan needs more entrepreneurs-turned-investors to serve as role models.
"Those guys can give the best advice on how to build the next-generation, world-changing companies," he said.
That is what Mr. Son is attempting to do through Mistletoe, which supports startup-education programs and pitch events -- where entrepreneurs try to sell their ideas to investors -- while working with ventures to find solutions to problems in areas from transportation to Japan's aging population.
Mr. Son identifies himself with the first generation of Japanese entrepreneurs that launched startups during the dot-com boom of the late 1990s. Fundraising then was a nightmare, he recalled, with significantly less money available for entrepreneurs and banks reluctant to lend to unknown businesses.
A lot has changed since then. Today's entrepreneurs can point to the success of some of those unknown businesses -- the likes of e-commerce company Rakuten Inc. and mobile Internet operation DeNA Ltd. have become household names in Japan, if not world-wide.
The number of companies going public reached an eight-year high last year at 98, around two-thirds of which listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange's Mothers market for high-growth startups, according to the Japan Exchange Group.
Mr. Son's startup successes include Yahoo Japan, which he helped launch in 1996 while still a student at the University of Tokyo, and which now runs Japan's largest portal site, and GungHo Online Entertainment Inc., which produces top-grossing videogames like Puzzle & Dragons.
His mission now is to relay his decades of experience to a new generation of entrepreneurs.
Mistletoe's 1,300-square-meter "startup studio" offers participants workspace and the assistance of a staff that includes experts in fields ranging from artificial intelligence to industrial design.
"It can be hard to attract the necessary talent to launch a startup, so we work with them and provide advice," he said.
Tenants include Fove Inc., which is developing an eye-tracking virtual reality headset. Mistletoe also is investing in roughly 20 startups, including Fomm Corp., which is making affordable, compact-electric vehicles that can move on water -- aimed at flood-prone markets like Thailand and Indonesia.
The next step would be a successful product release.
"There's a lot of support in Japan available for launching startups, but what's important is to establish structures for businesses to commercialize innovation," said Atsuko Nomura, senior researcher at the Japan Research Institute. "That's where large companies could come in, but we're not seeing enough of that."
With the advent of the Internet of Things -- a network of devices connected to the Internet -- Mr. Son says there is big potential for Japan, a country that has traditionally excelled in producing hardware.
"Japan's large, established companies are still home to very powerful, innovative technologies, but they are risk-averse compared with startups that have nothing to lose," he said. "The way for Japan to develop its own unique ecosystem is to have them both coexist and cooperate, and we'd like to be that bridge."
Credit: By Alexander Martin
