What does the future hold for the internet giants of today -- and the companies that will rise to prominence down the road?
The Wall Street Journal's editor in chief, Gerard Baker, spoke with Yuri Milner, the founder of technology-investment firm DST Global and co-creator of prizes to honor scientific achievements and reinvigorate the search for life in space. Here are edited excerpts of the discussion.
MR. MILNER: It's not a secret that the internet as an investment class did very well in the last 10 years. I just wanted to reflect on some of the reasons why and make predictions on how well this asset class will do in the next 10 years.
There is common knowledge about why this specific asset class is so powerful. There is no need for physical infrastructure. All the heavy lifting has been already done: low operating costs, global distribution networks, viral capabilities to distribute products and a very fast product-development cycle.
I wanted to focus on two more reasons.
Internet companies spend dramatically more on R&D per dollar of revenue. The second reason is that internet companies have been extremely successful in attracting and retaining talent. All of those reasons lead to value creation. But we asked, what's going to happen in the next 10 years?
And you only need to make some relatively conservative assumptions to come up with a significant number. What percentage of consumption is happening online, the number is only 6% globally. We believe that in the next seven to eight years, this number will more than double. That means that there will be an additional $4 trillion created in that space.
MR. BAKER: What could change that trajectory?
MR. MILNER: It looks like that's how innovation is taking place in the 21st century. The internet is enabling innovation. In the last maybe 20 years new companies were more successful in capturing this opportunity. And these companies over time became big companies.
MR. BAKER: These companies are enormously dominant. Their scale is extraordinary. Apple approaching a trillion dollars of market cap. Google. Facebook. How concerned should we be about the domination in all kinds of things?
MR. MILNER: The key question we all collectively need to ask is, what is best for consumers? What is best for all of us? Let's also not forget that these companies became big in a mostly organic way. There was not a significant amount of M&A happening.
MR. BAKER: You're comfortable right now that the concentration that we're seeing is not fundamentally either anticompetitive or harmful to the consumer?
MR. MILNER: Obviously, there has to be a balance. Governments are looking for ways to find this balance. What I would like to focus on and what I do focus on is what value these companies can bring to all of us in the future.
As I mentioned, the sector really dominates in R&D spend. If we focus on the biggest projects that require many billions of dollars in funding -- like, for example, virtual reality or artificial intelligence -- those projects require an enormous amount of capital. They require computation. They require server capacity. And I think we all have an intrinsic interest in those projects getting funded. So what I'm saying is that in order for all of us to reap the benefits of AI, for example, as soon as possible we need a certain amount of concentration of capital so that those projects get funded.
MR. BAKER: Can China go on, in political terms and from an investment perspective, to continue to develop its own separate internet companies? And Facebook and everybody else will just have to deal with the rest of the world?
MR. MILNER: The interesting byproduct of these massive companies that have been created is that the employees and the founders of those companies, obviously they reap the benefits of the success. And the byproduct of this is the creation of a very vibrant angel community.
From the angel community follows a VC community. And then a VC community is followed by growth stage, late stage and then public stage [companies]. In order to create a Silicon Valley-type phenomenon, an angel community is critical. And an angel community is really very dependent on those massive success stories. So that's how the cycle gets going.
MR. BAKER: Our opening poll question was about finding intelligent life. Some people would be happy if we found more intelligent life on Earth first rather than finding intelligent life in the rest of the universe. You've got a very strong interest in this. You've put up money for a prize. Why is this something you regard as so important?
MR. MILNER: We should be looking beyond the horizon. I truly believe that we collectively as a civilization should allocate a small fraction of our resources to try to solve existential questions. "Are we alone in the universe?" is one of those existential questions.
Credit: By Gerard Baker
