WASHINGTON -- U.S. adversaries have targeted Spanish-language speakers and other minority groups in efforts to influence the presidential election, seeking to fan internal social divisions and elevate their favored candidate through disinformation and propaganda.
Russia and Iran have attempted in recent months to focus on specific slices of the electorate to influence voters toward their preferred outcome, according to U.S. intelligence officials and disinformation researchers.
Aided by artificial intelligence, Iran has created websites that pose as legitimate, local news sources to target both Muslim and Black populations in the U.S., including in swing states, experts said, though they appear to attract minimal readers.
In a far more significant effort, Russia has invested heavily in overt and covert efforts to create Spanish-language content, which officials and experts said have grown considerably since Moscow sought to influence the last two presidential elections.
"Russia sees Spanish speakers as a very appealing audience, including in the U.S., where there are opportunities to make inroads," says Valerie Wirtschafter, a fellow at the Brookings Institution who has tracked Moscow's efforts to target Spanish speakers.
Vice President Kamala Harris and former President Donald Trump are both courting Latino voters in their race for the presidency, with both making campaign stops Thursday in the battleground states of Nevada and Arizona.
Moscow favors Trump, while Tehran prefers Harris to win, according to U.S. intelligence agencies. The two U.S. adversaries have denied attempting to meddle in the U.S. election.
Recent efforts by U.S. agencies and some social-media companies to identify and dismantle foreign operations to target minority voter groups have underscored how much the tactics have evolved since 2016. In that campaign year, Russia spammed social media with posts denigrating Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton. Russia's 2016 efforts included attempts to suppress turnout for Black Americans, a strong Democratic constituency.
The proliferation of fake websites, expansion to new platforms like TikTok, and popularity of messaging apps such as WhatsApp in these communities have made foreign state-linked content ubiquitous and more challenging to track. The relative lack of moderation of non-English content on social media also makes it difficult to stem the spread of disinformation.
One such effort is Head-Post, which publishes daily content about U.S. politics in both English and Spanish. Its Spanish website lists two names identified as reporters with what appear to be AI-generated headshots. Neither author, both of whom have pumped out thousands of posts since last year, has a record of writing for other publications. A significant fraction of them promoted Trump's campaign promises and amplified his allies, especially billionaire Elon Musk.
Head-Post on its website claims to be headquartered in Coventry, England. According to a confidential assessment by Microsoft seen by The Wall Street Journal, Head-Post uses overlapping fake personas and content-distribution networks previously tied to NewsFront, a site the U.S. has said is guided by Russia's Federal Security Service, or FSB. NewsFront has been taken off social-media platforms and had its domain removed in August 2023. Five days later, Head-Post was created. Head-Post didn't respond to a request for comment.
While the sites generally brought in little traffic, Russia has also been able to capitalize on the sprawling Spanish-language media operation its state broadcasters have built in recent years, according to U.S. officials and independent analysts. These outlets, including RT en Espanol and Sputnik Mundo, target a demographic of 600 million Spanish speakers who rank among the globe's most active media consumers -- including the 40 million Americans who speak Spanish at home. RT has said publicly that it has hundreds of Spanish-speaking employees and reaches tens of millions of Spanish speakers worldwide.
The rapid expansion of Kremlin-linked Spanish media following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, and its ability to directly reach Americans, has alarmed U.S. officials and lawmakers. A bipartisan group of U.S. senators warned in 2022 that the Russian content in Latin America can "regularly reach Spanish-speaking communities in the United States, directly harming our national interests."
As of June 2023, at least 10% of the traffic to RT en Espanol was coming from the U.S., according to an analysis by the Bulgaria-based Center for the Study of Democracy. But its reach is likely much broader, given that it licenses its content to hundreds of cash-strapped outlets in Latin America free.
Ahead of the 2024 election, Russia also sought to reach younger Spanish-speaking audiences on new platforms. Engagement for TikTok posts in Spanish from Russia-linked accounts doubled in 2024, according to the Brookings Institution, a Washington-based think tank.
The posts included criticism of Biden's Israel and Ukraine policies, questions about his age and fitness, and promotion of Tucker Carlson's coverage of Russia. Among the 30 most popular TikTok videos focused on U.S. politics posted in the first three months this year, 22 were posted by Russia's Spanish-language accounts, according to Brookings.
Credit: By Dustin Volz and Vera Bergengruen
