Pinterest Inc.'s longtime chief executive is stepping down and a Google commerce executive is taking over the top job, the social-media company said Tuesday.
Ben Silbermann, who co-founded Pinterest in 2010 and served as its CEO ever since, is transitioning to executive chairman of the board, a newly created position. His replacement, Bill Ready, comes from Alphabet Inc.'s Google, where he had been president of commerce since 2020. Mr. Ready, who earlier in his career was operating chief of PayPal Holdings Inc. and before that CEO of Venmo, has also joined Pinterest's board as a director, the company said.
"The decision is driven by what I think is best for Pinterest," Mr. Silbermann, 39 years old, said of the executive changes in an interview with The Wall Street Journal, adding that he's looking forward to having more time to focus on consumers' unmet needs and emerging products. "Bill's actually going to be a better CEO than I am for this next chapter."
Pinterest shares rose more than 5% in early after-hours trading following the news.
The passing of the baton follows similar moves by other tech company founders in recent years, including Amazon.com Inc.'s Jeff Bezos, Twitter Inc.'s Jack Dorsey and JD.com Inc.'s Richard Liu. It comes as tech stocks are in the midst of their biggest rout in more than a decade.
Mr. Ready, 42, joins Pinterest as the company is seeking to boost revenue beyond its initial advertising-centric model to include e-commerce initiatives. The company partnered with Shopify Inc. in 2020, giving its users the ability to purchase products they find on its image-sharing platform by clicking on a link to a merchant's website. Last month, Pinterest acquired the startup the Yes, an artificial-intelligence platform that customizes the fashion-shopping experience for users.
Pinterest faces challenges in this area, though, as online consumer spending has lately been on the decline. Census Bureau data show foot traffic to bricks-and-mortar stores has rebounded since vaccines and booster shots became widely available and the worst waves of the virus receded. Sales slowed at many digital storefronts specializing in apparel, home furnishings and other categories where many consumers prefer to see in-person and touch what they are buying.
Mr. Ready says he isn't deterred. "Even as consumers are returning to spending more time in the physical world, digital engagement remains significantly elevated," he said. For many people, "the shopping journey starts online, regardless of whether they finish digitally or in store."
Pinterest, he added, is poised to make a significant dent in the e-commerce landscape because its users already come to its platform to get inspiration and take action on a range of projects, such as planning weddings, completing home renovations and creating recipes. "The user is coming with a high amount of intent and I think that is quite unique in the ecosystem," Mr. Ready said
Last year, PayPal backed out of talks to buy Pinterest after the payments company's shareholders balked. PayPal owns Venmo, another payments service.
Generate image description

Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
