A big day for Alphabet and other tech stocks helped lift major indexes, getting markets off to a strong start ahead of the Federal Reserve's rate decision this week.
Alphabet shares surged 4.6%, and Apple shares rose 0.6%, after a Bloomberg report that Google's Gemini artificial-intelligence engine could be used in Apple's iPhone. Nvidia shares ticked up 0.7% ahead of the company's unveiling of its latest generation of computing chips.
Tesla's stock jumped 6.3%, though it was still down 30% for the year.
The gains helped lift the S&P 500 0.6%, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite advanced 0.8% and the Dow Jones Industrial Average added 0.2%. All three indexes had slipped last week after inflation data came in hotter than expected.
It wasn't just tech stocks that fared well. Nine out of the 11 sectors of the S&P 500 finished in the green. The Russell 2000, however, edged down slightly, reflecting some weakness in shares of smaller companies.
"The big thing that we're seeing is that the market is not afraid of Fed hawkishness," said Steve Englander, head of global G-10 FX research and North America macro strategy at Standard Chartered.
The Fed on Wednesday is widely expected to keep interest rates steady at the conclusion of its two-day policy meeting. But investors have some concern about what the central bank could signal about the prospects for rate cuts later this year after two straight months of firmer-than-expected inflation data.
Along with its rate decision, the Fed will release its dot plot, in which officials anonymously forecast where they think rates will be over the next few years.
The Fed's last dot plot in December showed a median forecast of three 0.25 percentage point rate cuts this year, reflecting a view that slowing inflation could allow for easier monetary policy. This time, some analysts such as Englander believe that the forecast will shift to two cuts in 2024.
Matthew Tuttle, chief executive officer of Tuttle Capital Management, said he wasn't betting against stocks at this point but was exercising caution ahead of the Fed meeting.
He expects that "there won't be any bullish surprise out of that meeting" but there could be a negative surprise.
For the year, the S&P 500 is up 8%.
While stocks were resilient Monday, speculation about higher-for-longer interest rates did weigh on bond prices.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note settled at 4.339%, according to Tradeweb, edging up from 4.303% Friday to mark its highest closing level of the year.
Front-month ICE Brent crude for May delivery gained $1.55, or 1.8%, to $86.89 a barrel.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.2%. At midday Tuesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.4% ahead of the Bank of Japan's interest-rate decision. Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 0.8%, while the Shanghai Composite was off 0.1%. S&P 500 futures were down 0.1%.
Credit: By Sam Goldfarb
