[First in a Series]
Clint Hinote returned from a deployment in Baghdad in the spring of 2018 to a new assignment and a staggering realization.
A classified Pentagon wargame simulated a Chinese push to take control of the South China Sea. The Air Force officer, charged with plotting the service's future, learned that China's well-stocked missile force had rained down on the bases and ports the U.S. relied on in the region, turning American combat aircraft and munitions into smoldering ruins in days.
"My response was, 'Holy crap. We are going to lose if we fight like this,'" he recalled.
The officer, now a lieutenant general, began posting sticky notes on the walls of his closet-size office at the Pentagon, listing the problems to solve if the military was to have a chance of blunting a potential attack from China.
"I did not have an idea how to resolve them," said Lt. Gen. Hinote. "I was struck how quickly China had advanced, and how our long-held doctrines about warfare were becoming obsolete."
Five years ago, after decades fighting insurgencies in the Middle East and Central Asia, the U.S. started tackling a new era of great-power competition with China and Russia. It isn't yet ready, and there are major obstacles in the way.
Despite an annual defense budget that has risen to more than $800 billion, the shift has been delayed by a preoccupation with the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the pursuit of big-ticket weapons that didn't pan out, internal U.S. government debates over budgets and disagreement over the urgency of the threat from Beijing, according to current and former U.S. defense officials and commanders. Continuing concerns in the Mideast, especially about Iran, and the Russian invasion of Ukraine have absorbed attention and resources.
Corporate consolidation across the defense industry has left the Pentagon with fewer arms manufacturers. Shipyards are struggling to produce the submarines the Navy says it needs to counter China's larger naval fleet, and weapon designers are rushing to catch up with China and Russia in developing superfast hypersonic missiles.
When the Washington think tank the Center for Strategic and International Studies ran a wargame last year that simulated a Chinese amphibious attack on Taiwan, the U.S. side ran out of long-range anti-ship cruise missiles within a week.
The military is struggling to meet recruitment goals, with Americans turned off by the long conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, potentially leaving the all-volunteer force short of manpower. Plans to position more forces within striking range of China are still a work in progress. The Central Intelligence Agency, after two decades of conducting paramilitary operations against insurgents and terrorists, is moving away from those areas to focus more on its core mission of espionage.
The U.S. military's success in the Mideast and Afghanistan came in part from air superiority, a less well-equipped foe and the ability to control the initiation of the war. A conflict with China would be very different. The U.S. would be fighting with its Asian bases and ports under attack and would need to support forces over long and potentially vulnerable supply routes.
If a conflict with China gave Russia the confidence to take further action in Eastern Europe, the U.S. and its allies would need to fight a two-front war. China and Russia are both nuclear powers. Action could extend to the Arctic, where the U.S. lags behind Russia in icebreakers and ports as Moscow appears ready to welcome Beijing's help in the region.
This article is the first in a series examining the challenges faced by America's military as it enters a new international era.
The U.S. military is still more capable than its main adversaries. The Chinese have their own obstacles in developing the capability to carry out a large-scale amphibious assault, while the weaknesses of Russia's military have been exposed in Ukraine. But a defense of Taiwan would require U.S. forces, which are also tasked with deterring conflict in Europe and the Middle East, to operate over enormous distances and within range of China's firepower.
The threat is mounting. Beijing has in recent years shifted the security terrain in its favor in the areas around China. In the South China Sea, it has built artificial islands and fortified them with military installations to assert control over the strategic waterway and deny the U.S. Navy freedom to roam.
Decades of ever bigger military budgets, including a 7% boost in spending this year, have improved the lethality of China's air force, missiles and submarines, and better training has created a more modern force from what was once a military of rural recruits. China is developing weapons and other capabilities to destroy an opponent's satellites, the Pentagon says, and its cyberhacking presents a threat to infrastructure.
The CIA said President Xi Jinping has set 2027 as a deadline for the Chinese military to be ready to carry out a Taiwan invasion, though it said Mr. Xi and the military have doubts whether Beijing could currently do so.
A China in control of the South China Sea and Taiwan would hold sway over waters through which trillions of dollars in trade passes each year. It would also command supplies of advanced semiconductors, threaten the security of U.S. allies such as Japan and challenge American pre-eminence in a part of the world it has dominated since World War II.
In its efforts to meet the new challenge, the Pentagon has expanded its access to bases in the Philippines and Japan while shrinking the U.S. military footprint in the Middle East. New tactics have been devised to disperse U.S. forces and make them less of an inviting target for China's missiles.
The Pentagon's annual budget for research and development has been boosted to $140 billion -- an all time high. The military is pursuing cutting-edge technology it hopes will enable the military services to share targeting data instantaneously so that U.S. air, land, sea and space forces, operating over thousands of miles, can act in unison, a current challenge.
"This is a massive problem to dig out of," said Eric Wesley, a retired Army lieutenant general who served as the deputy commanding general of the Army Futures Command, which oversees that service's transformation. "We are in a vulnerable period where we are pursuing this deterrence capability and their time is running out."
Chris Meagher, a top Pentagon spokesman, said that Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin was directly overseeing the implementation of the U.S. defense strategy to counter China and that the department's forthcoming spending request would advance the effort.
"The challenge posed by the PRC is real, but this Department is tackling it in historic ways with urgency and confidence," he said, referring to the People's Republic of China. "We are continuing our work developing new operational concepts, deploying cutting-edge capabilities, and making investments now and for the long term to meet the challenges we face."
A little more than a generation ago, the U.S. looked unassailable. The collapse of the Soviet Union and the rapid success of the U.S.-led Desert Storm campaign to evict Saddam Hussein's troops from Kuwait in 1991 demonstrated Washington's ability to wage a new type of war, using precision-guided munitions and stealth technology to vanquish regional dangers.
By the mid-1990s, strategists at the Pentagon's in-house think tank saw trouble ahead. By using long-range missiles, antisatellite weapons and electronic warfare, Beijing could turn the tables on Washington by attacking the bases and ports the U.S. relied on in the western Pacific to project power, potentially keeping the Americans far from the conflict.
The U.S. planned to skip a generation of technology and move to advanced tools, such as long-range weapons, sensors and data-sharing technology to counter Beijing's "anti-access" strategy.
Then the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks changed the threat, and the Pentagon's mission.
"There was a moment when we thought 'Huzzah, the transformation of the force is actually going to happen,'" said Jeff McKitrick, who worked at the Pentagon think tank and is now a researcher with the Institute for Defense Analyses, a Pentagon-supported research center. "Then 9/11 came and everybody focused like a laser beam on the global war on terror."
Soon this became the mission of Gen. Hinote, then a major, as well. He was known by the call sign "Q," after the fictional character in the James Bond stories who runs the spy service's gadget lab, because of his skill in programming the radars and sensors of fighter jets. At the outset of the 2003 Iraq war, he was assigned to a squadron of "stealthy" F-117 fighter jets.
He helped plan the operation to strike at targets in Baghdad and disable the air defenses of Saddam Hussein's forces. "We had a really good plan for taking down the Iraqi communications infrastructure, leadership infrastructure and what we thought were the weapons of mass destruction," he said. "China learned from that."
As the U.S. wars in Iraq and Afghanistan dragged on, the top U.S. Air Force officer in Japan warned that China's air defenses were becoming impenetrable to all but the most sophisticated U.S. fighters.
In 2011, Congress and the White House agreed to multiyear spending limits known as sequestration to curb the federal deficit. The move forced a series of across-the-board cuts and hampered initiatives to transform the military, including on artificial intelligence, robotics, autonomous systems and advanced manufacturing.
In 2018, the Pentagon issued a National Defense Strategy saying the U.S. would prepare for a new world of "great power competition."
Deterring China from invading Taiwan, a longstanding U.S. partner that Beijing claims as Chinese territory, defines the challenge. Allowing China to take Taiwan, just 100 miles from the Chinese mainland, and then trying to wrest it back, Pentagon officials concluded, would involve the U.S. in a protracted fight and might spur China to escalate to nuclear weapons. The U.S. needed to demonstrate it could prevent Beijing from seizing the island in the first place -- a requirement included in the Biden administration's National Defense Strategy issued in 2022.
In 2019, Gen. Hinote, using his new authority in the Air Force's future war office, organized another classified wargame. The simulation postulated a Chinese attack on Taiwan and assessed how two U.S. forces might fare in contesting it: an "outside force" made up entirely of long-range U.S. bombers and missiles, and an "inside force" of aircraft, ships and troops that would fight within the range of Chinese planes and missiles.
The conclusion was that neither approach would succeed on its own. "We needed a mix to protect Taiwan and Japan," he said. "Ever since, we have been gaming, simulating and experimenting to determine that mix."
A more recent wargame conducted by the Pentagon's Joint Staff showed the U.S. could stymie a Chinese invasion of Taiwan and force a stalemate if the conflict was fought later in the decade, although high casualties on both sides would result. That simulation assumed the U.S. would have the benefit of new weapons, tactics and military deployments that are currently being planned at the Pentagon.
To prepare for the future, the Marine Corps has gotten rid of its tanks and is reinventing itself as a naval infantry force that would attack Chinese ships from small islands in the western Pacific. A new Marine littoral regiment, which operates close to the shore and will be equipped with anti-ship missiles, is to be based in Okinawa by 2025.
The Army, which saw its electronic warfare, short-range air defense and engineering capabilities atrophy amid budget pressures and the previous decades' wars, is moving to develop new weapons systems that can strike targets at much longer ranges. It is planning to deploy a new hypersonic missile in the fall though its utility against Chinese forces will depend on securing basing rights in the Pacific.
The Navy, which is confronting budget pressures, personnel shortages and limits to American shipbuilding capacity, is currently planning to expand its fleet to at least 355 crewed ships, a size still smaller than China's current navy. In the near term, the U.S. will have around 290 ships.
The Air Force, which has one of the oldest and smallest inventory of aircraft in its 75-year history, has rolled out the first B-21 bomber and is pursuing the capability to pair piloted warplanes with fleets of drones. It has tested a new hypersonic missile that will be fired from fighter aircraft, and developed plans to disperse its planes among a wider range of bases in the Pacific.
Decades-old B-52s are being refurbished to fill out the bomber fleet. The service has decided to buy the E-7 command aircraft -- originally produced by Australia -- and is procuring advanced weapons to attack Chinese invasion forces.
At times, the pace has been slower than Gen. Hinote would have liked. "As we began to push for change, we lost most of the budget battles," he said. "There is more sense of urgency now, but we know how far we have to go."
The general has pushed to equip cargo planes with cruise missiles to boost allied firepower, the use of high-altitude balloons to carry sensors and electric "flying cars" to carry people and equipment throughout the Pacific island chains -- ideas that have led to experiments but so far no procurement decisions.
He thinks a future Air Force could rely more on autonomous, uncrewed aircraft and deploy fewer fighters. "When push comes to shove and you have to decide if you are going to field unmanned vehicles, or keep flying old aircraft, we've never made that decision," he said.
"I think we've got a recipe for blunting" a Chinese attack, he said. "I just think you have to reinvent your force to do it."
Credit: By Michael R. Gordon
