[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Investors have been treating Broadcom like the next Nvidia. They forgot about the iPhone.
Broadcom's market value has more than doubled over the past year, and its stock has been the third-biggest gainer on the PHLX Semiconductor Index in that time behind Nvidia and Advanced Micro Devices. Surging demand for systems to power generative artificial intelligence services has driven sales for Broadcom's networking chips, which are used for things like connecting Nvidia's popular GPU chips together in data centers to form what are effectively AI supercomputers.
That is quickly becoming a big business for Broadcom. The company told analysts during its fiscal first-quarter earnings call Thursday afternoon that revenue from AI chips totaled $2.3 billion in the January-ending quarter -- a 53% jump from the previous quarter. Chief Executive Officer Hock Tan also added that the company now expects AI revenue to top $10 billion in its current fiscal year, which is more than double the $4.2 billion from those products during the previous year.
But, unlike Nvidia, which is now drawing the vast majority of its overall revenue from AI processors used in data centers, Broadcom is now a well-diversified tech giant spanning both the semiconductor and software markets. Most of them aren't growing anything like AI -- with some not growing at all. Broadcom's wireless segment, which primarily supplies radio-frequency chips to Apple for the iPhone, saw revenue slip 4% year-over-year to about $2 billion.
Other parts of the company's chip business, such as server storage and broadband connectivity, are faring even worse.
That splashed a bit of cold water on Broadcom's red-hot stock, which slipped 7% Friday. Marvell Technology, another diversified chip maker with a growing AI business, reported results for the January quarter Thursday that showed a similar dynamic, with non-AI segments missing Wall Street's projections. Marvell also issued a disappointing revenue forecast for the current quarter and shares tumbled more than 11% Friday.
The chip industry has broadly benefited from the notion that it is the first in line to see significant revenue from generative AI due to the heavy computing horsepower required by services such as ChatGPT.
But, like Broadcom and Marvell, most chip companies also carry exposure to other market segments that are either mature and slow-growing or still dealing with inventory overhangs caused by over-ordering earlier in the pandemic. And Broadcom now generates 40% of its business from software, thanks to its acquisition of VMware last year. That sort of steady, recurring revenue will put the company in a better position to deal with the chip industry's notorious cycles.
That should come in handy -- AI hype won't last forever.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
