Now that was a decade! In 2009 we wore analog watches, had landline phones, hung out in bookstores, and even hailed taxis. Ah, the good old days. Please don't make us go back.
Jobless claims were 432,000 in the final week of 2009; they're now 222,000. Unemployment was 10%; it's now 3.5%. Ten-year Treasurys were yielding 3.8% and are now at 1.9% -- a lower rate than most economists thought possible with unemployment so low.
Oil went from $80 a barrel to $60. The Fed now has $4 trillion in total assets to provide liquidity for the global economy. We're in the midst of a record expansion, and past decade had no down year for U.S. gross domestic product. Wow. No wonder the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose from 10428 to over 28000.
In 2009 Apple started selling the iPhone 3GS. It had a 3 1/2-inch screen with a 480-by-320 display -- less than half the resolution of a 20th-century TV set. The hot feature was -- wait for it -- a "built-in digital compass." The price tag was $199. It sold like hotcakes. You wouldn't want one now.
In 2019 the iPhone 11 Pro has a 5.8-inch screen and a 2,436-by-1,125 display. It features 30,000 infrared probes that can read your face. Yet everyone complains about the $999 price, and sales are flat.
Numbers don't do the decade justice anyhow. The Boeing 787 Dreamliner can fly nonstop from just about anywhere to anywhere. Movies mostly still stink ("Cats," anyone?) but the visuals are amazing. Instead of cheesy plastic models of cities like the ones Godzilla destroyed, we've now seen just about every major city, modeled in spectacular 3-D, crumble to the ground -- fulfilling urban-renewal fantasies in high resolution.
Streaming (not orange) is the new black, radically changing how cable companies and studios deal with customers (and no, I'm not related to Mitch Kessler). Netflix started streaming movies in 2007, and almost all its growth took place in the past 10 years (though believe it or not, three million customers still get DVDs in the mail). One of the hottest uses of streaming is for e-sports: 15 million viewers a day at Twitch (launched 2011) sit back and watch on their screens as others play videogames on their own screens.
Don't forget that we now talk to our computers -- behavior that a decade ago would've prompted those around you to call for guys in white coats. Artificial intelligence and neural networks have been around for a long time. But cheap servers and the perfection of "backpropagation," an algorithm that vastly improves the accuracy of machine learning, have in the past few years made facial and voice recognition viable. Ask Alexa.
It isn't all fun and games. The Brookings Institution projects that advances in logistics and food distribution have reduced poverty in most of the world -- from 550 million poor outside Africa in 2009 to fewer than 100 million today. Forget your dumb smartphone; this is the greatest gift of technology and capitalism. But the number of African poor has actually risen, to more than 400 million, so there's still work to do.
In the U.S., another major development is tech companies with values approaching and even over $1 trillion. Critics focus on the ways Silicon Valley gets under our skin, alleging that Facebook swings elections, Google knows too much about us, and Amazon biases product search results. Nonetheless, usage is up, up, up.
Epitomizing the 2010s is something else that gets under your skin, though literally. How cool is it that we now have glucose monitors that read from a patch with a small sensor stuck under your skin and update a smartphone app? The app also lets caregivers follow patients' readings, replacing finger pricks, pens and phone calls -- all to the benefit of the 30 million Americans who suffer from diabetes.
Over Thanksgiving weekend, this service from Dexcom went down, freaking out caregivers. Count it as a blessing to be able to freak out over something that didn't exist 10 years ago. This now-essential service combines integration, mobility, cloud computing, a network effect and a human-machine interface. The same systems are behind Uber, Spotify, Tesla, Fortnite, Peloton, Alexa and many other 2010s successes.
This decade has proved that progress is relentless. Expect it, even though we should never take it for granted. Property rights, an educated workforce, fair tax codes that enable capital formation, and light-touch regulations are essential ingredients. It's why the U.S., not China, has driven global innovation (again) in the 2010s. But essential ingredients are not enough; every success is like capturing lightning in a bottle. Failure is the norm (Google Glass, Pied Piper) so we should celebrate successes, not burden or handcuff them with dumb laws or other hurdles (California Legislature, I'm talking to you). See you in the new year, when we'll ask: Will the '20s roar?
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com

Credit: By Andy Kessler
