AUTOMATION
Tech Wave to Affect
Women in Workforce
Automation could force more than 100 million women globally to find new occupations by 2030, according to a study from McKinsey Global Institute.
The study, released Tuesday, shows technological advancements affect the genders nearly evenly.
That finding upends the notion that automation hits predominantly male manufacturing workers the hardest.
Emerging automation technologies will look different and displace a large number of women, said Mekala Krishnan, fellow at the McKinsey Global Institute and one of the report's authors. Advancements could take the form of Alexa-like virtual assistants replacing clerical tasks, wider adoption of cashierless checkouts and artificial intelligence replacing customer-service workers at call centers.
And that technology could change the jobs done by women in the way robotic arms in factories put downward pressure on mostly male manufacturing jobs in the U.S. in recent decades.
The study looked at 10 of the world's largest economies, including the U.S., China and India, and found that 107 million jobs held by women are at risk of being displaced by automation, or 20% overall of female employment. That nearly matches the 21% of jobs held by men at risk of being displaced.
-- Eric Morath
---
NEW YORK
Manafort May Be
Moved to Rikers
Paul Manafort, the former Trump campaign chairman now in federal prison, is set to be moved to New York to be arraigned on state charges as soon as next week, according to people familiar with the matter.
How Mr. Manafort will be housed while awaiting his state trial on residential-mortgage fraud charges is an open question. He is fighting those charges while serving a 7 1/2-year federal sentence at a minimum-security prison in Loretto, Pa.
While awaiting his federal trial last year in Virginia, Mr. Manafort was held in solitary confinement for his own protection. When he arrives in New York City to face his state charges, he could be held in isolation on Rikers Island, the city jail complex located in the East River where many defendants facing state charges await trial.
Notorious or high-profile defendants are often kept away from a jail's general population for their safety, former prosecutors and jail officials say.
Todd Blanche, a lawyer representing Mr. Manafort, said Tuesday that his client hoped to remain in his current federal facility.A spokesman for the Manhattan district attorney's office, which is prosecuting the case, declined to comment.
-- Corinne Ramey
---
U.S. SPACE COMMAND
Nominee Warns
Of Threats to U.S.
The Air Force general nominated by President Trump to head the new U.S. Space Command said Tuesday that increasing competition with China and Russia is raising the stakes over the use of intelligence and weapons orbiting the globe.
Gen. John Raymond told a Senate committee that developing and protecting U.S. equipment in space is growing more important not just for projecting power above the planet but for ensuring traditional battlefield dominance. He told senators that China has shown the ability to jam systems like U.S. global positioning equipment that helps troops find their way on the battlefield and helps smart weapons hit their targets. China also can shoot down a satellite in orbit.
-- Ben Kesling
---
MAINE
Lawmakers Approve
Assisted-Suicide Bill
The Maine Legislature voted to legalize assisted suicide, with supporters declaring it in line with the state's tradition of individualism and opponents insisting the practice tempts fate.
The bill now goes to Democratic Gov. Janet Mills, who has 10 days to act on the bill and hasn't indicated whether she will let it become law. Her office said she hasn't yet taken a position.
The proposal had failed once in a statewide vote and at least seven previous times in the Legislature. If Gov. Mills signs it, Maine would join seven other states, including New Jersey this year, and Washington, D.C., with similar laws, according to the Death With Dignity National Center and the Death With Dignity Political Fund.
-- Associated Press
