NEW JERSEY
Poll: Support Is Down
For 2016 Christie Run
Gov. Chris Christie is losing support for a potential presidential bid in his home state, according to a poll released Tuesday.
A Rutgers-Eagleton Poll of 722 registered voters found that 24% believed Mr. Christie would make a good president, while 69% believed he wouldn't -- a 10 percentage point increase in negativity from the university's February survey on the topic.
The softening in support included state Republicans. While 72% of those identified as Republicans said Mr. Christie would be a good president in the February survey, that percentage dropped to 53% in the new poll.
"Voters who know Gov. Christie best simply do not see him as president," said David Redlawsk, director of the Eagleton Center for Public Interest Polling.
Mr. Christie has faulted Rutgers' polls in the past, and his advisers say surveys this far out in the election cycle have no bearing on his chances if he chooses to run.
The telephone poll had a margin of error of 4 percentage points.
-- Heather Haddon
---
NEW YORK
Safe-Sleep Campaign
For Infants Launched
The city is launching a campaign to help prevent sleep-related infant deaths, saying dozens of babies die each year from accidental suffocation.
An average of 50 babies a year die due to unsafe sleeping practices, including parents rolling over onto infants, officials said Monday.
The city's campaign tells parents to place infants on their backs alone in a crib free of toys, bumpers or pillows. "Stay Close. Sleep Apart," reads the ad, which officials say will be placed in subways and bus shelters.
Dr. Mary Marron-Corwin, head of pediatrics at Harlem Hospital Center, said it is a "common scenario" for parents to lack cribs and to place babies elsewhere to sleep.
The city distributes free cribs to eligible families through a number of agencies. Officials said parents in need of a crib should call 311.
-- Mara Gay
---
NEW YORK
Alan Turing Notebook
Fetches $1 Million-Plus
A notebook once belonging to Alan Turing, the mathematician and computer scientist known for breaking the German Enigma Code, sold for just over $1 million at the auction house Bonhams New York on Monday.
Dating to 1942, when Mr. Turing was working to crack the seemingly unbreakable World War II code, the 56-page manuscript contains handwritten notes on math and computer science.
"It's him working through things, and we see ideas that he never had the opportunity to develop in his lifetime," said Cassandra Hatton, director of history of science and technology at the auction house.
Previously, the most expensive Alan Turing item sold for GBP 205,250 (about $300,000) in 2013 at Bonhams, Ms. Hatton said.
The subject of the movie "The Imitation Game," Mr. Turing was a leader in the field of computing and artificial intelligence. Demand for his manuscript was based on the rarity of the personal notebook, and the buyer has remained anonymous.
-- Pia Catton
