More technology providers are pricing their products and services based on a promised outcome rather than charging customers set subscription fees or on a per-user basis.
While still far from the norm, the uptick in such pricing models has put pressure on those vendors to offer more flexible pricing options to attract and retain increasingly budget-conscious customers, analysts say.
Outcome-based pricing models charge customers some percent of reaching a business goal like increased revenue or cost savings.
Value-based models, which can overlap with outcome-based models, are also becoming more widely adopted as alternate pricing systems. They include things like growth in registered customers or the amount of data for artificial intelligence.
Recent interest in outcome-based pricing -- which has been around for decades but not gained widespread traction in technology -- is being driven by tighter technology budgets and customer pushback against big cloud-computing charges, analysts say. Most cloud providers charge customers based on the amount of computing power they use, on an as-needed basis, but that can lead to huge, unexpected cloud bills when usage surges.
Forty-three percent of leaders at technology vendors said customers are changing their focus from buying solutions to outcomes, and 23% said customers are putting more focus on business value, according to a survey last year by research and consulting firm Gartner. Forty-six percent of tech firms face challenges in reaching revenue goals, Gartner's survey this year found, and can expect to make more pricing concessions as a result.
At the same time, price increases for subscriptions to business software -- still the most common method of charging for software -- have reached increases of 20% or more compared with previous years, some corporate technology chiefs say. That has put IT leaders in the hot seat to find ways to negotiate deals or cut costs.
"Where cost pressure is high, value-and outcome-based pricing is top of mind," said Rafee Tarafdar, chief technology officer of Infosys, a business consulting, IT and outsourcing services firm.
Granica, a startup that helps companies save on their cloud costs by compressing cloud storage, charges customers a percentage of what they actually save on those costs, said co-founder and Chief Executive Rahul Ponnala.
Nylas, a provider of email, calendar and contacts integration, negotiated a rate of 25% with Granica, said Troy Allen, the company's senior vice president of engineering. "Even paying them 25%, that's still 75% of the savings we couldn't gain on our own," he said.
Startups and smaller firms view outcome-based pricing as a way to woo customers from larger competitors, especially as those providers continue raising prices and seeking aggressive contract renewals.
In recent years, chief information officers have become more adept at using data and AI to track their IT spending and tie it to business outcomes. "They've been challenging these providers," said Jagjeet Gill, a principal in Deloitte's technology, media and telecommunications group. "I'm paying so much in consumption, but ultimately I need your services to really impact the outcomes I'm trying to achieve."
Credit: By Belle Lin
