Tech-recruiting startup Andela Inc. said it has raised $200 million to help fund its effort to connect employers with software engineers in an increasingly global search for tech talent.
SoftBank Group Corp. led the investment in the seven-year-old New York-based startup, whose platform employs artificial intelligence to match employers with workers in a range of markets including Africa, Latin America and Eastern Europe.
"Hiring remote technical talent is one of the top challenges that companies face today," Lydia Jett, a partner at SoftBank Investment Advisers, a subsidiary that manages SoftBank's investment funds, said. "We believe Andela will become the preferred talent partner for the world's best companies as remote and hybrid work arrangements become the norm," she said.
Past investors include Generation Investment Management, Spark Capital and the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, which marked its investing debut five years ago by leading a $24 million Series B funding round in Andela. The company has raised a total of $381 million to date.
The latest round, which values the company at roughly $1.5 billion, comes as chief information officers and other tech leaders pressed to find talent take a more global approach to building IT teams.
Andela's rapid growth was fueled by adoption of remote work and hybrid-workplace strategies during the pandemic, along with fierce competition for tech talent, said Jeremy Johnson, the company's co-founder and chief executive. That's prompting recruiters to look beyond Silicon Valley, India, China and other traditional tech hubs, Mr. Johnson said.
The company plans to use the new funds to expand its network of job candidates to span at least 100 countries by the end of the year, from roughly 80 currently, he said. Built from an initial group of software engineers in Lagos, Nigeria, and Nairobi, Kenya, the company's network encompassed seven countries before the pandemic struck, he said.
Andela said it uses artificial intelligence to pair candidates in its network with job postings by member employers world-wide. It analyzes data including applicants' technical skills, training and experience, workplace compatibility and other variables that can help foster productive teams. Employers pay the company for successful placements, as well as added services like regulatory and labor-law guidance.
To find a match, the company works closely with corporate CIOs to get a sense of what kind of role they need to fill, Mr. Johnson said.
Credit: By Angus Loten
