After a breakup, a good friend offers words of support. A therapist focuses on healing and growth. But a new artificial intelligence dating tool is more likely to offer some blunt feedback when asked to assess what went wrong.
Maggie Crabtree, a 34-year-old retail strategy professional living in Los Angeles, recently tried the new app Texts From My Ex, which uses AI to analyze the chat history of any two people, then rates their compatibility.
Currently, a first analysis is free, so Crabtree gamely downloaded the software from TextsFromMyEx.com onto her computer and inputted a conversation with an ex she had dated long distance for four months. Texts From My Ex quickly gave their communication an abysmal four out of 10 rating, saying that their conversations were "as smooth as a porcupine."
Though the app's founder, Alex Weitzman, was unsure how people would feel about the tool and the obvious potential privacy concerns, she reports that within a week of its launch in July, 30,000 people gave the app access to their iMessage history. (Notably, the app promises to only process text, not images or audio files. Your nudes are safe.) It's also available for WhatsApp texters, and Weitzman says support for Facebook Messenger and other platforms is imminent.
A report from Texts From My Ex starts with an overall compatibility score (a percentage of 100), then breaks down its analysis along seven categories, which each get a score from one to 10. These categories include "attachment style," "communication" and "sexiness."
After digging into these individual scores, Crabtree noticed that the app had based a big portion of its analysis on one particular drunk text exchange between her and her ex. She decided to pay $5 to submit her text history again, to see if the AI might focus on something different.
The second time, the AI seemed to analyze a larger portion of the supplied conversation. In the "highlights" section of the report, it called out one particular interaction as "adorable" and "funny." Texts From My Ex even went so far as to say that it seemed Crabtree's ex genuinely supported her.
Unfortunately, that wasn't Crabtree's lived experience of the relationship. "I didn't feel [that] in person, but it's nice that it's there over text," she joked. The overall compatibility score of 58% that the app issued felt more accurate to her, regardless of how sassily the report was phrased.
Explaining why it wouldn't have worked between Crabtree and her ex, the app offered, "It turns out your love story is like a sitcom -- miscommunication provides the quirky punch lines to keep your audience entertained. That's all good and well for sitcoms, but it's not good for real life."
Credit: By Rae Witte
