Artificial intelligence experts said they have developed a computer card shark that plays poker almost perfectly, having mastered a version of a popular game called Texas Hold'em.
While playful at heart, their advance in the computational mathematics of game theory may lead to broader innovations in military strategy, national security, medical decision-making, complex contract negotiations and auctions, experts said.
The basic poker game "has been essentially solved," said Tuomas Sandholm, director of the Electronic Marketplaces Laboratory at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, whose own poker-playing program won a 2014 world championship. He wasn't involved in the project. "This is a breakthrough."
In recent years, high-powered computer programs have outmatched top human players in chess, checkers, Scrabble and the quiz game Jeopardy, but the uncertainties of poker -- where so much information about the state of play is hidden -- until now had defied the efforts of dozens of research teams.
An estimated 150 million people play poker world-wide, according to to the International Federation of Poker in Switzerland and the U.S.-based Poker Players Alliance, which describe Texas Hold 'em as the most popular version of the card game.
In their work announced Thursday, researchers led by Michael Bowling at Canada's University of Alberta Computer Poker Research Group in Edmonton tackled a two-player variant of that game called heads-up limit hold 'em in which the size of bets and the number of rounds of play during each hand are fixed. It is the simplest version of the game that people usually play. Scientists are still working to solve more complex variations of the poker game. "Our goal is to advance artificial intelligence, and poker, we believe, is a really good test bed for trying out new algorithms," said Dr. Bowling. "Poker is an ideal game to capture all kinds of uncertainty."
Already, computer experts are using such artificial intelligence techniques to handle the real-world complexities of bidding on large commercial trucking contracts, to arrange randomized schedules for air marshals guarding commercial airliners, and to ensure equitable distribution of human kidneys donated for transplant surgery, experts said.
Dr. Bowling and his colleagues are working now to apply their latest poker-based game theories to the treatment of diabetes.
To learn all the nuances of bluff, bet, hole cards and luck of the draw, the algorithm ran on an array of 4,000 computer processors for 68 days, calculating the optimal outcomes for more than a trillion possibilities of play. The scientists published their research in Science.
The program worked through more than six billion hands every second, more poker than has been played by the entire human race, the researchers said. With each hand, the system refined its decisions closer and closer to the ideal solution.
At each decision point, the system strove for what is known as the Nash Equilibrium, a winning strategy that benefits competing players in a noncooperative game. It is named for John Nash Jr., a Princeton University mathematician whose work on chance and complex systems won him a share of the 1994 Nobel Prize in Economics.
The end result is a program called Cepheus that not only outplays skilled human players in a fair game, but always plays an essentially perfect game, the researchers said. "If you played against it, no matter what you do, you still wouldn't be able to eke out any more than a tiny advantage over millions and millions of hands," Dr. Bowling said. Among other things, the researchers discovered the dealer almost always has an edge.
The researchers don't plan to commercialize their new system. In fact, they are making the computer source code public and have set up a university website where people can try their hand against the system free.
Credit: By Robert Lee Hotz
