U.S. health regulators last week authorized the use of the first artificial-intelligence tool designed to help doctors diagnose prostate cancer.
The tool, Paige Prostate from New York startup Paige.AI Inc., analyzes digital scans of prostate biopsy slides and compares them against data sets of cell and tissue patterns previously identified as indicators of tumors.
Paige Prostate uses neural network technology, an advanced form of AI composed of various layers of artificial neurons designed to mimic the way a human brain works, which is extremely good at analyzing images and picking out patterns.
The Food and Drug Administration has been reviewing and authorizing a growing number of AI-based medical systems. The FDA website lists more than 300 of the systems marketed in the U.S., with the agency having authorized about half in just the last 20 months or so.
The FDA said Paige Prostate is the first AI-based software program it has authorized that is designed to identify areas of interest in prostate biopsy. The software can help increase the identification of cancerous tissues, which could ultimately save lives, the agency added.
"When AI is combined with traditional screenings or surveillance methods, it could help find problems early on, when they may be easier to treat," said Bakul Patel, director of the FDA's Digital Health Center of Excellence.
Other efforts using AI to detect cancers include a system developed by Google's health research unit that it said can match or outperform radiologists at detecting breast cancer, while Intel Corp. and a group of top healthcare institutions have worked on a system designed to make it easier for radiologists to spot the boundaries of brain tumors.
Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in American men, behind only skin cancer, according to the American Cancer Society. The organization estimates there will be about 250,000 new cases of prostate cancer and more than 34,000 deaths from it in the U.S. this year.
In traditional prostate cancer screening, pathologists examine under a microscope tissue samples taken during biopsies for signs of a cancerous tumor. It is a laborious process that can take 30 to 60 minutes per exam, according to Paige.
In a clinical trial Paige submitted to the FDA, pathologists manually viewing images spotted signs of cancer 89.5% of the time. Using Paige Prostate, pathologists identified signs of cancer 96.8% of the time.
"What we've shown with this technology is that Paige Prostate will actually improve the accuracy and the quality of the diagnosis, providing better care to these patients," said Leo Grady, Paige's chief executive officer.
Paige said its tool's development and validation data sets were built using approximately 55,000 pathology images from more than 1,000 healthcare providers. The company said it is also developing a product based on the technology it used in Paige Prostate to help detect breast cancer.
Paige's tool is a useful advance for improving the accuracy of image interpretation, said Eric Topol, a medical doctor and professor of molecular medicine at the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif. But, he notes, the use of AI in pathology is new and it will take time to determine how effective such tools are in practice.
"It's still very early," said Dr. Topol, the author of the book "Deep Medicine: How Artificial Intelligence Can Make Healthcare Human Again."
Quest Diagnostics Inc., which operates medical testing labs across the U.S., has tested Paige Prostate at its Inc. pathology unit and plans to use the software across various sites as soon as October, said Kristie Dolan, general manager of Quest's oncology franchise operation.
"We see the software as a tool to support our pathologists," she said.
Paige, which has about 160 employees, in March received $125 million in a Series C financing round, bringing the total capital invested in the company to more than $220 million.
Credit: By John McCormick
