Happy the elephant will soon have her day in New York's highest court.
The 51-year-old Asian elephant won't attend -- among other impediments, the 8,500-pound animal lives at the Bronx Zoo -- but her lawyers have filed a writ of habeas corpus, arguing she is a legal person. If she had such status, her detention at the zoo would be unlawful and she could be sent to an elephant sanctuary, her lawyers argue.
"The elephant is being imprisoned against her will," said lawyer Steven Wise, who represents Happy. "For more than 40 years she has been kept as a prisoner."
Happy is in a small but growing company of animals and natural entities fighting for legal rights -- with help from their self-appointed human lawyers -- in U.S. courts. The lawsuits mark an effort by lawyers who argue that animals, nature and ecosystems deserve some of the same legal rights long held by people and corporations.
In Florida, two lakes, a marsh and two streams sued to stop a development project. In Minnesota, manoomin, a type of wild rice, has filed a lawsuit to block an oil pipeline. Happy's lawyers, the nonprofit Nonhuman Rights Project, have represented whales, chimpanzees and dolphins who they argue have the complex cognitive abilities and autonomy to merit legal personhood.
Courts and governments in countries including New Zealand, Bangladesh, India and Colombia have debated the rights of rivers, mountains and landscapes. Ecuador's constitution gives "pachamama," which translates to "Mother Earth," a legally enforceable right to exist and flourish.
In the U.S., it's an uphill battle. Happy's hearing on May 18 before the New York Court of Appeals, which only hears cases that raise unsettled questions of law, is by itself a victory, her lawyers say. "This fight we're in, it's only been nine years," said Mr. Wise. "We are trying to change the world."
Some actual persons are threatened by the personhood fight. A Missouri bill seeks to block people from suing on behalf of ecosystems. "Any plaintiff bringing a civil action must be human and shall not represent nonhuman entities," according to the bill. Idaho lawmakers this spring passed a bill that bans environmental elements, artificial intelligence, nonhuman animals and inanimate objects from gaining personhood. Rep. Tammy Nichols, a Republican, said she introduced the bill because her constituents were concerned that a natural rights movement threatened the state's farm industry and resources like lumber and minerals.
"If a pig has co-equal rights to you or I, and a farmer wanted to butcher that pig, it would be similar to the farmer wanting to butcher you or I," she said. "That pig would have rights, so you can't just go kill it."
Lawyers who have fought cases seeking animals' personhood say such arguments are a slippery slope, threatening to free a menagerie of pigs, cattle and dogs. In the case of chimps Hercules and Leo, who were held for research at a state university, the New York attorney general's office argued the chimps aren't legal persons.
"If a pig, another intelligent animal, for example, is found to be 'autonomous and self-determining' will the tens of millions of pigs on farms throughout the country be subject to habeas corpus relief or other legal rights?" the attorney general's office, which represented the public university, wrote in a legal brief.
The judge ruled in favor of the university.
In Florida, nearly 90% of voters in Orange County approved in November 2020 a county charter amendment that gave rights to local bodies of water. The following April, to test the new law, Lake Hart, Lake Mary Jane and their co-plaintiffs sued the state's environmental protection agency, which issued a permit for a commercial development. They argued the agency had violated water rights outlined in the charter, including to exist, flow and be protected from pollution.
"Because they have these rights, they are parties to the action," said local environmentalist Charles O'Neal, the lakes' only human co-plaintiff. "I am there to speak on their behalf."
The state has argued that a bill signed into law by Gov. Ron DeSantis in June 2020 prohibited local governments from granting legal rights to plants, animals or bodies of water. The Florida Department of Environmental Protection declined to comment.
The case remains ongoing.
In Minnesota, manoomin, the rice, is the lead plaintiff in a tribal-court lawsuit against state officials over water permits for an oil pipeline. Manoomin's lawyers argued that an 1837 treaty guaranteed the Chippewa the right to gather wild rice.
The state, which argued the tribal court didn't have jurisdiction, filed a lawsuit in federal court against the tribe and the tribal court judge, but not the rice.
"They've got their own image to maintain," said lawyer Frank Bibeau, who represents manoomin. "They weren't going to sue manoomin too."
The matter is pending before the Eighth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.
As for Happy, during the upcoming arguments she will remain at the zoo, where she has lived since 1977. She once shared a pen with her longtime companion, Grumpy. But Grumpy died after another elephant pair, Patty and Maxine, attacked her. Now Patty and Happy, who the zoo says has a history of not interacting well with other elephants, are in adjacent enclosures.
The zoo has argued that Happy is perfectly happy. The Nonhuman Rights Project has "exploited Happy and the name of the Bronx Zoo to further their misguided philosophical agenda," the zoo has said.
The elephant's legal saga began in 2018, in Orleans County in upstate New York. The zoo argued that not only should the court deny Happy legal personhood, but the case should be heard in the Bronx, in case the elephant needed to make the trip to court.
The judge transferred the case to the Bronx. Citing legal precedent, a lower court and appellate court ruled against Happy's personhood.
"We are constrained by the case law to find that Happy is not a 'person' and is not being illegally imprisoned," wrote state Supreme Court Justice Alison Tuitt, of the lower court. But the elephant, she wrote, "is an intelligent, autonomous being who should be treated with respect and dignity, and who may be entitled to liberty."
Credit: By Corinne Ramey and Deanna Paul
