Cisco Systems recently had a problem: A manager and a new employee at the technology giant struggled to work together. Both people felt frustrated. What to do?
As is increasingly the answer inside large U.S. companies, leaders turned to generative AI for help. Cisco's human-resources team uploaded chat logs between the employee and manager, hoping to suss out the source of the tension. (Both people consented to this, Cisco says.)
After quickly sifting through pages of discussions, the software came up with an answer: The manager didn't feel heard as the employee asked some of the same questions over and over. The employee, seeking as much clarity as possible, could sense a high degree of frustration. The company says knowing the details helped the relationship improve.
"There was just this 'Aha!'" says Francine Katsoudas, Cisco's top human-resources executive.
Companies are using generative AI for ever more sophisticated tasks -- including work such as deciphering friction between colleagues at Cisco, once exclusively the domain of well-paid knowledge workers. This change is fueling predictions of workplace transformation -- both ominous and optimistic.
Some fear a wave of disruptive job losses, as AI becomes better able to take over the work long done by knowledge workers. The thinking goes: Do you really need so many people in the HR department if the software can do it cheaper and more quickly?
Others say such concerns are overblown. They anticipate that AI will unlock innovations and usher in a higher quality of life.
JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon has said that AI might require future generations to work only 3 1/2 days a week. Technology will invent cures for cancer, Dimon said last year, and allow more people to live to 100 by finding breakthroughs impossible to achieve through the mind alone.
Others say AI will free people to do more of what interests them. Within 10 years, AI will take on "80% of 80% of the jobs that exist today," said Vinod Khosla, founder of venture-capital firm Khosla Ventures, in a Wall Street Journal interview last fall. "The need to work in society will disappear within 25 years for those countries that adapt these technologies."
Among executives on the ground, however, the situation is more murky. Many say they are now trying to separate hype from reality to come up with their own answer to a fundamental question: How pervasive will AI become in corporate life, and how quickly should I adopt it in my own company?
"At the end of the day, it's the human interaction with the technology that's going to make or break the impact," says Marc Casper, CEO of life-sciences company Thermo Fisher Scientific, which is using generative AI in corporate functions such as marketing to help write advertising content.
Some roles will significantly change. Research by the McKinsey Global Institute has found that, with generative AI and other tools, 30% of the hours worked today could be automated by 2030.
Even so, the hurdles to broad AI adoption are many. Regulations remain in flux. Adopting AI means added costs. Companies selling AI tools, including OpenAI, face legal challenges, including from prominent executives like Elon Musk. Some executives also fear putting proprietary information inside large language models.
Labor unions have pushed back against AI; in Hollywood, the use of AI was a central issue in strikes last year among unions representing actors and writers.
Getting people to change how they do their jobs and to adopt AI tools also takes time.
"It's one thing for the CEO and the board and the management team to understand AI. But to really succeed you have to bring everybody along, and so that's actually the hardest part," says Clara Shih, who oversees artificial intelligence at Salesforce.
In interviews with more than two dozen executives in recent weeks, many executives say they haven't seen evidence yet that artificial intelligence is the job-killer -- at least in the next few years -- that some initially suspected when OpenAI's ChatGPT emerged more than a year ago. This is partly because many companies are still working to understand all that AI can do beyond work in call centers and among software coders.
A variety of experiments are under way. Some companies are now rolling out AI tools to create photos for marketing projects or to analyze contracts. Others hope it can be used to produce training videos more quickly. Bob Toohey, chief human resources officer at the insurer Allstate, recently experimented with an AI tool that could allow the company to create internal videos in his voice or others from text prompts to allow for faster on-the-job learning.
At Ecolab, a water-management and infection-prevention company, executives are testing generative AI to analyze earnings reports from rivals and to help in preparing for its own investor calls.
Christophe Beck, Ecolab's chief executive officer, says the company's finance team is using generative AI to parse earnings-call transcripts from competitors, asking questions such as: "What were the highlights that the CEO shared?" and "Where was the CEO the most secure? Where was the CEO least secure?"
With some AI software priced at $30 per employee a month, a number of executives have questioned the price tag. Many employers are finding that they are spending more money on AI than they are realizing in productivity improvements, says Christoph Schweizer, CEO of Boston Consulting Group. He encourages companies not to take a wait-and-see approach, saying they should try AI tools now to gain an edge.
Some companies say they won't fire existing employees, but they may not need to hire as significantly in the future.
A survey from consulting giant Accenture in January found that roughly 60% of workers fear AI could eliminate their jobs. Manish Sharma, CEO of North America for Accenture, says that, based on his interactions with clients, he is convinced that AI will create more roles than it replaces. The jobs, though, might be different.
At the San Francisco company Tome, a generative AI storytelling and presentation platform, CEO Keith Peiris says he has begun looking to hire what he calls "resourceful generalists," versus specialists with the exact experience he may need, knowing smart professionals can use AI software to amplify their knowledge and solve new problems that emerge.
Chip maker Qualcomm is looking to create more marketing content for social media like TikTok. Instead of hiring an army of additional video editors, Don McGuire, the company's chief marketing officer, has decided to build a generative-AI creative studio in Mexico City. It plans to hire up to a dozen people there. "It will be built with people, but with tools that are rooted in Gen AI," McGuire says.
---
Chip Cutter is a reporter covering workplace issues in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. Email him at chip.cutter@wsj.com.
Credit: By Chip Cutter
