Seventeen-year-old Suhas Badrinarayan attended a conference last week for high-school students interested in business. In between competitive events, everyone was talking about Nvidia.
Shares of Nvidia are up 40% this year, even with a roughly 4% pullback Tuesday. The chip stock is the top performer in the S&P 500 after tripling and leading the index last year. The semiconductor maker has added roughly $1.4 trillion in market value since the start of 2023.
Suhas, a high-school senior in the Portland, Ore., area, said he first invested in Nvidia stock in 2020, when many of his friends bought Nvidia graphics cards to build computers for videogaming. He added to his position in 2022 after learning that OpenAI used Nvidia chips to power artificial-intelligence image generator Dall-E 2. Since then, Nvidia has swelled to make up more than one-quarter of his portfolio. (Since he isn't old enough to open his own brokerage account, he invests in an account that he shares with his parents.)
"If it continues rising, it's going to reach almost meme-stock levels of growth," Suhas said of Nvidia stock.
Suhas is one of many everyday investors along for Nvidia's meteoric, AI-fueled rise.
Individual investors poured a net $1.2 billion into Nvidia shares this year. Nvidia attracted more net inflows than any of the other megacap technology stocks in the so-called Magnificent Seven: Alphabet, Amazon.com, Apple, Meta Platforms, Microsoft and Tesla. That is according to Nasdaq Data Link, which uses publicly available information to track about half of all individual-investor trading activity in U.S. equities, as of Feb. 9.
Nvidia's quarterly earnings report on Wednesday could be the spark for the stock's next leg higher -- or a reality check to send shares tumbling. Analysts penciled in $110 billion in annual revenue by 2026, according to forecasts compiled by FactSet, up from $59 billion in the 12 months that ended in January.
Nvidia topped Wall Street's revenue forecasts in each of the past 10 quarters, and profit forecasts in nine of them. The stock rallied seven times in the trading session following the report, including a 24% gain last May.
The stock has surged because the chip maker is capitalizing on enthusiasm for artificial-intelligence technology, and evidence is mounting that the boom is in full force. Shares of Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing, a key supplier for chip makers such as Nvidia, closed at their highest level since 2022 on Thursday after reporting strong January sales.
Other technology giants, like Microsoft, Alphabet and Amazon, signaled major AI-related investments in the year ahead.
Dave Segars, 61, has long invested in large-cap tech stocks, including buying Google at its initial public offering, but was reluctant to invest in Nvidia at first. He had been burned by buying chip stocks like Intel in the past. Still, he was convinced to purchase Nvidia shares in 2017 after watching Jim Cramer discuss the company on CNBC's "Mad Money." Segars said he bought another nearly $25,000 of Nvidia shares at the end of 2023.
"I honestly can't believe how high the stock has gotten," said Segars, an engineering entrepreneur in Charlottesville, Va.
Alex Labarre, a 39-year-old financial analyst in Portland, Ore., first bought Nvidia shares in a retirement account around 2021, then watched them crash in 2022. He held on to the stock because he believes Nvidia will benefit from growth in the videogame industry and was pleasantly surprised when shares soared last year.
Labarre trimmed his holding at the end of 2023 to lock in some profits. He said the position is now valued at roughly $39,000 and he doesn't plan to exit anytime soon.
"I was happy to ride that AI boom," Labarre said.
By some metrics, Nvidia has become even more popular than Tesla, a longtime favorite among everyday investors.
This month, Nvidia trading volumes have made up an average of about 8% of daily trading volumes in U.S. equities among everyday investors, compared with Tesla's 7%, according to Vanda Research. That is a big change from last February, when Tesla attracted 22% of the daily trading volumes on average, while Nvidia drew about 5%.
Nvidia's persistent strength is unusual. Since 1999, the S&P 500's best performer in a given year has risen in the following year just 59% of the time, for an average gain of about 18%, according to Dow Jones Market Data. Fellow chip maker Advanced Micro Devices is the only company to pace the index two years in a row over that time frame, in 2018 and 2019.
"I've seen people lose fortunes believing the immediate past was going to repeat into the immediate future," said John Goltermann, chief investment officer at Townsend & Associates.
In down years, Nvidia shares performed quite poorly, losing 50% in 2022 and 31% in 2018.
Credit: By Hannah Miao and Charley Grant
