Corrections & Amplifications
BeatBox Beverages of Austin, Texas, sells boxed, wine-based cocktails. An article about virtual assistants in Monday's Workplace Technology report incorrectly described it as a cocktail-delivery company. Also, Aimy Steadman, BeatBox's chief operating officer, asks her sales team each day which distributors they checked in with. The article incorrectly said she asks which suppliers they checked in with.
(WSJ March 16, 2016)
Virtual assistants like Siri, Cortana and Google Now have become a fixture in many people's daily lives, helping them get driving directions, find phone numbers and search the Web using their voice.
Now a crop of savvy users have found ways to use those tools at work, too.
Virtual assistants can tackle a range of workplace tasks, such as scour emails for important information, send reminders about future appointments and set up meetings automatically. Thanks to big data and artificial intelligence, assistants are better able to understand the way people really communicate and are beginning to anticipate their needs.
According to Gallup, nearly two-thirds of working adults say they don't have enough time in the workday to complete what they set out to do. Here's a look at some of the ways people are using the fast-growing army of virtual-assistant bots to make their work lives more efficient.
Checking in with staff
Aimy Steadman, chief operating officer of cocktail-delivery startup BeatBox Beverages in Austin, Texas, needs to ask her roughly 50-member sales team the same questions each day: What sales did you make? Which suppliers did you check in with and what updates do you have from them?
Instead of having to remember to send out a daily email, she relies on a piece of artificial-intelligence software called Howdy to check in with her staff and get the information from them. Howdy, which works inside the popular office-productivity software Slack, is programmed to shoot each member of her team those questions each day. The program collates the answers into a single document, which it sends to her when the answers are ready. If she needs answers sooner, she sends a chat to Howdy, typing "Howdy, do you have an update for me?" into the Slack interface. Howdy then sends her a document with employees' responses, while sending a reminder to those who haven't gotten around to it to pony up.
The time saved by not having to send out the daily email and collect the information is time she can spend "growing the business," Ms. Steadman says.
Working by voice
The accuracy of apps that recognize speech was poor for a long time but has surged in the past two years, according to Stanford University computer-science professor Christopher Manning. That has made it much more feasible to do a number of tasks by voice command alone.
For general note-taking and dictation, office workers can edit and write documents by voice using applications like Microsoft Corp.'s Cortana, which works on the Windows 10 operating system, or Alphabet Inc., which recently added voice dictation features into Google Docs. Users of Google Docs now have the option of pressing a microphone button on the left side of their screen, which enables them to capture ideas, write memos and edit tasks -- without touching the keyboard. (Accuracy is far from perfect, though.)
It's also possible to search through all the files on a computer by voice. Mike Halsey, a U.K.-based technology writer, uses Cortana's signature voice command -- "Hey Cortana" -- to search for items on his PC. Rather than search for a document by calling up individual apps, Cortana will automatically search through all Microsoft apps, such as Word and PowerPoint. Cortana's voice assistant understands what he is saying 60% to 70% of the time, Mr. Halsey says.
Location-based reminders
Russ Buchmann uses Google Now to avoid an all-too-common problem: When he's close to a store, he realizes he needs more office supplies -- but doesn't remember exactly what.
If Mr. Buchmann, head of IT at Tyrone, Pa., retailer Shoe Fly Shoe Inc., had human assistants, he could simply dispatch them to a store to buy the items. But with Google Now, he doesn't need to.
When he realizes he needs to buy routers, he says to his phone, "OK Google. Note to self: Pick up routers at Best Buy." Google Now adds the note to his reminders list. The next time he finds himself close to a Best Buy, the female voice of Google Now pipes up with an alert reminding him that he has a shopping list there. "It takes some of the pressure off of having to keep track of everything," Mr. Buchmann says.
Both Siri and Cortana can also be configured for location-based reminders. In addition, workers can configure their virtual assistants to send time-based reminders -- for example, to remind them to call someone by Wednesday or to file a document to their boss by a certain time.
Of course, each company's virtual assistant works best in its own ecosystem of apps. Google Now works best with Gmail and Google apps, Cortana works best with Microsoft products, and so on.
Combing through emails
Searching through emails looking for a particular piece of information is one of the most tedious work tasks. Now virtual assistants have been programmed to streamline that job by recognizing certain key pieces of information in the messages.
For instance, when Mr. Buchmann wants to track his orders for new parts, he needs only to speak into his phone and ask it, "OK Google, show me my shipment." Google Now dives into his Gmail account, pulls out a list of tracking numbers for packages en route to the company's stores and reads them aloud.
Likewise, Google Now can pull up flight information, saving him from digging through messages for the information.
Microsoft's Cortana tries to be helpful proactively. If the program detects language in an email that suggests the user is interested in having a meeting, such as "Let's get together," the program will ask if the user wants a meeting to be set up.
Google is also testing a proactive timesaving feature that suggests responses to an email a person receives. For example, "We'll be there" or "I'll check on it."
Still, these email-sifting tools are fairly limited for now. For example, Cortana and Google Now can only do advanced scouring for package and flight information. It could take a long time to train the software to recognize other categories of information, as it requires feeding it masses of data.
And Cortana's predictive feature doesn't work for inbound requests. For example, if a worker received an email from a salesperson that included the words "buy now," the system wouldn't suggest scheduling a meeting. Cortana was designed that way so users wouldn't be inundated with requests they didn't want. The drawback is that a request from an important person -- who the worker might actually want to meet -- will be ignored too.
Unlike Cortana and Google Now, Apple's Siri can't sift through emails and pull out information. However, Siri can be used for email dictation, such as, "send an email to so and so."
Scheduling meetings
Setting up and keeping track of meetings is one of the main tasks of any real-life assistant. Dennis Mortensen, CEO of virtual-assistant company x.ai, believes that software can do as good a job.
With his company's software, users can pick one of two personalities, Amy or Andrew, to be their virtual assistant. Once users have made their choice, they simply copy Amy and Andrew on emails sent to people the user intends to meet up with. (Their emails are Amy@x.ai and Andrew@x.ai.) The software detects language like "Let's meet up" or "Can you schedule a call" in messages and chats with the person on the other end to set up a time, then sends a calendar invite.
Bubba Page, CEO of Outro.com, has been using Amy over the past year. He was about to hire a real-life assistant, but says that with Amy, he hasn't needed to.
He says that as a startup CEO, he gets 200 to 300 emails a day. By the time two parties agree to meet, and then decide on a time and place, scheduling can take a lot of back and forth -- he estimates it takes six emails on average before a meeting is complete. Amy saves him time by taking over that job. He says the software works well enough that he recommended it to his employees and that he uses the bot to set up all his meetings, except those with the most important people on his contact list, such as investors.
"There's a slight chance something could go wrong," he says, "and I don't want to risk it."
He also admires the smooth way Amy responds when conversations get out of her league. "I just wanted to pass along this message I received from Kelly," she said to him recently, about a conversation that was too complicated for her to handle. "It doesn't look like it's a message I can provide an answer to, so I suggest you follow up with Kelly directly."
---
Of course, the growing intelligence of virtual assistants comes with trade-offs. Privacy is a big one. Like a real-life assistant, the value of a digital assistant comes in knowing the boss -- their past meetings, their priorities, and their preferences for who they like to speak with.
For a digital assistant to shoulder some of the functions of a real-life one, it requires permission to access your personal data -- and a lot of it. For Cortana to suggest a meeting, or for Siri to tie an unknown number to a person, they need to be able to read the content of your emails. Location-based alerts, like those offered by Google Now, require giving the assistant the ability to monitor your location all the time. Ultimately, individuals are providing tech companies with a far more intimate and complete picture of their lives than ever before.
There are courtesy trade-offs, too. Many virtual assistants work by the user speaking aloud to computers. But speaking aloud to a computer, particularly in work settings, can be annoying to colleagues. Mr. Buchmann, for example, says that he often asks "OK Google" questions about topics that come up during meetings with colleagues. So far, he says, no one has called him rude, but he does try to be careful. "I definitely think there's a time and a place to use your voice," he said. "And a time and a place not to."
---
Ms. Dwoskin is a former Wall Street Journal reporter. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Elizabeth Dwoskin
