Fitbit Sets IPO Terms
Fitbit Inc., a pioneer in wearable fitness tracking, is looking to raise up to $358 million in its initial public offering, according to a regulatory filing made Tuesday.
Fitbit said it plans to sell 22.4 million shares for between $14 to $16 a share.
Including about 7.5 million shares some stockholders plan to sell, the offering is valued at about $448 million at the midpoint of the range.
The San Francisco company filed to go public last month in a move that will help fend away a mounting assault from a range of corporate giants eager for a piece of the burgeoning market.
Fitbit's products' novel ability to count the number of daily steps and monitor distance traveled and calories burned seized the attention of data-obsessed modern consumers, and paved the way for a new category of hardware technology.
The company disclosed in May regulatory filings that it made a $131.8 million profit last year on revenue that nearly tripled to $745.4 million. Since 2007, Fitbit has sold roughly 20.5 million of its fitness-tracking devices -- from the $60 Zip clip-on to the $250 Surge wristwatch -- with more than half sold last year alone.
It is looking to trade on the New York Stock Exchange under ticker symbol FIT.
-- Chelsey Dulaney
Facebook Opens
Third AI Hub in Paris
Facebook Inc. is opening an artificial-intelligence research lab in Paris, hoping to tap into a large European talent pool.
"It will create opportunities for researchers in France and create an ecosystem around Facebook, where startups will work on similar topics," said Yann LeCun, Facebook's head of AI research.
Mr. LeCun, a well-known French-born AI researcher, told the Journal there was a long tradition of excellence in France in AI-related research, like deep learning and computer vision -- teaching software to recognize language and images roughly the same way a human brain does.
The company has hired six researchers for its Paris AI lab, including Gabriel Synnaeve, most recently a postdoctoral fellow at Ecole Normale Superieure in Paris, working on things like understanding how babies learn speech and language.
The other new staffers include experts in image processing, text analysis, speech recognition, and real-time strategy games. Facebook plans to hire another six people by the end of the year, and 20 to 25 next year, said Chief Technology Officer Mike Schroepfer.
-- Amir Mizroch
GameStop Agrees
To Acquire Geeknet
GameStop Corp. agreed to acquire Geeknet Inc. in a deal valued at $140 million, trumping Geeknet's previous agreement with teen-focused retailer Hot Topic Inc.
GameStop will pay $20 a share for Geeknet, as the videogame retailer seeks to expand its presence in the game-related merchandise and collectibles category.
Hot Topic had agreed to pay $17.50 a share for Geeknet for a total consideration of $122 million. On Friday, Geeknet said Hot Topic had until Monday to match or beat the latest bid.
A Hot Topic spokesman declined to comment Tuesday. Hot Topic, which was taken private by Sycamore Partners in 2013, sells apparel and accessories influenced by music and pop culture through its namesake stores.
Geeknet is the parent company of online retailers ThinkGeek and ThinkGeek Solutions, which sell an assortment of clothing, gadgets and videogame-themed merchandise targeted at so-called geeks and hackers.
-- Tess Stynes
