When we turn to the numbers, it's often because we want to know objectively if something is getting better or worse -- the job market, inflation, our health, the national mood and so on.
I've spent the better part of two years writing this column that digs deeply into the numbers in the news, where they come from and how they're used and abused. I've come to an unsettling conclusion: The numbers themselves -- including our abilities to measure these types of questions with surveys, specifically -- are getting worse and we aren't always using the numbers well.
Our overarching problem is that so much data is based on surveys to which people no longer respond. One example is the Current Population Survey, from the Census Bureau and Bureau of Labor Statistics. The survey underpins the monthly jobs report and is very good, but its response rate has fallen some 20 percentage points this year from 90% a decade ago.
Nearly every other major survey has fared worse. The White House Office of Management and Budget once articulated a standard that survey response rates should be above 80%. Today, nearly no surveys remain above that standard.
Outside the government, the practice of conducting surveys by cold calling households at random, the way surveys are explained in a Statistics 101 class, is increasingly abandoned, as it must be in a world when people no longer answer phones.
Consider opinion polling. In 2000, over 90% of national polls relied on randomly calling people on the phone, according to the Pew Research Center. As recently as 2014, a narrow majority still operated this way. By 2022, fewer than 9%, or just 6 out of 69 organizations, still polled this way, Pew found.
Instead, polling data largely comes from finding panels of willing respondents and repeatedly quizzing them. Many of the organizations doing this are very thoughtful. They think about how to weight responses to match the overall population, aiming to make results as close to random surveying as possible.
Journalists and statisticians still dutifully report the "margin of error" from these surveys. But the margin of error shows only one type of error, sampling error, which is how much a random sample of a certain size might differ from the overall population.
Other types of error are potentially much bigger. What if the people who don't respond to surveys are much different than those who do? What we end up with is data that's just fuzzier than it used to be. The U.S. statisticians I've met who work on these issues are smart and honest people. I don't think there's any conspiracies here, merely that we're kidding ourselves to believe the quality of data remains the same.
Some respond by saying, "But there's more data than ever before. Big data. Machine learning. Artificial intelligence."
There's incredible promise. Alternate data sources, such as satellite data, give us a tool to observe what's really happening in untrustworthy economies. Autocrats can fake their GDP data more easily than they can fake how much pollution their factories emit.
But, no reputable alternate data providers claim to wholly duplicate what government agencies provide. For the foreseeable future, these are supplements, not replacements.
The other big challenge facing data is how we use it. That's complicated by our current circumstances, where the pandemic era still looms large.
This has created an environment in which it's easy to cherry pick a starting point for data comparisons and come up with nearly any result you would like.
What if one person is upset that consumer prices are far higher than they were in 2019, and another is relieved that they didn't climb as fast over the most recent 12-month period? Well, both can be right. The numbers can tell us how things moved, but they can't tell us which time frame is most salient.
There's often a similar dynamic coming out of recessions, a period where things are measurably improving but people don't realize it yet. But the disruption to our way of life in recent years was far stranger and bigger than typical recessions. It's no surprise that many people don't totally know what to make of it all.
I'm not optimistic that 2024 will be a year in which the incentives are aligned for everyone to improve data quality or use the numbers in a more honest way.
We're heading into a divisive election. The only point on which candidates seem to agree is that the stakes are extremely high -- existential even. For many politicians, commentators and even voters, everything must be in service to the electoral outcome.
People want righteous certitude. They don't want to hear that numbers are complicated, that we need to examine them more carefully than in the past, and that we need to undertake a lot of work fixing them up.
On a personal note, as 2024 begins, I will be taking a temporary leave from this column. Though my concerns about the state of numbers are somewhat severe, I'm not abandoning the column out of despair. The reason for this hiatus is a happy one: parental leave to care for my newborn daughter. For me, it is also a reminder that the most important things in life -- undivided time with your kids, as well as baby snuggles, first crawls, first foods and first steps and such -- are things you can't measure with numbers anyway.
Credit: By Josh Zumbrun
