[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
U.S. companies just haven't been pushing boundaries like they used to.
Innovation is the secret sauce of growth, enabling an economy to advance at a faster pace than the mere combination of investment and labor allows. A history of innovation encompassing the likes of the light bulb and Internet is a big reason the U.S. economy has been so much more robust over the long haul than others.
But there is no guarantee past will be prologue.
Robert Gordon, an economist at Northwestern University, thinks innovation won't be quick enough to save the U.S. economy from lackluster growth stemming from headwinds like an aging society and increasing inequality. He argues that even with the boost from personal computers and the Web in the late 1990s through the early 2000s, innovation since the 1970s hasn't been as strong as in earlier decades.
Disagreeing with that assessment, MIT Sloan School of Management economists Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee point to factors such as recent advances in artificial intelligence, saying the pace of innovation has in fact been accelerating. They say the productivity figures Mr. Gordon uses to bolster his point don't capture the full story.
A look at technology prices suggests that, for now, Mr. Gordon is on to something.
A hallmark of technology is that it constantly gets cheaper: Buying a PC in 2005 equivalent to today's $1,000 model would have cost far more. But prices for hardware and software bought by U.S. companies haven't been falling as quickly as in the past, notes J.P. Morgan Chase economist Mike Feroli.
Prices of tech equipment in the second quarter were down 6.8% from two years ago, adjusting for the overall pace of inflation, according to the Commerce Department. In the 1990s, the average two-year decline was 17.7%. Software prices fell 3.4% in the same period, versus an average decline of 9.5% in the 1990s.
The government quality-adjusts its price figures; if a company is buying, say, a more advanced server for the same price it paid for a less powerful one five years ago, that registers as a price decline. So the slower rate of price deflation in recent years suggests technology isn't becoming obsolete as fast as it used to. The implication is that the pace of innovation is slowing.
Prices are far from a perfect measure of innovation. For example, Google is a big user of R, a programming language for statistical computing. But as an open-source project, R's price is zero, so it has no place in the statistics. Moreover, prices for technology capital goods don't reflect the flowering of high-tech tinkering that has emerged in recent years. With hobbyists making self-driven blimps in their garages, it is tough to declare American inventiveness dead.
But U.S. companies' tech demand has slowed: Spending on tech, minus depreciation, in the decade ended 2011 rose at its slowest pace since the 1940s. So the price signal still makes sense: If firms aren't buying into innovation, there is less incentive to innovate.
Until that changes, and more of the secret sauce is mixed up, the U.S. economy may not grow as quickly as it used to.
And since this ultimately powers sales and profits, the future for companies, and investors, will be a little less bright.
Credit: By Justin Lahart
