Willy Loman, the beleaguered road warrior of "Death of a Salesman," wouldn't recognize the technology-dependent sales staff at GuideSpark Inc.
Employees on the sales floor of the Menlo Park, Calif., human-resources software firm lean on more than a dozen digital aids. One analyzes records of millions of transactions stored in sales databases to serve up lists of potential customers, ranking them in order of their likelihood to buy. If a prospect doesn't pick up, another program, at the click of a mouse, leaves a voice-mail message from a prerecorded template. When a salesperson closes a deal, a third program triggers a morale-boosting gong sound.
Letting a computer determine the hottest prospects might sound questionable, but GuideSpark Chief Executive Keith Kitani believes this and other data-driven features have dramatically boosted his team's productivity. His 70-person sales crew makes triple the number of calls and meetings it did two years ago. Revenue has picked up as staffers pare time spent on rote tasks, such as manual record-keeping and researching prospects, and focus on the most promising leads.
Silicon Valley startups are automating sales departments for a shot at the more than $23 billion companies spend each year on sales software. Some of these startups mine sales staff emails, calendars, social-media feeds as well as news articles and customer databases for patterns that help them predict the likelihood of a sale or the behavior of potential buyers.
Such companies have amassed roughly $400 million in venture capital in the past two years, according to Dow Jones VentureSource. (VentureSource is owned by News Corp, publisher of The Wall Street Journal.)
The combination of predictive smarts and automation promises to push sales into a new era of data-driven efficiency, just as it has fields as diverse as advertising and professional sports.
"Sales offers possibly the biggest opportunity today in adding [artificial] intelligence in the enterprise," said Mike Dauber, a partner with venture-capital firm Amplify Partners who has invested in the new generation of sales tools.
This emerging technology addresses a growing desperation among sales professionals, particularly those targeting businesses rather than consumers. Buyers increasingly bypass the sales middleman to research and buy directly online. This shift will cost many U.S. sales workers their jobs in the next five years, Forrester Research Inc. estimated. To stay viable, sales departments are looking for a digital leg up from companies such as Infer Inc., InsideSales.com, Hoopla Software Inc., ClearSlide Inc., Leadspace, 6Sense Insights Inc. and SalesPredict Inc.
Some of these tools can seem creepy. Software from startups including ClearSlide alerts salespeople when a potential client reads a pitch email, so they can follow up just when the prospect may be most receptive. It also tells them whether a prospect lingered on the message once they have opened it, signaling substantial interest. 6Sense uses advertising technology software known as cookies to help customers identify the job titles and companies of the people who have visited their website.
Amanda Kahlow, 6Sense's founder and CEO, said, "None of our customers see this as a privacy violation. This is about helping prospects finding the products they are looking for."
On Tuesday, sales-software titan Salesforce.com Inc. entered the fray. The company is outfitting its widely used sales tools with computerized predictions and automation from RelateIQ, a startup it acquired a year ago for about $340 million. The new service, called SalesforceIQ, draws on sales staff emails, calendars and Salesforce's own databases. It proffers tips on how to interact with specific customers and nudges salespeople when, for example, they haven't spoken lately to a client they tend to contact regularly. (News Corp was an investor in RelateIQ prior to its acquisition by Salesforce and an early test site for SalesforceIQ.)
Salesforce's entry in the market validates the use of data to aid sales, but it also complicates the company's role in the data-driven sales landscape. Most young sales prediction or automation companies rely in part on data stored by Salesforce and have digital hooks into Salesforce systems. Moreover, it has invested in data-driven startups including Apttus Corp., InsideSales and 6Sense.
Credit: By Shira Ovide and Elizabeth Dwoskin
