If Nick Hawker's computer models are right, the snap of a pistol shrimp's claw holds the secret to boundless clean energy.
Mr. Hawker's company, First Light Fusion, is one of around two dozen startups chasing the dream of generating electricity by squeezing atoms together.
Fusion, first theorized a century ago and shown to be possible decades later, is the same power that lights the sun and every other star, as well as hydrogen bombs. All it requires is the force to press small atoms together to build bigger ones -- a process that releases huge amounts of energy, no greenhouse emissions and limited radioactivity.
The hitch is that these atoms repel each other, and overcoming that resistance requires enormous strength. Scientists now are building systems that squeeze, pummel and bombard atoms into submission. Their challenge is to get far more energy out of a reaction than they put in, a feat nobody has yet accomplished.
Concerns about global warming have brought fresh intensity to a field that languished for years. In December, Congress boosted research spending on fusion.
"If we can make fusion work, it really would be the perfect way to generate energy," says Steven Cowley, director of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, run by Princeton University for the Energy Department.
Princeton and many other advanced labs are trying to fuse hydrogen isotopes by enveloping them in an intense magnetic field that traps and squeezes the atoms, heating them to temperatures 10 times the sun's core. Physicists generate the field with electromagnets demanding so much current that they must be superconductive, which has required cooling to near absolute zero -- the point where all motion stops.
For years, scientists believed that this required reactors big enough to walk through, powered by electromagnets heavier than a blue whale and house-sized freezers. Budgets ran in billions of dollars, meaning only governments could underwrite fusion experiments.
Technological breakthroughs have upended those assumptions. Advances in computing, precision machinery and synthetic materials have allowed scientists to design reactors a fraction of the size and cost of those just a few years ago. Lower price tags have put fusion within reach of private investors, allowing ventures to sprout.
Advances in computer modeling brought First Light's Mr. Hawker to fusion over a decade ago, when he was getting a Ph.D. on simulating fluid dynamics at the University of Oxford. Mr. Hawker's adviser, Yiannis Ventikos, was intrigued by bubbles collapsing under intense force, like those produced by the tiny pistol shrimp's claw, which it snaps to generate a "bubble bullet" that stuns its prey. Scientists in 2001 had shown that the implosions produced not just noise but also extreme pressure, a flash of light -- dubbed shrimpoluminescense -- and temperatures exceeding 5,000 degrees Kelvin.
Physicists decades earlier had considered bubble collapse to trigger fusion but lacked the computing power or math to model it. Revisiting the question with advanced algorithms and powerful processors, Mr. Hawker and Mr. Ventikos showed the potential to generate million-degree conditions needed for fusion.
Today, First Light has raised GBP 25 million (US$32.8 million) to build machines for testing its computer models. If the shock waves deliver, the next step is to build a prototype generator, potentially as soon as 2025.
"Things that were unthinkable 10 or 20 years ago are now fairly straightforward," says Jonathan Carling, chief executive of Tokamak Energy, another startup based near Oxford, England.
Tokamak Energy and at least two North American startups also aim around 2025 to fire up prototype fusion reactors, each roughly the size of turbines inside traditional power plants.
If any of the upstarts succeed, it will mark a scientific leapfrog for the record books. Until recently, the unquestioned leader on the path to achieving a self-sustaining fusion reaction -- a crucial hurdle before developing power plants -- was a 35-country consortium based in southern France called ITER. First proposed in 1985, the project today is a construction site of more than a dozen buildings. Coming together at its core is the world's biggest fusion system, a 98-foot-tall drum housing a 37-foot-high doughnut-shaped reactor core.
The project, costing more than $20 billion, was designed to show fusion's viability and develop needed technologies -- not put power on the grid.
Slated to begin testing in 2025 and achieve fusion around 2035, ITER targets a 10-fold increase in power between what goes in and what comes out. If all goes well, Director-General Bernard Bigot foresees others leveraging ITER's research to build commercial fusion plants in the 2050s.
Officials across the growing industry say recent advances would have been impossible without work being done by government projects like ITER and Princeton's lab.
"We're going to learn a lot from ITER," says Bob Mumgaard, chief executive of Boston-based Commonwealth Fusion Systems.
General Fusion, a venture in Vancouver, Canada, is working on an approach involving mechanical compression inside a spherical reactor using synchronized pistons -- enabled in part by 3-D printing and digital industrial controls, says Christofer Mowry, chief executive.
Both Commonwealth Fusion in Boston and Tokamak Energy in Oxford aim to shrink ITER's doughnut-shaped reactor to a scale that could fit inside a gymnasium by using new electromagnets roughly 2% the size of ITER's. The magnets use novel alloys that become superconductive at temperatures achievable with commercially available helium, so are much less expensive and energy-intensive to operate.
First Light avoids magnets and relies more on physical compression in a collapsing bubble, painstakingly planned on computers. Leaps in processing power have helped simulate blindingly fast shock waves, as have advances in the science of modeling and machine learning.
The prospect of compact, affordable fusion reactors producing bountiful energy but no greenhouse gasses that researchers say contribute to climate change has sparked investor interest. The 21 startups in the Fusion Industry Association trade group together have raised as much as $1.5 billion -- most of it in the past five years, says Executive Director Andrew Holland.
Few investors are traditional venture capitalists. Since payback could take more than a decade, investments today are "almost philanthropy," says Mr. Cowley at Princeton. "Investors want to be part of something that will change the world."
ITER's Mr. Bigot fears some may be overly optimistic. He questions whether materials exist to protect the insides of compact fusion reactors, which could get even hotter than his giant machine.
"If they succeed, we applaud them," says Tim Luce, head of science and operations at ITER.
One issue not sparking deep concern is radioactivity. Fusion reactions can't snowball out of control if a reactor breaks, as existing fission nuclear reactors can; without the required heat and pressure to sustain it, fusion would just stop. Reactor components used in fusion would pose little danger before long, because only a small amount of mildly radioactive fuel is required and the residue has a relatively short half-life. Fission waste, which is far more radioactive, lasts for eons.
Another consensus across the fusion world is it's no longer a scientific riddle. Today it presents engineering challenges of equipment, materials and designs that can be tackled with time, testing and money, say proponents.
"It's not an issue of if but when," says ITER's Mr. Luce.

Credit: By Daniel Michaels
