Tech companies whose businesses have surged during the pandemic -- like Amazon.com Inc. and Zoom Video Communications Inc. -- are snagging more of the M.B.A. talent entering the workforce, helping to offset pullbacks by industries harder hit by the Covid-19 economy.
Openings for tech positions rose at 57% of full-time master of business administration programs this past fall, according to a survey of nearly 100 schools by industry group MBA Career Services & Employer Alliance. Overall, though, it has been a lackluster recruiting season at business schools, the survey found, as nearly half reported an overall decline in opportunities for students.
Sectors hit hardest by the pandemic, such as retail and energy, have pulled back their M.B.A. recruiting, according to the report. That is especially the case for companies in the hospitality industry, which 61% of business schools said have cut back job opportunities.
Nearly half the schools also reported a decline in recruiting from consulting firms -- traditionally some of the biggest hirers of M.B.A. graduates every year. Several of those firms, including PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP and Bain & Co., said last year that they planned to make fewer hires among second-year M.B.A. candidates, beyond those who interned in the summer.
Some of the biggest recruiters have been tech companies whose business have boomed during the coronavirus crisis, including Amazon, Zoom and Netflix Inc., said Megan Hendricks, executive director of the MBA Career Services & Employer Alliance. Amazon plans to recruit more than 1,000 M.B.A. students for full-time jobs and internships this year, a company spokeswoman said, while Zoom said it intends to hire more M.B.A. graduates as part of a new, global emerging-talent program. Netflix had no comment.
Akintayo Abiodun, a 38-year-old Nigerian in the second year of his M.B.A. studies at Rice University's Jones Graduate School of Business in Houston, had originally planned to pursue a career in the oil-and-gas industry. But he said he reconsidered after discovering many companies outside the tech industry weren't sponsoring international students this year.
After a summer internship with a regional bank didn't lead to a job offer, Mr. Abiodun accepted a role with Amazon's finance leadership-development program in Seattle once he graduates this spring.
"Being international, your options are already restricted," he said.
Business school graduates have increasingly gravitated to careers in technology in recent years, often starting and moving up in product-management roles that combine elements of marketing, design and problem solving. Business schools, in turn, have responded by fashioning more graduate degrees with training in tech skills such as data analytics and artificial intelligence.
Julie Pollok, a 25-year-old M.B.A. student at Southern Methodist University's Cox School of Business in Dallas, said she came into the program looking for a role in brand management at a packaged-goods company but is now looking at tech marketing. She plans to intern with Samsung Electronics Co. "The recruiting in tech was just more optimistic," she said.
Credit: By Patrick Thomas
