A friendly game of Go in the city of Wuzhen this week has given Google an opening to return to China's good graces, seven years after it left the country over government censorship of its namesake search engine and hacks of its Gmail service.
Few companies can match Google for its global reach, with more than a billion customers for each of seven different products. Yet China manages without it, leaving a gaping hole in the global map for the Silicon Valley company and its parent, Alphabet Inc., as they expand into driverless cars, cloud computing and other technologies made possible by advances in artificial intelligence, or AI.
On the surface, the Google entourage was here for a three-game Go rematch between its AlphaGo computer program and Ke Jie, China's 19-year-old world champion. After two matches, AlphaGo is up 2-0, with a final game set for Saturday.
Beyond the contest, the event allowed Google to be seen in a country that is significant for its long-term business prospects and to forge relationships with Chinese government officials who could play pivotal roles in that respect. And Wuzhen is the site of an annual internet conference convened by the Cyberspace Administration of China.
In the near term, the AlphaGo event was a chance for Google to raise its profile with China's young engineering talent, who are much in demand as rivals such as Amazon.com Inc., Facebook Inc. and Chinese internet firm Baidu Inc. ramp up ambitions in products dependent on advanced AI technology.
Two top AI executives in Google's cloud unit are Chinese women: Fei-Fei Li and Jia Li, the former head of research at messaging company Snap Inc.
China's AI talent has "significantly increased in quality and number," said Ms. Jia, who attended the Wuzhen event. She said Google is looking to hire AI engineers in China to add to the more than 500 staff in Beijing and Shanghai. Although its main products are blocked, Google still runs an online advertising business in mainland China, helping Chinese and international firms market their businesses overseas and on some domestic platforms.
Hiring Chinese engineers will likely be easier than winning over the country's regulators and consumers, given lingering bitterness over Google's 2010 departure, when company co-founder Sergey Brin
became an outspoken critic of China's government.
In a sign of the importance Google placed on the event, Alphabet Chairman Eric Schmidt made his first public appearance in China since 2015, joined by Google scientists including Demis Hassabis and Jeff Dean.
Google worked with the provincial government in the region to stage AlphaGo, but no Chinese internet service live-streamed the event. People familiar with the situation said streaming plans were dropped at the last minute for reasons that weren't clear.
Google remains interested in expanding its presence in China, but it recognizes the challenges and is moving slowly, according to a person familiar with the company's thinking. Google recently introduced its Translate app into China and is working to bring in more Android apps over the next year, this person said.
There are many business reasons to return. China is a dark spot for Google Cloud, its business of running companies' systems and data on its computers.
In hardware, Google recently launched new flagship smartphones and a smart talking speaker. But the key selling points of those devices are their Google services, such as Google's virtual assistant, which are blocked in China, and these products aren't available there.
Credit: Liza Lin; Jack Nicas
