TOKYO -- Google is expanding in Japan to ride a wave of technology investment in Asia and challenge cloud-computing providers Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft Corp.
Google, a unit of Alphabet Inc., said on Friday it plans to move in 2019 to a new Tokyo office big enough to double its staff. The company also said it is seeking new ways to use big data and machine learning in Japan, as well as expand its cloud services for local businesses.
Japanese companies, including the likes of utility Tokyo Electric Power Co. and clothing-chain operator Fast Retailing Co., increasingly are looking for faster and more secure ways to store and analyze huge amounts of data.
Google's plans for Japan come as the company invests heavily in Asia to catch up in services such as cloud-storage products from Amazon and Microsoft.
"Doubling our presence in Japan means growing our strong engineering teams here," Alphabet Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat said at a news conference. Google has about 1,300 employees in Japan.
That could see Google vying with Yahoo Japan Corp. for engineers in a tight labor market. Japan's biggest internet-portal operator, a joint venture between SoftBank Group Corp.'s Japan unit and Yahoo Inc., is building up its own infrastructure for big data and machine learning.
Yahoo Japan has invested in a supercomputer specializing in deep-learning applications and a data-research center with 500 engineers, spending years to personalize its voice-recognition and electronic-payments services.
In 2010, the company adopted Google's search-engine algorithms and advertisement-delivery system.
As a trailblazer for Japan's use of the internet, Yahoo Japan has managed to keep its lead over Google among personal computer users, with a monthly average of 34 million users to Google's 22 million, according to market research firm Nielsen Co. Japan.
But increasing smartphone use has helped Google log twice as many user searches as Yahoo Japan, according to web-traffic analysis firm Statcounter.
A Yahoo Japan spokesman declined to comment on Google's plans.

Credit: By Mayumi Negishi
