Instacart's shares jumped in their trading debut, another promising sign for a reawakening IPO market.
Shares of the grocery-delivery company finished their first day of trading at $33.70 on Tuesday on the Nasdaq exchange under the ticker CART, up 12% from the IPO price of $30 a share.
Instacart's initial public offering had been in the works for years, and Chief Executive Fidji Simo said in an interview that the company's main goal with the offering is to provide liquidity to its employees. Instacart already has been operating like a public company, she said, and following the IPO it will continue to look for acquisition targets and other ways to build its retail support technology.
"We will continue to deepen and expand all of the services that we launched with grocers," Simo said.
At its closing price, Instacart commanded a valuation of more than $11 billion on a fully diluted basis.
Instacart shares traded around $38 in afternoon trading, as the broader market declined. That gave the company a valuation of more than $12.6 billion on a fully diluted basis.
Instacart, formally known as Maplebear, has been one of the buzziest IPOs this year along with British chip designer Arm and marketing-automation company Klaviyo, and will serve as a signal for whether the market has opened for new listings after a lengthy freeze. Arm's stock rose 25% in its stock-market debut, though it has pared those gains.
Founded in 2012, Instacart sends couriers to grocery stores to pick out orders and deliver them to people's homes. The company in recent years has expanded into other areas such as advertising and technology services and has sights set on healthcare, artificial-intelligence-aided services and other areas.
The San Francisco company, which has raised more than $2 billion in venture-capital funding, has long explored a public listing. Instacart filed confidentially to do so last year and had planned to list its shares by the end of 2022. It pulled back on those plans in the fall, citing tumultuous market conditions.
Grocery delivery remains a competitive business for Instacart and rivals such as Uber Technologies and DoorDash. U.S. consumers are ordering more groceries online than they did before the pandemic but are doing so less frequently. For retailers, offering online-shopping operations can be expensive because of the labor and transportation costs involved. Many grocers are working with multiple third-party service providers, ramping up competition among delivery companies.
In their pitch to investors, Instacart executives said the grocery industry is among the biggest retail sectors, though it has been slower to adopt e-commerce than others. Grocers of all sizes will need to embrace technology both in-store and online to meet shifting consumer needs, they said.
During Instacart's IPO roadshow, Simo said, investors praised the company's profitability, the promise of its advertising business and its advantages against competitors.
"I'm excited, clearly. But I'm more excited about the big turnaround in business performance," Simo said.
When Simo took the CEO job in 2021, the company's sales had been declining and some wondered if Instacart would wind up a pandemic fad. She said Instacart has proved that it can build on pandemic-driven growth profitably.
Credit: By Jaewon Kang and Corrie Driebusch
