Paradise, Calif., the town destroyed by the 2018 Camp Fire, says it is close to a debt default, heightening municipal-bond investors' concerns over how a warming planet is adding risk to their $4 trillion market.
A downed power line sparked the fire, which spread through forested hills baked dry by a lengthy drought. The town received $219 million in settlement money from utility PG&E Corp. in 2020, but Paradise recently disclosed to bondholders that "no assurances can be given" that it will repay about $5 million that one of its agencies borrowed years ago. The agency's cash is close to running out, and local officials have earmarked the settlement funds for reconstruction, not debt repayment. S&P Global Ratings slashed the bonds' rating by six notches to triple-C in June, pushing it deeper into junk territory.
Municipalities have long suffered from weather-related destruction. Many investors are growing more concerned that climate change is intensifying wildfires, even while critical infrastructure is unprepared and underfunded. Bond-fund managers say the mounting cost of such events means state and federal governments will be less willing to bail out creditors when they strike.
The municipal-debt market, which finances community services like schools, hospitals and power plants, is following insurers, real-estate developers and fishing fleets in adapting to the risk. Some bond funds are using artificial intelligence to predict which investments are most likely to get hit by natural disasters.
"A growing subset of investors are comfortable putting their thumbs on scale and saying 'I don't want anything with high climate exposure'," said Adam Stern, co-head of municipal research at Breckinridge Capital Advisors. Accounts focused on sustainable investing have grown fourfold for the firm over the past five years, he said.
Defaulting on the redevelopment agency bonds could taint Paradise's reputation with bond investors in the future, analysts say. The bonds recently traded around 80 cents on the dollar, down from 97 cents in May, according to Electronic Municipal Market Access.
Research firm Municipal Market Analytics hardly ever heard questions from clients about climate change five years ago, said partner Matt Fabian. Now they get questions every week from asset managers, bankers and regulators.
Municipal bond borrowers inconsistently disclose environmental, social and governance factors, making it difficult for portfolio managers to measure their exposure to changing climate.
Historically, municipal investors counted on bond insurers to protect them against events like natural disasters but only about 7.5% of municipal debt outstanding is currently insured, down from over half in 2005, according to a Municipal Market Analytics analysis of Bloomberg data. Many municipalities stopped buying policies after the 2008 financial crisis, when bond insurers lost their AAA credit ratings, causing problems for municipal borrowers.
Private and federal insurers have also pulled back on weather-related coverage, making it harder for devastated towns to rebuild.
Generate image description

Credit: By Matt Wirz and Heather Gillers
