International Business Machines Corp. is buying data company Truven Health Analytics Inc. for $2.6 billion, in a bid to expand its already considerable presence in the health-care industry.
The deal will double the size of IBM's Watson Health business unit to 5,000 employees, as the company adds new technology services to sell to doctors and hospitals.
"We're now deeply embedded in the health-care system," said John Kelly, IBM's senior vice president of solutions portfolio and research.
IBM has been on a health-care spending spree in the past year, doling out more than $4 billion to buy medical-technology companies.
With Truven, as with several other recent IBM acquisitions, the prize is data, which IBM will use to improve its Watson artificial-intelligence system, Mr. Kelly said. Machine-learning systems such as Watson require immense amounts of so-called training data, from which they extract useful patterns. "We've been systematically putting together the platform and the underlying data," he said, aiming "to reduce costs and improve outcomes."
"Health-care data is incredibly valuable right now," said Michael Chernew, an economist at Harvard Medical School who studies health policy and has used Truven data in his research.
IBM shares surged on Thursday, ending 4 p.m. trading on the New York Stock Exchange up 5% at $132.45.
Truven, based in Ann Arbor, Mich., supplies health-care data services to employers, hospitals and drugmakers to help them gauge the efficacy of products and services. Its software can scan millions of records and, for example, tell employers or hospitals whether patients were given unnecessary procedures. Mr. Kelly said he believed that Watson could better analyze Truven's data.
The deal, expected to close within a few months, is the largest acquisition made by Virginia Rometty since she took over as IBM's chief executive in 2012. She is trying to turn around the 104-year-old company's fortunes by making new investments in data analytics, security and mobile computing as IBM's core businesses continue to decline.
Watson Health is delivered as a set of services over the Web. On a call with analysts last month, IBM Chief Financial Officer Martin Schroeter said that such software-as-a-service offerings are "a fairly small business," when compared with IBM's overall $23 billion software business, but they are "growing quite well."
IBM's other health-care acquisitions include Phytel Inc. and Explorys Inc., companies that maintained clinical data on more than 50 million patients, and Merge Healthcare Inc., which specialized in medical-image technology.
IBM has folded these acquisitions into Watson Health, aiming to develop software to make suggestions that doctors can use to improve care.
The effort amounts to a big bet in a largely unproven domain: the meeting of life sciences and artificial intelligence. Watson might be able to spot anomalies such as cancer in Merge Healthcare's magnetic-resonance-imaging pictures, for instance.
IBM is trying to take a pole position in the crowded race to profit from health-care data. A 3-year-old startup, Enlitic Inc., has built similar tools and is teaming with hospitals and imaging companies to analyze their data.
Truven's data will allow Watson to turn its artificial intelligence on the often- opaque world of medical costs and pricing. That information has already proven valuable to nearly every part of the health-care system.
Truven performed an analysis last year for the state of Delaware to determine the biggest drivers behind a surge in the state's health-care spending. And the company's Red Book service includes information about prices charged by pharmaceutical companies for their medications, including how those change over time, an important question for researchers, government policy makers and corporate executives.
The company also owns Micromedex Drugdex, one of the so-called compendiums that list clinical uses of drugs, including those not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Moreover, Truven is one of relatively few companies with a large collection of commercial claims reflecting what medical-services insurers actually pay for on behalf of members, and how much they spend. Such data is vital as employers, insurers, health-care providers and others try to track patterns of spending, identify gaps in care and shift to new forms of payment intended to reward efficiency and quality.
Researchers rely on commercial claims to complement government-program data, so they can include people whose coverage comes through managed-care companies.
"Any effort to control health-care spending growth, to improve quality, to understand what's going on, requires access to claims data," said Harvard's Dr. Chernew.
Truven was formerly the health-care unit of Thomson Reuters Corp. It was sold in 2012 to private-equity firm Veritas Capital Fund Management LLC for $1.25 billion.
IBM's Mr. Kelly stopped short of saying that the Truven acquisition would mark the end of IBM's health-care buying spree, but said, "we have all of the major data sets that we need."
---
Elizabeth Dwoskin contributed to this article.
Credit: By Robert McMillan and Anna Wilde Mathews
