So many people are now tapping into the internet and social media that the torrent of data they're creating is outstripping the storage capacity of traditional devices such as hard drives, optical discs and magnetic tape.
In fact, analysts at IBM Corp. estimate that 90% of all the electronic data in the world has been created in the past two years.
In a bid to contain this deluge, researchers at Columbia University and the New York Genome Center have crossed a significant new milestone. They have figured out how to store and retrieve a 122-year-old French movie, an entire computer operating system, and even a $50 Amazon gift card -- all in a single drop of DNA.
The experiment, reported Thursday in the journal Science, advances the hope that the same genetic chemistry that provides the biological instructions for all known living organisms may someday provide us with the ultimate form of storage for our Facebook archives.
The new research marks a dramatic increase in the amount of information that DNA can safely hold, and inches this technique closer to practical application. "Their big achievement is demonstrating high data density -- in this case 215 petabytes per gram of DNA," said Harvard University geneticist George Church, who wasn't involved in the project.
That is an amount of information roughly equivalent to billions of filing cabinets of text. In theory, a DNA storage system could reduce the entire Library of Congress to a small cube of DNA crystals or a sticky genetic liquid.
Perfected by eons of evolution, DNA is a naturally occurring acid that encodes a person's biological instructions by using various combinations of four base chemicals: adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C) and thymine (T). A DNA sequence isn't alive in any sense. It is a string of special chemicals that creates all the necessary proteins that are the building blocks of life.
The researchers converted their digital data, stored on a computer as a series of binary zeros and ones, into the same four-character chemical code. They used the resulting DNA sequence to create an unlimited number of genetic molecules that each contain all the original information.
The atomic-scale size of DNA isn't the only advantage. The stability and lifespan of the molecules is measured in centuries and far exceeds that of hard drives or magnetic tape, which means data can be stored safely for longer periods.
Over the past decade, as they developed these techniques, scientists also used DNA as an attention-getting device.
Research groups in the U.S., Europe and Canada have devised ways to use DNA to encode watermarks, write their names, or copy Shakespeare's sonnets. At the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Washington, researchers created micro-organisms that carry the tune of Walt Disney Co.'s "It's a Small World (After All)" in DNA.
In 2012, Dr. Church at Harvard translated his new book into a DNA sequence via a computer and then created billions of copies in a test tube. Last April, film industry giant Technicolor made DNA copies of a 1902 French silent film called "Voyage to The Moon," widely considered the first science-fiction film. A team at Microsoft Corp. and the University of Washington that set a record for DNA storage last year used the language of life to encode a video by the band OK Go!
In an independent test of the new system in February, mathematician Paul-Olivier Dehaye of the University of Zurich in Switzerland, who wasn't involved in the research, downloaded the DNA sequence and extracted the Amazon gift card coded in the DNA. He used it to buy himself a book on artificial intelligence. "It was a struggle, but it worked," said Dr. Dehaye.
In the latest experiment, computer scientist Yaniv Erlich at Columbia University and bioinformatics researcher Dina Zielinski at the Genome Center took advantage of DNA's natural ability to rapidly reorganize itself and recombine in complex but predictable patterns.
They encoded a copy of the Kolibri computer operating system, an 1895 French film called "Arrival of a train at La Ciotat," a gift card, a 1948 study by information theorist Claude Shannon, and an image of the plaque carried to the edge of the solar system by the Pioneer 10 and 11 space probes.
Since a natural DNA sequence often contains genetic material inserted by an infection, they also encoded a harmless computer virus into their DNA storage unit. "Usually you see a real virus on DNA, so we added a computer virus to ours," said Dr. Erlich. When triggered, their virus writes trillions of zeros. "It is a joke."
It took their computer two or three minutes to turn all that into a DNA sequence. To correct any errors in reconstructing the data, they used an algorithm originally designed for streaming video on a cellphone.
Dr. Church of Harvard said the researchers also showed they could make "nearly unlimited numbers of accurate physical copies" of the data archive inexpensively.
"We tortured our DNA sample in various ways and we could still recover the data perfectly," said Dr. Erlich. "We copied a copy of the copy of the copy of the copy of a copy -- nine times in all -- without any error."
All told, the DNA process cost about $3,500 per megabyte of storage, comparable to the cost of the first computer magnetic disk drive introduced by the IBM Corp. in 1956 -- a memory device so big it had to be carried on a forklift. It could store 3.5 megabytes of data and leased for $3,200 a month.
The Semiconductor Research Corp. and Microsoft are exploring the commercial potential of DNA archives. If they ever succeed, all the information in the entire internet one day could be reduced to the size of a sugar cube.
The advancement in DNA storage can't come soon enough. The data analytics company Domo calculates that the world's information overload is growing by 350,000 tweets, 2.5 million Instagram posts, 3 million Facebook updates and 4 million Google search queries every minute -- not to mention millions of uploaded photographs, music files and videos.
It's enough to fill 10 million Blu-ray discs -- or a flask of DNA.
Credit: By Robert Lee Hotz
