Amazon.com Inc. is fighting a barrage of seller scams on its website, including firing several employees suspected of having helped supply independent merchants with inside information, according to people familiar with the company's effort.
Amazon was investigating suspected data leaks and bribes of its employees, The Wall Street Journal reported in September. Since then, the company has dismissed several workers in the U.S. and India for allegedly inappropriately accessing internal data that was being misused by disreputable merchants, these people said.
Amazon in recent weeks also has deleted thousands of suspect reviews, restricted sellers' access to customer data on its website and stifled some techniques that trick the site into surfacing products higher in search results, according to the people.
An Amazon spokeswoman said the company is aggressively pursuing those who are trying to harm sellers on its website, using tools including machine learning to block bad behavior before it happens. "If bad actors abuse our systems, we take swift action, including terminating their selling accounts, deleting reviews, withholding funds, taking legal action and working with law enforcement," she added.
The crackdown, however, hasn't stopped some sellers from sabotaging rivals. A recent rash of merchants claim competitors are maliciously flagging products as being counterfeit or infringing trademarks, prompting Amazon to temporarily boot legitimate products from the site while it evaluates them.
Sellers also are buying Amazon wholesaler accounts on the black market to gain access to volumes of product listings, people familiar with the practice said. These accounts on Amazon's Vendor Central system are designed to enable wholesalers to edit product listings to ensure they are marketed accurately. But some sellers misuse these accounts to alter rivals' product pages, such as by changing photos to unrelated items, these people said.
Some Chinese firms are selling wholesale vendor accounts for roughly $15,000, or renting them for as much as $1,500 a month, the people familiar with the matter said.
An estimated three million merchants sell products on Amazon, according to e-commerce data firm Marketplace Pulse. This year, U.S. shoppers are on track to spend $124.1 billion online, 15% more than last year, according to Adobe Analytics. Roughly half that spending takes place on Amazon, according to analysts.
The competition intensifies during the important holiday retail season, helping prompt Vendor Central attacks.
Ankit Jain, an Amazon seller in Boca Raton, Fla., said his best-selling mermaid throw pillow was misclassified as an adult product in November, meaning it would no longer show up in most Amazon searches. Mr. Jain said he succeeded in persuading Amazon to switch it back.
Mr. Jain now has his own team based in India monitoring his listings every three minutes, so they can complain immediately to Amazon when his products are under attack. He estimates that miscategorizations have cost him 20% of his early holiday-season sales.
The Journal reported in July on ways sellers try to outsmart Amazon's automated system, which ranks products in search results. The tactics include pummeling rivals' listings with overly positive or negative reviews, and repeatedly clicking on links to products they want boosted to trick Amazon's algorithm into ranking them higher, said people familiar with the practices.
Amazon has increased efforts to scrub the site of potentially suspicious reviews, sellers said. In recent months, some listings lost thousands of reviews in a day. Some of the reviews were legitimate and erased inadvertently, according to the sellers and a person familiar with the matter.
Some sellers engage in a practice in which fake accounts use real addresses to place orders so they can leave positive reviews, people familiar with the matter said.
Intermediaries, meanwhile, are selling what they claim is authentic Amazon sales data that can give sellers an advantage, people familiar with the matter have said.
Amazon is focusing part of the internal bribery probe on India, a major alleged source of data misuse by Amazon employees, according to a person familiar with the effort.
Some Amazon employees in India and China who work with sellers in customer-support roles have said their ability to search an internal database for data such as specific product performance has been strictly limited, said people familiar with the matter.

Credit: Jon Emont, Robert McMillan, Laura Stevens
