WASHINGTON -- The Biden administration is sending an unmistakable signal to American business to steer investment away from China after years of blacklisting Chinese companies and scrutinizing their investments in the U.S.
An executive order President Biden issued on Wednesday -- while narrowly targeted at critical leading-edge technologies with military, surveillance and cyber capabilities -- more broadly aims to reorder the flow of American capital and expertise away from its biggest global rival.
The order prohibits U.S. investment in advanced semiconductors and quantum computing, and requires American investors to notify Washington about investments in other types of semiconductors and artificial intelligence. It also bars U.S. citizens and permanent residents from taking part in prohibited deals.
In doing so, White House officials said, the order intends to deny China the know-how, market access and other benefits U.S. venture-capital and private-equity firms bring with their investments. That is likely to further rattle American companies doing business in China, coming on top of weakening Chinese growth, Covid lockdowns that made travel to China difficult and a recent pressure campaign against U.S. and other foreign companies amid rising tensions between Washington and Beijing.
Andrew Polk, a partner with the boutique research firm Trivium China, said that while U.S. companies he advises remain interested in China's market, many have grown hesitant.
"What we always say -- and this resonates with our clients -- is that the risk-adjusted return in China has changed dramatically," Polk said. "So what we see is a lot of companies fundamentally rethinking their China strategies. It doesn't mean they'll necessarily change them, but they're stress testing them now, because we're clearly in a new environment."
Wednesday's order lands in the middle of a fragile nursing of relations by Washington and Beijing after months of bruising tensions, over Taiwan, the Ukraine war, espionage and technology controls. In the short term, officials and security specialists said, the tentative diplomatic progress of recent months is likely to hold.
Chinese leader Xi Jinping sees a calm in relations with the U.S., at least temporarily, as a boost to his prestige at home as the economy slips into deflation while growth falters and foreign investment plummets. A senior Chinese Foreign Ministry official, Yang Tao, held discussions with State Department and other officials in Washington last week with a prime focus on preparing for Xi to attend a summit of Asia-Pacific leaders in San Francisco in November and convene separate talks with Biden, people briefed on the discussions said.
Both sides also pushed ahead to repair communication channels, agreeing tentatively this month to set up working groups to discuss Asia-Pacific regional and maritime issues, officials said. Discussions are still under way for Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo to travel to Beijing in what would be the fourth visit by a senior Biden administration figure since June.
Longer term, however, the U.S. and China are locked in rivalry, driving them to disentangle the economic and commercial ties that for decades gave ballast to relations, and the new investment restrictions are likely to accelerate the momentum to draw farther apart.
"That talk of diversification, de-risking, decoupling, disentangling -- choose your 'D-word,' whichever one you like -- it's really baked into the minds in Washington, increasingly in Silicon Valley, and this is really being beamed right at Wall Street," said Liza Tobin, a former National Security Council official now with the Special Competitive Studies Project, a Washington-based group focused on technology policy.
Venture-capital firms, which once poured into China energetically, have already pulled back responding in part to sharpening tensions; U.S. investment in Chinese startups fell by more than 30% from 2021 to 2022 and is on pace to fall further this year, according to Crunchbase data.
"The real message to come out of this move is that it's an enduring trajectory" that companies and investors must consider, said Nate Picarsic, a fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies and co-founder of supply-chain intelligence firm Horizon Advisory. "Geopolitical and national security risks have become a permanent fixture."
After the order's unveiling, China's foreign ministry on Thursday deplored the move and said Biden was backtracking on past statements that the U.S. isn't looking to decouple economically.
The Chinese foreign ministry suggested possible retaliation, saying Beijing will "resolutely safeguard our rights and interests."
Credit: By Charles Hutzler
