Third-grader Joey Basso has hundreds of viewing options on Disney+, Netflix and Amazon Prime. But what he really likes to do is watch "Unspeakable," a loud YouTube personality with goofball tastes whose stunts include destroying new electronics equipment.
"His first thing is to go to YouTube," said dad Joe Basso. "He falls into it."
Children are loading their extra hours of quarantine screen time with entertainment that makes "Trolls World Tour" feel like a TED Talk. Seven of the biggest YouTube channels for children logged a combined growth of 13.2 million subscribers since the beginning of March, according to the social-media marketing company Socialbakers.
Some kids are discovering new online personalities for the first time. Some stuck-at-home parents are finally seeing what their kids have been watching all along. Either way, child-curated playlists have left some parents nostalgic for the issues that once vexed them, like the merchandising bonanza of a Disney film or the focus-grouped formulas of children's TV.
"I know exactly what she's hearing when she watches 'Frozen 2' -- it feels safer, like you're being less neglectful," said Heather Wheeler Sadlemire, a marketing executive from Albany, N.Y. Her 6-year-old daughter Amelia has been watching "Frozen"-style dolls with names that sound like "Elsia" and "Anya" on the YouTube channel "Come Play With Me." The dolls speak in little-girl voices while bouncing around in make-believe adventures. Amelia often uses the story lines when she plays with her Barbies.
"Unspeakable," whose stars recently filled the living room of a house with sand to play beach volleyball, features a cast of what looks like a child's fantasy of subversive babysitters. Mr. Basso, an IT manager from Glendale Heights, Ill., thinks the bunch is wholesome enough, but their screaming drives him out of the room. He likes Joey to watch shows like "The Simpsons" for more substantive entertainment.
"We create shows that kids are interested in, not what their parents are interested in," said Reed Duchscher, founder of Night Media, a talent management company that represents "Unspeakable" and other YouTube stars. "Kids look at YouTube creators . . . as authentic. They see them as friends."
Tension is mounting over child-driven viewing as schools post educational videos to YouTube. After a clip ends, the screen fills with noneducational video suggestions.
The recommendations threatened such a "black hole of distraction" for Carleigh Rochon's 9-year-old son that he must be supervised during video lessons, Ms. Rochon said. "The interface is just riddled with, 'Watch this next,'" said the web developer from Richmond, Calif. "We literally cannot leave the room."
Children under 13 are not allowed to create accounts on YouTube and the company terminates "tens of thousands of accounts per week" to keep youngsters off the platform, said spokeswoman Mariana De Felice. Parents who want more oversight can use YouTube Kids, where adults can handpick channels, she said.
In response to regulatory action, YouTube agreed in a settlement last year to curb the use of data from child-directed videos or channels to help protect child privacy.
Other social-media outlets are also busy. TikTok was the most downloaded nongame app world-wide in March, according to market researcher Sensor Tower. Many online personalities maintain an active presence on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and paid subscription sites like Patreon.
"I really want my messages to be uplifting and there to be morals," said Micah Jeter, a 20-year-old college student from Temple, Texas, whose MixiePixie7 videos include stop-motion animation with American Girl dolls. Her viewers become so engrossed that when a boy doll showed up wearing tiny toy headphones in a recent Patreon video, a fan asked in the comments what music he was listening to.
Hunter Parsons, a father of two in Golden, Colo., is surprised by the appeal of "A is for Adley," a YouTube series about a redheaded girl who enjoys activities like visiting gaming arcades, petting horses and making pancakes. His daughter Margot, 5, is mesmerized by shows like this. "She can't read," he said, "but she knows what 'Skip Ad' is."
Children love to watch other children, maybe even more so when they can't play with them, said Jill Murphy, vice president and editor in chief at Common Sense Media, a nonprofit that rates and reviews entertainment for families. She sees upsides to kids choosing their own entertainment. Children might move on faster from an online obsession if they are allowed to explore it on their own. "It's an opportunity to get insight into your own kids in a new way."
Other popular online options include shows about videogames. Before schools closed, a channel with content around "Fortnite" seldom hit a million views a post, but now those videos from NewScape Studios fetch one million views most days, said company founder Cory Crater, a 25-year-old from Austin, Texas. Last month, NewScape hit 100 million views across all its YouTube channels, up from 56 million in March, he said. The company produces 21 videos a week by churning out quick scripts and using basic computer graphics that cut out detailed character movements.
While the outbreak keeps San Francisco seventh-grader Cameron MacLeod at home, he said he prefers YouTube to most other screen entertainment. "You really can't ever get sick of it because you can watch it forever," he said. "You can keep watching over and over again until the earth dies."
---
New This Week: 'Homecoming'
(Amazon Prime Video)
Newly released movies and shows
In the first moments of "Homecoming," Janelle Monae's character wakes up alone in a rowboat with no idea who she is -- and so the second season of the psychological thriller begins.
While the first season centered on a caseworker (Julia Roberts), her sessions with a patient (Stephan James) and the unmasking of the true purpose of a reintegration facility for soldiers with PTSD, the second is more character-driven.
"Season one was so much about withholding," says Kyle Patrick Alvarez, who was brought in to direct and executive produce the new season. "You don't know what's going on. The mystery is discovering what's happening. And here, the mystery is being driven more by [Ms. Monae's] character and her plight and her drive." ("Homecoming" is based on a Gimlet Media podcast. Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, has a content partnership with Gimlet Media, a unit of Spotify.)
In the new season's winding seven episodes, more is revealed about the mysterious company behind the facility, while piecing together who Ms. Monae's character is and how she ended up stranded in the middle of a lake in a boat without oars.
Mr. Alvarez says one of the challenges of the new season -- which also adds Joan Cusack and Chris Cooper to the cast -- was expanding the "Homecoming" world while maintaining the show's distinct look and tone. "Like: OK, we have the toolbox and we have the playground and we know what our limits are, what the show is, so now let's expand it to the furthest reaches of what it can be."
Relevant Oldies: 'Cooped Up'
(Crackle)
Older content that is newly available, or suddenly newsworthy.
Jake is semi-pro wrestler forced to self-isolate at home because he got close to someone who was infected with a coronavirus. He doesn't have a working TV, phone or access to the internet.
"What am I supposed to do now?" he asks Emily, an epidemiologist who gives him the bad news.
This isn't a true story. It's "Cooped Up," an Australian comedy released in 2016 that's now available to view for free on the Crackle streaming service (Crackle.com). The movie was written by John Ratchford, and directed, produced and financed by Kane Guglielmi. In addition to being a movie about isolating in one's home, "Cooped Up" looks like it could have been made while isolating in one's home. It takes place almost entirely inside and most of the movie revolves around conversations between Jake (Charles Cottier) and Emily (Kathryn Beck), who checks in on him (without getting too close).
After self-isolating with his family, who recently moved to Tuscany, Mr. Guglielmi, the director, feels all the more sympathetic for his protagonist
"With all of this technology and these forms of entertainment and also the distraction of everything that's been going on with the film," he says, "I still feel a little bit crazy myself."
An Expert Recommends: 'Toast of London'
(Netflix)
Kanan Gill is a stand-up comedian based in Bangalore, India, who recently released the comedy special, "Yours Sincerely, Kanan Gill," on Netflix. Here, he recommends "Toast of London." (Edited from an interview.)
"So, I only recently started watching 'Toast of London,' after it had been popping up in my Netflix suggestions for more than a year. I generally tend to be mistrustful of recommendations from artificial intelligence, but this couldn't have been more right. It's a British comedy about an actor, Steven Toast (Matt Berry), who's down on his luck. It's silly and absurd in the best possible ways. It's a sendup of formulaic TV shows and all their tropes. I've watched and worked on a lot of shows in my life, so this hits home for me. In 'Toast,' everything that we're used to in entertainment is heightened as much as possible: a tough director of a play is rumored to have murdered difficult actors; the protagonist's play is so terrible that people protest outside it and cab drivers stop to yell at him; the antagonist of the show is worked into every possible plot -- his presence always presented as a huge surprise. I've already been through its three seasons twice."
Critical Consensus: 'Line of Duty'
(Acorn TV, AMC)
Works and people generating critical buzz.
"Line of Duty," one of the top-rated shows in the U.K., received a stateside accolade last month when Mystery Writers of America bestowed an Edgar Award for best television episode teleplay on an episode in the series' fifth season.
The series follows a British police department's internal affairs unit, which looks at a different case in each season. AMC is airing the series on Saturday nights and is currently in the midst of the second season. All five seasons are available on the Acorn TV streaming service (acorn.tv).
The British TV veteran who created the show, Jed Mercurio, says he chose to look at cops investigating cops as a way to examine "how the police function as an element of society."
"The platform," he says, "allows us to explore hot-button topics in British policing, many of which are universal issues in policing worldwide."
Mr. Mercurio says a former classmate who is now a police officer is an adviser. Mr. Mercurio got his start in TV through a similar path: While he was working toward a military career in aviation medicine, he answered an ad seeking medical advisers for a TV drama. But so far, his anonymous adviser is keeping his day job. "That's great," Mr. Mercurio says, "because he knows exactly what's going on on the ground."
-- Chris Kornelis

Credit: By Ellen Gamerman
