GEELY AUTOMOBILE HOLDINGS
Chinese Car Maker
Posts 36% Profit Rise
Geely Automobile Holdings Ltd. reported a 36% rise in first-half net profit, to 1.91 billion yuan ($288 million) from 1.40 billion a year earlier.
The Hong Kong-listed company said revenue for the six months ended June increased 31% to 18.09 billion yuan and sales volume grew 11% to 280,337 cars.
The company didn't recommend an interim dividend.
-- Chester Yung
---
INTEL
Plans for Artificial
Intelligence Chips Set
Intel Corp. signaled it wants a bigger role in artificial intelligence, revealing plans to modify a line of chips to target a fast-growing market turning into a battleground for technology suppliers.
The company told technology developers Wednesday that it plans next year to deliver a new version of the Xeon Phi processor -- a product line previously targeted at scientific applications -- with added features designed to accelerate tasks associated with what Silicon Valley calls artificial intelligence.
Intel said the technology will help accelerate a technique called deep learning, increasingly used for tasks such as interpreting speech, identifying objects in photos and piloting autonomous vehicles.
-- Don Clark
---
HARLEY-DAVIDSON
Settlement Payment
For Emissions Charge
Harley-Davidson Inc. will pay $15 million to resolve U.S. claims that it violated air pollution laws, authorities said Thursday.
The company made or sold 340,000 devices that let its motorcycles emit more pollution than it had certified they would to regulators, according to a lawsuit filed by the Justice Department on behalf of the Environmental Protection Agency.
It also sold 12,682 motorcycles that didn't meet regulatory requirements, according to the lawsuit. The company didn't admit to the allegations, but agreed to enter into the settlement that will require it to pay a $12 million penalty and spend $3 million on a clean air project, according to court documents.
-- Aruna Viswanatha
---
TREASURY WINE ESTATES
Winemaker Gets
Boost From Asia
Australia's Treasury Wine Estates Ltd., owner of the famed Penfolds brand and one of the world's largest winemakers, said its net profit for the year ended June more than doubled to 179.4 million Australian dollars (US$137 million) from A$77.6 million a year earlier.
It declared a final dividend of 12 Australian cents a share, bringing the total to 20 cents, up 43% from the prior year.
Treasury Wine completed the purchase of the bulk of Diageo PLC's U.S. and U.K. operations at the start of this calendar year.
-- Mike Cherney
