How fast is technology spreading at big banks? A $100 million currency trade was recently made through J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. with a cellphone.
So said J.P. Morgan Chairman and Chief Executive James Dimon on Tuesday after the release of his annual shareholder letter.
Responding to a question from a student on innovation in financial services during an interview with Yahoo Finance, Mr. Dimon talked about how the nation's largest bank spent $9.5 billion on technology and how customers were using electronics in a variety of businesses, including the bank's foreign-exchange business.
"We had someone do a $100 million F-X trade on their mobile phone the other day," Mr. Dimon said.
He then transitioned to joking about a potential future innovation that could save banks and investors money -- keeping people from doing trades after a few drinks.
What they are going to have to do one day is "put a breathalyzer on that phone, so you don't feel macho after dinner and a drink or two and say -- I'm going long the yen!" Mr. Dimon said, blowing into his hand to simulate the process.
Corporate and investment bank chief Daniel Pinto wrote in his shareholder letter that 83% of notional forex trading at J.P. Morgan is now done electronically, a big shift from years past. And on peak days in 2016, $200 billion in currencies was traded through the bank's electronic channels, including its J.P. Morgan Markets platform that provides services ranging from research to posttrade reporting.
Those technology investments along with risk oversight helped the bank during big market swings such as Brexit, the U.S. presidential election and uncertainty around China's growth rate, Mr. Pinto wrote.
Mr. Dimon also wrote about technology in his letter. "The reasons we invest so much in technology (whether it's digital, big data or machine learning) are simple: to benefit customers with better, faster and often cheaper products and services, to reduce errors and to make the firm more efficient," Mr. Dimon wrote.
He said that about $3 billion of the $9.5 billion in technology spending in 2016 was for new projects, and about $600 million of that was in financial-technology areas including digital and mobile efforts.
Credit: By Emily Glazer
