The legendary Italian-American physicist Enrico Fermi once posed a question that has rattled my brain ever since I learned of it more than four decades ago: "Where are they?" Extraterrestrials, that is.
Human technological civilization is roughly 300 years old. Its exponential growth suggests that before too long -- say, a thousand years -- human activity will be grand enough to become conspicuous throughout our galaxy, as fast as light can spread the message (a few tens of thousands of years).
Given that our galaxy has about a hundred billion stars, and perhaps 10 times as many planets and large moons, Fermi reasoned, many technological civilizations will spring up. There should be several conspicuous hubs of activity with a big jump on us, having evolved eons earlier. So why haven't we encountered them?
One possible answer is that such civilizations are extremely rare. The emergence of life may be unusual. But our own planet's history suggests otherwise. Though we don't understand in detail how life began, we have several plausible scenarios and know that it arose relatively quickly once Earth became a stable, reasonably cool body. So life on Earthlike planets should be common.
Generalized intelligence, that produces technology, took a lot longer to develop, however, and the road from amoebas to hominids is littered with evolutionary accidents. So maybe we're our galaxy's only example. Maybe. But since evolution has supported many wild and sophisticated experiments, and because the experiment of intelligence brings spectacular adaptive success, I suspect the opposite. Plenty of older technological civilizations are out there.
So, where are they? The two answers that I've liked the best I call "immoderate greatness" and "silence is golden."
The phrase "immoderate greatness" comes from Edward Gibbon's description of the fall of Rome as "the natural and inevitable effect of immoderate greatness. . . . The stupendous fabric yielded to the pressure of its own weight." The decline of other empires, such as those of the Spanish and the British, suggests that complex civilizations might be inherently fragile. Our own might well fall victim to nuclear war or catastrophic climate change. Maybe advanced technological civilizations inevitably flame out.
My second answer, "silence is golden," is inspired by the development of quantum computers. They're uniquely powerful machines, but they're delicate and work best in the cold and dark, insulated from radiation and heat. A hyperadvanced civilization, embodied in artificial intelligence, might just want to be left alone, in order to optimize its intelligence and thinking power.
Recently, as I listened to a lecture about computing by the physicist Richard Wolfson, a more specific idea about advanced civilizations occurred to me. It subsumes the ones I've just described. I call it: "Good thinks come in small packages."
It's based on two interrelated principles: that effective computation must involve interactions and that the speed of light limits communication. As a result, the most effective -- fast, but synchronized -- thinking must take place in small spaces.
Consider a computer operating at a speed of 10 gigahertz, which is not far from what you can buy today. In the time between its computational steps, light can travel just over an inch. Accordingly, powerful thinking entities that obey the laws of physics, and which need to exchange up-to-date information, can't be spaced much farther apart than that. Thinkers at the vanguard of a hyperadvanced technology, striving to be both quick-witted and coherent, would keep that technology small.
Thus, truly advanced, information-based civilizations might choose to expand inward, to achieve speed and integration -- not outward, where they'd lose patience waiting for feedback. If that's the case, then the answer to Fermi's "Where are they?" is: Out there, but inconspicuous.

Credit: By Frank Wilczek
