Google's top cloud-computing executive and one of tech's highest-ranking women is departing the company after three years and will be succeeded by a former executive of business-software rival Oracle Corp.
Diane Greene will relinquish her role as CEO of Google Cloud in January, she said in a blog post Friday. Thomas Kurian, a former president of product development at Oracle, will then step in. Ms. Greene will retain her seat on the board of Google parent Alphabet Inc.
Ms. Greene, a Silicon Valley veteran who co-founded corporate-software pioneer VMware Inc., joined Google in 2015 to help it take on Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft Corp. in the growing market for cloud computing software and services.
Ms. Greene expanded Google's sales force and struck deals with corporate clients such as Target Corp. and HSBC Holdings but failed to gain market share at the same rate as Microsoft.
"They haven't performed as well as the expectation was when Diane was brought on," said Holger Mueller, principal analyst at Constellation Research, Inc.
Google remains a relatively tiny player in a market dominated by Amazon, which generated 51.8% of revenue in the global cloud-software market in 2017, according to Gartner. Microsoft outpaced other players, increasing its share to 13.3% last year, from 8.7% the year earlier. Google nudged its share up to 3.3%, from 2.7% in 2016.
Inside Google, where the core business of online ads is showing signs of slowing, cloud computing is seen as a key driver of growth. Google said earlier this year cloud sales generated more than $1 billion quarterly, but it hasn't disclosed any further specifics.
Analysts at Credit Suisse expect the division to generate $6.9 billion, or about 6% of Alphabet's total revenue this year -- up from an estimated 3% last year. In the third quarter alone, Amazon's cloud division generated $6.68 billion.
Ms. Greene's investment in artificial intelligence tools has given Google advantages over competitors but also put her at the center of a debate about the ethical use of AI. Her team's work helping the U.S. Defense Department with drone targeting, an effort called Project Maven, sparked internal backlash from Google employees earlier this year, ultimately leading the company to say it would stop renewing the contract.
Mr. Kurian led Oracle's transformation from a vendor of legacy software applications that companies run in their own data centers to one that belatedly embraced cloud computing.
But as Oracle's rivals grew faster in the cloud-infrastructure market, Chairman Larry Ellison reorganized the engineering teams that develop the company's cloud-computing services this summer, according to a person familiar with the internal discussions. Those changes left Mr. Kurian with a smaller remit, the person said. Oracle announced that Mr. Kurian would take "extended time off" in early September, and said later that month that he wouldn't return.

Credit: By Douglas MacMillan and Jay Greene
