[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Going from zero to nearly $5 billion in sales in a year is nothing to sneeze at. Unfortunately for Advanced Micro Devices, it's also a hard act to repeat.
The chip maker better known as AMD unveiled its latest generation of artificial intelligence processors Thursday. Those come a little less than a year after the company launched its first entry into the market of so-called GPU accelerators -- the systems crucial to generative AI computing. Nvidia dominates that market, but that didn't stop AMD from making some bold promises, including a target of selling $2 billion worth of the initial chips in their first year on the market.
AMD has already more than doubled that target, projecting GPU revenue of more than $4.5 billion for this year during its last earnings call in July. But that seems to have left little upside for Thursday's event, which disappointed investors who were looking for further updates to the company's financial outlook. AMD's shares fell 4% Thursday.
That is a contrast to last year's unveiling, which sent the stock soaring 25% over the following month after already having surged 80% since the start of the year. AMD has been mostly a laggard this year -- relative to both semiconductor peers and the broader market. The company's ability to field compelling AI chips isn't the worry.
But AMD has other business lines exposed to slowdowns in demand for both personal computers and videogame consoles. And the challenge of a very powerful incumbent means the company still has doubters -- even given the strong sales of its first GPU offerings.
Nvidia's shares have soared 172% this year after a whopping 239% gain last year, putting the chip maker's market cap at $3.3 trillion second only to Apple's.
AMD's latest offerings certainly won't cost Nvidia its enormous lead. But with demand still booming for AI infrastructure, the hope is that AMD can carve out a lucrative slice of a growing pie.
Curtis of Jefferies noted that "with Nvidia potentially sold out through 2025, there still seems to be enough demand to go around." Wall Street expects AMD's GPU revenue to hit nearly $12.8 billion in 2026, which would make it nearly one-third of the company's total business by that time, according to consensus estimates from Visible Alpha.
Nvidia, however, is projected to do nearly $85 billion in revenue for just its Blackwell line of GPUs in roughly the same period.
And AMD isn't Nvidia's only challenger. There aren't estimates yet for how many AI workloads will fall by that time to the processors designed in-house by today's biggest AI chip buyers: Amazon, Microsoft and Google.
In a report last week, Vivek Arya of BofA Securities said AMD needs to show a "credible path" to a 10% share of the AI market. AMD still has some chipping away left to do.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
