WASHINGTON -- The Russian government has launched a "whole-of-government" effort to influence the outcome of the U.S. presidential election and favors Republican candidate Donald Trump in the race, senior U.S. intelligence officials said Tuesday.
The officials didn't mention Trump by name but said that Russia's current activity -- described as covert social-media use and other online propaganda efforts -- mirrored the 2020 and 2016 election cycles, when Moscow also favored Trump and sought to undermine Democratic candidates, according to U.S. intelligence agencies.
"We haven't observed a shift in Russia's preferences for the presidential race from past elections," a senior official in the Office of the Director of National Intelligence said, during a media briefing summarizing intelligence on foreign threats to the election.
Along with Russia, Iran has become "increasingly aggressive" in its foreign influence efforts, including in recent weeks by covertly encouraging protests against the war in Gaza, Avril Haines, the director of national intelligence, said in a separate statement on Tuesday.
The warnings underscore how U.S. adversaries are continuing to exploit social-media platforms and other avenues to manipulate public opinion, despite efforts by the intelligence and law-enforcement agencies to expose and crack down on the influence operations.
The Russian embassy in Washington didn't respond to a request for comment. A spokesman for the Iranian government didn't reply to a request for comment.
Russia was seeking to influence specific voting groups, including those in swing states, promote divisive narratives and denigrate specific politicians, the officials who briefed reporters said. They declined to provide details about the voters or politicians who have been targeted.
The Kremlin is also working to influence members of Congress and is broadly seeking to undermine U.S. support for Ukraine in its war with Russia, the officials said.
Moscow employs commercial firms to obscure its involvement and attempts to spread propaganda by planting it with influential Americans, the senior ODNI official said.
Officials indicated that the activity witnessed so far this election cycle isn't on the scale or scope seen in 2016, when Russia's actions included a hack-and-leak of Democratic Party emails, rudimentary cyber-probing of some state election systems and other actions intended to undermine Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton's campaign.
But they said Moscow and other countries were likely to increase their efforts to influence the race as the November election date drew closer.
In contrast to Russia and Iran, China doesn't appear to be seeking to interfere in the U.S. election, the official who briefed reporters said. U.S. intelligence agencies came to a similar conclusion concerning China's involvement around the 2020 presidential election.
The findings highlight the rising concerns by U.S. officials and security experts about foreign adversaries potentially pouring resources into the 2024 presidential election contest eight years after Russia engineered a multipronged interference campaign seeking to help Trump defeat Clinton.
The efforts observed so far haven't included attempts to disrupt procedures of the election itself, officials said.
Developments in artificial intelligence pose additional risks to the 2024 election, the intelligence officials said, calling it a "malign influence accelerant" that allowed bad actors to quickly create convincing audio and video deepfakes.
---
Joel Schectman contributed to this article.
Credit: By Dustin Volz
