[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Timing hasn't been Okta's friend for a while, but that looks to be changing.
The cloud software company that specializes in identity-management services for businesses had a rotten run of luck last year. A breach by a hacking group worried Okta's customers and shook the faith of investors after the company reported the incident in March. That roughly coincided with integration problems with the record-sized acquisition of Auth0 the year before. And all this was taking place during a global economic slowdown that was driving corporate customers to finally hit the brakes on tech spending.
The net result was Okta's once-blistering growth rapidly slowing and its once-highflying stock grounded. Okta's shares lost 70% of their value last year. It didn't help that the stock began 2022 trading at more than 20 times forward sales -- about twice the median valuation for the BVP Nasdaq Emerging Cloud Index at the time.
Expectations are far more grounded now, and the company's performance is picking up. Okta's fiscal fourth-quarter results late Wednesday showed both revenue and billings -- an indication of business transacted during the quarter -- soundly beating Wall Street's forecasts. Adjusted operating income of $46 million was a big surprise -- nearly triple analysts' forecasts. Okta also lifted its revenue projection for the fiscal year ending in January 2024 by about 1% from the range it gave three months ago, a notable move considering that many other tech companies have seen their business prospects weaken in that time.
Okta's share price jumped 13% on Thursday, but still trades around six times forward sales. The report had echoes of Salesforce, Okta's San Francisco neighbor that also saw its stock jump Thursday following surprisingly strong results that showed renewed growth rates and greater attention to the bottom line. But many analysts view Salesforce's projection for 10% revenue growth this fiscal year as risky.
By contrast, Okta's projection of 16% revenue growth for the same year looks more achievable, especially against the 49% growth it has averaged over the past five years.
Okta also seems to have regained the confidence of its customer base following last year's hack. A survey of mostly large Okta customers by Stifel in January found 90% happy with the service and about half interested in the company's newer customer identity-management software. Okta said Wednesday that it has landed ChatGPT owner Open-AI as a customer for that offering. In a world suddenly awash with companies trying to ride the hype on generative AI, this makes Okta one of the few companies that will actually be making some money on it in the foreseeable future. Timing is finally going Okta's way.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
