Chinese Tech Entices
Venture Investors
Americans underestimate the Chinese tech sector at their own peril, said venture investors Kai-Fu Lee and Jim Breyer at The Wall Street Journal's global technology conference on Wednesday.
"A lot of people in the U.S. just don't realize how strong the Chinese entrepreneurial, engineering, product, research capabilities are," said Mr. Lee, chairman and chief executive of the early stage venture firm Sinovation Ventures, which invests in Chinese companies.
He pointed to the market capitalization of Chinese internet firms Tencent Holdings Ltd. and Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., which are approaching those of their American counterparts Facebook Inc. and Amazon Inc., as well as artificial-intelligence research coming from China.
"Anyone here who thinks China is a copycat. That's just wrong," Mr. Lee said, arguing that the U.S. will fall behind China if it takes the country's technology sector for granted.
-- Rolfe Winkler
Second Life Creators
Refine Virtual Reality
Get ready for virtual reality meetings. And yes, you can stay in your pajamas.
Onstage at The Wall Street Journal's WSJDLive 2016 global technology conference, Second Life creator Linden Lab demonstrated its forthcoming social virtual reality platform Sansar. It lets you create a 3-D virtual avatar and environment and then invite others to join you.
Similar to Second Life, users will be able to create and sell virtual goods in the platform. Linden Lab plans to launch Sansar in the first quarter of 2017. It will be available for the Oculus Rift and HTC Vive headsets.
-- Joanna Stern
Design Is Crucial,
Says Automattic
Apple Inc.'s iPhone is often viewed as a prototypical example of great design.
But too often, technology is too hard for the masses to use because the products are made by engineers who don't give much thought to how average consumers will use them. When products prove too hard to use, engineers often jokingly say "RTFM," for read the f---ing manual, said John Maeda, global head of computational design and inclusion at Automattic Inc., the company behind digital publishing platform WordPress.
That approach won't work anymore, he said, adding products will fail if they aren't designed well.
"The perception that Apple is getting better at design is falling," Mr. Maeda said.
At the same time, the perception of Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Microsoft Corp., both long seen as laggards in design, has improved. Earlier Wednesday, Microsoft introduced a new all-in-one personal computer to compete with Apple's iMac.
-- Jay Greene
