Meigan Rocco had no idea what she was in for last April when a bright blue lazuli bunting flew into her front yard on Long Island. The West Coast bird was last seen in New York state more than 20 years ago.
"You about to be real popular," warned a member of the Bird Identification Facebook group, after Rocco's friend posted a picture of the finch-like songbird.
When Rocco woke up the next morning, six birders were perched across the street from her house. Over three days, more than 700 people -- some from as far as Buffalo -- filed past her home and pointed binoculars and telephoto lenses at the feeder in her front yard. Some cried.
"I had to be careful backing out of my driveway so that I didn't run anyone over," she said.
The popularity of bird-watching has surged since the pandemic, which brought restless, locked-down people outdoors. About 96 million Americans said they went bird-watching in 2022, more than double the number in 2016, according to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
For traditionalists, it's a bit much. Armed with apps that make it easier than ever to track, identify and record birds, armies of birders seem to pop up almost as soon as a rare bird appears.
"Bird-watching is becoming like Pokemon Go," said Garth Riley, a birder from Toronto, Canada, referring to the mobile videogame where an app uses a phone's GPS and camera to lead players to real-life locations where they collect virtual items.
Riley worries the new breed of watchers overlooks the well being of the birds in their rush to collect as many sightings as they can.
This spring, he helped censor a Toronto-area Discord chat channel to remove references to the location of a pair of bald eagles. The pair were the first eagles ever to be seen nesting in Toronto. Conservationists feared that if too many birders appeared with cameras they would cause the eagles to abandon the nest. The gawkers stayed away, and two eaglets were born in May.
Dominik Mosur, an animal care attendant at San Francisco's Randall Museum, was strolling in the city's Pine Lake Park in July when he startled a red and black slate-throated redstart, a bird that usually roams between Mexico and South America. This was the first known sighting in California.
Mosur quickly posted a blurry picture to a chat group. Within 20 minutes, the first birder appeared in the park. After 45 minutes, 30 people were looking to get pictures of the rare find. The flow of people continued for weeks.
"The quiet little neighborhood park that I would enjoy was all of a sudden overrun with people." he said.
Mosur, a self-described "bird nerd," is a reviewer for eBird, an online database created by Cornell University. So far, 930,000 people have submitted 1.6 billion bird reports to the database, which helps people track bird migration patterns and keep tabs on nearby sightings.
Long gone are the days when bird watchers with binoculars hanging around their necks and thick field guides in hand would log their sightings in little notebooks. Now, people can access tomes of knowledge by opening the eBird app. They can hold up their phones and identify a bird by its call, using the artificial intelligence-powered Merlin Bird ID app.
Mary Birrer, a teacher-naturalist at New Jersey Audubon, encourages participants on her bird walks to use the apps to help identify species.
Birrer, 30, this year participated in the World Series of Birding, an annual competition where teams vie to spot as many birds in the Garden State as they can within 24 hours.
The competition prohibits most tech. Participants can't use their Merlin app to identify a bird through its song; they have to physically see or hear the bird for it to count.
Ken Walsh, a Pennsylvania resident who has been birding for more than 50 years, competed in the World Series as a member of the "1000 Birds" team, which spotted 180 birds over 24 hours, including a winter wren, a brown creeper and a black skimmer.
When Walsh was starting out, he relied on illustrated bird guides and tape recordings of birdsongs to identify birds.
"There was something more organic about how we found birds," he said. "Now a lot of people just drive around finding birds that other people found."
Some apps allow users to lure birds to them by playing birdsongs. Most national parks have banned the apps, however, because the recordings can stress out and confuse the birds.
They can also confuse the birders.
Several years ago, in a nature preserve in Maine, Walsh thought he had heard the call of a rare Kentucky warbler. He took off in the direction of the song, bursting through the bushes only to find another birder holding up his phone and playing a recording of the warbler's call.
Tom Burke, 81, is holding on to the old ways. He still records weekly updates to his phone hotline, the New York City Area Rare Bird Alert. Birders can call the hotline to listen to a four-minute voice message from Burke that lists notable bird sightings. Burke, who has been maintaining the Rare Bird Alert since 1986, said roughly a dozen listeners every week listen to the entire message.
"A couple of Amish friends have told me that they've always been able to phone the number and get information even though they can't look it up on the internet," said Burke.
On Long Island, Meigan Rocco said she has no regrets about the experience with the lazuli bunting. The crowds were respectful and they didn't leave any garbage behind. She now has an eBird account, and she's kept in touch with a few of the birders she met.
"I think I accidentally became a crazy bird lady," she said.
Credit: By Vipal Monga and Julia Munslow
