Few venture-backed software companies are stepping into the limelight of the public markets. The reasons include a slowdown in revenue growth, changing expectations for new listings among public investors and a disconnect between the high private valuations and lower values companies could fetch in the public markets.
Add the AI transition to the list.
Most software companies today have to develop what investors call an "AI story" -- a clear way in which their business is applying the latest advancements in AI, as well as coping with the new challenges it introduces. That requires figuring out technical kinks, sales predictability and competitive pressures. All this stretches the timeline.
"We are learning as we go," said Tiago Paiva, chief executive and founder of Talkdesk, who has been leading his company as it adjusts to this new world. Talkdesk, which was valued at $10 billion in a private financing round in 2021, is developing software for customer-service centers.
Talkdesk is seeing both opportunities and challenges in this AI transition, Paiva said. He declined to address IPO plans, saying Talkdesk is focused on improving its business metrics.
Once Talkdesk began embedding generative AI features in its software, from customer-call summaries to autonomous AI agents that respond to customer queries, it also had to adjust its pricing strategy, for example. The new AI-driven deals are larger, but revenue became less predictable than in the prior scheme, he said. "We've changed prices several times over the past 12 to 18 months," Paiva said.
Talkdesk used to base its pricing per seat or per person using the software. With the addition of gen AI features, "you are charging for the volume of interactions. You are going after the money that the companies are spending on payroll," Paiva said.
Pricing is in flux across several industries because of AI. Generative AI creates new text, video, code and other outputs in response to prompts -- technology that proponents say could transform workflows across the economy.
There are past instances of transformational technology causing bumps on the road to an initial public offering. Way back when, the switch from desktop to mobile, for example, complicated Facebook's IPO plans.
Today, a company that is rolling out new AI products is better off doing that experimentation in the private markets, said Tom Loverro, general partner at venture firm IVP.
"Having that forecastability for your new AI thing is very difficult," Loverro said. "It may make it harder to go public. You may want to wait," he added.
A couple of years ago, it appeared that the large set of business-software startups valued at more than $1 billion in the private markets were on the verge of going public. But the IPO market froze.
"Typically a common sight in the IPO market, there has been a drought of VC-backed business-software platforms since the start of 2022," said Matt Kennedy, senior strategist, at Renaissance Capital, a provider of pre-IPO research and IPO-focused exchange-traded funds.
The biggest VC-backed business-software company on file to go public currently is ServiceTitan, per Renaissance. The company, founded in 2007, mentions AI or machine learning roughly a hundred times in its prospectus, Kennedy said.
"When management pitches the deal to IPO investors, they'll need to be ready for questions about how they're using AI, and whether a new competitor could leverage AI to disrupt the industry or take market share," Kennedy said.
Even though integrating AI into products takes time, Kennedy added that the biggest reason for the dearth of software IPOs has been the mismatch between private valuations and what the public markets offer.
The improving stock market trends may finally set the stage for new launches in 2025, he said. An AI story will likely be required.
Credit: By Yuliya Chernova
