Tesla's head of finance operations has left the company, further shuffling the electric-vehicle maker's top ranks after several longstanding leaders departed amid a restructuring in the spring.
Tesla Vice President Sreela Venkataratnam, an 11-year veteran of the company, said on Wednesday in a post on LinkedIn that she would take time off work after stepping down from her role.
Venkataratnam was one of the two most senior female executives at Tesla. Her departure leaves Laurie Shelby, vice president of environmental, health, safety and security, as the lone woman in Chief Executive Elon Musk's executive team.
Venkataratnam said she played a strategic role in factory construction, the ramping up of vehicle manufacturing and the growth of Tesla's energy business. During her tenure, the company grew from a market capitalization of $4 billion to a height of $1 trillion in 2021. It is now trading at a market cap around $700 billion.
Tesla didn't respond to a request for comment.
The EV maker has experienced a wave of high-profile executive exits over the past year, including the two most senior deputies in Musk's inner circle -- his chief financial officer and head of the energy business -- who led Tesla through rapid growth in vehicle sales and global expansion.
Tesla is facing growing competitive pressures in the EV market, as well as uncertainty from Musk's shifting strategy, in which he has positioned Tesla for another leg of growth by recasting the automaker as an artificial-intelligence and robotics company. Musk is making deep capital investments in its "Full-Self Driving" driver-assistance software and its Dojo supercomputer, as well as a coming robotaxi product.
Tesla vehicle sales have declined over the past year, hurt by the company's aging lineup, decelerating EV demand in the U.S. and increased competition in China. Tesla shares are down more than 11% from the start of the year.
Last August, Tesla Chief Financial Officer Zach Kirkhorn stepped down after four years in that role and more than 10 years at the company. He was succeeded by Vaibhav Taneja, the chief accounting officer at Tesla, who joined the company in 2016.
In mid-April, Tesla's senior vice president of energy, Drew Baglino, left the automaker amid layoffs of 10% of the company's workforce. Baglino had worked at Tesla for 18 years and was widely viewed as Musk's second in command.
Rohan Patel, Tesla's head of public policy, left at the same time, and soon after Tesla's head of investor relations, Martin Viecha, said he would also leave his role.
In late April, Musk fired Tesla's senior director of supercharger, Rebecca Tinucci, and her entire team. Some of those employees since have returned to the company. On Thursday, Tinucci said she had joined Uber Technologies as its head of sustainability.
Credit: By Becky Peterson
