Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. posted its first decline in revenue and issued a muted outlook on weakness in digital advertising and as it faces growing competition from rival TikTok.
The company reported quarterly revenue of $28.8 billion, down almost 1% from a year earlier and slightly below the $28.9 billion Wall Street was expecting. It marks the first time that the company has posted a quarterly drop in revenue from the year earlier.
"We seem to have entered an economic downturn that will have a broad impact on the digital advertising business," Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said on an earnings call Wednesday. "It's always hard to predict how deep or how long these cycles will be but I'd say that the situation seems worse than it did a quarter ago."
Meta is grappling with a digital advertising market in upheaval from soaring inflation and other factors that are causing a slowdown in ad spending. Google parent Alphabet Inc. reported on Tuesday the slowest rate of growth since the second quarter of 2020, when the pandemic crimped demand for advertising in some areas. Rival Snap Inc. reported its weakest-ever quarterly sales growth last week while Twitter Inc. reported a decline in revenue.
Meta said it expected third-quarter revenue in the range of $26 billion to $28.5 billion. That is below the $30.4 billion expected by analysts surveyed by FactSet.
The company also disclosed that Facebook's daily active user base rose to 1.97 billion users. The figure was 1.96 billion three months ago. The increase defied expectations of analysts surveyed by FactSet who thought user numbers would fall.
Meta posted net profit of $6.7 billion for the second quarter, the third quarter in a row Meta's bottom line has fallen. The company hasn't experienced such a slump since the fourth quarter of 2012.
The weak advertising demand was reflected in Meta's average price per ad, which fell 14% in the quarter. A year ago, the company reported an increase of 47% year-over-year for its average price per ad.
Separately, the Federal Trade Commission said on Wednesday that it is seeking to block Meta from acquiring Within Unlimited Inc. and its virtual-reality dedicated fitness app, Supernatural. The FTC said the deal violates antitrust law, a position Meta rejected.
The company said that it is continuing to face challenges in targeting ads as a result of changes made by Apple Inc. to the iPhone's operating system. Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg, who plans to depart Meta after 14 years, said that the company is adapting its ad system to do more with less data with products like so-called click to message ads, which open a chat with a business whenever a user clicks on the ad.
Those types of ads are already a multibillion-dollar business and are growing at double digits, she said. "We are hugely optimistic about this area of our business, and I am very convinced it will work," Ms. Sandberg said.
Chief Financial Officer David Wehner said in a statement that the company, like others, is feeling the pinch from the strong dollar, which is weighing on the top line.
Meta's shares have retreated since the company posted quarterly results in February that showed a sharper-than-expected decline in profit, gloomy revenue outlook and a dip in daily users.
Meta's stock closed more than 6% higher and fell more than 4% after hours following the results.
The company also said it expects its total expenses for 2022 to be between $85 billion and $88 billion, down from the company's previous outlook of $87 billion to $92 billion. The company attributed the lowered forecast to a reduction in hiring and overall expense-growth plans for the year.
Mr. Zuckerberg reiterated that the company plans to slow the pace of long-term investments and steadily reduce head count growth over the next year. "This is a period that demands more intensity," Mr. Zuckerberg said. "And I expect us to get more done with fewer resources."
The CEO in April said the company would change how users would see content, in a bid to boost engagement. The company plans to use artificial intelligence to recommend content to Facebook and Instagram users from around those social networks, rather than solely showing users content from accounts they already follow. This effort mimics one of the signature features of TikTok, which Mr. Zuckerberg said posed stiff competition for Meta.
Nearly one in six posts shown on Facebook and Instagram feeds are now coming from accounts that users don't follow based on artificial-intelligence recommendations. That figure could rise to nearly one in every three posts shown to users coming from accounts they don't follow by the end of 2023.
Generate image description

Credit: By Salvador Rodriguez
