Amazon.com reported record first-quarter sales as the artificial-intelligence boom powered growth in its cloud-computing unit, helping the company continue to shake off last year's postpandemic slump.
Revenue rose 13% to $143.3 billion, an all-time high in the January-to-March period, and profit surged to $10.4 billion. Both figures exceeded Wall Street expectations.
Amazon Chief Executive Andy Jassy has reoriented the company to focus on AI innovations since falling behind Microsoft, Google and other peers in the area. In his annual letter to shareholders, he laid out his vision for how generative AI could be a critical building block in establishing Amazon's next pillar of growth following its online retail Marketplace, Amazon Prime and its cloud-computing unit, Amazon Web Services.
Sales in the Amazon Web Services cloud-computing arm, known as AWS, a critically important profit center for the company, increased more than 17% in the first quarter to about $25 billion. The division's operating profit rose nearly 84%.
Jassy said AWS's AI capabilities are reaccelerating that business's growth rate, which is now at $100 billion in annual revenue. Amazon on Tuesday projected second-quarter sales of $144 billion to $149 billion, slightly below analyst expectations of $150.2 billion, according to FactSet.
"There's a very large opportunity in front of us," Jassy said on a conference call with analysts. "I don't know if any of us has seen a possibility like this in technology in a really long time, for sure since the cloud, perhaps since the internet."
Amazon's stock rose 2% after hours. Through Tuesday's close, the stock has risen about 15% so far this year.
Amazon projected second-quarter sales of $144 billion to $149 billion, slightly below analyst expectations of $150.2 billion, according to FactSet.
Amazon's latest quarterly results showed demand for its cloud services is again increasing at a healthy clip, said Daniel Morgan, senior analyst and portfolio manager at Synovus Trust. "This puts Amazon on par with Alphabet and Microsoft in regards to reinvigorated growth back into the data center," he said.
AWS sales had decelerated last year after years of rapid expansion. Lower enterprise demand hurt the unit, though Amazon indicated it expected growth to pick up again as businesses responded positively to the company's latest cloud offerings.
Investors have paid close attention to AI spending levels at the world's largest technology companies, punishing those whose path to profitability is less clear. Alphabet's Google, Microsoft and Meta Platforms all forecast significant capital-spending increases, with Meta saying it would boost spending by up to $10 billion to support its AI investments. Meta shares fell by more than 10% after issuing a relatively disappointing revenue forecast for the second quarter.
"We expect the combination of growth and high demand for GenAI to meaningfully increase year over year capital expenditures in 2024," Chief Financial Officer Brian Olsavsky said on the conference call.
He said that the $14 billion in capital expenditures during the first quarter will be the low point for the year. The majority of the spending will be on AWS infrastructure and generative AI investment.
Amazon is a large investor in AI startup Anthropic, and AWS in November introduced an AI chatbot for companies that it calls Amazon Q. On Tuesday, the company said Amazon Q is generally available through AWS.
Earlier this year, Amazon said it was launching an AI-powered shopping assistant named Rufus on its mobile app. Executives said it is designed to improve the shopping experience and enhance the search bar.
Generate image description

Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
