Investor enthusiasm for artificial intelligence took center stage again after Microsoft announced it was hiring freshly ousted OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman to lead its new advanced AI research team.
The news spurred a rally in Microsoft shares, helping power stock indexes higher. The S&P 500 climbed 0.7% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite advanced 1.1%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 0.6%, or around 204 points.
Coming off three straight weeks of gains, the S&P 500 is up 8.4% this month and 18% for the year. The recent rally has been fueled by growing bets that the Federal Reserve is done raising interest rates. But optimism about AI has continued to be a tailwind as well, extending a trend that kicked off last year after OpenAI's release of its ChatGPT chatbot.
Already a major beneficiary of the AI trade, Microsoft shares rose a further 2.1% to a record after it announced Altman's hiring late Sunday. The move followed Altman's unexpected ouster by OpenAI's board on Friday, and a subsequent effort by investors to bring him back to the company.
Another major piece of the AI trade also gained momentum, with Nvidia shares rising 2.3% ahead of the chip maker's earnings report on Tuesday. Nvidia's semiconductors are considered central to the development of AI efforts by companies and its stock has been a big contributor to the S&P 500's gains this year.
Ryan Detrick, chief market strategist at Carson Group, said "there's still incredible potential" in artificial intelligence. "Companies like Microsoft and Nvidia, they're clearly capitalizing on that," he said.
Stocks on Monday also got a boost from a further decline in U.S. Treasury yields.
Yields, which help determine interest rates across the economy, initially ticked higher in morning trading but fell after a government auction of 20-year bonds met with strong demand from investors.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note settled at 4.421%, down from 4.441% Friday and 4.874% at the end of October.
Among individual stocks outside of the tech sector, Boeing rose 4.6%. That added to its gains from last week, when Dubai-based Emirates Airline said it would purchase 95 jets from the company.
Paramount Global was among the top gainers in the S&P 500, rising 5.6% after it said in a filing late Friday that it had adopted a severance plan for senior executives that would be implemented if they leave following a change in control of the company.
Meanwhile, Bayer's Frankfurt-listed shares fell 18% after the German chemical and drug giant said that it was halting a trial for an experimental cardiovascular drug. Shares of Bristol Myers Squibb, which is developing a similar drug, dropped 3.8%.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.1%. At midday Tuesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.15%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 1% and South Korea's Kospi was up 0.9%. S&P 500 futures rose 0.1%.
The U.S. stock and bond markets will be closed Thursday for Thanksgiving and will close early on Friday.
Credit: By Sam Goldfarb
