With tensions between the U.S. and China rising on many fronts, President-elect Joe Biden will take office aiming to align Western democracies to broadly pressure Beijing, a clear break with President Trump's go-it-alone approach.
Chinese President Xi Jinping has been thinking along the same lines and is a step ahead, setting up an overt competition for global leadership. He has been busy in recent years trying to draw traditional U.S. allies into China's economic orbit.
Moves this week by both Washington and Beijing are forcing China higher on the Biden agenda. Upon taking office he'll need to decide whether to overturn recent Trump administration actions. They include delisting Chinese telecommunications companies on the New York Stock Exchange, banning transactions with Chinese-connected apps and blacklisting China's largest computer chip maker.
He will also need to decide how hard to press Beijing over its broad crackdown on civil liberties in Hong Kong.
At the heart of Mr. Biden's China policy is what he calls a Summit of Democracies that would seek to establish a clear alternative to Beijing's autocratic rule, said Biden senior advisers interviewed during and after the presidential campaign. The U.S. will also try to organize smaller groups of democracies to tackle specific issues such as advanced telecommunications and artificial intelligence.
For Mr. Biden, resetting America's China policy means rejecting the current administration's approach. Mr. Trump fought with allies on trade and security issues as he took on China and brought actions domestically that have been tied up in the courts. Even so, Mr. Trump changed the tenor of the U.S.-China relationship by confronting Beijingon a number of issues. He also helped shape a growing consensus in Congress and the public that China isn't just a competitor but also a threat to American global leadership.
Mr. Biden argues America needs to bring multilateral pressure to bear. Otherwise, Beijing can pit one country against another by offering preferential access to its vast market. "China always saw an escape hatch through their economic relationships with others," said Jake Sullivan, Mr. Biden's choice for national security adviser. "Only by closing off those escape hatches would you get China to curb their trade abuses."
Given the lure of the vast Chinese market, Mr. Biden could face a tough time convincing allies to sign up for a united front against Beijing. China and the European Union, for instance, recently reached an investment treaty. U.S. allies say they can't be sure of America's long-term commitment to an international alliance, given four years of a unilateral approach.
China's leaders will try to ease the tension with the U.S. that deepened during the Trump administration, according to Chinese officials. Beijing plans to dispatch its top diplomat, Yang Jiechi, to Washington shortly after Mr. Biden is sworn in to explore how the two countries could cooperate, said people with knowledge of the matter.
Short-term, there is a trade war to tend to. One issue is what price China is willing to pay -- if any -- for the U.S. to lift tariffs on about $370 billion in Chinese exports to the U.S. Biden advisers said the president-elect won't roll them back soon. He plans to analyze the impact of the levies on the American economy and consult with allies before acting. Business groups that opposed the tariffs now say he should negotiate for concessions.
Beijing seems willing to wait. "Biden will sooner or later launch a renegotiation of the trade deal, as the current agreement is unrealistic," said Shi Yihong, a foreign-policy adviser to the central government, referring to China's purchasing targets. "A renegotiation is also in line with China's wishes."
Longer-term, Mr. Biden's multilateralist strategy will be informed by one view he does share with the Trump administration, that China poses a broad challenge to U.S. economic and political leadership in the 21st century. The president-elect criticizes Beijing for robbing U.S. companies of technology, unfairly subsidizing its state-owned firms and suppressing human rights.
Some advisers who worked with him in the Barack Obama administration, during which Washington cooperated with Beijing over the global financial crisis and other issues, now say the era of engagement is over, although they still look to Beijing for help on climate change and other Biden priorities.
"The trick is to navigate this in a way where we have all the tools we need to succeed in these various competitions with China," said Antony Blinken, who served the Obama administration and is Mr. Biden's choice for secretary of state, "but at the same time keeping open channels to cooperation where it's in our interest."
Mr. Biden's flagship effort will be his Summit for Democracy. It is designed, he wrote in Foreign Affairs magazine last year, "to renew the spirit and shared purpose of the nations of the free world." The plan is modeled after a 2012 nuclear-security summit President Obama convened to limit the spread of nuclear material. Mr. Obama's summit included China's leader. Mr. Biden's is designed to exclude Mr. Xi and other authoritarian leaders.
During the campaign, Mr. Biden talked of creating "a united front of friends and partners to challenge China's abusive behavior." Although some former Obama China experts doubt he will describe the summit that way, it would be a clear message from the meeting.
The Biden team plans to recruit leading democracies for alliances on technology issues, his advisers said, including development of new telecommunications technologies that will lessen dependence on 5G equipment from Huawei Technologies Co. Biden advisers complain that the Trump administration's efforts to block Huawei haven't succeeded because the U.S. never developed an effective 5G alternative.
"There's a division in the world between techno-democracies and techno-autocracies," Mr. Blinken said. "The techno-democracies have not done a very good job of organizing ourselves."
Potential partners might be reluctant to sign up for a U.S. effort to take on China after four years of Trump unilateralism -- and with the possibility Mr. Trump or another similar politician could regain the presidency in 2024.
"You'd be asking countries to forgo opportunities in the only major economy in the world that's growing to do what?" said Jorge Guajardo, a former Mexican ambassador to China who now advises companies on the China market: "To ally with the U.S., which has proved to be an unreliable partner."
And Western nations fear alienating Beijing and its market. The EU completed a bilateral investment deal with China in late December after seven years of negotiation. That put Mr. Xi in a stronger position with the new U.S. administration and served as reminder that it couldn't take European support for granted.
Mr. Sullivan seemed to acknowledge the changed circumstance in a Dec. 21 tweet before the deal was finished: "The Biden-Harris administration would welcome early consultations with our European partners on our common concerns about China's economic practices."
Beijing is pursuing its own multilateral agenda to further draw U.S. allies into its economic orbit. Beijing once preferred dealing one-on-one with trading partners, figuring its economy would give it an edge. The trade battle with the Trump administration has prompted a rethinking.
Mr. Xi sees multilateral approaches as more productive, Chinese officials said. China has stepped up efforts to work through international organizations including the World Trade Organization and United Nations. "If you control the rules," said an official with knowledge of the leadership's thinking, "you can control the game."
In November, Beijing signed a regional trade pact, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, with 14 other nations, including Japan, South Korea and Australia. Beijing's interest in completing the pact grew with each trade sanction from the Trump administration.
Recently, Mr. Xi said China would "favorably consider" joining an 11-nation Asia-Pacific trade pact the Obama administration championed, the Comprehensive and Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership. That agreement would require China to allow free flows of data across its borders and revamp its state-owned companies -- the kind of changes the Trump administration couldn't get Beijing to accept in bilateral trade talks.
In 2017, Mr. Trump pulled the U.S. out of an early version of the deal, then called simply the Trans-Pacific Partnership, complaining it was a job killer. The pact has become so toxic with labor unions and Democratic lawmakers that Mr. Biden says it needs to be renegotiated before he would consider joining.
Beijing is capitalizing on the irony of considering joining a pact with standards set by U.S. negotiators but rejected by a U.S. president. Skeptics question Beijing's willingness to make the necessary changes, saying it could be a way to tie up the West in negotiations.
Mr. Biden must fit the tariff conundrum into his new-multilateralism strategy. The Trump administration assessed tariffs on $370 billion of Chinese goods, three-quarters of what China sends the U.S. annually, during a two-year trade war. That culminated in a deal signed a year ago in which China agreed to dramatically increase purchases of U.S. goods, although it has so far fallen short of its pledged shipments.
The Biden team hasn't made commitments to new talks. That is yet another thing for Mr. Biden to discuss with allies first, Mr. Sullivan said: "He's not going to lock himself into a particular approach."

Credit: By Bob Davis and Lingling Wei
