Would you join a hot tech company that has quintupled its head count in three years and pays an average salary of almost $600,000? Before you answer, consider this: The company is OnlyFans, the subscription website known for X-rated content.
Adult entertainment -- including pornography, sex toys and novelties -- is a $58.4 billion global industry on pace to reach $96.2 billion in 2032, according to Allied Market Research.
Most of the open roles at these companies aren't what you think. On job boards at Pornhub's parent company and similar businesses, titles like "senior financial accountant," "sales development representative" and "full-stack software developer" dominate.
At a time when so much adult content is user-generated, and in the early stages of being created by artificial intelligence, career opportunities abound for fully clothed, college-educated professionals.
"We have funding from investors, and we're actively hiring," says Spencer Heilner, founder and chief executive of SirenAI, which makes interactive virtual companions. A former Boston Consulting Group consultant with a degree from Brigham Young University, Heilner fits the industry's surprising new prototype.
His startup has doubled in the past three months to about 25 people lured by equity stakes and the reality of tech-sector layoffs. Many white-collar professionals say working for an adult-entertainment company wasn't their first choice, but it was the best-paying or only available option.
"There are not as many companies hiring, and that makes job seekers more open to taking a role in an industry they're less keen on," says Matt Massucci, chief executive of the recruiting firm Hirewell, which recently mulled a contract with an AI porn company in need of engineers. The firm recruits for cannabis and gambling companies but decided it didn't want to be associated with adult content.
Job seekers who have taken unsexy jobs at sex companies say the compensation packages can be generous -- not always matching base salaries at the biggest names in tech, but often with ownership shares that can produce future windfalls.
They also say pivoting to "normal" careers later can be challenging because they are stigmatized by prospective employers.
Cierra Ortega says her recent job hunt was hampered by her one-year stint as a creator-experience representative at OnlyFans, a role that involved recruiting content producers to the platform and helping them grow their audiences. She joined the company after another offer was rescinded.
Even though she never appeared in explicit posts, Ortega, 24 years old, says OnlyFans was like a scarlet letter on her CV when she left last summer to look for new opportunities. She says one interviewer fixated on the company's most lurid qualities instead of the skills she developed there. Others didn't take her seriously.
"I got to a place where I was like, 'Maybe I should take this off my resume,'" she says. A gap might look better, she thought. In the end, she decided not to censor her experience, figuring she wouldn't want to work for a judgmental company.
OnlyFans didn't respond to requests for comment.
Ortega juggled freelance gigs until landing last month at a startup that styles itself as a PG-13 alternative to OnlyFans.
Americans' sexual mores have loosened in recent years, according to Gallup polls. Roughly four in 10 people say pornography is morally acceptable, up from three in 10 in 2011, and approval of heterosexual sex outside of marriage stands at 72%, compared with 53% in 2001. That doesn't mean workplaces welcome people with risque lines on their resumes.
Mickey Mod, an adult-site web developer and creative director, says he was recently offered a job editing a financial podcast only to have the opportunity rescinded. The 44-year-old says he was told the human-resources department had a problem with his background, which includes on-screen work.
"It's about liability," says Mod. "I know a lot of people who've had a similar experience where a company feels that if there were ever some sort of sexual-harassment claim, they couldn't defend hiring someone who worked in porn."
Adult-entertainment businesses often have nondescript corporate names that can offer former employees a fig leaf of cover. The parent company of Pornhub and YouPorn changed its name to Aylo last year after being acquired by a private-equity firm. It was previously called MindGeek. Sex-toy maker Doc Johnson is officially called Health Devices Corp.
That's what appears on Victoria Bowman's resume. As director of marketing and public relations from 2011 to 2014, she led a rebranding effort to make the company's products more mainstream.
Her unusual experience has produced funny, awkward and sometimes frustrating moments while job hunting.
"I've had times when I'll get far along in the interview process and then hear nothing," says Bowman, 47. "I always wonder: 'Did they do some digging and find something that tips the scale away from me?'"
Now a senior director of brand marketing at a data-intelligence firm, she recalls a tense job interview when she was trying to break into the tech sector. The hiring manager seemed stern, she recalls, until he got them both laughing with a wisecrack about her previous career. She was qualified for the open role, and that turned out to be all that mattered.
The adult industry's biggest recruiting challenge is candidates' fear that they might struggle to get jobs in the future, says Chad Braverman, Doc Johnson's chief creative and operating officer. The company, with some 500 employees, is hiring in its marketing and product-development departments.
"It's not an easy hire because there's still a stigma, even though we're more mainstream than ever," he says. "It comes down to selling the opportunity: This is something unique and interesting -- and recession-proof."
Credit: By Callum Borchers
