Injury prevention in the NBA is an oxymoron. That's the problem with injuries: They can't be prevented because they can't be predicted. But what if they could?
That's the premise of a new research paper being presented at the MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference this week. The study attempts to predict NBA injuries in order to prevent them -- and it claims that resting the 20% of players above a certain risk threshold could avert 60% of injuries.
"You can either lose a player for two months, or you can lose him for one game," said Hisham Talukder, a co-author of the study and data scientist at Dow Jones, which owns The Wall Street Journal.
Injury prevention has become an NBA obsession in recent years as teams have realized that playing their stars every minute of every game may not be the best way to keep them healthy for the entire season. Even the best NBA players -- and maybe especially them -- are spending more time on the bench now than ever before. The new approach seems to be working: Injuries are down this year from the last two years, according to a database kept by athletic trainer Jeff Stotts.
But the paper suggests there may be an uptick soon. The study applied machine-learning methods to analyze 500 injuries from the 2014 and 2015 seasons involving rotation NBA players and then tried to isolate what may have caused those injuries.
What surprised the authors most were the factors that were least important: the number of games in the last 14 days and the number of games on consecutive nights in that time. NBA teams have become careful about resting their players in highly concentrated parts of the schedule, and the league itself slashed the frequency of back-to-backs this season. All of which only makes it more counter-intuitive that this study found it may not matter as much as everyone thought.
Better indicators were a player's speed, usage and overall season workload. That helps explain why the highest injury risk right now is someone who plays like a complete maniac: Oklahoma City guard Russell Westbrook.
Talukder and Thomas Vincent, the co-authors, cautioned that their work isn't close to complete. There will never be a model that can predict all injuries. Even this one would have to include more information for NBA teams to believe it predicts muscle-stress injuries accurately enough to act on it. The current research is based on publicly available numbers, but the authors say they plan to add injury histories, season travel schedules and other advanced statistics -- as long as NBA teams don't beat them to it with better data.

Generate image description

Credit: By Ben Cohen
