Graphics-chip giant Nvidia Corp. is seeing no immediate letup in pandemic-fueled demand for home computing, videogaming and the chips used in big data centers, promising this quarter to top the record sales it just posted.
Nvidia, which has been among the biggest winners from the changes in how people live their lives during the health crisis, on Wednesday reported fiscal-third-quarter sales of $4.73 billion, up 57% from the previous year, generating $2.12 in earnings a share. It also promised to top the revenue figure with around $4.8 billion in sales in the current quarter, beating Wall Street's expectations.
Chief Executive Jensen Huang has transformed Nvidia over the past decade from a niche player in graphics-processing chips into a major force in artificial intelligence and data-science computing.
Nvidia's chips are in Nintendo Switch gaming consoles that have been hot commodities during global lockdowns: almost seven million sold in the third quarter, according to Nintendo.
"Nvidia is firing on all cylinders, achieving record revenues in gaming, data center and overall," Mr. Huang said.
The Santa Clara, Calif., company's shares have more than doubled this year, and Nvidia has surpassed Intel Corp. as the most valuable U.S. semiconductor company.
Leveraging that rise, Mr. Huang wants to expand Nvidia's focus further with the proposed $40 billion acquisition of U.K.-based chip designer Arm Holdings. Arm's circuit designs are in almost all smartphones, and its acquisition would instantly open up a new business line for Nvidia.
Nvidia isn't alone among tech giants anticipating continued pandemic-driven demand for remote-computing services.
Microsoft Corp. last month reported a healthy rise in sales, driven by its cloud-computing division. Amazon.com Inc., Facebook Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google have all seen demand for digital offerings persist as the pandemic drags on.
Nvidia has also prospered also from demand for high-end graphics cards that computer gamers prize. The company in September unveiled a card that quickly sold out, leading to frustration from gamers and an apology from Nvidia.
Its chips are also increasingly being used in supercomputers and data centers, used by companies and scientists to rapidly perform huge numbers of calculations.
The company's graphics chips also have proved useful in other tasks, including artificial-intelligence calculations that underpin popular gadgets like smart speakers and underlie product-recommendation engines.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
