Alexis Prendergast, a 25-year-old Brooklyn woman who has autism spectrum disorder, is the first to admit there are skills she hasn't mastered. "Mostly it's social stuff. I miss some cues," she says. Her wiring also lends unusual strengths, like an ability to focus for long stretches on tasks requiring great attention to detail. Happily, she found an employer looking for someone just like her.
Daivergent, a Manhattan tech startup, provides autistic contractors to clients seeking high accuracy and speed on tasks including data entry and online research. Most people find these jobs tedious and tiring; they get sloppy after an hour, says co-founder and chief executive officer Byran Dai. But Daivergent's autistic workers "can do it for the day, can do it for the week, can do it month after month," he says.
Mr. Dai, who launched his company in February with $50,000 in savings and $100,000 in funding from the Entrepreneurs Roundtable Accelerator, manages a team of four autistic employees at his headquarters and a pool of some 200 contractors around the country who work from home.
In a project Mr. Dai describes as typical, workers digitally labeled items such as doors and windows in blueprints for a company making construction cost-estimate software. The tagged images are used to train an artificial-intelligence system to recognize such objects on its own.
Daivergent's remote workers are paid by the project. They might earn a set amount for tagging a certain number of images, for example. Pay typically works out to $12 to $20 an hour, Mr. Dai says. Employees and contractors can choose their own schedules, and most work between five and 30 hours a week. Daivergent offers no benefits but plans to do so in the future.
For Mr. Dai, who is 28 and grew up in New York City before studying data science and epidemiology at Harvard University and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, the motivation to start Daivergent was personal. His 19-year-old brother, Brandon, is on the autism spectrum. Four years ago, before their mother died of cancer-related complications, she asked Mr. Dai to look after him.
People on the spectrum often struggle with job interviews and navigating the social aspects of work. An estimated 50% to 75% of people on the autism spectrum experience long-term periods of unemployment. "I want him to have a meaningful life," Mr. Dai says of his brother.
Autistic workers can face other challenges in the workforce once employed. Many people with autism think very literally and may struggle with ambiguity. So Mr. Dai developed his own digital work platform to accommodate Daivergent's workers. It breaks projects into small chunks so workers can easily track their own progress, and the system relies heavily on video instruction.
Employees such as Leon Campbell, a Bronx 23-year-old who recently graduated from Hunter College, say they appreciate this structure. "I was afraid my first job would be overwhelming and give me more stress than even school did," he says. "But this is simpler."
Mr. Dai consulted with employment-services experts at the Arc New York, an advocacy group, while developing the work platform. To refine it further, Daivergent is also consulting with a licensed clinical social worker specializing in young adults on the autism spectrum.
Because the spectrum includes such a range of conditions, Mr. Dai says he doesn't require any specific diagnosis to hire. He typically recruits from organizations that provide support services to people on the spectrum.
Some small outfits already employ workers on the spectrum for remote work, says Dave Kearon, director of adult services for advocacy organization Autism Speaks, but Daivergent stands out for the training it provides. "He's offering not just technical skills but social and communication skills-training."
The Points Guy, a website for consumers aiming to maximize their travel rewards, retained Daivergent to help build the database behind its new app. "It's super complicated, and it's tedious work," says director of product management Alon Hartuv. "But they provided the goods."
---
AnneKadet@wsj.com

Credit: By Anne Kadet
