Ken Griffin is back the near the top of the hedge-fund world. The billionaire Mr. Griffin has not just rebuilt Citadel from its crisis-era lows, but pushed it to aggressively expand into new areas -- all while he contends with a high-profile divorce that has Chicago's gossip pages hanging on every filing. As he prepares to mark Citadel's 25th anniversary later this year, Mr. Griffin sat for several interviews with the Journal's Rob Copeland to discuss his investing style, the markets today and politics. Condensed excerpts follow:
Q: Your divorce has made public some unflattering allegations about you, many of which you've denied. How do you deal with the scrutiny?
A: Long ago I had to sort of learn to have a thick skin to read some of the things you read in the papers and to also keep my ego in check when you read some really flattering things in the papers. Two-thousand eight was a failure that I had to endure. I didn't foresee the collapse of the U.S. financial system -- I just didn't see that coming -- that the U.S. banking sector would survive only because of the support and lifeline from the U.S. government. I then had to fight it out in the 3 years and 17 days post-08 to make back the losses that we incurred in 16 weeks. So that's a backdrop. In the last year, it's regrettable that the strategy used by the now-withdrawn opposing counsel was to try to attack my character in my hometown. That didn't work. My actions speak louder than anything else. Let me be clear: All I really care about is my kids know that their parents love them.
Q: Tell me something about yourself that people might find surprising.
A: It drives people nuts that I take them to McDonald's all the time. It's the call from Ken: 'Let's go for a walk.' Everyone knows that is code for, 'We're going to McDonald's.' People have these images of what the successful business person is supposed to act like and be like and so forth.
Q: What is it like to see your personal life, business life and political giving become headline news?
A: For choice, I prefer not to be a public figure. I don't have Tom Cruise's good looks. I don't have a need to be on the front page of fill-in-the-blank. On my political giving, look, there's probably not a week that goes by that I don't realize the sacrifices that our forefathers made for this country. Yes, I'm involved in politics. Because frankly, if not me, who?
Q: You've given millions to back Republican Bruce Rauner for governor of Illinois, yet also boosted Democrat Rahm Emanuel for mayor of Chicago. Where do your politics lie?
A: I can't describe myself as a die-hard Republication or faithful Democrat. The distinction between our two parties in the United States is pretty narrow. We need a mayor who understands how to get through a balance sheet; it was an easy call to get behind Rahm. I want Bruce to be comfortable knowing that he's got my support however he feels it's best to use. Anyone who knows him knows you don't have influence with Bruce.
Q: Where are you leaning in the 2016 presidential race?
A: I love Walker for taking on the entrenched interests in Wisconsin. I want to see how he can do on the national stage. I think Rubio's got a really compelling message and he comes from a background that gives him real insight into the challenges that the middle class faces. I wish Jeb had any last name but Bush, because I think Jeb's track record is really good. As an American, I'm uncomfortable with the idea of family political dynasties. We don't need another Clinton and we don't need another Bush.
Q: How is Citadel dealing with the recent market volatility in China (note: interview conducted before one of the firm's accounts in China was suspended by regulators)
A: When I think about the next 10 years, we are going to have a very meaningful business in China. We've seen the government of China respond very vigorously to the issues at hand. This is the first time they've seen so much wealth disappear so quickly in such a visible way. I think they over-responded but you can understand why they did so. They just haven't experienced this before culturally as a regime. This is a very interesting moment for them. The 10-year story on China is completely intact.
Q: How is the firm doing things differently now than it did five or 10 years ago?
A: We recently hired someone with a machine learning background from Amazon.com, and one of the problems he worked on there was the routing of calls from its call center. What's the applicability of that? Amazon, as you can imagine, has endless calls every day from its customers and if they can route those calls more quickly and more efficiently the customer experience is better. The actual mathematical techniques that Amazon uses to think about that problem we think have applicability to the financial markets. It's neat.
Q: Many of your competitors are shying from calling themselves "hedge funds." Do you have ambitions for Citadel to be something else?
A: Over the years, there have been moments in time where the word "hedge fund" in the popular media has had positive connotations and negative connotations, but the word has a very strong historical anchoring to me. We're here to create wealth for our stakeholders in good times. We're here hopefully to create wealth in difficult times.
(See related article: "In Depth: Citadel Is Back and in No Mood to Be Cautious" -- WSJA August 5, 2015)
Credit: By Rob Copeland
