KPMG plans to invest $2 billion in artificial intelligence and cloud services across its business lines globally during the next five years through a partnership with Microsoft, the latest move by a Big Four accounting firm to double down on the technologies.
The professional-services company on Tuesday said it expects the partnership to bring in more than $12 billion in revenue over five years. Annually, that would represent about 7% of KPMG's global revenue, which totaled $34.64 billion in the year ended Sept. 30, 2022. The company, the smallest of the Big Four by revenue, declined to provide a projected revenue figure for the year ending September.
Through the new investment, the roughly 265,000-person company will further automate aspects of its tax, audit and consulting services, aimed at enabling employees to provide faster analysis, spending more time on doling out strategic advice and helping more companies integrate AI into their operations.
Microsoft declined to comment on the investment it is making in the partnership.
KPMG's global chair and chief executive, Bill Thomas, said the company isn't looking to use technology to eliminate jobs, but rather to enhance its workforce with AI skills -- for example, by moving people to new roles or offering them training.
"I certainly don't expect that we'll lay off a lot of people because we've invested in this partnership," Thomas said. "I would expect that our organization will continue to grow and we will reskill people to the extent possible and, frankly, create all sorts of opportunities in ways that we can't even imagine yet."
As part of the expanded partnership, KPMG will have early access to an AI assistant called Microsoft 365 Copilot, before its launch to the general public. KPMG's deal with Microsoft also includes the Azure cloud platform, through which the professional-services company already uses OpenAI to build and run apps. Microsoft has a partnership with OpenAI, the startup behind the ChatGPT chatbot.
Credit: By Mark Maurer
