Some of the earliest investors in IEX Group Inc. recently sold their stakes in the upstart stock exchange, including activist hedge funds Third Point LLC and Pershing Square Capital Management LP, people familiar with the matter said.
The funds exited their stakes in a transaction that valued privately owned IEX at more than $700 million, up from its previous valuation of about $500 million, according to people briefed on the deal. Another early investor, Senator Investment Group LP, and some employees of New York-based IEX also sold shares in the deal, they said. The transaction closed in March but hasn't been previously reported.
IEX rose to fame five years ago after its founders were featured in Michael Lewis's best-seller "Flash Boys." The company, founded in 2012, has said it seeks to protect investors against what it calls predatory high-speed trading strategies. Its chief executive, Brad Katsuyama, is a vocal critic of incumbent stock exchanges.
The company has struggled to break into the deeply entrenched U.S. stock-exchange business. IEX's share of U.S. equities trading is 2.6%, according to research firm Tabb Group, and it has one listed company.
The New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq Inc. list thousands of companies and together handle about 40% of trading volume in U.S. stocks.
Third Point, led by billionaire investor Daniel Loeb, and Senator Investment Group declined to comment.
Pershing Square, led by shareholder activist William Ackman, disclosed the sale of its IEX stake in the March 25 annual report of its publicly traded vehicle, Pershing Square Holdings Ltd. The firm invested $1 million in IEX in January 2013 and made a net profit of $3.7 million after taxes and other expenses, the report said.
IEX didn't raise new capital in the transaction. Toronto-based venture-capital firm Georgian Partners -- which typically focuses on artificial intelligence and big data startups -- invested in IEX in the deal, while longtime IEX investors Bain Capital Ventures and the venture arm of Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co. increased their stakes, the companies confirmed.
Matt Harris, a partner at Bain Capital Ventures, said he believed IEX would keep building market share. "We're satisfied that they're grinding their way up," he said.
Mr. Harris added that he expected IEX to win more listings later this year. Companies that switch exchanges tend to make the jump in the final months of the year, because their listing fees at NYSE and Nasdaq are due on Jan. 1 for the year ahead. Online brokerage Interactive Brokers Group Inc. switched from Nasdaq to IEX in October, and remains IEX's only issuer.
"Like most companies, our investor mix has changed over time as we've moved from being a startup getting off the ground to a growth company setting a new standard for national securities exchanges," said Gerald Lam, an IEX spokesman.
IEX has been hit with turnover recently, with more than half a dozen people leaving the firm of around 90 employees in the past six months, including some senior managers.
Danny Aisen, a co-founder of IEX, left in December to start his own company, along with one of IEX's quantitative researchers. Mr. Aisen was featured in "Flash Boys" as a puzzle genius who helped design systems to counter high-frequency trading.
IEX's main unit, Investors Exchange LLC, reported net income of $10.7 million on revenue of more than $122 million in 2017, the last year for which its financials are available.
Revenue likely grew last year with growth in IEX's market share and the increased trading volume and volatility of the U.S. stock market.
The company has pushed beyond its core stock-exchange business with an arm focused on technology ventures. IEX's investments include TradeWind Markets Inc., a startup looking to bring blockchain technology to precious-metals trading.
IEX has also explored a potential foray into the videogame industry, discussing whether its technology could be used in online multiplayer games to help level the playing field between people with slower and faster network connections, according to people familiar with the matter.

Credit: By Alexander Osipovich and Liz Hoffman
