Tencent reported worse-than-expected results in the fourth quarter as the Chinese technology giant navigated a slowing economy.
The videogame and social-media company on Wednesday said its fourth-quarter net profit slumped 75% to 27.025 billion yuan, or $3.75 billion, attributing the decline to a 106.6 billion yuan gain from the disposal of its stake in Chinese food-delivery giant Meituan a year earlier.
The Shenzhen-based company said revenue for the period rose 7.1% to 155.2 billion yuan.
Both measures missed the expectations of analysts polled by FactSet.
The results come as Beijing strikes a positive tone on the country's tech industry. Chinese Premier Li Qiang in March called artificial intelligence an important engine for "new productive forces," state media reported.
Tencent said revenue from its bread-and-butter game and social-network business, which accounted for 45% of the top line, fell 2% to 69.08 billion yuan for the fourth quarter. Domestic game sales declined 3% to 27 billion yuan, while international game sales increased 1% to 13.9 billion yuan.
At a briefing after the results, Tencent President Martin Lau acknowledged that revenue from the domestic game business has been soft in 2023, saying that monetization stagnated for its two major games, "Peacekeeper Elite" and "Honor of Kings."
But the company expects an improvement from the second quarter, he said. Blockbuster title "Dungeon & Fighter Mobile" will also be launched then.
The improved outlook is the latest sign that things are looking up for the videogame maker. Beijing has softened its stance on the videogame sector in recent months, with gaming approvals appearing to be back on track.
Chinese regulators in February approved a new batch of imported titles, including the DnF Mobile game from Tencent and its Korean partner Nexon.
The moves are being seen as part of efforts to reverse a prolonged decline in the country's stock markets and support a slowing economy.
Tencent's shares have yet to fully recover to where they were in late December, when they plunged 12% in a single day -- shedding about $46 billion in market value -- after China's videogame regulator proposed measures to limit the time and money people spend on computer and smartphone games.
Shares closed on Wednesday at 288.80 Hong Kong dollars each, or US$36.91, compared with around HK$310 in late 2023.
The company said it would issue a final dividend of HK$3.40 a share for 2023, up from HK$2.40 in 2022.
It also intends to at least double the size of share buybacks to over HK$100 billion this year from HK$49 billion in 2023.
Credit: By Tracy Qu
