When was the last time you tried to find a public phone in Midtown Manhattan? It isn't easy.
The challenge presented itself last week after my cellphone perished.
My woes began the previous weekend after the phone followed me into a swimming pool. This wasn't a case of spontaneously deciding to take a dip with my clothes on. Rather, I was walking around the edge of the pool doing a little spring-cleaning when some of the surrounding flagstones -- unbeknownst to me they had loosened over the winter -- gave way, sending me into the frigid water.
The primary victims were my pride and my device. My older daughter, something of a techie, suggested drawing out the moisture by immersing the phone in rice for 12 to 24 hours. Unfortunately, nobody told the phone this was supposed to restore it to life, and the operation failed.
It's one thing to know intuitively that you've grown dependent on your smartphone, quite another to be forced to survive without its benefits.
The awareness of my dependency probably peaked after I'd left the office Tuesday evening having forgotten to call my wife about our dinner plans -- by dinner plans I mean should I pick up something on the way home? -- and realized this once-simple operation would now require locating a public phone.
But there were other exercises I wanted to perform that had now also become insurmountable obstacles. Along with thoughts of dinner came questions about dessert. That brought to mind Myzel's, a chocolate shop in the vicinity, whose hours of operation I wanted to check since it was past 7 p.m. and the shop was probably closed.
The query could have been addressed with a few clicks on my cellphone, but its answer was now as inaccessible as the papyrus scrolls at the ancient library at Alexandria.
The urge for quality chocolate hit at approximately the 72-hour mark of phonelessness. The previous afternoon I was reporting a story at the NYC Transit Museum. Normally, I'd have employed the phone to find the fastest subway route there, and then emerging at Borough Hall in Brooklyn, have it point me in the right direction.
Instead, I was dependent on the kindness of strangers for directions.
Also, being without a phone prevented my staying on top of emails. This shouldn't be a big deal since 90% of them are encouraging me to do things I have no interest in -- for example, taking out a second mortgage -- and the other 10% can wait. But I'm one of those pathetic types who checks his email messages when forced to wait at stop lights, as if the White House might be trying to contact me for advice on negotiating with Iran.
The evening my new, improved cellphone arrived and life returned to normal, I attended the movie Ex Machina with my brother. It's about a female robot who's easy to fall in love with. However, the larger lesson is about the perils of having the machines supersede us.
I've never been especially concerned about the triumph of artificial intelligence -- unlike, say, physicist Stephen Hawking -- assuming that rather than enslave us we'll become inseparable and indistinguishable, a happy synergy equal parts human and nanotechnology. Plus, I probably won't be around to see the day.
In that regard, the cellphone or Apple watch will be looked back upon as an example of rudimentary integration.
But what happens when we become wireless devices ourselves? And fall into swimming pools, real or metaphorical, and short-circuit? Will that become the definition of death? Will our families lower us into giant vats of rice with tears in their eyes and fingers crossed?
So as I stood rather helplessly outside the Warwick Hotel on 54th Street wondering what to do next -- I'd visited assuming the venerable institution, built by William Randolph Hearst in 1926, might still have a public pay phone or two; it doesn't -- it occurred to me that as a matter of personal, and perhaps even national, security, one should be required to go technology-free a day or two a month just to sharpen our survival skills. It would be the equivalent of Cold War children doing duck-and-cover drills.
It increasingly looks as if the next World War will be fought in cyberspace. Those least tethered to technology -- who can read a map, grow a head of lettuce and whose ego isn't dependent on how many people are trying to get in touch with him or her at any particular moment -- will emerge as kings.
I eventually found a public phone. At the corner of Fifth Avenue and 54th Street, I believe.
I sidled up to it, feeling as if I were entering a time warp, and deposited a quarter. Miraculously it worked, connecting me to home.
My wife informed me she already had her dinner and I was on my own. As I walked away I enjoyed the anachronistic satisfaction of a quarter well spent and the anticipation of a journey home through the park, disconnected from everything except the trees and the setting sun.
---
ralph.gardner@wsj.com
