Atlantic salmon, though unremarkable in size, is a big fish in the culinary world. But producers face a pesky problem to keep salmon king.
Health-conscious consumers who covet its brain-enriching Omega-3 have helped make salmon one of the fastest-growing food sources on the planet. Victoria Beckham told The Wall Street Journal last year she considers it a dietary staple. She's not alone. In America, salmon is the second-most popular seafood after shrimp.
The fish frenzy has driven prices higher and spawned new billionaires, such as Gustav Magnar Witzoe, the 31-year-old Norwegian heir to a salmon fortune and a fashion model who made a splash at this year's Met Gala in a salmon-colored Versace cape.
Norway's fjords and coasts are the farmed fish's top habitat, with around 500 million salmon swimming in the chilly waters -- a ratio of roughly 90 Norwegian salmon to every Norwegian human.
Atlantic salmon farming, introduced as overfishing and river pollution shrank the wild salmon population, increased 74 times from 1985 to 2022. Salmon are bred in tanks on land, then moved into the ocean, where they swim in giant nets.
But these days, the industry is swimming upstream.
Atlantic salmon production dipped in 2022 and '23, as disease outbreaks and a surge in jellyfish attacks ravaged the fish. Norway's plentiful fjords have filled up. The coastlines of Chile -- the world's second-largest producer -- are also saturated. There aren't many new places to rear the fish, which require cool temperatures and mild currents.
Some analysts anticipate a sharp slowdown as governments move to curtail farming, concerned in part that farmed salmon -- bred selectively to gain weight quickly -- are escaping their nets and spreading their wonky genetics to their cousins in the wild. Canada, a top producer, recently stopped granting new licenses to coastal open-net salmon farms in British Columbia to protect the state's wild salmon population.
Another big reason governments are clamping down: an explosion of bloodsucking, treatment-resistant fish lice.
These parasites are no small-fry. They lay hundreds of eggs at a time and quickly permeate shallow coastal waters, sucking at the flesh of cooped-up salmon.
To fight infestation, companies are employing an ever-expanding arsenal, from mechanical brushes that delouse fish to underwater lasers that zap these villains of the salmon-farming world.
"They are spending so much money trying to come up with new ideas and tools to combat the problems," said Lars Daniel Garshol, lead salmonids analyst at Kontali, a Norwegian seafood analysis company. "But they're having a hard time solving them."
Take, for example, this fishy solution: Some farmers began dumping lumpfish -- stout, grumpy-looking creatures that snack on sea lice -- into salmon pens. Only to have many of the fish take a liking to salmon food pellets over lice. Some also developed cataracts, making hunting the parasites harder.
Researchers are now looking for ways to identify the most eager lice-eaters with the aim of selectively breeding them. A study at Swansea University in Wales concluded that personality tests could be used to build "elite" lines of cleaner fish. Part of the research involved dumping a yellow golf ball and a green Lego brick into lumpfish tanks, to see which fish would be bold enough to make an approach.
There's also the question of what to do with the fish when their time is up. Researchers with close ties to the industry have tried to find markets that would fancy a lumpfish lunch. It's a tough sell.
Participants in one study said the fish's flesh was tasteless, and they were turned off by the fact the fish were raised on lice.
"They thought it was rather scary looking and very unappetizing," said market researcher Goril Voldnes of Nofima, a Norwegian government-owned research institute.
One of the more powerful tools being deployed in the battle against lice -- lasers -- didn't seem like such a promising notion at the start.
When John Breivik, a veteran of Norway's oil-and-gas industry, approached salmon farmers in 2010 with the idea of zapping lice with lasers, he was met with incredulity. "Every fish farmer that we met said: This is science fiction, this is 'Star Wars,'" said Breivik.
Stingray Marine Solutions, the company he created with colleagues in 2012, used machine learning to teach underwater lasers to recognize the shape of lice and fire off pulses. Crucially, the beam is weak enough that if it hits salmon, it bounces off their scales.
A Stingray factory opened in November to produce over 1,000 laser sets annually. Each costs around $45,000 a year.
Alf-Goran Knutsen, a third-generation salmon farmer, is general manager of the Kvaroy Group, a Whole Foods supplier with a salmon farm on the Arctic Circle. A few years ago Knutsen dumped his lumpfish, which struggled with their health, and replaced them with an armada of 82 Stingray lasers.
"Right now we're at 150,000-200,000 shots per laser a day," he said. "That's an insane number, and that also tells you we are able to control the lice situation at the moment."
Joachim Nielsen wants to cut the ocean out of the process altogether.
The Norwegian financier moved his family to Yokohama, Japan, two years ago and erected giant fish tanks at the foot of Mount Fuji. The farm, home to 1.3 million salmon that will never know the ocean, plans to begin harvesting in September.
Since the fish are disconnected from nature, Nielsen said, they don't have to worry about sea lice or escapees breeding with wild salmon. But they face other challenges, including high costs and complicated water-treatment systems.
Another challenge of on-land farming systems is that salmon hit maturity early, stunting their growth, especially in males. Nielsen found a way to swim around that problem: all-girl farms.
His company, Proximar Seafood, secures eggs from a genetics company that uses hormones to change the sex of salmon from female to male. When these males reproduce, they only pass on the X chromosome, leading to offspring that are female. "What used to be a big headache has been largely resolved," Nielsen said.
Supply from land-based farms remains tiny. They are expected to make up around 1% of global production by 2025 if projects like Nielsen's succeed.
Leonardo DiCaprio, a critic of salmon farms, is backing a radical solution that involves neither fishing nor farming. He is an investor in Wildtype, which is growing fish cells in steel tanks and developing cell-cultivated salmon meat at what it calls a pilot fishery in San Francisco.
"This facility looks just like a neighborhood microbrewery, except we grow salmon cells in our tanks instead of beer," Wildtype says.
Credit: By Jon Emont
