Should the U.S. bring its nearly 30,000 troops home from the Korean Peninsula in return for North Korean nuclear disarmament? An adviser to South Korean President Moon Jae-in recently suggested the answer might be yes. And Kim Jong Un likely won't give up the bomb without an end to the U.S.-South Korea alliance in its current form.
This might sound like a reasonable trade-off, but recall that the North Korean threat consists of much more than nuclear weapons. Pyongyang maintains a huge conventional military, robust special forces, stocks of chemical and biological arms, and hundreds of artillery tubes and missile launchers in range of Seoul. If these threats could also be substantially reduced, it would be fair to ask about the future of the alliance.
Yet consider its tremendous benefits. A strong U.S.-led alliance system has been very good for international peace and stability, and the U.S.-South Korea alliance has been an integral part of that broader community. This transcends specific threats from North Korea, Russia or any other hostile power.
South Korea is the world's 11th-largest economy and remains influential. No one should want to return to the anarchy that prevailed in Europe and East Asia a century ago, when countries had weak and shifting relationships but no enduring bonds. The result was two world wars followed by catastrophic conflict in Korea.
In military terms, the alliance has proved its mettle beyond the Korean Peninsula. The U.S. has some 60 allies and security partners. But few countries have shown the same commitment to collaborative global military operations, combined with the same fighting capability, as South Korea. It has the largest military by head count of any American ally, and arguably one of the toughest and most combat-capable forces. For future security missions -- counterterrorism, protection of sea lanes, cyberdefense -- the alliance offers great benefits for the U.S.
Then there is South Korea's immediate security -- and, most of all, concerns about China. South Koreans are in no hurry to pick a fight with a rising China, as even a reunified Korea would have only 5% of China's population. China isn't an enemy Koreans can afford to have, but also not a country most Koreans want to trust and deal with on their own. Some kind of alliance with the U.S. would reassure Koreans about their future security and role in the world.
What kind of alliance would make sense if the North Korean danger disappeared? A first option would be a modestly scaled-back version of today's, with no more than 25,000 troops stationed at all times. The U.S. would retain something like its current mix of U.S. forces: a brigade of heavy Army forces, additional ground-logistics capabilities, two wings of Air Force fighters and attack aircraft, as well as facilities in Korea's southeast. But this would be backed by a commitment to send hundreds of thousands of troops for the direct defense of South Korea. Under this scenario, a hypothetical China threat would replace today's real North Korean threat for military planning.
The other option would be perhaps 5,000 to 8,000 troops. This wouldn't emphasize a Chinese invasion threat, but rather binational or multinational expeditionary operations throughout the region and globe. Most of today's American fighter aircraft in Korea, with their relatively short ranges, might return to the U.S., as would logistics capabilities to bring in more than 300,000 in the case of a general war.
The heavy Army brigade now in Korea might be transformed into a light brigade, better suited for peacekeeping missions. It could be based at a new regional peacekeeping center where other nations -- even China -- could send forces to train. U.S. special forces would remain in modest numbers. Some U.S. Navy ships might be located in Korea too. Perhaps the U.S. could create a hub for ships employing robotics and artificial intelligence, given South Korea's excellence in those areas.
We don't need to answer these questions now, but it isn't too soon to start the debate. And it is definitely not too soon to oppose any North Korean demand to end the U.S.-South Korea alliance as part of a nuclear deal.
---
Mr. O'Hanlon is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: South Korean Defense and the U.S. Tripwire" -- WSJ June 9, 2018)

Credit: By Michael O'Hanlon
