In 2021 the U.S. and its allies have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to reverse global democratic retreat and put autocracies like Russia and China on the back foot. That will happen if major democracies unite in the pursuit of freedom.
President-elect Joe Biden aims to "build back better." He cannot turn back the clock four years to a creaky multilateral world where allies are picked off by autocracies that exchange strategic investment or cheap energy for unwavering loyalty. Allowing allies to sell out their economic security while expecting Uncle Sam to act as their security guarantor would open the door for another Trump-like isolationist to reclaim the White House in four years.
Instead the U.S. should focus on giving the democratic world a new sense of confidence, which free societies -- with their inbuilt self-doubt, opposition and division -- too often lack. As secretary general of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, I sought to build these links across the free world, creating and strengthening partnerships with Indo-Pacific democracies like Japan, Australia and South Korea.
Yet in the years after I left public office the world has seen a resurgence of authoritarianism, and technology has reached an inflection point where it can both liberate and oppress. Five years ago an alliance of democracies was a noble goal in progress, but today it is essential to solving urgent problems.
Determined American leadership must be at the heart of this effort. The U.S. alone has the power and reach. It also enjoys a resilient democracy of its own. The 2020 elections were a stress test for American democracy. It passed, securing a transfer of power even when the head of state himself sought to delegitimize the process.
President-elect Joe Biden has a queue of America's weary allies outside his door. We are yearning for a determined leader and, from experience, I believe Joe Biden will seize this opportunity.
In 2018 I launched the first Copenhagen Democracy Summit, under the auspices of my Alliance of Democracies Foundation. The summit convenes national leaders, democracy activists, and representatives from tech and civil society to strengthen the forces of democracy. The former vice president opened the first summit and co-founded a new trans-Atlantic initiative, with former Republican Secretary of Homeland Security Michael Chertoff and me, to fight foreign election meddling.
Mr. Biden's speech made a strong argument for renewing alliances and standing up for democracy. "Democracy's all about one simple thing," he said: "freedom, freedom, freedom." During his campaign this year, he pledged to host a similar summit of democratic leaders as president.
America will lead the endeavor, but it won't be alone. Democracies in the Indo-Pacific, from Taiwan to Australia, India and Japan, are also looking for like-minded friends to counter China's aggressive posture.
In Europe, a post-Brexit U.K. will host the Group of Seven summit in 2021, bringing together the world's top democratic and economic firepower. London intends to use this opportunity to make what one senior politician described to me as an "overture to the free world." It has already floated a potential "Democratic 10," or D-10, opening the top global table to other major democracies such as India, Australia and South Korea. And Britain will try to build new consensus on economic resilience in areas such as foreign subsidies, global trade reform and technological advancement.
It's that last topic, tech, that poses an existential challenge for democracies. The world is in a figurative technological arms race. Whoever wins that race will lead in setting rules, standards and norms for emerging technological systems, from facial recognition to weapons of war. If China wins the race, freedom will wane.
The free world should learn from its internal tussles over Huawei and TikTok and build a digital alliance to prepare for the next set of challenges. This includes setting common privacy standards for transferring the metadata needed to develop cutting-edge artificial intelligence, cooperating on how to regulate internet platforms, and combining firepower to develop telecom networks, quantum computing and artificial intelligence -- all faster, better and freer than China.
Not every U.S. ally is fully convinced of the need for a global democratic caucus. France and Germany may be concerned that an alliance of democracies would supplant the global multilateral system represented by the United Nations. And a resurgence of the trans-Atlantic alliance could reduce the imperative for Europe to develop strategic independence from the U.S.
On both of these concerns, I disagree. Strengthening the global democratic alliance would enable member nations to rebuild multilateralism, not bypass it. We need to talk to China, about climate change and other struggles, but let's do so from a position of relative strength. And Europe should simultaneously continue to be more self-sufficient and invest more in its own security, because a stronger Europe means a freer world.
Thirty years ago advanced democracies were told that they'd reached the "end of history," and that the continued advance of freedom was inevitable. The opposite has been the case: Freedom has retreated as America retreated from its place as the global leader. We may not see a better opportunity again to recover from the West's crippling disease of democratic self-doubt. It's time to build an alliance of democracies.
---
Mr. Rasmussen was NATO secretary general, 2009-14. He founded the Alliance of Democracies Foundation in 2017.

Credit: By Anders Fogh Rasmussen
