KYIV, Ukraine -- A Russian soldier who killed an unarmed civilian in Ukraine and the victim's widow testified Thursday in the first war-crimes case since Russia's invasion, while Ukraine's military said it largely fended off counterattacks in the northeast.
Vadim Shishimarin, a 21-year-old Russian sergeant, has admitted to fatally shooting Oleksandr Shelipov, 62, in the northeastern town of Chupakhivka in late February. Prosecutors have asked the three-judge panel to sentence him to life in prison, the harshest possible penalty under Ukrainian law.
Sgt. Shishimarin told a Kyiv courtroom that after his regiment's tanks were destroyed on Feb. 28, an officer ordered the commandeering of a civilian car, and five men got in, including Sgt. Shishimarin. As they drove, he said, they saw a man talking on a cellphone. The officer said the man would report their position to the Ukrainian forces, Sgt. Shishimarin said, and ordered him to shoot, which he did. He said he didn't see if he hit the man. "It was fast," he said. "I barely saw him."
Sgt. Shishimarin acknowledged that he wasn't obligated to follow the order because none of the others in the car was his commanding officer.
The group was ambushed by people shooting from the woods -- they couldn't tell who. The prosecutor later said it was local hunters. The driver was killed and the car crashed into a ditch. The remaining four soldiers jumped out of the vehicle and fled.
The group surrendered to a civilian in the morning.
"I admit guilt," Sgt. Shishimarin said. "I understand that you cannot forgive me. But I apologize."
Kateryna Shelipova, Mr. Shelipov's 61-year-old wife, told the judges that on Feb. 28 she heard shots and ran to her gate to see a gray car drive by with Sgt. Shishimarin holding a gun in the back seat.
Frightened, she said she closed the gate and waited there for about five minutes. Then she went outside and saw her husband lying on the sidewalk, shot in the head. "His brain was visible," she said.
Ms. Shelipova said her husband was a civilian: "He never carried weapons."
Ukrainian authorities hope that Sgt. Shishimarin will be the first of many Russian soldiers tried for war crimes. Last month, they filed criminal charges against 10 Russian soldiers accused of taking civilians hostage and mistreating them in Bucha, near Kyiv. Officials are working to identify more alleged war-crime perpetrators, using several methods, including an artificial-intelligence system that can match faces of Russian casualties to social-media posts.
Moscow has denied committing war crimes or targeting civilians.
There are complexities in bringing war-crime cases while the fighting continues.
Another soldier who was in the car with Sgt. Shishimarin testified Thursday, but Sgt. Shishimarin's attorney, Victor Ovsyannikov, said he wanted the other two soldiers in the vehicle to take the stand as well.
However, the prosecution said they couldn't appear in court because they were part of a prisoner exchange more than a month ago.
Though prosecutors argued that Sgt. Shishimarin should remain in a Ukrainian prison for life, the possibility that he, too, would be part of a prisoner exchange was raised by Ms. Shelipova. She told the court she hoped Sgt. Shishimarin would spend the rest of his life in prison, but that she would accept if he were part of a prisoner exchange.
Sgt. Shishimarin's trial is set to continue Friday.
In eastern Ukraine on Thursday, heavy fighting continued, with the military saying its forces fought off several Russian assaults. Russia is counterattacking to the north of Ukraine's second-most-populous city of Kharkiv in an attempt to win back territory lost to Ukraine in recent days, said the General Staff of Ukraine.
Elsewhere in the east, Russia carried out attacks with artillery, missiles and airstrikes but wasn't gaining ground, the General Staff said.
Oleksiy Arestovych, a Ukrainian presidential adviser, said late Wednesday that Russia's advance in the east had been slow and its forces were pushed back in some places. "The enemy engaged all its force and means to break our defense. But it isn't working," he said in a post on the Telegram messaging service. "We are slowly turning the situation to our advantage."
U.S. Army Gen. Mark Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, spoke via telephone Thursday with his Russian counterpart for the first time since Russia's Feb. 24 invasion of Ukraine, the Pentagon said. Chief of Russian General Staff Gen. Valery Gerasimov and Gen. Milley "discussed several security-related issues of concern and agreed to keep the lines of communication open," said Army Col. Dave Butler, a spokesman for Gen. Milley.
Meanwhile, Russia's Defense Ministry said 771 more Ukrainian soldiers surrendered at the Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol, bringing the total to 1,730. The ministry also published what it said was more footage showing Ukrainian prisoners of war walking in line on a road, waiting to be searched.
Denis Pushilin, head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic, a Russia-backed statelet in eastern Ukraine, said on Russian state television that more than half of the fighters have left the plant.
Credit: By Ian Lovett and James Marson
