RIYADH, Saudi Arabia -- Chinese companies are racing to expand in the Middle East as Beijing builds its diplomatic role in a region that is more open to U.S. competitors than it has been in years.
This week, several thousand Chinese businesspeople -- including the chair of the Hong Kong stock exchange and the chief executive of the Bank of China -- gathered in Riyadh to explore investment opportunities in energy, mining, infrastructure, manufacturing and tech sectors such as gaming and artificial intelligence. It was the first Arab-China Business Conference held in Saudi Arabia, geared around the kingdom's plans to reconfigure its economy. Organizers said it drew the biggest crowd in the event's 10-year history.
The two-day conference, which began on Sunday, followed a flurry of activity since Chinese leader Xi Jinping visited Saudi Arabia in December and Beijing's subsequent role in brokering a deal to restore relations between Saudi Arabia and its big rival in the region, Iran. Several high-level delegations have streamed to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates in recent months.
Henry Zhang, president and managing partner at tech-focused private-equity investor Hermitage Capital, said it has become a must within the Chinese business community to visit the kingdom.
"If you haven't been to Saudi for the past six to 12 months, you're out of fashion both from a political standpoint and from a business standpoint," he said on the sidelines of the forum in the glittering halls of the Ritz-Carlton convention center.
"I've seen guys I haven't met for seven or eight years here, not in China. It's crazy. You see everybody here," he said.
For the Saudis and their smaller Persian Gulf neighbors, the push for Chinese business is part of a larger geopolitical pivot. The Gulf states are trying to bind China closer and, in the process, hedge against their dependence on the U.S. and enhance their own influence. U.S. officials have warned the Saudis and Emiratis that close security relations with China would hurt ties with Washington, but have largely not objected to business dealings.
Saudi Energy Minister Prince Abdulaziz bin Salman said he ignores criticism of growing ties with China and insisted the kingdom wants to work with everybody.
"You will go where opportunity comes your way," he said. "So there is nothing political about it."
The Gulf countries say they are trying to build on an energy relationship with China that makes the Asian nation their biggest trading partner. Following the diplomatic opening, Chinese companies large and small are taking a closer look at business opportunities in Saudi Arabia and the rest of the Middle East.
Chinese businesses had mostly regarded the Middle East as a market for cheap Chinese goods and a key source of energy. That could change if the business talks moving forward now turn into long-term investment deals, executives said.
China's Baoshan Iron & Steel in May said it would commit $4 billion to build a factory with national oil company Saudi Aramco and the Saudi sovereign-wealth fund to manufacture steel plates in a new economic zone on the kingdom's eastern coast. Chinese cloud-computing companies have said they would invest hundreds of millions of dollars in Saudi Arabia in the coming years.
In all, Saudi and Chinese companies announced more than $50 billion in deals in a range of sectors during Xi's visit in December. Among those making trips to the Gulf were the mayor of Beijing and the chief executive of Hong Kong, who made a renewed push in February for Aramco to list its shares in the city. This week's conference resulted in a further $10 billion in nonbinding agreements. Saudi Arabia's flag carrier Saudia also announced a Riyadh-Beijing direct flight during the event.
Amid rising global geopolitical tension and a slowing economy at home, Chinese companies are eager to tap new frontiers. For many, the Middle East and North Africa look increasingly attractive.
"It's one of the few markets that's still welcoming Chinese," said Edison Gao, China-based group vice president of Saudi conglomerate Ajlan & Bros. That sentiment was echoed by other conference participants who said they found Saudi Arabia to be "China-friendly."
Credit: By Stephen Kalin
