Twitter Inc. said it has clamped down on harassment on its service, a campaign that is forcing the company to confront tricky questions about how it applies its standards.
Twitter suspends or restricts accounts for abusive content at 10 times the rate of a year ago, the company said during a media briefing at its San Francisco headquarters this week. Twitter declined to say how many of its 328 million monthly average users are affected.
Compared with the previous four months, Twitter over the past four months has removed twice as many new accounts created by repeat offenders banned for abuse, said Ed Ho, general manager of consumer product and engineering teams.
Over the past year Twitter has increasingly used artificial intelligence to flag potential abuse, instead of leaving detection to users. This marks a change for a company that had been loath to police its platform, former employees say.
But tweets posted by President Donald Trump on his personal account in recent weeks have raised the question of whether he is violating the social network's rules. In late June, Mr. Trump ridiculed the appearance of television news host Mika Brzezinski; in July, he posted a doctored video of himself beating up a man whose face had been digitally altered to show the CNN logo.
Asked this week whether the site treats Mr. Trump like other users, Twitter's head of trust and safety, Del Harvey, said, "We apply our policies consistently. Rules are rules."
Those rules ban graphic content, threats of violence and the targeted abuse of others, though comments judged hateful or abusive can be exempted if they are deemed newsworthy. Twitter last year created a Trust and Safety Council made up of safety advocates, academics and researchers to advise it on online safety.
"The Trump tweets are a litmus test for folks in the safety council, folks who work for Twitter and observers on the outside," said council member Stephen Balkam, founder of the nonprofit Family Online Safety Institute. "There are robust discussions about whether the tweets should be left up or not."
A spokeswoman for Twitter declined to comment on Mr. Trump, citing a policy of not commenting on specific users.
The White House has defended the tweets. Deputy press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Americans "knew what they were getting when they elected Donald Trump."
How Twitter applies harassment policies to public figures versus ordinary users suggests the limits of its willingness to censor.
"For our democracy, I think we should all see what Trump is saying," said council member Danielle Citron, a professor at the University of Maryland School of Law who studies online harassment. She has advised Twitter since 2009.
Other academics disagree. Retired professor Michael Hawley, formerly of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab, wrote to Twitter in early July urging a temporary ban on Mr. Trump's personal and official Twitter accounts, @realdonaldtrump and @potus, for violating the terms of service.
"Such tweets have the effect of promoting abusive behavior, or worse, stimulating real violence," he wrote.
Mr. Trump's tweets have drawn rebuke from lawmakers from both parties.

Credit: By Georgia Wells
