A new report from college admissions officials aiming to tamp down the competition for acceptance drew praise Wednesday but also skepticism about its potential to alleviate the stress on ambitious students.
More than 85 college admissions chiefs, high school leaders and other educators signed on to "Turning the Tide," which calls for a concerted effort to signal they value real intellectual engagement and sincere, sustained community service.
The group seeks to deter students from packing resumes with laundry lists of achievements, Advanced Placement courses and activities that burn them out without inspiring deep learning or concern for the common good.
"We want students to lead balanced lives," said Stuart Schmill, dean of admissions at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, at a New York City event where the report was released.
Some admissions officials said they have long preached these lessons about authenticity and exploring schools beyond the brand names, but they hope that having many desirable colleges send this message together will have more clout.
"I am horrified about what we've done, what we've helped to create," said Diane Anci, dean of admissions at Kenyon College in Ohio, after describing the palpable fear and anxiety among juniors facing the process. "I'm horrified by the completely unlevel playing field because there is this entire world of truly talented kids" who don't have fair access to good counseling and campus visits, she said.
Institutions endorsing the report include Cornell University, Columbia University, Drew University, Princeton University, Yale University, Trinity College and Connecticut College.
The report proposed a range of ways colleges can help low-income students, such as emphasizing in applications that part-time jobs and taking care of family members are highly valued. More broadly, the report called on colleges to have essays that ask students to reflect on their community service or contribution to the public good, which Yale and several other institutions pledged to do.
It also proposed discouraging students from taking an admissions test more than twice, and warning that applications that are "over-coached" by advisers can be transparent and detrimental.
Some parents and college advisers applauded the effort to calm students down. But others expressed doubts.
"Now upper-middle-class students will be bent out of shape trying to figure out what to keep on their resumes," said Claire Cafaro, a private admissions counselor in Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J. "Most of us are a little skeptical that the actual impact will be what the nice words sound like."
Bob Patterson, a former director of admissions at Stanford University, cautioned that when the most selective schools signal they are putting such a premium on community service, it could encourage more applications from students who aren't academically ready, only to disappoint them by not admitting them.
(See related letter: "Feedback Friday: Report on College Entry Doesn't Deserve Praise" -- WSJ Jan. 29, 2016)
Credit: By Leslie Brody
