PC INDUSTRY
Shipments Rose 1%
In Third Quarter
Personal-computer shipments rose 1% world-wide in the September quarter, according to research firm Gartner, which expects shipments during the holiday season to be weaker than a year ago.
PC shipments totaled 84.1 million units in the third quarter, up from 83.3 million in the year-ago period, according to preliminary data.
"As many schools worldwide reopened, there was no longer an immediate need for PCs and Chromebooks to support at-home education," Mikako Kitagawa, research director at Gartner, said.
Lower demand from education drove a 17% year-over-year decline in Chromebook shipments, which Gartner now includes in its PC market results.
Fourth-quarter demand is expected to be driven by replacements rather than new units, Gartner said. Lenovo Group Ltd. retained the No. 1 spot, followed by HP Inc., which had its second consecutive quarter of year-over-year decline in shipments driven by the weaker Chromebook demand in education, Gartner said. Dell Technologies Inc. was third and saw the largest year-over-year growth in unit shipments.
-- Maria Armental
---
EXXON MOBIL
Plastic-Recycling
Facility to Be Built
Exxon Mobil Corp. said it plans to build its first large-scale advanced recycling facility in Texas.
Exxon Mobil said it expects the plant at its Baytown complex near Houston to start operations by the end of next year, with an initial planned capacity to recycle 30,000 metric tons of plastic waste annually.
The company noted that a smaller, temporary facility is already producing commercial volumes of certified circular polymers that would be available by the end of 2021 to meet growing demand.
Exxon Mobil said it is developing plans to build about 500,000 metric tons of advanced recycling capacity around the world by 2026. It said it is collaborating with Plastic Energy on an advanced recycling plant in France, and it is assessing sites in the Netherlands, the Gulf Coast, Canada and Singapore.
-- Colin Kellaher
---
IBM
Raytheon to Partner
On Defense Work
International Business Machines Corp. and Raytheon Technologies Corp. will work together on technology used in aerospace and defense applications, the companies said.
The projects will apply artificial intelligence, cryptography and quantum solutions for applications including defense, aerospace and intelligence work, the companies said. Some of the work will focus on using cryptography to improve encryption methods, Raytheon technology chief Mark E. Russell said. A team with members from both companies will work on ways to insert IBM commercial technology into Raytheon programs.
-- Matt Grossman
