Stocks, bonds and precious metals retreated, reversing course after markets last week extended a monthlong stretch of gains.
Higher bond yields weighed on shares of large technology companies, pressuring the broader stock market. The tech-focused Nasdaq Composite lost 0.8%. The benchmark S&P 500 dropped 0.5%. The Dow industrials slipped 0.1%, or 41 points, snapping a four-day win streak.
Shares of Nvidia, the darling of the artificial-intelligence boom, fell 2.7% as chip stocks declined. Microsoft shares slid 1.4%. Amazon.com declined 1.5%.
A recent ascent in bond prices halted as yields rose. The 10-year Treasury yield climbed to 4.286% from 4.225% Friday. The yield on two-year Treasurys, which is sensitive to federal-funds rate expectations, also rose after recording its biggest weekly decline since March.
Investors are betting the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates by more than a percentage point in 2024. Rapidly falling bond yields fueled the stock market's best month in more than a year in November.
"It's natural, after so much exuberance, to see a pullback," said Lisa Erickson, head of public markets at U.S. Bank Wealth Management. Many investors see this week's monthly jobs data, due Friday, and inflation reports next week as the next tests for the market.
Despite Monday's drawdown, signs of investor optimism remained. The Russell 2000 index of small-cap stocks defied the rest of the market, finishing 1% higher.
The Russell 2000 is the "big thing to watch" heading into the end of the year, said Ross Mayfield, an investment strategy analyst at Baird. Higher rates, inflation and a concentration in beleaguered sectors such as regional banks have weighed on the index in recent years. "Small-caps wouldn't rally if a recession was the market's base case," he said.
Bitcoin climbed above $42,000 in Monday trading, marking the highest level the cryptocurrency has seen since April 2022, around when the Fed kicked off its policy-tightening campaign. The rise has been aided by the possibility that an exchange-traded fund tied to spot bitcoin will win approval soon.
In corporate news, Uber Technologies shares rose 2.2% after S&P Global said the ride-hailing company will join the S&P 500 index. Investors are piling in ahead of the move, which typically draws buying from funds that track the benchmark. Spotify Technology shares jumped after the streaming company announced its third round of layoffs this year.
Alaska Air shares fell 14% after the carrier agreed to buy Hawaiian Airlines. Hawaiian's shares surged nearly threefold to $14.22, their highest close in more than a year.
Gold -- which benefits from falling real rates as well as war and economic uncertainty -- hit an intraday record of $2,152.30 a troy ounce during overnight trading. It settled at $2,024.10 a troy ounce.
Oil extended its recent slide. Benchmark Brent crude fell 1.1% to $78.03 a barrel. Cruise lines have benefited from falling oil prices: Norwegian Cruise Line advanced 6.6% on the day and Royal Caribbean Cruises added 3.1%.
Overseas markets mostly weakened. Mining stocks weighed on the Stoxx Europe 600, which slipped 0.1%.
At midday Tuesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 1.35%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 1.4% and the Shanghai Composite was down 0.65%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.2%.
Credit: By Eric Wallerstein
