President Biden sought to prove he can keep the longer-term goal of countering China in his sights as the Israel-Hamas conflict grinds on, hosting Australia's prime minister at the White House for a series of high-level meetings.
The White House framed Wednesday's summit between Biden and Prime Minister Anthony Albanese as part of a new "innovation alliance" between the two nations, with Washington and Canberra cooperating on projects that go beyond the military ties that the Biden administration has reinforced in recent years.
During a welcoming ceremony on the South Lawn of the White House, Biden said the two leaders are striving for "an economy where no one fears coercion" -- a subtle dig at China, which has irritated the U.S. and allies by using access to its huge market as a political weapon against companies and countries.
The two leaders were expected to "share notes and compare details" about their interactions with Chinese leaders, according to a White House official. Albanese plans to visit China and meet with leader Xi Jinping in the next two weeks. U.S. officials have been working to pave the way for a meeting between Xi and Biden at a summit of Asia-Pacific leaders in San Francisco next month.
Announcements included an agreement to allow U.S. companies to launch into space from Australia, cooperation on critical minerals and artificial intelligence.
The two countries said they would help fund a new underwater fiber-optic cable system between Australia, Fiji and French Polynesia, expanding it to include the ability to branch off to other islands in later years. The White House said the Google-led cable system would support more reliable internet access in the region. Australia committed $50 million to the construction effort, while the U.S. offered $15 million.
Facebook and Google owner Alphabet have during the past decade funded many of the telecom industry's new submarine cables as a way to cost-effectively move massive amounts of data. U.S. officials have taken a closer look at that infrastructure, especially in the Pacific, as they vie with China for influence abroad.
The visit comes as the White House has been consumed by a crisis in the Middle East in the aftermath of Hamas's attack on Israel, testing the extent to which the U.S. can keep larger foreign policy priorities on track as it works to contain the conflict.
Both leaders referenced the conflict during remarks on the South Lawn, with Biden saying the two countries are "standing with Israel against Hamas's terrorism." Albanese said, "Australians condemned the atrocities, terror and pitiless brutality of Hamas."
The visit also occurred as the House was emerging from its weekslong internal stalemate, with Republicans electing a speaker just as the two leaders walked into the Rose Garden for a joint news conference Wednesday afternoon.
The uncertainty in Congress has injected doubt over whether lawmakers can deliver funding for projects that the U.S. has promised Australia, including backing for a nuclear-powered submarine deal that will require significant U.S. investment to move forward.
"Do you know anyone in elected office who can give a personal guarantee?" Biden said during the news conference, when asked by an Australian reporter about whether his administration can deliver on the deal. He added: "I'm confident that we can get this done."
White House aides said the president remains engaged on the larger goal of countering a growing threat from China and seeking to deter Beijing from launching military action against Taiwan, which China claims as part of its territory. And Australia is viewed as a linchpin to the U.S. effort to counter China.
Credit: By Annie Linskey and Mike Cherney
