[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
If you have fear of missing out -- or FOMO -- when deciding whether to invest in stocks, it is because you might indeed miss out.
It is hard to shake the feeling that the market might be a bit frothy. Even as central bankers rein in expectations for rate cuts, investors have embraced bets on generative artificial intelligence. The Nasdaq closed at a high on Thursday, finally rising above the previous peak recorded on Nov. 19, 2021. The index climbed to another record on Friday.
Even if the technology giants driving it higher aren't riding a bubble, their lofty valuations make it likely that future rewards for investing will be lower. And the rest of the equity market isn't particularly cheap either. So investors' temptation to leave their cash parked in deposits or money-market funds is more than understandable.
But if you wait for rates to start coming down to buy riskier assets, you could be giving up on a lot of gains. On Wednesday, Swiss bank UBS published the 2024 version of its Global Investment Returns Yearbook, a compendium of very long-run performance data that used to be published by Credit Suisse. One key takeaway is that most returns historically captured by investors have come during times when officials were lowering borrowing costs or leaving them unchanged after lowering them.
In the U.S., real annualized returns from equities during easing cycles have been 9.4%, compared with 3% during tightening cycles.
Part of the difference in stock-market performance between easing and tightening cycles is due to inflation being higher when central banks turn hawkish, eroding nominal gains. But most of it comes from higher nominal returns in the first place.
For bonds, periods of rising rates have delivered almost no returns. This was mostly because higher inflation wiped them out.
A raft of other research also shows that historically, most stock-market gains have come during only a few days, sometimes right after central banks cut rates.
One caveat is that investors have become aware of the historical precedent. Increasingly, the bond market is pricing in a much bigger chunk of the expected decline in rates before they actually happen, research by TS Lombard shows. This raises the possibility that stocks, too, have already enjoyed much of the gains from monetary easing ahead of time.
Rate-cutting may start later than investors previously thought, but it is still likely to happen at some point this year. Judging by the post-1995 period, sometimes it only takes that initial easing to trigger a rush of market optimism, even if borrowing costs end up staying high for quite a while.
Most investors may not be able to afford to lurk on the sidelines.
Credit: By Jon Sindreu
