Technology giants strengthened their grip on the top of the annual Management Top 250 ranking of America's best-run companies. For the fourth year running, Microsoft finished in first place.
Apple placed second, and Nvidia ranks third. Google parent Alphabet jumped 20 places to finish at No. 4, and International Business Machines rounds out the top five companies in the ranking compiled by researchers at the Drucker Institute, part of Claremont Graduate University.
The top five companies scored well across a wide range of measurements, from job satisfaction to supply-chain management to shareholder returns -- strengths reflected in their standing in the ranking's five main components. Apple's financial-strength metrics jumped, giving it the top score in that category among the Management Top 250, with Microsoft second and Alphabet third.
All five companies scored high for innovation, with Apple second in the category, Microsoft third and IBM sixth. The top five overall have all made deep pushes into new generative-AI technologies in recent years, perhaps none more aggressively than Microsoft, which is incorporating the technology into the next generations of its software.
Nvidia tied for the top score for employee engagement and development, with Microsoft fourth in the category. And Nvidia buttressed its position with customers, ranking 10th for customer satisfaction. Microsoft also ranks third for social responsibility.
Healthcare companies also performed well, with Merck, Eli Lilly, Pfizer and Johnson & Johnson all among the top 15 overall, winning points for satisfied customers, R&D spending, new patents and trademarks. Procter & Gamble, Nike and PepsiCo were the only consumer-goods companies to make it into the top 25 companies overall, boosted by the strength of their profits and market share.
By contrast, retailers generally struggled this year, particularly Walgreens and Kroger, which both fell out of the top 250. Across the retail sector, with the exception of savings-focused Walmart and Costco, companies saw drops in their standing with customers.
"A lot of retailers are just not quite as good at customer service as they once were," says Neil Saunders, managing director of research firm GlobalData's retail division. "When you combine that with the price increases, it leads to a very unhappy confluence of factors," he says.
Walgreens declined to comment. Kroger didn't respond to requests for comment.
The Management Top 250 ranking compares companies using the late management guru Peter Drucker's principles to identify the most effectively managed businesses. This year, nearly 800 companies were scored. Within the five main categories of customer satisfaction, employee engagement and development, innovation, social responsibility and financial strength, the ranking is constructed from an analysis of 34 individual metrics provided by 15 third-party sources.
To be included in the ranking, a company had to be part of the Dow Jones U.S. Total Stock Market Index or the S&P Composite 1500 Index, or both. Additionally, the companies must have had a market capitalization of at least $10 billion as of June 30 or reported annual revenue or more than $3 billion as of March 31. A complete explanation of the methodology is available with the rankings at wsj.com/managementtop250.
Though technology companies dominate the top of this year's list, a wide spectrum of sectors is represented in the ranking, including automakers, hospitality chains and financial-services firms.
Drucker, who is considered by some to be the father of modern corporate management, emphasized a comprehensive approach to corporate leadership, arguing that businesses should benefit not only investors but also society.
"Without these private-sector institutions, our public-sector and social-sector institutions would not have the resources to function," says Michael Kelly, executive director of the Drucker Institute. Well-managed companies create good paying jobs, engage with their communities and strengthen the tax base, he says. "The significance of one of these companies in a community is enormous."
Microsoft has held the top spot in the ranking since 2020 by consistently performing well across most of the five main components of the overall ranking. This year, the company ranks in the top five among the Management Top 250 in each of those components except customer satisfaction, where it ranks 148th.
Last year, Microsoft took first place in the innovation category, but it was unseated this year by Amazon.com, No. 15 overall. Still, Microsoft has benefited greatly from big bets on increasingly important technologies like AI, as well as pushes into cloud computing and gaming, staying ahead of the curve against competitors including other tech heavyweights.
Microsoft has been by far the most acquisitive of the U.S. tech giants. This year, it completed a $75 billion acquisition of videogame maker Activision Blizzard. The purchase, which closed in October, is the biggest deal in Microsoft's nearly 50-year history.
"Microsoft and other top-performing companies who have sustained themselves at the top of the rankings look to have developed a virtuous cycle that continuously reinforces their successes," Kelly says. "This allows these companies to secure the resources and capital needed to innovate and secure talent," which in turn allows them to achieve greater and greater successes, he says.
No component of the ranking is more heavily dominated by tech firms than employee engagement and development. Employees at technology firms are typically highly paid and enjoy generous perks.
Major changes in the ranking this year include Mattel, which jumped more than 100 places to finish at No. 154, thanks to an increase in trademark applications and registrations, which boosted its score in the innovation category.
"Mattel, at its core, is a creative company," Chief Executive Ynon Kreiz says. Innovation at the toy maker, he says, has been a personal priority since he took the reins in 2018. "The biggest change in our DNA was to think of the people who buy our products not only as consumers but as fans with emotional connections to our products."
Mattel has enjoyed a resurgence with consumers following the release of the blockbuster "Barbie" movie, which has raked in more than $1.4 billion at the box office since its July debut. Mattel has said it expects its revenue related to the movie to total about $125 million, including toy sales and a share of the box-office receipts.
"Barbie was more than just a movie," Kreiz says. "The goal was always to create a cultural event."
Other big gainers in the ranking include drugmaker Merck, which jumped 78 places to finish at No. 10, and Eli Lilly, which climbed 45 places to finish at No. 11. Both companies saw significant increases in scores for customer satisfaction and innovation.
"Customer satisfaction is directly tied to the innovation we bring and the benefit we can deliver for patients," says Rob Davis, chairman and chief executive of Merck. He says Merck has worked to broaden its portfolio across therapeutic areas, especially its pipeline of cancer treatments. "We have continued to see several important breakthroughs in oncology," he says.
General Electric rocketed up the list to No. 25, from outside the top 250 companies last year, as its strategy of slimming down has been rewarded by investors. This year, the company significantly improved its scores in innovation and employee engagement and development, as well as financial strength.
GE has sold units that made lightbulbs and locomotives, as well as oil-and-gas operations and most of its GE Capital arm. The company also continued to clean up its balance sheet, using asset sales to pay down debt. Rising demand for its jet engines and its wind turbines have been a boon for the remaining GE units.
Each year, a handful of "all-star" companies earn high marks in all five of the ranking's main components. Apple, Cisco Systems, Eli Lilly, Merck, Nvidia, Pfizer and Visa are the 2023 all-stars, scoring in the top 20% in each of the five components.
All-stars placed first in three of the five components: Apple for financial strength, Merck for customer satisfaction, and Nvida in a tie with Intuit for employee engagement and development.
Many more companies have red flags -- scores that are especially weak in one or more ranking component, a warning of possible trouble ahead. This year, 11 of the top 100 companies earned a red flag in at least one category, up from nine of the top 100 last year.
Walmart was the top-ranked company to receive a red flag. Though it placed 26th overall and finished in the top five companies in the innovation category, its employee engagement and development rank was third from the bottom among the Management Top 250.
Among other top 100 companies, Chevron earned a red flag in the customer-satisfaction category. The remaining nine red flags in the top 100 were given for poor financial-strength scores. Those companies are Advanced Micro Devices, Becton Dickinson, Boston Scientific, eBay, Ecolab, Medtronic, Salesforce, S&P Global and Whirlpool.
---
Tom Corrigan is a Wall Street Journal reporter in New York. He can be reached at tom.corrigan@wsj.com.
Credit: By Tom Corrigan
