U.S. investment advisers will soon need to start detecting and reporting suspected money laundering to the government under a newly proposed rule, as the U.S. again attempts to rein in potential illicit finance flowing through the private funds sector.
The new requirements, proposed Tuesday by the U.S. Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, would apply to investment advisers who register with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and those who are exempted from registration but still required to report to the SEC.
Investment advisers are generally required to register with the SEC if they oversee at least $110 million in client assets. Exempt reporting advisers generally advise only private funds and oversee less than $150 million in the U.S. or advise only venture-capital funds.
About 17,000 state-registered advisers aren't covered by the proposed rules, a senior FinCEN official said in a briefing call Monday.
Under the proposed rules, investment advisers would need to implement an anti-money-laundering and counterterrorism financing compliance program, file suspicious activity reports with FinCEN and keep records such as those related to fund transfers, similar to obligations in place for banks and broker-dealers. The proposed rule would also allow information sharing between FinCEN, law enforcement agencies and certain financial institutions.
FinCEN said it would delegate the examination process to the SEC, which is responsible for overseeing investment advisers.
Investment advisers, who earn compensation for providing advice to investors on securities, aren't generally subject to comprehensive anti-money-laundering measures. Their clients range from individual investors to private institutions and high-net-worth individuals.
FinCEN has twice in the past tried to put in place anti-money-laundering rules on the investment adviser sector by proposing rulemakings, including as recently as in 2015. But neither proposed rule was completed.
The investment sector has grown larger in the intervening years, nearly doubling in assets under management since 2015. This uneven application of anti-money-laundering controls across the sector has enabled both legitimate and illicit investors to "shop around" for advisers who don't ask about the source of their wealth, FinCEN said.
There has also been a surge in the use of investment advisers by bad actors, such as sanctioned individuals, corrupt officials, tax evaders and other criminals, looking to access the U.S. financial markets, according to FinCEN.
"The issue and the need for transparency is greater than it has ever been," the senior FinCEN official said.
Through a risk assessment, also published on Tuesday, FinCEN said it has seen U.S. competitors using investment advisers to invest in early-stage companies to gain access to sensitive information and technologies with national security implications.
For instance, the FinCEN official said the agency has seen U.S. investment advisers with significant ties to Russian oligarchs investing in companies developing artificial intelligence and autonomous vehicles as well as in government military and intelligence contractors.
If the proposed rule is adopted, investment advisers would have 12 months to become compliant. FinCEN is seeking comments on the proposed rule until April 15.
The proposed rule could be more of a challenge for small and midsize investment advisers to implement, compared with larger peers who may already have an anti-money-laundering program in place, according to Alma Angotti, a partner specializing in financial crimes and investigations at consulting firm Guidehouse.
"A lot of these companies and these funds probably have the skeletons of a program," Angotti said, adding that without a regulatory and examination regime in place so far, it remains difficult to tell if existing programs are effective.
But regardless of an organization's size, it remains important for these advisers to have risk-based compliance programs, she said. "For their own risk management, you shouldn't want to hold money for the bad guys," she said.
For these funds, the due-diligence process for determining the identity of investors and the source of their funding -- similar to the process at banks dealing with high-net-worth clients -- would likely be the biggest piece of their program to be put in place to comply with the new suspicious activity monitoring and reporting requirements, according to Angotti.
Tuesday's proposed rule comes as the U.S. ramps up efforts to increase financial transparency after President Biden made anticorruption a central pillar of his administration's national security agenda.
FinCEN last week proposed a new rule that would require the disclosure of the names of people behind anonymous shell companies and trusts involved in all-cash residential real-estate transactions.
The agency is already in the process of implementing a sweeping transparency law that has created a new corporate ownership database and requires businesses to file reports detailing their beneficial ownership information.
Angotti was an enforcement attorney at FinCEN and helped write rules that affected capital-market participants after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, including the first proposed rule for investment advisers in 2003.
She said she is optimistic that the third time could be the charm for these rules to be finalized.
"These national security concerns about illicit financing flow are really at the forefront," she said, adding that the U.S. has been an outlier among jurisdictions in not requiring anti-money-laundering rules for investment advisers.
Credit: By Mengqi Sun
