My father, who worked for the U.S. Treasury in the 1970s, called Henry Kissinger the smartest, hardest-working person he ever knew. As a teenager, I responded by demonstrating against the Nixon administration and the Vietnam War. Little did I understand that Kissinger was working step by step to end the war while the demonstrations took place.
Years later I met Henry for the first time. He asked me about how Google worked and joined me on stage at headquarters where he announced that Google was "a threat to the world's civilization." The Googlers loved it, and Henry eventually became my best friend.
To work with Henry was unlike working with anyone else. In our collaborations, I wrote long technical memos that he would digest. Later, by himself listening to loud classical music and writing in indecipherable longhand, he would incorporate each of my points in majestically crafted language.
I decided Henry would benefit from modern technology, including an iPad. His first email was to his wife, Nancy: "The world has changed forever." We did his first selfie together. Not every experiment was a success: While Google Voice can perfectly transcribe both English and German speech, Henry's accent proved too much for it, so we went back to longhand.
Nancy was his true love. They were married for nearly five decades, and he was so devoted to her that when I spoke with him my first question was always, "How are you both?" He adored and admired her, and she understood that to be married to a genius is a unique privilege.
Most accounts of Kissinger's Cold War diplomacy missed how he actually operated. Henry had a simple model of geopolitical progress: You try to figure out what the other side wants, understand its motivations and pain points, and then find something that is possible and that it will see as an improvement. He was a fearsome negotiator with an impressive grasp of other countries' history and an ability to assess their leaders realistically and to think three moves ahead. He viewed American culture as not strategic in this way: We tend to approach adversaries with a list of demands when we should have a conversation about a stable long-term outcome.
Grand strategy in his mind was exactly that. The exploitation of the Sino-Soviet split was a natural outgrowth of this approach. A young Kissinger today wouldn't have such a simple intellectual structure -- always be closer to your opponents than they are to each other -- but he would have a similar approach: Build allies where you can, push hard in defense of democracy and freedom, and stick to your principles.
If realism is a doctrine of taking the world as it is, Henry was ultimately an idealist. He used realism, informed by deep research, to understand what people and leaders wanted. He always started by asking the other side to explain its goals. He sized up the world frankly, which often led observers to mistake him for a pessimist. But he thought that confronting the truth is the only way to solve problems. He usually told the other side exactly what he wanted and worked hard to make his objective inevitable. He was slow and methodical, considering every step over and over. But when a breakthrough occurred, he moved quickly to seize the moment. Diplomacy is an art of patience and speed, listening and telling, and he was the master.
I often wonder what he must have been like when he was 32 and I was born. I imagine the smartest person at Harvard, engaged in the deep thinking that developed modern nuclear-arms strategy. The story of his youth -- of a young Jewish German becoming a teenager under Nazi rule, then escaping to the U.S. in 1938 -- was riveting.
He idolized his father, who was from a tiny rural town and wanted to serve society as a teacher in the Gymnasium system. The fall of German democracy taught Henry that governmental systems can collapse and that catastrophic failure is to be avoided at all costs. Thirteen of his relatives, including his grandmother and four of his father's sisters, were killed in the Holocaust.
He spoke in the matter-of-fact language typical of the Greatest Generation when he described prewar New York, where he worked in a shaving-brush factory, and the Army, in which he fought bravely, was awarded a Bronze star, and liberated a concentration camp.
Drafted in World War II, Pvt. Kissinger was cleaning latrines when a general came by and asked him to explain a situational map. He was quickly transferred to a more senior role. Later that year, he met Col. Fritz Kraemer, an officer who had a good eye for talent. Kraemer later was influential in Henry's decision to go to Harvard. Henry liberally credits others with taking chances on him as a young man, and we should remember that the next generation needs as much help as Kissinger -- or I -- did to be able to make a difference in the world.
Henry was originally captivated by Kant, Spinoza and other German thinkers of the Enlightenment. In the 1950s he was a pioneering thinker in the new field of nuclear strategy. Decades later, having been trained to look for structural changes in the public sphere and for technological transformations of geopolitics, he saw Google in its early years, recognized its importance, but didn't quite know why.
More recently, as the artificial-intelligence revolution began unfolding, Henry listened to a speech by the computer scientist Demis Hassabis and concluded that we are developing a new kind of intelligence that we don't understand. Henry decided the technical people don't ask the right questions, and at age 95 he set out in his thorough way to understand a completely new field. He started with algorithms and how computers work, and learned the technology all the way up to ChatGPT by sheer effort. He also found time to write "Leadership: Six Studies in World Strategy" (2022), which I recommend.
How did Henry make it to 100? He never retired. Until shortly before his death, he was working as hard as he did when he was 70. From the moment he woke up, he was thinking, taking joy in following a new idea, a new strategy, a new challenge. He never lost his deep commitment to making the world safer and more prosperous. In his final year, he still advised governments, and Republicans and Democrats made the pilgrimage to his country home, knowing that he often saw a path where others didn't.
Henry was extraordinarily loyal to his friends. He got to know their fears and ambitions and -- as any great mentor does -- encouraged the right part of their motivations. He encouraged and assisted me in my transition from running a corporation to working on hard technical and political problems. He prided himself on eulogizing the friends he outlived. He woke up in the morning as an optimist about the world. He believed that our present problems are solvable, that the future promise of AI is achievable, and that our social divisions can be bridged. He believed that the U.S. could coexist with China through mutual understanding, that Russia could eventually rejoin the community of nations, and that Arab-Israeli tensions could be reduced.
But he also believed that the world sorely lacks great leadership. We simply have too few people with the vision we need. He would suggest we compare our leaders today with, for instance, the Roosevelts to understand what we are missing.
Henry lived for a century and saw it all. Those of us who are younger should remember that he experienced World War II; that he faced fears of nuclear Armageddon for four decades and helped us control the danger; and that he saw in his 100 years an enormous increase in freedom, education and wealth all around the world. Imagine seeing the world through his eyes -- compare what we are dealing with now to being a Jewish boy in Hitler's Germany -- and you understand why Henry was an optimist.
---
Mr. Schmidt was CEO of Google, (2001-11) and executive chairman of Google and its successor, Alphabet Inc. (2011-17), and is co-author, with Kissinger and Daniel Huttenlocher, of "The Age of AI: And Our Human Future."
Credit: By Eric Schmidt
