BEIJING -- As China prepared to battle the coronavirus disease, President Xi Jinping ordered state-owned companies to step up "unconditionally, and at any cost," according to officials briefed on the late January directive.
At the center of the outbreak in Wuhan, China State Construction Engineering Corp. conjured up more than 20,000 construction workers and engineers to build two hospitals. Other state enterprises provided power and materials. Within about 10 days, a 1,000-bed hospital and a 1,600-bed facility opened.
To deal with the country's economic ills, state firms pared electricity bills and lowered rents. State banks initiated hundreds of billions of dollars in low-cost loans.
In tough times, China's Communist Party rulers turn to the nation's vast state sector. The strategy, used during the 2008 financial crisis, is helping China absorb some of the economic shocks of the Covid-19 epidemic. It also could hasten the retreat from a market-oriented economy.
Many private manufacturers are struggling to restore production, yet more than 95% of some 20,000 industrial companies controlled by the central government are churning out masks, medicines, steel, heavy machinery and other products -- keeping workers on the job.
That is the advantage of the Chinese system, said an official at the regulator overseeing large state-controlled firms, the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission: "It's like in a battlefield, and state-owned enterprises are the ones who can act fast and decisively."
Amid signs the epidemic is coming under control in China, official data released Monday revealed the heavy economic toll from Mr. Xi's decision to lock down much of the country: The economy contracted in the first two months of the year. Factory output, retail sales and construction activity all plunged. Some economists expect no growth in the first quarter.
The question is whether China's system can now get the country back on its feet, given a potential global recession that would weaken demand and hurt Chinese manufacturers already battered by the U.S.-China trade war.
In the long term, the country's top-down emergency response threatens market reforms many agree would advance China's economy.
"If and when the outbreak fades, the conclusion is inevitably going to be that the overwhelming exercise of state power saved China," said Andrew Batson, a former Wall Street Journal reporter, now China research director at Gavekal Dragonomics.
State firms are expected to pile up debts and losses from the coronavirus, adding to obligations accumulated in the slowed growth of past years. State-owned steel plants and auto makers are among those anticipating sizable losses.
Increased government and party control over the economy threatens to crowd out private enterprise and foreign competitors. These include companies that provide 80% of the jobs, as well as most technological innovation.
Market-oriented economists said the government should be finding ways to better motivate entrepreneurs. Private companies have been wiped out by government campaigns to cut excess capacity.
Voices advocating market reforms -- such as shrinking state firms to make room for more private investment in telecommunications, energy and elsewhere -- are drowned out by those focused on stability and near-term growth, government advisers say. The outbreak could further weaken support for reforms.
"The virus hurts the Chinese economy, in large part, by generating greater party-state intervention," said Scott Kennedy, of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.
Mr. Xi issued his call to arms as soon as he ordered the lockdown of Wuhan and surrounding Hubei province in January, Chinese officials said.
China Pharmaceutical Group, also known as Sinopharm, and China Resources Group ramped up production and imports of masks and other medical supplies, to be distributed by the government. China National Petroleum Corp. and China Petroleum & Chemical Corp., two oil giants, revamped production schedules to focus on raw materials for medical masks.
Major landlords, including China Resources and China Poly Group, have reduced rents by tens of millions of dollars for businesses.
The central government also has urged state firms to keep its workers and hire more, especially college graduates.
Strengthening central control over the economy has been a hallmark of Mr. Xi's consolidation of power since he assumed party leadership in late 2012. Government directives, rather than market forces, determine pricing for such assets as real estate and even commodities like pork.
Mr. Xi's rule reversed the ascendancy of private firms in the decade following China's 2001 entry into the World Trade Organization.
The share of private firms investing in factories, buildings and such in China peaked at roughly 64% in 2015. It has since been in gradual decline, with state firms getting more resources, including bank loans.
Beijing now directly supervises 128 state firms, down from about 140 in 2012. But these enterprises have grown larger because of government-led consolidations aimed at creating industry leaders, so-called national champions.
State firms serve Beijing's goal of dominating such tech industries as artificial intelligence and 5G wireless.
The nearly two-year trade war with the U.S. has left China's leadership more convinced that it needs to accelerate its state model to reduce the country's reliance on foreign technology.
China's state companies are grappling with deteriorating finances that in many cases reach back to their response to the global financial crisis.
At the time, Beijing launched a 4 trillion yuan ($586 billion) economic stimulus, mostly carried out by state banks, construction firms, developers, steel producers and local governments.
The spending spree ensured China's growth and helped pull the world economy out of recession. It also led to a buildup in China's debt load, which hit 252% of national output in 2019 from just more than 130% 11 years earlier.
Most of the debt growth came from state-owned companies and finance firms controlled by government.
"This year could be another year of leveraging up due to the coronavirus shock," said Larry Hu, a China economist at Macquarie Group.
Banks are especially conflicted about Beijing's economic push. Some were already struggling with a surge in bad debts in the past few years and remain wary of lending to private companies.
When China's central bank enacted a policy in February to enable banks to make 300 billion yuan worth of inexpensive loans, most of the money went to state firms instead of private businesses.
Even the full weight of Mr. Xi's Communist Party leadership hasn't been able to bring China in sync with market demands from the coronavirus disease.
Gao Xiaoqing, a villager in landlocked Gansu province in northwestern China, was trapped for days at home with her family because they had no masks, which were required to move about in public. The masks had sold out.
Village officials eventually gave one mask to each household. Ms. Gao, her husband and their two children take turns wearing their mask to leave the house.
At night, Ms. Gao carefully cleans the mask and places it by her pillow. "We're thankful that we even have one," she said.
---
Virus Battles Add
To Costs, Losses
China State Construction is among the state-owned enterprises facing steep obligations that will worsen in the coronavirus pandemic. It had loaded up on debt to build infrastructure in China and abroad. As of September 2019, the most recent data available, 76% of its assets were financed with debt.
For years, it looked to aggressively pursue big-ticket projects. The effort is expected to expand as part of Beijing's fight against the coronavirus and to prop up growth. Yet it will further drive up debt at the company, according to Standard & Poor's.
The firm likely will have insufficient cash on hand to pay for its operating expenses, according to S&P. The company didn't respond to requests to comment.
Despite the darkening financial outlook, Chinese President Xi Jinping has said China must adhere to its development targets, which call for doubling the size of the national economy in the decade through 2020.
Officials say the goal requires economic growth this year of about 5.5%. Current estimates by many economists are below 5%.
State firms will be pivotal to reaching that goal, even if it means more risk.
In late February, China's state planner, the National Development and Reform Commission, pressed the country's largest energy producers to cut oil and gas prices to help businesses restart operations, official notices said.
That could lead to steeper losses for the energy giants, which are struggling with plunging oil prices, analysts said.
The State Grid Corp. and China Southern Power Grid Co. announced plans to shave some 59 billion yuan from the electricity bills of more than 50 million industrial firms.

Credit: By Lingling Wei
