[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
A mass recall of Tesla's Autopilot feature and crisis at General Motors' autonomous-taxi business might give the impression that self-driving cars have hit a roadblock. In fact, the technology is on the cusp of much wider adoption. Just don't expect it to change your life immediately -- or the economics of making cars.
Last Wednesday, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration recalled more than two million Teslas equipped with Autopilot, which steers them automatically and matches their speed to surrounding traffic. But the news wasn't as bad as the number makes it sound, either for Tesla's profit or for its driver-assistance technology.
The flaw identified by the regulator was with the security measures used by the company to ensure its human drivers keep their hands on the wheel, rather than with the automated driving functions themselves. Monitoring will be beefed up via an over-the-air update that can be delivered at virtually no cost.
The only damage is reputational: The news was a reminder that Tesla's technology is still far from the autonomous dream Chief Executive Elon Musk has long promised.
The problem at GM's Cruise, which was previously running a "robotaxi" service in San Francisco, is more serious. The company fired almost one-quarter of its staff on Thursday amid drastic cuts. California's Department of Motor Vehicles revoked Cruise's self-driving license in October following an accident that highlighted technological and cultural weaknesses, forcing it to halt operations and hit the brakes on its growth plan.
Tesla and Cruise have been approaching self-driving technology from opposite angles: Vehicles with incrementally better driver-assistance features on the one hand; fully driverless taxis on the other. The latter approach received a lot of attention and some sky-high private-market valuations a few years ago, but the former route is now firmly in favor.
Last year Ford Motor canceled its robotaxi project Argo and hired some of the unit's staff to help with BlueCruise, a peer to Tesla's Autopilot. Industry leader Waymo is still plugging away because its majority owner Alphabet can just about afford it. For most, though, robotaxis are too uncertain a bet to warrant the vast expense of mastering driverless technology without selling something else along the way.
The momentum on the other route to potential autonomy can be seen in the share price of Mobileye Global, a pioneer of driver automation that was bought by Intel in 2017 and spun out again last year via a minority initial public offering. The stock is now roughly double its IPO price.
A lot of traditional carmakers seem interested in Mobileye's self-driving package, SuperVision, which competes with Tesla's Autopilot and its upgraded version, Full Self-Driving. Like FSD, SuperVision can do most things a human driver can, while also needing constant monitoring. Mobileye launched the technology with Chinese brand Zeekr last year, and Porsche has since signed up. Next year the Israeli company should bring more automakers on board while also -- crucially in this business -- turning a profit on standard driver-assistance features.
Like Tesla with FSD, Mobileye expects SuperVision to lead eventually to a genuinely autonomous system that won't need so much monitoring.
To achieve this, the supplier would add an additional layer of sensors and computing power but still hopes to deliver the package for under $6,000 in 2025. Tesla's technological approach is different: Musk is counting on artificial intelligence rather than extra sensors to deliver a breakthrough -- a solution that could be cheap to deliver via over-the-air updates if it actually works. Any system that takes responsibility away from the human driver will require a lot of regulatory proofing.
Whatever the prospects for greater autonomy, cars that drive themselves under human supervision are taking off. The caveat for investors is that they might not be huge money spinners. Tesla charges $12,000 for its FSD package, partly based on the promise that it will be upgraded to something more revolutionary, but the company might not be able to maintain the premium as more comparable products hit the market. It already reduced the price from $15,000 in September.
As a comparison, Mercedes-Benz this year got regulatory permission from California and Nevada for a self-driving system that can navigate motorway traffic jams without the attention of the driver -- arguably a step up from Tesla's technology, albeit a small one. It will charge $2,500 for the option on its 2024 S-Class and electric EQS models.
Historically, technology has always come down in price as it has spread through the automotive ecosystem. There is no reason to think self-driving features will be different.
Their gradual normalization will be a boon to highway drivers and to specialist suppliers such as Mobileye. To automakers, though, it might become just another cost of keeping customers.
Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
