Intel gave a tepid outlook for sales in its current quarter, signaling further challenges for its business amid signs that the PC market is starting to recover.
The company forecast roughly $12.7 billion of sales for the first quarter, higher than the same period last year but lower than Wall Street expected in a survey of analysts by FactSet.
The company's shares fell more than 8% in after-hours trading.
Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger said factors including a rocky market for a programmable-chip unit and weaker-than-anticipated sales for Mobileye Global, an autonomous-driving company in which Intel owns a majority stake, hurt the outlook. He characterized those headwinds as "temporary," and said he expected sales to grow every quarter this year, both sequentially and year-over-year.
That growth is expected to come partly from a long-awaited rebound in the market for personal computers, where Intel's chips are ubiquitous.
After eight straight quarters of decline, research firm Gartner said this month that PC shipments had increased by 0.3% in the October-to-December quarter. Intel and its peers are betting that growing interest in AI software on PCs will give the market an added boost through this year. Intel last month launched new laptop chips with features that speed up AI calculations.
Intel said sales in the division that handles PC chips rose 33% to $8.8 billion in the fourth quarter, as the company's overall revenue climbed. Intel made $15.4 billion of sales in the quarter, up from $14 billion a year before and better than analysts forecast. Intel also made $2.7 billion of profit, reversing a loss in the year-ago period.
In addition to PCs, Intel is vying for a bigger foothold in chips that do AI calculations in data centers, where its competitor Nvidia is the dominant player. Buyers of data center equipment are spending heavily on Nvidia's chips, using them to create advanced-language and image-generating systems such as OpenAI's ChatGPT.
Intel's AI and data center division's sales fell 10% to $4 billion in the fourth quarter. But Gelsinger said Intel was positioned to grab a bigger part of the AI computing market as the focus shifts away from creating advanced AI systems and toward deploying them.
Other chip makers are starting to see benefits, too. South Korea's SK Hynix, a major maker of memory chips that are critical in AI systems, on Wednesday reported a profit for its last quarter, besting analyst forecasts of a loss.
The results come at a crucial time for Intel and Gelsinger, who was hired three years ago to return the company to the ranks of the world's most advanced chip makers.
Gelsinger has doubled down on Intel's manufacturing operations, plowing tens of billions of dollars into new factories. He started a business making chips on contract for outside circuit designers -- something the company had never succeeded at before.
Gelsinger said the company's bid to leap ahead in manufacturing is on track.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
