United Parcel Service said it plans to shed about 12,000 jobs this year and mandated staff work from offices five days a week starting March 4, as the package-delivery giant seeks to boost productivity amid a protracted slowdown in business.
The cuts are primarily targeted at management staff worldwide as well as contract workers, UPS executives said Tuesday, adding that those jobs aren't likely to return even when business picks up. The company has around 85,000 management employees.
Unionized package handling and transportation workers account for the bulk of UPS's 495,000 employees. Union workers aren't affected by the latest round of cuts.
The layoffs at UPS are happening across Corporate America weeks into the new year as executives look to thin staffing ranks to trim costs, eliminate redundant roles and speed decision-making. Executives and analysts said that beyond the budget-tightening that often happens at the beginning of the calendar year, there is a growing sense that the work of slimming down isn't over.
UPS, similar to layoffs announced by employers including Alphabet, Salesforce and Wayfair, is homing in on a larger group of white-collar workers after offering buyouts to some last year. It has been testing artificial intelligence and machine-learning tools and is ramping its use of both across the enterprise.
"Here we've identified new ways of working and are calling this fit to serve," Chief Executive Carol Tome told analysts on an earnings conference call.
The moves came after UPS's revenue declined in the fourth quarter amid weaker volumes in both its domestic and international businesses. For the full year the average number of U.S. packages UPS handled a day fell 7.4% from 2022.
Tome described 2023 as a difficult and disappointing year. This year is slated to present challenges, too, despite the planned job cuts saving UPS an estimated $1 billion.
It guided revenue in 2024 to be between $92 billion and $94.5 billion, which was below analysts' forecasts. Profits would be lower than year-earlier levels as well. FedEx in December cut its full-year revenue outlook amid weakness in delivery volumes.
Shares of UPS fell more than 8% in Tuesday's trading. The stock is down about 18% over the past 12 months, compared with a 23% gain in the S&P 500 over the same time frame.
UPS's financial results often serve as a barometer for the U.S. and the global economy. The carrier delivers parcels for retailers, and it also has insights on industrial production in its handling of transportation and logistics for manufacturers.
In addition to muted growth in the parcels, the company is grappling with higher costs after agreeing to wage increases in a union contract for its drivers and warehouse workers. It also faces increased competition from smaller carriers doing last-mile deliveries. Some rank-and-file employees have had their work shifts reduced as parcel volumes remain well below peaks experienced during the Covid-19 pandemic.
UPS, based in Atlanta, is also joining a number of companies that want employees to work from offices every weekday. The company faced contentious labor negotiations last year in which union officials said that drivers and warehouse staff believed it was unfair that office staffers could work from home during the pandemic and they couldn't.
"By adopting this approach, we recognize the ongoing commitment of our operators and other UPSers who have and continue to work in-person in our facilities five days and sometimes more per week," the company said in a recent staff memo viewed by The Wall Street Journal.
Some corporate roles are also being newly scrutinized following massive hiring sprees during the pandemic, with some executives still feeling companies went too far in expanding their teams.
UPS now has roughly around the same number of employees as it did before the pandemic. At the end of 2019, UPS had more than 495,000 employees, of which, 87,000 were management workers. By the end of the next year, UPS reported 536,000 employees, 93,000 of which were in management roles.
UPS said it expects small-package volume growth in the U.S. to be less than 1% this year, though in the long-term it projects a 3% growth rate.
UPS said it would share more details on how it is planning to improve productivity during a March 26 investor event.
The 2024 recovery is likely to be uneven for UPS. The company noted a drop from industrial production from Europe, and, while volumes of small packages picked up in the shipping lane from China to the U.S. late last year, it remains cautious about business prospects.
UPS's truckload brokerage unit, Coyote Logistics, was a drag on the company's revenue. This business has been hit hard by excess capacity from higher inventory levels and consumers spending more on services than on goods. Tome said that UPS was looking at strategic alternatives for Coyote, which UPS purchased in 2015 to expand the company's portfolio.
---
Dean Seal contributed to this article.
Credit: By Esther Fung
