Stocks resumed their climb, led by the shares of big technology companies that have powered the market for much of the year.
The S&P 500 rose 0.8%, closing near its high for the year. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite rose 1.4% and the Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 0.2%.
After a big November rally fueled by encouraging inflation data, stocks had mostly stalled to start December. The rally was back on Thursday thanks to more artificial-intelligence speculation, a driver of this year's gains.
Advanced Micro Devices was the S&P 500's best performer, closing up 9.9% after the chip maker said Microsoft, Meta Platforms and Oracle adopted or are in the process of adopting its new AI chips. Google parent Alphabet soared 5.3% a day after unveiling its new AI system that will become widely available early next year.
Amazon.com rose 1.6% and Meta gained 2.9%. Shares of Nvidia, the big winner of the AI trade, rose 2.4%.
"We are in a digital, cloud computing generative AI supercycle," said Nancy Tengler, chief executive of Laffer Tengler Investments.
Tengler is bullish on tech firms that are pivoting to AI despite their high valuations, and believes that stock buybacks will support the share prices of large tech companies such as Microsoft.
A rapid fall in Treasury yields is also helping tech shares by making their expected future profits more valuable to investors. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note was little changed from Wednesday at 4.129%.
Rising yields had been weighing on stocks earlier this fall, when the 10-year yield touched 5%. But investors have since priced in a soft landing for the economy and interest- rate cuts from the Federal Reserve next year.
Traders in interest-rate derivatives are pricing in greater than 50% odds of a rate cut at the Fed's March meeting.
The S&P 500 is up 19% this year.
Lower yields are also offering some relief in the mortgage market. Mortgage rates fell to just above 7% for the first time in around four months and are nearly a percentage point lower than their recent peak, mortgage giant Freddie Mac said Thursday.
Investors will get their next look at the health of the economy on Friday with the release of the Labor Department's closely watched employment report.
Airline stocks got a boost after JetBlue Airways lifted its fourth-quarter sales outlook, saying that holiday travel demand has been strong. JetBlue rose 15%. American Airlines, Southwest Airlines and Delta Air Lines shares all rose more than 3%.
Oil prices edged lower, with Brent crude, the international benchmark, closing at $74.05 a barrel.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 Index slid 0.3%.
At midday Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 1.7%, the Shanghai Composite was down 0.5% but South Korea's Kospi was up 0.8%. S&P 500 futures were unchanged.
Credit: By Jack Pitcher
