Every day Nick Impson, a 25-year-old graduate student at Georgetown University, checks in with Woebot, a text-based chatbot.
Woebot asks Mr. Impson, who has been battling depression, what is happening in his life that day and how he is feeling. Woebot analyzes the language Mr. Impson uses and provides coping strategies drawn from cognitive behavioral therapy. The whole exchange takes about 10 minutes.
Mr. Impson started using Woebot as part of a study aimed at determining whether the tool, created by Stanford University lecturer and clinical research psychologist Alison Darcy, could mirror the therapeutic process for depression, as cost and perceived stigma prevent many people from seeing human therapists. Dr. Darcy's study, published in 2017 in the peer-reviewed Journal of Medical Internet Research Mental Health, tracked 58 college students for two weeks and found that those who used Woebot experienced a decrease in depression symptoms of 20%, a result that can take four to six weeks with traditional behavioral therapy.
"Now instead of keeping things bottled up and feeling isolated, I have an outlet and my worries don't seem so overwhelming," says Mr. Impson, who continued using the tool after the study ended.
Dr. Darcy, founder and chief executive of Woebot Labs Inc., is just one of many researchers at universities and companies exploring how AI might be used to help treat depression and other mental-health conditions. Some are developing AI-powered chatbots such as Woebot and Tess, from San Francisco-based startup X2AI, to help treat people directly. Others are developing algorithms that can spot patterns in the spoken language or brain scans of those with mental-health disorders and then use those patterns to identify the best type of traditional treatment for new patients with similar conditions.
The tools -- most of them experimental -- aim to provide access to mental-health care at a lower price and to help patients avoid the side effects of therapies that aren't suited to them.
"Psychiatrists and neurologists are overwhelmed by the number of mental-health patients," says Guillermo Cecchi, a computational psychiatrist at International Business Machines Corp.'s IBM Research unit. "We need to come up with tools to multiply the reach and effect of mental-health practitioners."
Among those working on AI systems designed to home in on the most effective treatments for depression is Conor Liston, an assistant professor of neuroscience at Cornell University's Weill Cornell Medicine.
In a 2017 study published in the peer-reviewed Nature Medicine, Dr. Liston studied the brain scans of 1,188 people, a third of whom were depressed. His system found patterns that helped categorize four different types of depression, classifications a clinician couldn't make by speaking with a patient.
With these categories, Dr. Liston's AI system was able to predict with approximately 88% accuracy whether transcranial magnetic stimulation, a form of treatment for severely depressed patients, would work for new patients.
Dr. Liston's study examined only one form of treatment for depression, but "it is a really important first step," says Joshua Gordon, the director of the National Institute of Mental Health. "The next step would be a study that would suggest which category of depressed patient would respond best to which specific type of treatment."
Canadian startup Aifred Health appears headed in that direction. Aifred says its algorithm is "learning" to recognize patterns in depression treatment data to better predict outcomes, using 35,000 patient records gathered from universities and open-data initiatives. The company aims to collect 35,000 more starting this summer and then begin clinical trials of the algorithm this year.
"We want to take the process of what can be months or years to find the right treatment down to minutes," says David Benrimoh, Aifred chief executive officer.
Similarly, David Fleck, an associate professor at the University of Cincinnati, is working on an AI system to identify which people with bipolar disorder are most likely to benefit from lithium -- a treatment that specifically targets mania symptoms but that he says works on about 50% of patients.
By looking for certain patterns in patients' brain scans, Dr. Fleck's system was able to predict with approximately 95% accuracy in a 2017 study who was most likely to benefit from lithium and who should avoid the treatment, the side effects of which can include dry mouth, tremors and long-term kidney problems.
At IBM, Dr. Cecchi's team is developing a tool that analyzes patients' speech patterns in real time -- such as when they are talking to a doctor -- to determine whether a given treatment is working or needs to be adjusted. The tool is trained to make that determination by analyzing classes of words patients use (are they more related to perception or action?), syntactic patterns (the frequency of adjectives used versus nouns) and acoustic features (pitch, variance of volume, frequency of pauses).
In a recent study, AI systems that Dr. Cecchi's team developed with universities including Columbia University were able to predict with 83% accuracy which patients with schizophrenia would go on to have a psychotic episode.
While many see early benefits from this and other research, "we need studies of thousands of patients to have confidence that this is really something that is not dependent on the particular features of a particular cohort or protocol," says Dr. Cecchi.
To be sure, critics have raised concerns about the safety of emerging AI-powered mental-health tools and the sensitivity of the information being gathered, analyzed and recorded by these systems. Although the information used to train AI systems is typically scrubbed or anonymized, some worry about system hacks and leaks.
Others raise concerns about people using apps before larger randomized clinical trials have been conducted. With "any mental-health website or app, there needs to be an evaluation of the negative impact as well as the benefits," says Adam Miner, an AI researcher and clinical psychologist at Stanford University. "If the app doesn't work, are people less likely to get the help they need?"
---
Ms. McConnon is a writer in New York. Email her at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Aili McConnon
