TAIPEI -- Benson Chen, a 31-year-old owner of a Taipei-based e-commerce coffee business, introduced a newcomer called Meiyu to his family's online chat group. Trouble followed almost immediately.
Mr. Chen's mother posted a health advisory offering hydration tips for the flu season. Meiyu weighed in with punctilious certitude.
"This is a rumor," Meiyu said. "The internet has a lot of information on drinking water. Doctors say not all of it is credible."
A long silence ensued. "It was awkward," Mr. Chen said, comparing Meiyu's rebuke to "an instant slap in the face."
Meiyu isn't a pushy new paramour destined for epic mother-in-law battles. She is a fact-checking chatbot, one of the most advanced in the world.
Users have been adding Auntie Meiyu, as the cartoon blonde character is known, to chat groups since she was launched in December. The artificial-intelligence bot will interject in real time when she detects posts about the news, pointing out factual errors and alternative interpretations.
The technology, created by Taiwanese developers, is a step ahead of most fact-checking apps, which don't jump into conversations.
Meiyu quickly became hot in Taiwan, which had just gone through divisive local elections and is rife with rumors of China's interference in social media. The bot now has more than 110,000 users on the Japanese messaging app Line, which covers about 90% of the mobile-messaging market in Taiwan.
In a nation with long-held Chinese traditions of etiquette, however, Meiyu is proving to be socially inept. Online chat groups often comprise several dozen extended family members. Openly disputing facts with elder relatives is considered bad behavior.
"False," Meiyu declares when she detects an errant post. On a post advocating the benefits of eating fruits on an empty stomach, she said: "The doctor quoted in this post does not have proper qualifications."
Carol Hsu, the app's developer, said she is trying, after hearing user feedback, to make the bot's pronouncements sound more conversational.
Some are secretly thrilled that Meiyu is speaking up, since they don't feel they can. Melissa Edmons, a 32-year-old American married to a Taiwanese man, said her mother-in-law used to post up to several times an hour in the family chat group with all manner of dubious tips, from warnings that oven-baked food causes cancer, to instructions on how to survive brake failure in a moving car.
Ms. Edmons's brother-in-law introduced Meiyu to the group in late December. Since then, Ms. Edmons estimates the bot has corrected her mother-in-law on half of all her posts, including those on ovens and cars.
"Every time she gets corrected, she kind of doesn't talk anymore," said Ms. Edmons, who lives in the southern city of Tainan. "She might stop chatting for a few hours."
Hsieh Fong-chun, a 66-year-old retiree, kicked Meiyu out of his group after she issued what his nephew said were many corrections to Mr. Hsieh's posts.
"It's just weird to have someone outside the family participating" in a family chat, Mr. Hsieh said.
Mr. Hsieh said that when Meiyu was in the group he would listen to the bot if she said something agreeable; otherwise, he would ignore her.
Clyde Lin was scolded by his uncle after the 39-year-old pilot brought Meiyu into the family chat group late last year. "Who is this?" Mr. Lin said his uncle demanded. The family group contained too much personal information to give access to a bot, Mr. Lin said his uncle said.
Mr. Lin was being careless in "inviting a wolf into their home," he said his uncle told him, questioning the chatbot's origins. His uncle ejected Meiyu from the group -- which made things frosty between them.
Meiyu created tension in a chat group of 57 gay men that Oliver Lim joined three years ago. When Mr. Lim, a 35-year-old insurance agent in Taipei, added the bot in December, the group's founder -- who wanted his sexuality to remain private to the outside world -- viewed her with instant suspicion.
"Everyone's going to get outed this way," Mr. Lim said the founder told him. "That's not good."
Out went Meiyu. Mr. Lim's relationship with the founder -- which had already been deteriorating amid online arguments -- hit a breaking point.
Ms. Hsu, the developer, said Meiyu isn't designed to collect personal data on users. The free app relies on an open-source fact-checking resource in Taiwan called CoFacts.
Annie Chang, a 21-year-old student, introduced Meiyu into her chat group in late December because she wanted a nonconfrontational way to correct online falsehoods. It turned out the reaction to Meiyu was much the same as if a live person were speaking, she said.
"It's like you were on the street one day preaching what you think is a certain truth, and then someone immediately and loudly disagrees with you," she said.
Meiyu eventually was quietly shoved from her group -- Ms. Chang said she doesn't know who did it -- after Meiyu dismissed a post advertising the health benefits of massage.
"The purpose for this chat group was so that everyone can become better friends," Ms. Chang said. "If I have to keep explaining Meiyu, it'll just leave a bad impression in the group."

Credit: By Joyu Wang and Chuin-Wei Yap
