Tesla plans to spend more than $500 million to expand its electric-vehicle charging network this year, Chief Executive Elon Musk said, days after the carmaker signaled plans to slow down the build-out of its Supercharger network by laying off much of the team responsible for the work.
In a post on his social-media platform X on Friday, Musk wrote, "just to reiterate," Tesla will spend "well over" a half-billion dollars to expand its Supercharger network, including creating thousands of new chargers this year.
"That's just on new sites and expansions, not counting operations costs, which are much higher," Musk added.
Tesla's stock has been under pressure this year. The company said in April it plans to lay off 10% of its global workforce, and has seen a drop in vehicle sales amid a lower demand for EVs and higher competition. Tesla reported its lowest profit since 2021 in the first quarter but promised an acceleration in the launch of new, more affordable models. Shares are down about 32% year to date.
The world's most-valuable automaker recently laid off much of its Supercharger team, surprising the industry at large. Musk had said Tesla still planned to increase its charging network, but at a slower pace for new locations and would be focusing on the expansion of existing sites. It also said in filings at the time that it was working to expand its charging network, in addition to investing in autonomous driving, other artificial intelligence, new battery cell technology and new products, among others. It forecast capital expenditure this year at about $10 billion, and in a range of $8 billion to $10 billion each year the following two years.
The company started building its charging network over a decade ago and today has thousands of charging stations across the country. It has been opening up its network to other kinds of cars and winning public funding for chargers, The Wall Street Journal has reported. After Tesla opened its charging to other cars, major automakers spent last summer announcing a switch to the Tesla-designed charging connector and signing agreements to allow their customers access to the Tesla network.
Tesla's cuts to the team has been seen as another blow in waning growth in EV sales. Tesla is known for building charging stations cheaper and faster than competitors. Its installations are up around 19% this year through March, to 1,526 charging ports, according to the firm EVAdoption. That is more than four times as many pieces of equipment as the nearest charging provider.
Credit: By Kimberley Kao
