It was a seductive pitch to city governments and police departments: Use predictive software to deter crime before it's committed.
Artificial intelligence-powered algorithms, the software companies said, could chew up data on incident reports, weather, time and other variables, learn historical patterns, and spit out forecasts faster, cheaper and more accurately than human analysts. Using big data to put cops in the right place at the right time would help discourage crime.
Federal funding helped push such tools to police departments in Los Angeles, New York and elsewhere in the 2010s. More recently, however, those tools have faced pushback. Criminal-justice advocates warn that a disproportionate number of reported incidents involving low-income people or people of color could lead to outsize police footprints in their communities and unequal enforcement relative to total crime. Some academics question how effective the tools really are.
Santa Cruz, Calif.'s police department stopped using software developed by PredPol, now known as Geolitica, in 2017. Weeks after the police killing of George Floyd ignited racial justice demonstrations around the U.S. last year, the city became the first in the nation to effectively ban such technology, with local officials warning it could contribute to racial profiling and strain police ties with the community. More recently, lawmakers in Oakland, Calif., and New Orleans voted to prohibit the tools.
The Los Angeles Police Department, where the prototype of Geolitica's software was initially tested, says it stopped using it last year because of budget cuts, a move that came after an internal watchdog called for more oversight of predictive analytics. The LAPD and Chicago Police Department halted programs to predict potential repeat offenders.
Now, predictive-policing companies are starting to rebrand and rethink their products, focusing less on "forecasting" crime and more on tracking cops, both to provide oversight and to learn what behaviors correlate to reduced crime.
The evidence that predictive software reduces crime more effectively than human analysts is mixed, says Sarah Brayne, a University of Texas at Austin professor who researched the LAPD's use of such tools for five years for a 2020 book, "Predict and Surveil: Data, Discretion, and the Future of Policing."
"Part of that is that nobody has access to the data required to engage in independent evaluation," says Ms. Brayne. Most predictive tools are privately made, though the New York Police Department created an in-house program. Proving causation between the tools and reductions in crime is also difficult, Ms. Brayne says.
Santa Cruz-based Geolitica, which helped popularize the term "predictive policing," changed its name in March to better reflect how police departments use its software, Chief Executive Brian Macdonald says. The company also wants to differentiate itself from programs that try to predict potential criminals.
PredPol "was a terrible name," Mr. MacDonald says, adding that he wanted to make the change for years. "We weren't really doing predictions. We were just identifying high-risk locations that officers could patrol."
Mr. MacDonald believes Geolitica's core data -- incident reports about shootings, burglaries and other crimes -- is the least biased information that data analytics tools can use. "It's not the police who are deciding there's a crime," he says. "It's you, the victim, who's saying crime happened here." Racial biases in policing, he says, are largely symptoms of deeper socioeconomic inequalities.
Police departments that use Geolitica often install global positioning systems in cop cars or radios to track where individual officers are patrolling, comparing deployments to crime forecasts. The private company's platform, maintained by 10 employees and used by about 50 departments, projects such data onto souped-up heat maps of geographic areas broken down into 500-square-foot boxes.
"We now actually have a couple of customers who don't even use our predictions," Mr. McDonald says. "They actually set their own patrol areas, and they use us for monitoring and management of the officers out in the field."
Ms. Brayne and some executives at software companies expect departments could increasingly employ these bird's eye views to monitor officers' movements and improve accountability, in addition to forecasting crime hot spots.
Newark, Calif.-based ShotSpotter is following a similar path. Its core product attempts to detect gunshots in neighborhoods using audio sensors. In 2018 it acquired crime-forecasting software HunchLab and launched a product called "ShotSpotter Missions."
Last year, the company renamed the offering to "ShotSpotter Connect" and says it beefed up the platform's patrol-management features. AI-powered algorithms spot patterns and trends across data sets to help police supervisors put cops in the right places, says Sam Klepper, ShotSpotter's senior vice president of marketing and product strategy. The goal is to track granular details of their work, from making traffic stops to visiting local businesses, he says.
"It's having reporting that the command staff can go back and look at and say, 'These tactics correlate to the most reductions in crime,' and they can double down on those types of activities," Mr. Klepper says.
Mr. Klepper says ShotSpotter, which has about 120 customers for various products, including police departments in Washington, D.C., and Wilmington, Del., sees an opportunity to use its predictive software to help target social work and mental-health services for high-risk areas. The firm hopes to test such a program but can't share details, he says.
William Bratton helped start the wave of crime-forecasting software when he called for predictive analytics as LAPD commissioner in 2008. He was also commissioner of the NYPD in 1994 when it launched CompStat, short for computerized statistics, which analyzed data about recent crimes to help cops identify hot spots. He says younger cops are more willing to embrace such technologies, but departments need to clarify guidelines that address community concerns.
"Let's face it, policing has not been a perfect institution," Mr. Bratton says. "We have, in some instances, abused the tools we're given."
Crime-forecasting firms are quick to distinguish their products from data-mining or facial-recognition technologies that use personal information to attempt to identify suspects. Geolitica and ShotSpotter say they rely on reported incidents and don't use data points such as arrests -- a metric for police activity rather than total crime -- for fear of perpetuating a cycle of over-policing in communities of color.
Critics such as Rashida Richardson, a Northeastern University professor who studies big data and racial justice, warn that firms' attempts to reposition their products could distract from fundamental questions about predictive analytics.
The potential for biased data goes beyond historical arrest records to the level of 911 calls, she says, pointing to the incident when a white dog walker in Central Park falsely accused a Black bird watcher of threatening her life.
"That's going to come in as a data point," Ms. Richardson says. "How does one deal with a data set when you don't know the context of every call for service?"
The tools also don't collect analogous information about nonphysical spaces where cyber- or white-collar crime occurs, which could make enforcement for such incidents less likely, she says.
The complexities of such data sets pose questions that many governments aren't currently equipped to answer, says Robert Cheetham, CEO of Azavea, the firm that sold HunchLab to ShotSpotter.
"We have zoning boards," Mr. Cheetham says. "Why not have civic-algorithm review boards, populated by a mix of people who understand cities, and academics and practitioners?"
A handful of jurisdictions have created such bodies in recent years to research government-used algorithms. In Pittsburgh, which paused a predictive-policing program last year, a public-private partnership is preparing to issue recommendations for how to use such technology in policing, criminal sentencing and child welfare services.
In Santa Cruz, lawmakers left open the possibility of using crime-forecasting and facial-recognition tools if the city council approves them based on a review of peer-reviewed research into bias. Mr. MacDonald of Geolitica says he supports the idea.
Justin Cummings, the Santa Cruz councilman and former mayor who spearheaded the city's restriction, says law-enforcement officials and lawmakers should root out existing bias before adopting new tools with unclear impacts.
"Ensuring everyone is treated equally under the law is something that we have to address first," Mr. Cummings says. "It's really tough."
Credit: By David Uberti
