This time of year, the mind inevitably turns to resolutions. The case for making them is highly uncertain. On the one hand, psychologists tell us that setting goals for ourselves enhances our sense of purpose and helps organize our lives around priorities. But the evidence suggests that most New Year's resolutions fail before January is out. So do we feel good for having set ourselves a target, or do we feel bad for having tried and (once again) failed?
In that sense, resolutions are a little like hope, something else we tend to turn to at the changing of the calendar. Philosophers have debated for centuries whether hope is a virtue or an evil. Since hope suggests uncertainty, is it incompatible with faith? Does hope in fact represent the triumph of self-delusion, an unwillingness to face up to the brutal realities? Or is hope a necessary condition for progress, a way of motivating us to strive for better? When Hope was all that was left in Pandora's box, was that fable meant to inspire us -- to tell us that, when all else has taken flight from our lives, we will still have hope as the last defense against despair? Or was it intended to torment us, to mock us with the idea that if all we have left is hope, then do we really have anything of value at all?
There is a wonderful line in the 1986 John Cleese movie "Clockwise," in which the former Python plays a school principal trying and repeatedly failing to take his star pupil to a conference at which she is to be honored. At one point, after yet another setback, he turns forlornly to his young charge and says, "It's not the despair, Laura. I can stand the despair. It's the hope."
So what's the right way to approach another uncertain new year? Dare we hope? Should we resolve? Perhaps we should dispense with both?
I find the easiest way to resolve the dilemma is to devise resolutions for others -- and then hope that they keep them. There is just as much chance they'll keep the resolutions I assign them as there is that I will keep my own. So here's my principal resolution for 2019: that everyone who in 2018 should really have behaved better will indeed behave better in the coming year. Surely there's no chance of disappointment with that one?
---
Another exercise in futility we like to engage in at this time of year (especially those of us who publish for a living) is making predictions. This is a mystifyingly substance-free exercise that carries no intrinsic value. Most of the millions of predictions you'll read this week are either of the farcically obvious sort -- there will be discord in Washington, there will be turbulence in financial markets, China will continue to grow, it will snow -- or they will be spectacularly wrong. Can you recall a single prediction that you've read in past years that was (a) controversial or at least challengeable in some material way, and (b) correct? Me neither.
In any case, the most important events that happen each year are almost by their very nature unpredictable. Yet for some reason, writers and media people still go at it year after year. You might like to follow Sam Goldwyn's reputed rule that he would never make predictions, especially about the future. But I prefer the line from an old economist whose advice when making predictions was, Always give a date or a number, but never both.
Yet 2019 offers especially juicy opportunities for the predictable prognosticators, with so many important issues to be resolved. Will President Trump be impeached? Will there be a recession in the U.S.? Will Brexit actually happen? Will North Korea denuclearize? Will China and the U.S. have a full-blown trade war? Will Facebook stop handing over my personal data to everyone who asks for it? Will the New England Patriots get to the Super Bowl again? Will artificial intelligence take my job? Will the Oscars turn into a political rally as actor after vacuous actor denounces the Republican Party? (OK -- that's an easy one.)
I can tell you now, with absolute confidence, that the answer to some of those questions is yes and the answer to the others is no.
And what's more, I promise to present myself here again next year and hold myself accountable.
Whether you make resolutions or predictions, or whether you just cling to hope and wait for events to come at you like a landslide, I wish you all a very happy, peaceful and prosperous New Year.

Credit: By Gerard Baker
