At least six top executives have departed Global X ETFs in the past three months, creating turmoil at the $42 billion fund manager known for its thematic exchange-traded funds.
Jon Maier, Global X's chief investment officer, and Ronnie Riven, head of finance, have decided to step down from their positions, a company spokesperson said. Both will stay on for a transition period.
Their departures follow those of Chief Executive Luis Berruga, who was replaced in November, and Chief Operating Officer John Belanger, who left Global X a week after Berruga. Crystal Christy, the head of human resources, and Bruno Stein, who led the Brazil operations, departed in December.
The exodus has raised concerns among Global X employees about the growing influence of its South Korean parent company and a clash of two different cultures, according to people familiar with the matter. Global X was acquired by asset-management giant Mirae Asset Global Investments in 2018.
Mirae named Thomas Park, the nephew of Mirae founder Park Hyeon-Joo and the co-CEO of Mirae's U.S. business, as Global X's interim chief executive late last year. Shortly after his appointment, Global X laid off about 10% of its workforce.
Those cuts primarily affected the digital assets team, the people said. An early contender to launch one of the first U.S. spot bitcoin ETFs, Global X withdrew its application last month after 10 other funds were successfully listed. The fund manager also said in January that it would liquidate 19 ETFs. Those funds are set to cease trading in the coming week. The closures include ETFs focused on China and thematic funds offering exposure to everything from the cannabis industry to health and wellness and "green building."
"For any business, leadership changes can be difficult in the short term," the spokesperson said. "Global X is an integral part of Mirae Asset's future and growth, and we remain committed to being an innovative leader in the global ETF industry."
Global X is the 14th-largest ETF issuer in the U.S., just behind Fidelity Investments, according to data provider VettaFi. It found success offering niche funds, opting not to compete with large asset managers such as BlackRock and State Street on low-cost, broad-stock market funds. Its assets have soared from $5 billion in 2017 on the back of popular income-focused and thematic strategies, where Global X is a "pioneer and industry leader," said Todd Rosenbluth, VettaFi's head of research. The fund manager was profitable in 2023.
Global X's largest fund invests in Nasdaq-100 stocks while also selling options on them in what is known as a covered-call strategy that aims to generate additional income for investors. It also runs popular equity funds focused on infrastructure development and robotics and artificial intelligence.
Maier, the chief investment officer, who joined Global X from Merrill Lynch in 2017, became something of a legend in the ETF industry as the man who picked the funds that went into Merrill's prepackaged investment portfolios. He helped grow assets in Merrill's model portfolios to more than $40 billion from less than $1 billion, and the strategies acquired the nickname "the Maier models."
Seoul-based Mirae, founded in 1997, manages about $600 billion in assets. In early 2020, it sold a minority stake in Global X to Tokyo-based Daiwa Securities Group. The investment, structured as a $120 million convertible bond, could convert to a minority equity stake in the ETF asset manager in 2025.
Credit: By Vicky Ge Huang and Jack Pitcher
