Two years ago, EF Hutton was riding high. The bank was the top dealmaker in the speculative world of special-purpose acquisition companies, making millions of dollars taking risky startups such as Donald Trump's social-media platform public.
Now, the firm that revived a storied Wall Street name is reeling from a vicious fight between two top executives. In dueling lawsuits last month, the partners accused each other of mismanagement and abusing drugs and alcohol. The suits revealed a federal investigation into securities fraud and allegations that one partner lost millions of dollars gambling and the other partied with strippers and prostitutes.
EF Hutton said Sunday that the partners had withdrawn their lawsuits, but the reputational damage and a slowdown in business threaten the bank's future. The SPAC boom has turned into a bust, and the pace of initial public offerings has slowed to a trickle. Investors have collectively lost tens of billions of dollars betting on companies that went public during the frenzy.
For much of the 20th century, EF Hutton was a successful brokerage. "When EF Hutton talks, people listen" was its catchphrase in commercials. The firm was eventually sold and the brand retired before two bankers, Joseph Rallo and David Boral, resurrected it in 2021.
The new EF Hutton has come under fire from some investors who have said it pushed speculative investments on them, such as a failed bet on a plant-based foods startup called Veg House Holdings.
Henry Ikezi, a real-estate developer in New York City, isn't sure he will get back the $1 million he invested in Veg House ahead of an IPO that never happened. He said he invested, in part, because of EF Hutton's work with Trump Media & Technology Group. An EF Hutton broker suggested he could get a 10-fold return on his investment.
"This was being done by a bank that had a good name, it had a license, assets and it had done the Trump deal," said Ikezi, a Republican who is running for Queens borough president. He has filed an arbitration claim against EF Hutton with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority.
An EF Hutton spokeswoman said the bank informed investors of the risks. Veg House said it is trying to make investors whole.
Many of the companies that EF Hutton helped take public are burning through their cash. They include several Chinese technology startups; a company that says it helps people pursue health, wealth and happiness; a startup trying to use artificial intelligence to make better electric cars and a maker of optionally manned air vehicles.
On average, shares of companies that went public via SPAC deals underwritten by EF Hutton are down about 70% from their listing price, figures from data provider SPAC Research show. Companies that did IPOs involving the bank are down about 60% on average, according to Dealogic.
"People assume it's the old EF Hutton," said Jonathan Kurta, a lawyer who is working with investors in Veg House. "But in reality, they're doing these really terrible deals."
In 2021, a SPAC working with EF Hutton called Digital World Acquisition announced a deal with Trump's social-media company and then became a meme stock popular with Trump supporters.
At the time, many banks avoided deals involving Trump because of reputational concerns after the Jan. 6, 2021, assault on the Capitol. Fees and shares from the deal eventually made EF Hutton over $15 million, a big payday for a bank of its size.
"Roping TMTG into a story about events in which we played no role whatsoever is a hilarious example of this reporter's all-encompassing biases," a Trump Media spokeswoman said in response to questions for this article.
Operating on the fringes of Wall Street, Rallo and Boral specialized in small-company IPOs and SPACs. SPACs are blank-check companies that merge with firms looking to go public. They are essentially backdoor IPOs that have historically enriched insiders at the expense of ordinary investors.
Flush with fees from the SPAC bubble, EF Hutton's revenue from underwriting and banking hit nearly $150 million in 2021, and Rallo made more than $26 million that year, the firm said in a lawsuit. The next year, EF Hutton became the top underwriter of SPACs. Rallo, then the firm's chief executive, bought a $25 million penthouse on Manhattan's Upper East Side in 2023.
In May this year, federal agents served Rallo with a search warrant as part of a fraud investigation, prompting Boral to oust him as CEO, EF Hutton said in the suit. "We have no indication that Joe will be charged with a crime," said Seth DuCharme, a lawyer for Rallo.
In its lawsuit, the bank said Rallo had a severe gambling problem, frequently drank to excess and had drained millions of dollars from EF Hutton to fund an extravagant lifestyle. Rallo had the firm reimburse him for expenses such as New York Knicks playoff tickets, private-jet flights for family vacations and intravenous drips from a practitioner called the "IV doc" to help him recover from hangovers, EF Hutton said. A spokesman for Rallo denied the allegations.
Rallo responded a few days later. In his countersuit, he accused Boral of overthrowing him in a "coup d'etat."
In April, the firm held a celebration in Palm Beach, Fla., shortly after the Trump Media listing. Following a night of partying, Boral paid a prostitute $500, accidentally taking the money from an EF Hutton account, then tried to cover it up when the payment raised red flags at the firm, Rallo contended in his lawsuit.
The claims in the lawsuits "should not be viewed as a reflection on Mr. Rallo or Mr. Boral," EF Hutton said in its statement Sunday.
The bank worked with businessmen such as Sean Dollinger, a serial entrepreneur who has run companies in fashion, telecommunications and cannabis. Last year, EF Hutton underwrote the listing of LQR House, an alcoholic-beverages company led by Dollinger. Its shares have fallen more than 99% since then, adjusting for splits.
Dollinger also founded Veg House, which aims to build vegan food halls and grocery stores. Ikezi, the New York real-estate developer, learned about Veg House from an EF Hutton broker, Keith D'Agostino.
"Do I think it's 10x? It very well could be," D'Agostino told Ikezi about the potential return on his $1 million investment in a recorded call heard by The Wall Street Journal. D'Agostino didn't respond to requests for comment.
Ikezi and other investors bought private shares of Veg House in January ahead of a planned IPO. They signed paperwork stating that if the listing were canceled, their shares would be repurchased, giving them a refund.
Veg House repeatedly delayed its IPO, then withdrew it in June. The investors still haven't gotten their money back. Veg House said it extended the date by which it would return the money to investors. Ikezi and other investors say they never agreed to the extension.
Veg House accused EF Hutton of mishandling the deal. The EF Hutton spokeswoman said the bank did nothing wrong.
After the failed IPO, Veg House tried to sell itself to another company, Above Food Ingredients. Dollinger told the Journal that investor funds could have been returned with money from the sale. But the sale fell through.
In recent weeks, the Securities and Exchange Commission's enforcement arm has inquired about the Veg House deal, according to messages seen by the Journal. The SEC declined to comment.
---
Elisa Cho contributed to this article.
Generate image description

Credit: By Alexander Osipovich and Amrith Ramkumar
