DAVOS, Switzerland -- Sam Altman and his most prominent ally, Satya Nadella, took to the stage together here to talk about their partnership and what the future holds for a technology that both excites and frightens people.
The CEOs, of OpenAI and Microsoft, respectively, have together been through a lot these past few months, including Altman's firing and rehiring by OpenAI's board in November and Nadella's crucial support of him through the drama.
In Wednesday's session during the annual World Economic Forum, they were aligned on many topics, but not all.
Both talked about the promise of generative artificial intelligence. Altman played down the possibility that rapidly improving AI technology would radically transform the world in the near term, saying rather that it would improve inexorably over a longer period and eventually have significant impact.
"The world had a two-week freakout with GPT4," he said, referring to the launch last year of OpenAI's latest version of its chatbot, which fueled predictions of the imminent arrival of artificial general intelligence, or machines as smart as humans. "And now, people are like, 'Why is it so slow?'" Altman said.
Nadella emphasized a bullish outlook. He said the world is within reach of a "magical moment" akin to the widespread adoption of the personal computer.
Nadella said he expected many positive impacts for workers, arguing they would become more productive and should see wages rise accordingly. He also said the availability of AI tools could help workers in numerous ways including easing midcareer transitions.
Altman struck a more cautious note on the technology's impact on the labor market. "We always find new things to do, and yet it does seem somewhat different if AI can, like, have more cognitive power than any of us," he said. "We have no idea what happens next."
The two CEOs also defended the independence of their companies, a relationship that has drawn scrutiny from antitrust regulators in the U.K. and European Union over whether they should regard the partnership as a de facto acquisition. Microsoft has agreed to invest $13 billion in the artificial-intelligence pioneer in exchange for what is essentially a 49% stake in the earnings of its for-profit arm.
Credit: By Sam Schechner and Jamie Heller
