KPMG LLP will soon have a new assistant to help it examine corporate America's books: Watson.
The auditing firm is forming an alliance with International Business Machines Corp.'s IBM Watson artificial-intelligence unit to develop high-tech tools for auditing and its other businesses. The deal is expected to be announced Tuesday.
Other auditing firms also are enlisting cutting-edge technology to help them review their clients' finances. Deloitte & Touche LLP has its Argus and Optix. And Ernst & Young LLP and PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have their own smart tools.
The Big Four are pouring hundreds of millions of dollars into new technologies, betting they will make audits more comprehensive, giving investors greater assurance that a company's finances are sound.
The new tools automate critical but rote tasks, letting auditors focus on more substantive issues. The tools can examine all of a client's transactions, instead of just a sample, reducing the chances of missing a problem, the firms say. They also make auditors better able to detect patterns in a client's finances worth investigating for errors or fraud.
Terms of KPMG's deal with IBM aren't being disclosed, but it represents "a pretty significant investment" on KPMG's part, said Steve Hill, the firm's head of innovation. He said Watson could help KPMG "fundamentally improve" its audits.
Watson will be fed data so it can master the standards and lingo of a particular industry. It could learn, for example, to evaluate bank loans to see if a bank was accurately gauging risk, and it could look at the bank's entire loan portfolio, instead of just the sample that a human auditor would have time to review.
Other audit firms also are relying more on automation. Ernst & Young made an initial investment of $400 million to develop its technologies, which it began using last year.
Among other benefits, the technology helps automate labor-intensive tasks, such as tallying inventory. Until a few years ago, auditors did that manually, armed with little but calculators and clipboards.
Not only can computers review nearly all a client's transactions, instead of just a portion, they can see patterns in oceans of data. They can determine whether a company records lots of sales just before a quarter ends, or pays lots of bills just afterward, timing that might inflate its results. They also can see if multiple, unusually big transactions involve the same person, a potential sign of fraud.
"Now you know exactly where to dig in and dive," said Randy Leali, Ernst & Young's global audit transformation leader.
At Deloitte, auditors are using Argus, their own artificial-intelligence tool that extracts information from documents, and Optix, a data-analytics engine that sorts a client's data and points auditors toward potential problems.
Deloitte's auditors could use the tool, for example, to chart all of a real-estate company's properties by their performance. A demonstration for a visitor showed Florida with a big red star on screen indicating operating income from properties there has declined. That would tip auditors to focus on Florida to see whether any write-downs were needed.
"When our clients see this, this is where the lightbulbs go off," said Jon Raphael, Deloitte's chief innovation officer.
Information-services company Wolters Kluwer NV recently switched to Deloitte as its auditor after the firm touted its ability to use data-analytics software to speed up audits and make them more precise, said Kevin Entricken, Wolters' chief financial officer.
A trial run this year in Wolters' Italian division allowed a thorough look at the unit's transactions in less time and helped shave 25% off the audit's cost, Mr. Entricken said. Wolters hopes to expand the software's use next year.
That doesn't mean everything is guaranteed to go smoothly. The new technology will cause disruption, spurring changes in the skills that auditors need, in what kind of auditors are hired and how they are trained. Auditors might become too dependent on technology, and the reams of electronic data the firms are gathering could make them targets for cyberhackers.
Audit firms say it is too soon for tech-related improvements to show up in their closely watched regulatory inspection results. In inspection reports released in 2015, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, the government's audit regulator, found deficiencies in 35% of the Big Four's audits it inspected, down from 39% the prior year. Those inspections, however, covered audits conducted in 2013, prior to widespread use of the new technology.
The PCAOB is "keenly interested" in technology's potential to improve audits, said chairman James Doty. But he warned that auditors would have to ensure it "does not diminish auditor skepticism and independence."
The firms say auditors won't become superfluous. Instead, technology will free them to spend more time investigating red flags in the company's numbers, among other things.
Technology isn't running away with audits, auditors say. "Human intervention and judgment will always be the most valuable part of any audit," said Michael Gallagher, a managing partner at PwC.
---
Vipal Monga contributed to this article.
Credit: By Michael Rapoport
