Facebook Inc. on Wednesday posted more than $1 billion in quarterly profit for the first time, showing the social network's mobile strength as advertisers increasingly look to reach younger users.
Investors drove shares up nearly 13% in after-hours trading, to $106.62, giving the 12-year-old company a market capitalization greater than $300 billion.
Mobile ads accounted for 80% of Facebook's ad revenue in the fourth quarter; three years ago, mobile-ad revenue accounted for just over 20%.
RBC Capital Markets analyst Mark Mahaney said, "2015 was the year that Facebook went from being an experiment to a must-buy for advertisers."
For most of the past year, Facebook's spending outpaced its revenue growth, as the company accelerated hiring and invested in projects such as virtual reality, artificial intelligence and delivering Internet access to remote areas.
In the latest quarter, however, that dynamic reversed: Revenue rose 52% to $5.84 billion, from $3.85 billion. Costs, meanwhile, rose 21%.
Advertising revenue jumped 57%. Excluding the effects of the stronger U.S. dollar, Facebook said ad revenue would have increased 66%, marking the fastest quarter of ad revenue growth since the first quarter of 2014, when revenue was less than half as much, Mr. Mahaney said.
Quarterly net income crossed the $1 billion threshold for the first time, roughly 3 1/2 years after Facebook's 2012 initial public offering. By comparison, Google parent Alphabet Inc. first posted quarterly net income of $1 billion in late 2006, less than 2 1/2 years after its IPO.
Facebook's strength on mobile is a sharp turnaround from the time around the IPO, when mobile was considered a weakness. "There was a long time when people thought, you know, our business might not be as good because we had no ads on mobile," Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said Wednesday.
But as users shifted to mobile devices, Mr. Zuckerberg told his product team to prioritize mobile-first products. "If you come in and you try to show me a desktop product, then I'm going to kick you out," Mr. Zuckerberg said he told the team at the time. "You have to come in and show me a mobile product."
Over the past two years, the number of people who tap Facebook exclusively through mobile devices has nearly tripled. In the fourth quarter, 823 million mobile-only users accessed Facebook, or its Messenger app, at least once a month.
Facebook said ad prices rose 21% in the fourth quarter, compared with a year earlier, largely because of demand for mobile ads. Mobile newsfeed ads fetch higher prices than ads on desktop, Chief Financial Officer David Wehner told analysts.
Advertisers say they are willing to pay up. "Facebook is by far the most effective mobile channel for us," said Andrew Blachman, chief operating officer of e-commerce company Tophatter Inc., who credits Facebook ads in part for Tophatter's "explosive growth" over the past year. "We've shifted more of our spend there."
For the fourth quarter, Facebook's net income totaled $1.56 billion, or 54 cents a share, up from $701 million, or 25 cents a share a year earlier. Excluding certain expenses, Facebook said it would have earned 79 cents a share, up from 54 cents on that basis a year earlier. Analysts had expected earnings of 68 cents a share on that basis.
Beyond mobile, analysts say Facebook still has many untapped revenue drivers at its disposal, including video, messaging and virtual reality. Facebook users watch 100 million hours of video on the social network every day, Mr. Zuckerberg said.
The company ramped up efforts to sell ads on its Instagram image-sharing network in the second half of last year. Facebook "made big strides" on Instagram in the fourth quarter, Mr. Wehner said in an interview.
Ninety-eight of the top 100 Facebook advertisers also advertised on Instagram in the fourth quarter, Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg told analysts.
"What they're starting to prove is they can monetize Instagram as well as they have Facebook," Mr. Mahaney said.
Facebook now generates little revenue from its virtual-reality unit Oculus VR and its two messaging apps, WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger.
"This is all the very beginning, video is barely monetized right now and the other platforms are barely monetized," said Jan Rezab, founder of Socialbakers, a social-media metrics company. "Video is only at 20% at what it can be."
Mr. Zuckerberg said Facebook will develop its various properties using the same, well-honed playbook that has benefited the primary Facebook app -- internally dubbed "big blue."
Earlier this month, Facebook's WhatsApp messaging unit said it would scrap its subscription fee and test ways to help businesses interact with users. Messenger added a similar feature in 2015.
WhatsApp ended the year with nearly one billion monthly active users. Oculus VR plans to start shipping its $599 Rift virtual-reality headset in March.
Facebook said average revenue per user rose one-third to $3.73.
Most new Facebook users are outside North America and Europe, but ad revenue grew most quickly in the U.S. and Canada, where average ad revenue per user grew 56% to $12.89. By comparison, ad revenue per user grew 35% in Europe, Facebook's second-largest region by users and revenue.
"Facebook is a primary channel for travelers to capture and share experiences with their friends," said Ed French, chief sales and marketing officer at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Co., part of Marriott International Inc. "Where travelers go, our money will go."
After years of rapid growth, Facebook also demonstrated more financial discipline.
In October 2014, Facebook projected 2015 costs would rise as much as 75%. During subsequent quarters, the company pared that forecast back to 55%.
Wednesday, Facebook said total costs and expenses last year rose 57%.
For 2016, Facebook said it expects expenses to rise 30% to 40%. It said it expects capital spending, for projects such as data centers, would increase to $4 billion to $4.5 billion, from $2.5 billion last year.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman
