It's good the Democratic House has the whole pandemic-and-depression situation under control, because 10 Members took time this week to write to Google's CEO demanding he explain the scope of the company's diversity and inclusion programs.
The letter was prompted by an NBC News report last week that Google had scaled back parts of its internal political bureaucracy. Employees told NBC anonymously that the tech company had cut "Sojourn, a comprehensive racial justice program created for employees to learn about implicit bias and how to navigate conversations about race and inequality," as well as "Allyship 101, a program to learn about different types of oppressed groups and ways of supporting them."
Members of the House Tech Accountability Caucus sent Google a critical letter responding to the report along with five questions including, "What diversity initiatives does Google currently provide for new hires?" and "Do employees working in artificial intelligence undergo additional bias training?"
Google is pushing back on the report and CEO Sundar Pichai told the Verge that "we probably have more resources invested in diversity now than at any point in our history as a company." It's no secret that many Silicon Valley companies have become liberal hothouses, and this episode illustrates how activist employees can enforce political orthodoxy. Overtly political programs are created even if they are outside the scope of the company's mission. Changes prompt leaks, hostile coverage and new Congressional demands. Management may decide in the future that it's best, as a matter of political protection, to let its diversity apparatus continue to grow.
It's tempting to laugh at the spectacle of America's leading tech companies re-enacting the dramas that have gripped liberal-arts colleges. Many have indulged activist employees for years. But the pandemic has underscored America's reliance on technology. Google is backing coronavirus research and promoting testing sites in its search results. It's not in anyone's interest for Silicon Valley to become more distracted by ideological obsessions, especially with Chinese technology companies eager to surpass American competitors.
Silicon Valley firms may be starting to realize that the more they make themselves into vehicles for political interests, the more they open themselves up to punitive regulation. For now, 10 Members of Congress can't dictate to Google how to design its diversity programs. But in the next Democratic Administration, the letter might be coming from an executive agency with enforcement power.
