You wouldn't paint your house with a watercolor brush, and you probably wouldn't cook a four-course gourmet dinner using only your toaster oven. We recognize that different projects call for different tools, even if they fall under the same basic umbrella of "painting" or "cooking."
Yet that recognition fails when it comes to one pervasive aspect of our working lives: writing. Whether we're jotting down a meeting note, writing a memo or drafting a 100-page report, we most often turn to that good old workhorse, the word processor.
Don't get me wrong: The word processor has its place, and there's rarely a day when I don't make use of Microsoft Word or Google Docs.
But that doesn't mean that a word processor is the right tool for every writing task -- because writing isn't just one kind of work. There are many different kinds of writing: articles, emails, blog posts, white papers, books, video scripts -- even PowerPoint presentation content. Using one tool for all of these is like plotting a rocket launch with a calculator.
Even within a single writing project, there are often very different stages -- from brainstorming to final editing -- each of which demands its own kind of thinking, and might benefit from its own kind of tool.
To figure out what belongs in your writing tool kit, think about the different challenges you have when you're writing -- because chances are, each one would benefit from a different type of software.
I don't know what to say. Whether you write a newsletter, post a lot or a little on social media, or just need occasional ideas for reports, finding something to write about is often the hardest part of the job. All too often, I think of something to write that I'm sure I won't forget. . .only to forget it.
That's why it's essential to set up a system for capturing all the different ideas you have, or even to capture little phrases or comments you might want to use in a future report, article or presentation.
I used to keep all these random ideas in a tiny paper notebook, but flipping through page after page of scrawled writing made it hard for me to find the right idea when I needed it. So about 15 years ago, I committed to putting all my random ideas into a digital notebook instead. That's a program like Evernote or Coda that lets me quickly add a note on my phone or computer, and provides a way to search through past notes without having to open a separate file to see each one.
I have found that the more religiously you capture your ideas, the more the ideas will come!
My ideas are all over the place. Once you know what you want to say, it can still be a big challenge to get to a first draft, because often our ideas are a bit jumbled before we get them on (virtual) paper. Some people organize their ideas in the writing itself, but for many of us, it helps to start with an outline.
I know people who still swear by index cards, sticky notes or white boards. But I prefer to make my index cards and sticky notes digital -- by using something like a virtual whiteboard. There are all kinds of applications that can serve this purpose: Some are marketed as outlining tools (such as Workflowy), some as digital whiteboards (like Miro), and some as "mind mapping" applications (such as Coggle and MindMeister).
What's essential is to find a tool that works like that collection of sticky notes: You want something that recognizes each idea or fact as a separate piece of information you can quickly rearrange on your screen, rather than treating all your separate thoughts as one big blob of text (the way a word processor does). You might find it especially helpful to work with something like MindMeister that lets you color-code your thoughts, drag ideas into different areas of your screen, or draw lines and arrows to connect related concepts.
By making it easier to rearrange your notes, these virtual outlining tools make it faster to go from a grab bag of ideas to a coherent outline. And unlike a physical whiteboard, it's a lot less likely to be erased.
I can't get started. Writer's block comes in lots of different flavors, but for me, there's nothing more daunting than staring at the blank page of a word processor. One trick I have is to open Facebook in a browser window, and write a few paragraphs as if I'm about to post something for a few friends; it immediately feels less stressful and more intuitive.
More recently, I've started enlisting the help of generative AI -- artificial-intelligence tools that can quickly generate a first draft from just a few words or a brief instruction. ChatGPT immediately replies with a draft, and while it won't be that great (for now, anyway), it gives me something I can revise and work from, instead of starting from a blank page.
I hate revising my work. I know that "all great writing is rewriting," but it's the part of the process I hate most.
Word processors just make this tough job even harder: Anything you cut can be annoyingly hard to retrieve, and if you are trying to move sentences or paragraphs from one section to another, especially on long documents, you are in for a tedious amount of cut-and-paste.
Once upon a time I handled this problem by printing out my draft documents and cutting them up with scissors: I'd rearrange the sliced-up pieces on the floor so I could figure out the right order.
Then I discovered how to do the slicing-up work on screen. Now I do all my editing in writing applications that let me cut a draft into paragraphs or sections, and drag the sections around a document until I have the right order. My favorite writing application (Scrivener) lets me see a list of all these little "slices" in the sidebar, so I get an outline-like overview of my completed document, broken down into its component parts.
I know it could be better. A word processor may catch your typos and spelling areas -- but it isn't going to make you a better writer. To make your writing clearer, tighter or more readable, try using an AI tool that will give you feedback on the structure and style of your written work. Grammar checkers and generative AI tools can take your draft text and return error-free copy; you can even ask the AI to shorten your 1,000 words to 800, or to change your brusque tone to warm and friendly.
In recent months, I've even started asking ChatGPT to suggest titles for me (it takes a lot of guidance and feedback until I get what I want), and I've also used it to turn key concepts into memorable acronyms. These are the kind of writing "stunts" that take humans loads of time, but that an AI can do in an instant.
-- Many people imagine that the arrival of ChatGPT and other generative AI tools means that we are on the cusp of a moment when people can opt out of writing work altogether. But that moment isn't here yet: So far, the power of AI lies in getting us from stalled to first draft, or putting the final flourishes on our prose.
And the more that machine-written text proliferates, the more we humans will need to craft writing that really stands out. But to deliver that caliber of written work, you need to overcome your biggest writing pain points -- which means picking the right tool for the job. Your readers will thank you.
---
Dr. Samuel is a technology researcher and co-author of "Remote, Inc.: How to Thrive at Work. . .Wherever You Are." Email her at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Alexandra Samuel
