Artificial intelligence powered the stock market for much of the year. Now it is testing stocks' November rally.
The S&P 500 and Dow industrials each slipped 0.2%. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite led the losses, sliding 0.6%.
This year's stock-market gains were largely fueled by the AI boom, but that stalled this summer as Treasury yields surged. The script has flipped back to big-tech stock domination in recent weeks. Cooling inflation raised hopes that the Federal Reserve is through with its rate-hiking campaign, weighing on Treasury yields.
"That was the starter gun for this end-of-year sprint," said Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at CFRA. "The market finally said OK, the Fed is done raising rates."
The benchmark 10-year yield finished Tuesday at 4.417%%, down from 4.421% on Monday. It remains well below its peak of 5% a month ago. Minutes from the Fed's most recent meeting showed officials expect policy to remain restrictive for some time.
Nvidia shares fell 0.9% before its after-market earnings report. Shares continued to fall in after=hours trading after the report, in which the chip maker reported higher earnings and revenue.
Investors also watched the drama unfold at OpenAI, contemplating the implications for Microsoft, which lost 1.2% on the day. The tech sector has broadly proved resilient to higher interest rates, but its strength doesn't augur another dot-com bubble, Stovall said. H
Consumers are becoming money-conscious now that inflation fatigue is setting in, evidenced by earnings reports among retailers.
"The consumer is basically running on fumes right now," said Megan Horneman, chief investment officer at Verdence Capital Advisors. "Even if inflation is slowing, it's still high, and that's a problem for a lot of people in this country."
Best Buy shares fell 0.7% after the retailer cut its full-year sales outlook, saying consumers are hunting for deals and demand has been hard to predict. Lowe's dropped 3.1% after slashing its outlook for the year. Core shoppers pulled back on big-ticket purchases, the company reported.
Kohl's shares fell 8.6% after reporting sales that missed Wall Street estimates. Chief Executive Tom Kingsbury said Kohl's is aggressively discounting to win market share this holiday season.
It wasn't all doom and gloom among retailers. Dick's Sporting Goods rose 2.2% after the sporting-goods seller lifted its full-year earnings forecast. Shares of Burlington Stores jumped 21% after beating analysts' expectations, setting its best single-day performance since going public in 2013.
At midday Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.6%. S&P 500 futures were flat.
Credit: By Eric Wallerstein
