The social-media site where the accused Pittsburgh synagogue shooter broadcast his intentions is pledging to curb threats of violence, while it said it plans to remain a platform where hate speech and other forms of extreme content are permitted.
Gab.com, which resumed service this week after a stretch in digital exile, will proactively police the site rather than wait for users to report troubling posts, founder Andrew Torba said.
"Is there room for improvement? Absolutely," he said.
Since Monday, Gab has permanently banned 200 accounts for violating its guidelines around threats of violence, Mr. Torba said. It also removed more than 1,000 posts that threatened violence and hadn't been reported by users.
Started in 2016 as a refuge for those who found the rules on mainstream social media too restrictive, Gab gained notoriety late last month after Robert Bowers posted anti-Semitic messages on the site shortly before allegedly killing 11 people at a Pittsburgh synagogue. Other companies quickly cut ties with Gab in the aftermath, including its web-hosting firm. As a result, Gab was offline within days.
While large tech firms have sophisticated artificial-intelligence systems designed to track troublesome speech, Mr. Torba and his team this week manually searched for keywords such as "kill" and "murder" to identify posts that violated the site's guidelines. Mr. Torba said that the searches were a first step, and the site is working on ways to automate the process.
As mainstream social-media platforms have cracked down on extremist content, frustrated and banned users found a haven in Gab. It has grown to 800,000 members and was adding about 100,000 users a month before the Oct. 27 shooting, according to Mr. Torba.
Mr. Torba said that he doesn't have a responsibility to encourage anything other than free expression and that he believes the most effective way to combat hate speech is with good speech.
"Hate speech is protected by First Amendment and Gab's guidelines," Mr. Torba said. "We certainly do not endorse it, but rather would encourage others to use their speech to shine a light on it."

Credit: By Yoree Koh and Georgia Wells
