When Nasdaq Inc. named Adena Friedman as its next chief executive in November, she won attention for being young, tech-savvy and the first woman to lead a major U.S. stock-exchange operator. Now, the hard part has begun.
Ms. Friedman, a 47-year-old black belt in taekwondo, has inherited a company whose traditional core business of U.S. stock trading has gotten much tougher since the heady 1990s when Nasdaq touted itself as "the stock market for the next 100 years."
Regulations in the late 1990s and the last decade brought competition to exchanges, opening the door to high-tech upstarts like Bats Global Markets Inc., which surpassed Nasdaq as the second-biggest U.S. exchange group by volume in 2014, and dozens of dark pools, or private trading venues. Two major market crashes in the last decade soured many investors on stocks altogether.
Analysts link a recent slide in Nasdaq's share of U.S. stock volume to a broad shift in trading toward securities listed on the New York Stock Exchange and its sister exchanges, including NYSE Arca, which specializes in exchange-traded funds.
Adding to Ms. Friedman's challenges, Nasdaq faces fierce competition from its historic rival NYSE for listings, even in the realm of hot tech stocks in which Nasdaq was once king. This week, the Big Board won the coveted initial public offering of Snap Inc., owner of the popular messaging app Snapchat.
To keep Nasdaq expanding, Ms. Friedman plans to keep pursuing a strategy, initiated under her predecessor, Robert Greifeld, of diversifying away from the stocks business into financial technology.
Ms. Friedman is perhaps most excited about the potential of artificial intelligence. Nasdaq uses AI in systems designed to spot wrongdoing at banks and tools that seek to enhance hedge funds' stock-trading strategies. Such efforts account for a tiny slice of Nasdaq's sales today, but Ms. Friedman sees huge potential in AI.
"We think in the next decade it could really transform the business," said Ms. Friedman, who became CEO on Jan. 1.
Nasdaq is pursuing initiatives to draw more trading back to its stock exchanges, which Ms. Friedman describes as a "long game." The company is also building its ETF business. More than 50 exchange-traded products switched from NYSE to Nasdaq last year, even though NYSE Arca remains the dominant player.
Ms. Friedman grew up steeped in finance. Her father, David Testa, was a longtime employee of T. Rowe Price Group Inc. who rose to the position of chief investment officer before retiring. As a child, Ms. Friedman recalls visiting the T. Rowe trading floor in Baltimore and doodling on the whiteboards with a marker. Both she and her brother -- now a hedge-fund manager -- took up careers in financial services.
"It was a big part of what attracted me to the industry," Ms. Friedman said.
Ms. Friedman joined Nasdaq after finishing business school at Vanderbilt University. From 1993 to 2011, she held job titles including head of data products, head of strategy and chief financial officer, and sometimes played second base on a company softball team.
She was a key player in the 2005 acquisition of Instinet Group Inc.'s computerized trading division, a deal aimed at shoring up Nasdaq's trading technology. While Mr. Greifeld shaped the vision for the deal, Ms. Friedman was one of his top lieutenants in implementing it and worked many late nights to make it happen, recalled John Jacobs, a former Nasdaq executive.
Despite the pressure on Ms. Friedman, "I never saw her lose her cool," said Mr. Jacobs, who is now a fellow at Georgetown University's business school.
In 2011, Ms. Friedman left Nasdaq to become CFO of private-equity powerhouse Carlyle Group LP. The move surprised many, not least because she was seen as a potential successor to Mr. Greifeld.
Ms. Friedman said she left because Carlyle offered her an "amazing opportunity" and she wanted to spend more time with her husband and two sons in Washington, D.C., where the buyout firm is based, instead of commuting to New York. She spent three years at Carlyle before returning to Nasdaq as president in 2014.
Former colleagues describe Ms. Friedman as hardworking, intelligent and a gifted communicator. When she joined Carlyle, the firm was moving toward becoming a public company. This pushed Ms. Friedman, as CFO, into the crucial role of explaining Carlyle's complicated financials to prospective investors.
Her performance during the roadshow before Carlyle's 2012 IPO impressed David Rubenstein, co-founder and co-CEO of the firm. "She's a star," Mr. Rubenstein said in an interview. "She knew the numbers inside out and upside down."
So far, Ms. Friedman's early moves as CEO at Nasdaq -- including a decision to exit its struggling European interest-rate futures business, announced Tuesday -- have been welcomed by Wall Street analysts.
Analysts say Ms. Friedman is well positioned to oversee Nasdaq's tech-centric strategy, citing her previous leadership of the firm's data and technology businesses. "She's been very involved in some of the newer, cutting-edge initiatives," said Richard Repetto, an analyst at Sandler O'Neill + Partners LP.
Ms. Friedman is betting that the tech focus will pay off. "We are more than an exchange company today," she said.
Credit: By Alexander Osipovich
