[Today, they're in the lab. Tomorrow, these AI-enabled devices might be in your home.]
Toilets That Spot Disease
Analyzing poop is an important way to prevent and diagnose gastrointestinal diseases, but the taboo around collecting it can make screening challenging, according to a 2014 study published in the British Journal of General Practice. Smart toilets could help change that.
Researchers at Stanford University have developed a prototype toilet that uses an artificial intelligence-trained camera to track the form of feces and monitor the color and flow of urine. A "lab-on-a-chip" device built into the toilet will analyze micro stool samples to detect viruses and blood, says Seung-min Park, the lead researcher on the project. This digital diary could yield valuable health insights and facilitate early, noninvasive diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome or colorectal cancer, Dr. Park says.
He says his team has signed on with Izen, a Korean toilet maker, to manufacture the toilet at a price of $300 to $1,000.
Scientists at Duke University are also developing a toilet that collects and analyzes waste, but after it has been flushed. The system, which uses AI-powered cameras and biochemical sensors, is more complex to install but preserves the user's privacy and could allow health authorities to monitor wastewater for pathogens, says Sonia Grego, the founding director of the Duke Smart Toilet Lab. The toilet could be rolled out in the next couple of years, she says.
Finder of Lost Keys
Scientists are working to end the curse of lost TV remotes and misplaced keys. Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Signal Kinetics research group have developed a robot that uses AI and wireless technologies to find hidden objects.
To spot a wallet wedged between cushions on a sofa, for instance, a robot outfitted with a robotic arm will send radio waves bouncing off an RFID tag -- a sophisticated bar code now used by retailers and manufacturers -- printed on the item. It will then analyze electromagnetic signals to calculate the distance to the target item, use a built-in camera to navigate to the sofa and lift the cushions until the wallet comes into sight and can be picked up. An algorithm will help the robot adapt its rummaging and grasping to objects and environments.
The latest version of the robot has a 96% success rate at finding and picking up objects in a lab setting, including clothes and household items, says Fadel Adib, the research group's founding director.
In the future, this home helper could also retrieve a specific wrench or screwdriver from a toolbox and assist a human in assembling a piece of furniture, says Dr. Adib. It might tidy up a home and place objects where one might expect to find them. "It's a Roomba on steroids," Dr. Adib says.
The researchers are aiming to make the robot available to consumers in five to 10 years at a cost of between $500 and $1,000, he says.
AI in a Shoe
Intelligent shoes could help identify early signs of motor disorders and make runners better athletes.
Smart insoles that analyze wearers' gaits and keep track of their steps already exist but aren't very accurate, says Damiano Zanotto, the director of the Wearable Robotic Systems Lab at the Stevens Institute of Technology. This could change with SportSole, a new system developed by Dr. Zanotto and his team.
It uses AI models to analyze data provided by sensors and more accurately measure the speed and length of a user's stride in real time, says Dr. Zanotto. Runners could use SportSole to get real-time feedback on their techniques and compare their performances to those of top athletes. Dr. Zanotto wants to make the product available to consumers by mid-2023.
SportSole could also help diagnose neurological disorders that affect motor functions, quantify the efficacy of medical treatments, or reduce the risk of accidental falls among the elderly by flagging haphazard step patterns, he says. "You want to be able to capture subtle changes in those gait parameters," Dr. Zanotto says. The technology is currently being used by researchers at Stanford and Columbia universities to monitor children with motor disorders and will soon be used at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston to help with physical therapy for Covid-19 long-haulers, he says.
An In-Home Recycling Center
Tossing a container in the wrong recycling bin is enough to spoil a whole batch of material, according to the Environmental Protection Agency. New home appliances could help solve this problem.
Lasso, a California-based startup, has raised $1.6 million to develop a smart bin that sorts, cleans and recycles a household's used materials. Users load metal, plastic and glass items into a "sensing chamber" where an AI-powered camera and infrared sensors sort them by material. The appliance then steam cleans containers and sends them to a grinder where they are processed into plastic flakes, crushed glass and metal shreds.
Users will be able to dispose of the recycled material by arranging between three and eight pickups a year by Lasso's collection teams, says Aldous Hicks, the company's chief executive. Future versions of the robot could process plastic films, paper and cardboard, and, eventually, organic materials including food scraps.
Units are set to go on sale in 2024 and be sold at around $3,500, Mr. Hicks says.
Credit: By Benoit Morenne
