Baidu Inc. is a company in transition, driven by Qi Lu, who joined the Chinese tech giant as its president earlier this year. Baidu, which rose to prominence as a search engine, has stumbled in recent years as it tried to expand into additional online services, and its profits have fallen.
Mr. Lu's plans to turn Baidu around include a big investment in artificial intelligence for the development of new technologies for search and other businesses -- including driverless cars, a technology where Google, the acknowledged leader, has a big head start. Mr. Lu announced in April that Baidu will open its self-driving car technologies to others, on a platform called Project Apollo, to help develop autonomous vehicles.
At last week's D.Live conference in Hong Kong, Mr. Lu discussed his vision for Baidu with The Wall Street Journal's China technology columnist, Li Yuan. Edited excerpts of their conversation follow.
MS. YUAN: Baidu has had a pretty tough year. How are you going to move the company forward?
MR. LU: The focus is always on driving innovation that leads to a better user experience and better overall economics [for the company]. On the user experience side, our focus is multifold.
One is adding more and more and better and better content as part of search's scope. For example, video, particularly the emerging short form of video. It can be an extremely powerful new medium, to transfer information, to communicate.
And the second is to make the user interactions richer and better. Because the inspiration for a user to search never came out of the blue. The reason you're searching for something is because you have a purpose in mind, you want to accomplish something. You want to listen to a song. You want to ask a question. You want to study.
We want to bring the user a lot closer to the [subject]. So that, for example, if you want to listen to a song, you can play the song. You can watch a movie, watch video clips -- interacting with the services directly.
MS. YUAN: But the problem now is that people increasingly rely on social media for information. And people don't search as much as before. How are you going to tackle that?
MR. LU: I do not agree with your premise. Social media is a great product. However, having said that, each social-media product is a proprietary, closed information ecosystem. That's number one.
Number two, the digital universe is expanding at such a vast pace, it will outstrip any social media, any proprietary closed world. And users, our interests, our needs are long-term. This is why search succeeded -- it never ends. If you blend these two, there's people always seeking more information.
The key is the search experience needs to be better. What search brings the user, the interaction needs to be richer. We want to enable every human being to easily discover access to anything they care about.
MS. YUAN: Baidu and Google, who's going to have a driverless car on the street first?
MR. LU: First of all, let me describe what I think is the state of the driverless-car industry. There's a bunch of companies in that space. And I believe Baidu is among the tier-one companies. And I believe Google is substantially ahead against everybody else. They started earlier and I have huge respect for Google as a company. They did a great job developing that technology.
Second, the technological foundation of a driverless car has lots and lots of components. It's a high-barrier business, because the depths of technology you need to develop is enormous.
Start with perception. Because to be able to perceive the road, the driving environment, as of today, you need to use Lidar, radar, cameras, a combination of sensors, fuse them together. And then you need to do mission-critical predictions about cars. Which cars are maneuvering and at what speed? How to prime our vehicles to maneuver in those environments? It's called planning control, and there's many different aspects of it.
If we're to take a perspective three years from now, five years from now, what's the determining factors -- who will be ahead in five years? The deciding factor is the speed of iteration [or developing software].
It's about writing software that learns. Data and algorithm and iteration is the game. The speed of iteration is everything.
I announced Project Apollo April 19. This is the key: Apollo is an open platform. It's open software, open services and open capability. We are going to open up our code. We're going to open up our capabilities for critical [proprietary technology] -- very high-barrier [technology], very hard for any company to develop, it needs time to accumulate. That's number one.
Number two, by design, the Apollo is an ecosystem, with OEMs [original-equipment manufacturers], with tier-one suppliers, with any service providers. Because the name of the game is for people to participate and collaborate. Imagine, the ecosystem on any given day would drive more roads, see more situations. The ecosystem algorithm can turn around at a much faster pace than any single closed company. If you take that perspective, I would make a case that in three years or in five years, the ecosystem -- not Baidu as a company -- the ecosystem of Apollo will be ahead of any single closed endeavors by one company.
MS. YUAN: Can you tell us who are going to be the OEMs who will be under Apollo and who are the startups, and why they want to be on this? Because I've talked to many industry people and they just don't believe that the big OEMs want to be on an open-source platform; first-tier startups want to be on this platform.
MR. LU: We will announce in the first week of July the number of partners that will participate. The feedback has been genuinely positive. Because this is genuinely win-win. Baidu's going to make money in areas we're good at -- algorithms, data -- we're not getting into their space. We're not a disrupter. We want to empower the OEMs. They will have access to technology. They can innovate at a faster pace. They can have better products to the market.
Credit: By Li Yuan
