London
-- A CENTENARY TRIBUTE
Alan Turing (1912-54) is best known as one of the Bletchley Park codebreakers who hastened the Allied victory in World War II by cracking the German Enigma code. But when only 24 years old, he made a hugely important contribution to mathematical logic, lobbing a bombshell into the philosophical discussion of whether any formal system of mathematics more complicated than arithmetic could be both consistent and complete, and whether there was any way to decide the issue.
Part of his argument was a thought-experiment imagining the universal "Turing Machine," a machine that can prove anything that is computable and then halt. Crucially, Turing proved that there is no algorithm for telling whether any given machine would stop, and that therefore the foundations of mathematics cannot be shown to be solid. The Universal Turing Machine is central to the theory of computation, and Turing is often considered a founder of computer science and artificial intelligence-the principles behind today's laptops and smartphones.
His centenary year begins this week and a yearlong exhibition, "Codebreaker: Alan Turing's Life and Legacy," opened yesterday at London's Science Museum.
Turing designed the circuitry for early electronic computers himself. One, a huge machine in the center of this exhibition, solved the mystery of a 1954 passenger airline crash-the damaged fuselage is also on display, along with several Enigma machines, films, models and other clues to Turing's colossal creativity.
Turing was gay. After the war, he was convicted of "gross indecency" and sentenced to chemical castration with estrogen. On June 7, 1954 he took his own life by eating an apple laced with cyanide.
The exhibition's curator, David Rooney, feels Turing's work was motivated by the death in 1930, aged 18, of a brilliant school friend; that event, he says, "focused Turing's complex ideas about intelligence and the mind." A display of letters to his friend's family shows that though Turing became an atheist because of the death, he grappled with the near-contradictory idea that "when the body dies the 'mechanism' of the body holding the spirit is gone and the spirit finds a new body."
An online petition for a posthumous pardon for Turing won't make up for what civilization lost by his death.
Until July 31, 2013
Credit: By Paul Levy
