Fashion insiders are tackling a mammoth creative challenge: transforming the runway show for the post-pandemic era and beyond.
Coronavirus halted the extravaganzas, where dozens of guests would perch shoulder-to-shoulder for a peek at new collections. Even as lockdowns lift, social distancing and safety protocols have designers and producers discussing shows that combine video, artificial intelligence and virtual reality with real models and physical locations. The new formats play to audiences watching online, rather than crammed into glitzy venues. The virtual events might be less expensive to produce and cast a smaller carbon footprint than in-person shows. The question is whether they can generate the same excitement -- and sales -- of traditional events.
Fashion shows have been a marketing bonanza for the estimated $310 billion global personal luxury goods industry. With buzzy stars in the front row and Instagram-famous models on stage, a brand can turbocharge its presence on social media and in magazines. In September, Jennifer Lopez's surprise turn on the catwalk at the Versace show blew up online.
Italian clothier Ermenegildo Zegna, Giorgio Armani, New York-based label Pyer Moss and fashion-week organizers have come up with alternatives for when the industry's calendar resumes with a digital-only London Fashion Week in June followed by Paris in July.
Zegna, known as the suitmaker of Wall Street executives and high-profile men, will be among the first big brands to hold a post-lockdown show. It will combine live models, digital technology and cinematography, said Zegna's artistic director, Alessandro Sartori, who described the July 17 presentation as a "phygital" event.
"Due to the rules, we cannot have an audience," Mr. Sartori said. "We will have a live part with real models and there will be a part that is prerecorded and we will fuse the two." Viewers will be able to watch the show online.
Preparations at Zegna's Milan studio involve new procedures for the house, which is celebrating its 110th anniversary this year. Models are quizzed on possible exposure to Covid-19 and submit to temperature checks before fittings and photography shoots. Zegna employees wear visors, masks and gloves when working with models, who wear masks and gloves. Clothes are disinfected after models try them on.
The Zegna show will be held during Milano Digital Fashion Week, the Italian Fashion Chamber's response to the crisis. Scheduled for July 14-17, the event will feature digital fashion shows and videos highlighting men's collections and some women's and men's pre-collections, the gap-fillers between spring and fall. Zegna is creating extra video content for the show, which can be seen on its website and social-media outlets. The material will include interactive elements, Mr. Sartori said. For example, models and clothes will be shot at different angles so viewers can zoom in on details. Mr. Sartori hopes that will inspire shoppers to linger online just as at the end of Zegna's live shows, models would stand still and guests could get a closer look at the clothes.
In late February, Giorgio Armani filmed its women's show in an empty theater and broadcast it online as Covid-19 cases began to emerge in Italy. On May 6, the company said it plans to hold shows for its Giorgio Armani and Emporio Armani labels in September. The format is being determined.
In lieu of a catwalk show, Pyer Moss recently said it would premiere a feature-length film in September at drive-ins in the U.S. Locations are being worked out. The type of cinema is a nod to social distancing by a brand known for using film and live music in its presentations. Titled "American, Also," the movie documents the two years leading up to Pyer Moss's concert-style runway show in 2019 at Brooklyn's Kings Theatre.
Pyer Moss designer Kerby Jean-Raymond said the label hopes the experience "will show that we appreciate fashion as an art form and communication tool that we've used to embolden a community around us." After screenings across the country, the label will release the film online.
Runway designer and events producer Alexandre de Betak, said he doesn't expect big shows with live audiences to return until 2021 at the earliest. People are wary of crowds, he said, and companies won't be spending as much to fly in editors, buyers and celebrities. Mr. de Betak is among those calling for shows to be more sustainable.
"We're working on a lot of alternatives, different formats, different ideas and it's very exciting," said Mr. de Betak, whose clients have included Dior, Jacquemus, Michael Kors, Saint Laurent and Zegna. "The shows for September and October which we are working on will be a mix, some being only digital content, or a hybrid, where there could be a little bit of an audience, or maybe no audience but still a live show."
The pandemic accelerated a push under way long before the crisis to reinvent the fashion show. Some editors, retailers and designers had assailed traditional shows as dated and not timed to when clothes were in stores.
In response, Ralph Lauren, Balenciaga and other labels amped up the entertainment factor, mounting spectacles that were Instagram catnip. Brands experimented with videos, movies, plays and happenings rather than traditional shows, with mixed success.
Those experiments "have been a nice way to shake it up, of doing something different that garnered attention and more publicity, but my experience has shown for the most part, in another year, they're back on the runway," said Fern Mallis, who created what became known as New York Fashion Week in the 1990s.
So far, nothing has replaced runway shows, which have been "a proven way of showing fashion and a designer's vision for decades, many, many decades," said Ms. Mallis, a former executive director of the Council of Fashion Designers of America and now a consultant. "That's what the industry is wrestling with right now."

Credit: By Ray A. Smith
