Companies in New York City that use artificial intelligence and other technology to make hiring, compensation and other human-resources decisions would face tighter restrictions under a bill introduced Thursday.
Some lawmakers say they want to make sure workers are treated fairly as companies increasingly use technology to automate everything from sorting through resumes to interviewing potential hires. A new bill proposed by Councilwoman Laurie Cumbo, a Brooklyn Democrat, would ban the sale of these automated tools unless the software had been audited for bias.
Elected officials and activists have become increasingly concerned that bias is embedded in many artificial-intelligence technologies. A recent government analysis of facial-recognition algorithms by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, for example, found that most are far more likely to misidentify Asian- and African-Americans compared with white people.
Councilwoman Alicka Ampry-Samuel, a Democrat from Brooklyn who is co-sponsoring the bill, said discrimination in the workforce isn't a new problem, and lawmakers want to make sure technology is helping rather than exacerbating it.
"If companies are using this type of technology, we want to make sure that the tools that they are using are used in a way that really speaks directly to the reduction of discrimination and bias," she said in an interview.
The proposed legislation would prohibit the sale of automated tools used for hiring or other employment decisions, such as compensation, unless they had passed an impartial antibias test within the past year. The bill also would require employers to notify job applicants within 30 days if their candidacies were assessed using automated technology.
City officials say artificial intelligence and other automated technology is becoming more widely used across industries, including financial services, health care and media. New York-based AI and machine-learning firms received $2.3 billion in venture-capital funding last year, according to data firm PitchBook.
AI developers need to think about diversity and inclusion from the very beginning, starting with the data they use, said Karen Bhatia, senior vice president of initiatives at the New York City Economic Development Corp. If a tech company is building an automated hiring tool but only uses data compiled from the resumes of white, male tech employees, then the algorithm could overlook women or minorities as it sorts through applications, she said.
Ms. Bhatia said job applicants should be aware that artificial intelligence is a factor in the hiring process. "Oftentimes what you see is these technologies are being used, but those who are ultimately being impacted by it don't even know," she said.
The bill says rules and enforcement would be determined by the city's Commission on Human Rights or another agency designated by the mayor. If signed into law, the bill would take effect in January 2022.

Credit: By Kate King
