This summer schools across the U.S. have adopted new policies to curtail student smartphone use. From Los Angeles to Fort Wayne, districts are instituting bans on internet-connected devices during the school day. These changes should free up students to focus on learning and engage in the real-life social interactions that are crucial to healthy development. They should also help address the mental-health crisis among adolescents.
But just enacting new smartphone policies isn't enough. This fall, students will walk onto campuses that feel different: no more furtive texting under desks, no more swiping or commenting or liking between classes, no more ignoring friends to scroll through virtual feeds. They are going to need help adapting. To make good on the promise of smartphone bans, educators and parents will need to help students reset and reconnect with each other without screens.
-- Talk to students about the reason for these limits.
Given that phones are a constant companion for most teens, these changes will likely feel unsettling to them. Adults might help students reflect by posing questions such as: What about this change makes you nervous? What do you think you'll miss the most? Do you see an upside in limiting your phone use while at school?
By naming their fears and feelings, students can become more self-aware about their smartphone habits, which is an essential step toward using these devices more responsibly. These conversations can also give adults more empathy, letting them see how dramatically these shifts in policy may affect the adolescent experience.
Ideally, these discussions will also prompt larger questions -- for students and adults -- about the role that technology plays in our lives: where it is practical and where it is pernicious, when it helps us move forward and when it holds us back. Adults need to share research that highlight the link between smartphone use and rising rates of anxiety, depression, loneliness, bullying and distraction in school. For older students, they might broaden the conversation to consider things like generative AI, which can democratize and deepen learning but also spread disinformation and exacerbate bullying.
Fundamentally, it is the job of parents and educators to patiently explain that these tools offer both benefits and risks, so some guardrails are necessary. Students should understand that managing their relationship with technology is a lifelong skill.
-- Reset home-school boundaries.
Parents and educators need to help children navigate being disconnected from home for much of the school day. Today's students are accustomed to constant communication with their parents: for consolation after a bad grade, advice on social drama and last-minute changes to after-school plans.
But this endless call and response often isn't healthy for young people. "When parents are in constant touch by day, the message to the child is that they are incapable of being on their own, making decisions, handling setbacks or taking risks," says Tovah P. Klein, a professor of psychology at Barnard College and author of the forthcoming book "Raising Resilience: How to Help Our Children Thrive in Times of Uncertainty." She argues that overeager parenting makes young people "less capable, less resilient in the face of challenges and less able to figure out their needs."
Concerns about contacting children in emergencies, such as a school shooting, have led parents themselves to become forceful opponents of phone bans in school districts across the country. These fears are understandable, but they should be weighed against other risks to student well-being, such as the psychological toll of social media.
School administrators need to make plain the negative effects of helicopter parenting and introduce clear protocols for communicating in emergencies. Schools and parents should see these changes as opportunities to help children stay focused in school and build the skills they need to operate independently, outside of the home.
-- Model a balanced relationship with technology.
Removing smartphones from schools should not be seen as a ban on all technology. Tutoring videos, class-messaging boards and hybrid learning arrangements all offer real benefits, and teachers are wise to embrace these tools as ways to enhance learning and encourage connections among students. Teachers should help students see such technology as a complement to classroom activities that demand a human touch, such as discussions, debates and group projects.
At home, parents can also clarify when and where tech is appropriate -- and when it is not. This might take the form of instituting phone-free times and places, such as the dinner table and bedrooms after certain hours. Some households swear by a weekly 12- or 24-hour tech detox, setting all screens aside on a Saturday or Sunday to embrace more analog pleasures, like board games, puzzles and time outdoors.
It can be helpful for parents to narrate aloud when and how they are using their devices, such as "I'm just sending this email to my boss" or "I'm reading a news article." (It isn't a bad idea to invest in some print media, too.) Adolescents are more likely to be mindful about their tech use when the adults in their lives model it first.
-- Teach face-to-face communication skills.
For adolescents who have grown up on screens, the mechanics of face-to-face communication can seem daunting. Yet these skills are necessary for their health, development and ability to participate in society, and they are teachable.
When children are forced to interact without their devices, some of these skills flourish naturally. Researchers have noticed that children are better at reading nonverbal cues at summer camps that ban smartphones. Schools that have already instituted full bans have reported more social engagement and better relationships between students.
Students also appreciate being taught how to handle social interaction. "I am riddled with anxiety, but learning discussion skills helps create a safe space to get me out of my comfort zone," said a 10th-grader in a survey done by R.E.A.L. Discussion, an organization that one of us founded to help schools teach face-to-face communication. A sixth-grader put it more plainly: "Learning discussion skills makes it so I can talk to people in the real world instead of standing there with my head down when someone is talking to me."
At home, parents can reinforce the importance and the mechanics of face-to-face interactions by engaging in screen-free conversations as often as possible, perhaps mandating them in the car or at the dinner table. It is also wise to encourage adolescents to speak clearly, make eye contact and notice things like tone as they go about their daily lives.
The generation of children rising through school today has never known a time without the delights and distractions of smartphones. The evidence is now clear that parents and educators need to help students to navigate this mixed blessing.
---
Liza Garonzik is the founder of R.E.A.L. Discussion. Claire Goldsmith is a former online learning administrator who advises schools and nonprofits on strategy and innovation.
Credit: By Liza Garonzik and Claire Goldsmith
