Fresh attacks targeted U.S. ships in the Middle East on Monday, days after the U.S. military led a round of strikes intended to blunt the capability of Iran-backed Houthi rebels to hit ships transiting the Red Sea.
Late Monday, Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps claimed an attack targeting what it called Israeli spy bases in Iraq in retaliation for Israel's killing of its commanders and allies, adding to tensions in the region about the potential for the war in Gaza to trigger an even broader regional conflict.
Earlier, a Houthi missile struck the Gibraltar Eagle, a U.S. bulk carrier, off the coast of Yemen without causing injury or significant damage on Monday, said the U.S. Central Command, which oversees U.S. military operations in the Middle East. The Houthis later claimed responsibility for the attack. Eagle Bulk Shipping, the ship's U.S. owner, didn't respond to a request for comment.
U.S. forces also detected on Monday an antiship ballistic missile fired toward the southern Red Sea commercial shipping lanes. The missile failed in flight and landed in Yemen, Centcom said.
Recent Houthi actions, initially directed against Israeli-linked vessels, have rattled global markets, upended international shipping routes and become increasingly indiscriminate. The rebels have attacked everything from boxships to tankers moving sanctioned Russian oil as the global shipping nexus complicates their ability to identify specific targets.
They vowed again Monday to continue their campaign against U.S. and international targets in the region in response to Israel's actions in Gaza. "Anyone attempting to hinder us from doing so will fail," a Houthi official said.
Nasruddin Amer, a Houthi spokesman, later said the Yemeni rebel group would expand its targeting of U.S. vessels. "The ship doesn't necessarily have to be heading to Israel for us to target it, it is enough for it to be American," he told the Al Jazeera news network.
The Houthi strikes follow what have been dozens of attacks targeting U.S. interests in the Middle East since the start of the war between Israel and Hamas in the Gaza Strip in October.
Iran's Revolutionary Guards said late Monday they had launched ballistic missiles at what they claimed were Israeli spy bases in Erbil, Iraq, in retaliation to the killing of some of their officers and allies, according to an IRGC statement carried by Iranian state media. In recent weeks, Israel has allegedly killed a top Guard adviser in Syria and senior members of Lebanon's Hezbollah and Hamas. Israel hasn't commented on the strikes.
Iraqi Kurd officials, who have denied any Israeli intelligence presence in Erbil, said the IRGC had struck a private home, killing five civilians. The strike was near the local U.S. consulate, but no U.S. facilities were impacted, according to U.S. officials. The Israeli prime minister's office didn't immediately return a request for comment.
The Houthis have launched dozens of missile and drone attacks in the Red Sea, mostly against commercial shipping, since the Oct. 7 attacks by Hamas and other militants from Gaza that prompted Israel to respond with an air and ground campaign in the Palestinian enclave.
In retaliation, the U.S. and its allies hit dozens of Houthi-controlled areas in Yemen last week in an effort to degrade the ability of the group to strike in the Red Sea.
The attacks come as Israel's defense minister said the country is close to completing its most intensive phase of fighting against Hamas in the Gaza Strip, amid pressure from the Biden administration to switch to a lower-intensity war campaign in Gaza.
The Houthi attacks on Monday followed the U.S. military's shooting down of a cruise missile fired from Houthi rebel areas toward a U.S. Navy destroyer in the Red Sea on Sunday.
Still, most of the Houthi attacks have struck ships that have no apparent connection to Israel or its allies.
In recent days, they have targeted a vessel laden with oil from the Russian port of Ust Luga, according to shipping trackers. The vessel had been owned by a British company but was bought last year by an offshore entity in the Seychelles.
Before that, a Norwegian vessel that was wrongly linked to Israel in some shipping databases was struck, according to its owner Inventor Chemical Tankers.
"The shipping industry involves such a maze of stakeholders it's difficult to assign a single nationality to a vessel," said Ami Daniel, CEO of maritime artificial-intelligence provider Windward.
Some shipowners and crews said that, to avoid attacks, they are radioing messages before crossing the Red Sea that they have no ties to Israel. The An Hai Wan, a tanker chartered by Beijing's shipping giant Cosco, sent a public radio message shortly before the first U.S.-led strike against the Houtis on Thursday saying it was manned by a Chinese crew.
"The American strikes threaten to militarize the Red Sea," Abdulmalik Al-Ajri, a member of the Houthi political bureau, told The Wall Street Journal before Monday's strikes. He warned that the escalation would pose a danger to ships unrelated to the conflict in Israel.
Around 23 ships stopped or reversed course after the intercepted attack on Sunday, but more than 90 were still sailing through the waterway toward the Suez Canal as of early Monday.
Container volumes through the Suez Canal between mid-December and Jan. 7 fell more than 60% from the same period a year ago -- from 3.3 million boxes to 1.3 million boxes as the result of the ship diversions to the Cape of Good Hope, according to data from Lloyd's List Intelligence.
Credit: By Benoit Faucon and Costas Paris
