The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed after fresh data showed the U.S. economy humming along in the second quarter.
The blue-chip index added 81.20 points, or 0.2%. The S&P 500 fell 0.5%, bringing its losses over the past three days to almost 3%, the biggest such decline since October. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite lost 0.9% after dropping 3.6% in the prior session -- its biggest decline since 2022.
The Russell 2000 index of small companies jumped 1.3%, continuing its banner stretch.
The moves continued a massive rotation that has rippled through the stock market for much of the past month, with technology titans getting hammered and relative laggards ripping higher.
Data Thursday showed the U.S. economy has remained surprisingly resilient despite higher interest rates. Gross domestic product -- the value of all goods and services produced in the U.S., adjusted for inflation and seasonality -- rose at an annual rate of 2.8% for April through June, the Commerce Department said.
That was faster than the 1.4% pace in the first quarter, and well above what economists had expected. Household spending, the main driver of the U.S. economy, rose at a quicker pace as Americans' incomes continued to rise.
Shares of energy companies, financials and smaller companies, whose fortunes tend to be especially tied to the economy, were among the biggest gainers in trading after the report. Over the past 12 trading days, the Russell 2000 has outperformed the S&P 500 by 12.7 percentage points, its largest 12-day outperformance on record.
Sebastien Page, head of global multiasset at T. Rowe Price, said he doesn't expect a recession and thinks stocks can keep doing well in coming months. "I think we could continue the rotation," Page said.
Some investors said that Wednesday's stock-market swoon marked a healthy pullback after months of major indexes going largely in one direction: up. The S&P 500 suffered its first pullback of at least 2% of 2024.
Individual companies recorded giant moves under the stock-market's surface. And some investors said they expected the bout of volatility to continue, and for major indexes to transition to a new phase marked by bigger swings. In addition to a packed stretch of U.S. corporate earnings, traders have also been parsing economic data and developments tied to the U.S. election.
Ford Motor shares plunged 18%, their biggest decline since November 2008, after the automobile company said vehicle-launch and warranty costs both weighed on profit, while its electric-vehicle business lost $1.1 billion.
Super Micro Computer, the poster child for the artificial-intelligence trade -- which has gotten crushed lately -- fell 2.2%, its ninth consecutive session of losses.
Credit: By Gunjan Banerji
