Online news in China may be heavily censored by the government, but that isn't diminishing the voracious appetite for it from China's mobile users.
Apps that use algorithms to scour tens of thousands of sources to find news and tailor feeds to individual users are the country's fastest-growing mobile segment, sparking an industrywide war to grab users' precious screen time.
Take Yang Dong, a 39-year-old construction contractor in the southern city of Shenzhen. He spends one to two hours a day on Jinri Toutiao, or Today's Top News, reading up on sports, finance and technology. Articles are curated for him by Toutiao's deep-learning computers that monitor his reading habits. Mr. Yang counts on Toutiao to update him on his favorite soccer teams.
Shen Yun, a programmer in Beijing, spends as many as three hours on the app reading international and technology news during his commute. Toutiao has learned that Mr. Shen, 27, watches videos of funny stunts before going to bed, so has some ready for him when he opens the app at night.
Successes like these have propelled Toutiao's developer, Beijing Bytedance Technology, to be valued at over $20 billion based on its latest fundraising round, according to a person familiar with the matter -- almost double its valuation of $11 billion at the end of 2016.
News apps enjoyed the highest year-over-year growth rate in June for accumulated time mobile users spent on online products. At 72.7%, it beat online travel and mobile video, the other two fastest-growing categories, according to QuestMobile, which provides mobile-internet data.
Such demand has sparked intense competition, attracting Chinese internet giants such as Tencent Holdings and Baidu, as well as five long-established news-portal sites. All are investing in machine learning to push personalized content based on thousands of data points that can include a user's location, browsing history and time spent on each article.
But news feeds in China look very different than those curated by Facebook and Google. For a start, the definition of news is broader in a nation where people largely ignore the heavily censored state media.
These news apps aggregate content not just from traditional news outlets, but also video sites, social media and individual creators.
By supplying personalized content, the apps want the users to stick around as long as possible. That way, they will be more likely to click on the in-feed ads.
While this isn't so different from the competition in the U.S. between the traditional media and the likes of Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat and Google, artificial intelligence plays a bigger role in China's online news industry as news apps fill the void in authoritative content.
Collapsing traditional media, stringent censorship, and bans on many foreign news sources mean these apps have to look far to discover content, something machines can do more efficiently than humans.
Toutiao says it has content partnerships with 20,000 traditional news-media organizations, which make up just 10% of its feed, and 800,000 new-media content creators, who are motivated and rewarded by the online traffic they attract.
Amassing 120 million daily active users since it started five years ago, the app trails only Tencent's QQ.com news-portal site. Toutiao ranks fifth among all apps in terms of total screen time, but more important, its average user spends over 70 minutes a day on it, ranking second only to Tencent's WeChat messaging app.
Toutiao booked $900 million in ad revenue in 2016, a fourfold increase from the previous year. It won't say whether it is profitable.
"We have the first-mover advantage," says Zhen Liu, senior vice president of Bytedance. Toutiao's computers have enough data to understand what users want, she says. "AI is like a child. It takes time to build up its intelligence level."
Founded by software programmer Zhang Yiming in Beijing in 2012, Toutiao approaches the news from a pure technology perspective. That is where Toutiao's success -- and some would argue its controversy -- lies.
Toutiao's algorithm led the company to an underserved market: less-educated people in smaller cities and rural areas. The app has been criticized by users, rivals and industry observers for feeding vulgar content and clickbait headlines.
Toutiao's Ms. Liu rejects the notion that its content is of poor taste, saying the algorithms can play a positive role in discovering and distributing useful content.
---
Follow Li Yuan on Twitter @LiYuan6 or write to li.yuan@wsj.com.

Credit: By Li Yuan
