Businesses are running up against a challenge social-media platforms have long wrestled with: preventing generative artificial intelligence from being hijacked for malicious ends.
Taking a page from those platforms, business-technology leaders are turning to software-based "guardrails" and human moderators to keep its use within prescribed bounds.
Intuit, the Mountain View, Calif., maker of TurboTax software, recently released a generative AI-based assistant that offers customers financial recommendations. Intuit Assist, which is available to a limited number of users, relies on large language models trained on internet data and models fine-tuned with Intuit's own data.
The company is planning to build a staff of eight full-time moderators to review what goes in and out of the large language model-powered system, including helping prevent employees from leaking sensitive company data, said Atticus Tysen, chief information security officer.
"As we go into trying to make really meaningful, specific answers around financials, we just don't know how well these models are going to do," Tysen said. "So it was important to us that we built a human into the loop."
AI models like OpenAI's GPT-4 are trained on vast amounts of internet content. Given the right prompts, a large language model can generate reams of toxic content inspired by the Web's darkest corners. That means content moderation needs to happen at the source -- when AI models are trained -- and on the outputs they churn out.
Intuit's homegrown content-moderation system, which is in its early stages, uses a separate large language model to automatically flag what it considers objectionable content, like profanity, Tysen said. For instance, a customer asking questions unrelated to financial guidance, or trying to engineer a prompt injection attack, will be automatically blocked by the system, he said. Those attacks could include tricking a chatbot into revealing customer data or how it works.
Human moderators will then be alerted to review the text and can send it to the model-building team -- improving the system's ability to block or pick up on harmful content. Intuit's customers will be able to notify the company if they believe their prompts were wrongly flagged and if they think the AI assistant has generated something inappropriate.
While there aren't yet firms that specialize in AI content moderation, Intuit is supplementing its staff with contractors trained in moderating social-media posts. Like so-called prompt engineers, AI content moderators could become part of a category of new job opportunities created by AI.
Intuit's goal is to let its moderation AI model do the bulk of the content review for its AI assistant, Tysen said, lessening the amount of toxic content to which humans are exposed. But for now, he said, generative AI isn't good enough to replace human reviewers.
Credit: By Belle Lin
