Janet Yellen's term as Federal Reserve chair expires in February 2018, providing President Trump with a unique opportunity to reshape monetary policy and improve the economy's growth trajectory. What should he look for in the next chairman?
First, the president should seek someone with a deep understanding of the American economy's dynamism -- someone who appreciates its capacity to grow and the important, but circumscribed, role of monetary policy in contributing to growth without inflation. Many observers believe the U.S. economy can't grow much faster than the anemic 2% of recent years. On the contrary, persistent stagnation is neither the experience of the past few decades nor our immutable destiny.
With lower individual and business tax rates, less burdensome regulations, federal spending restraint, and policies to better match workers' skills with labor market needs, the U.S. economy can achieve significantly faster long-term growth. Stunning advances in technologies, such as in artificial intelligence and 3-D printing, value-added manufacturing and advanced biosciences, will dramatically improve labor productivity and bolster future economic growth.
The next leader of the Fed must recognize this potential for higher productivity and be willing to establish a monetary policy that accommodates a faster-growing economy. He must not mistake more-rapid economic growth for an overheated, inflation-prone economy that needs cooling off. A Fed that made such a mistake would only perpetuate the slow-growth, low-productivity, stagnant-wage economy of the past decade.
Second, the Fed chief should be able to lead the Federal Open Market Committee to a sound medium-term strategy for noninflationary economic growth. If economic fundamentals change, the chair must be willing to make policy adjustments after consultation with the board. The Fed chief needs to lead a cohesive team with common goals.
Fed governors and regional bank presidents make too many speeches these days, especially about actions that should be taken at the next meeting. Such short-termism undermines the institution's purpose. A good model for the Fed chairman and governors comes from the great baseball player Ted Williams. When asked why he rarely spoke to the press, Williams often replied that he preferred to let his bat do the talking.
Third, the Fed chairman should be a steady hand in a time of economic turbulence. Although the economy has underperformed since the end of the Great Recession, it hasn't experienced another downturn. Such good fortune is unlikely to last. The business and financial cycles have not been repealed. External geopolitical and economic events could adversely affect the American economy. Part of the Fed's job is to minimize the damage from recession. The president should find someone with the credibility, temperament and track record to respond when events turn.
Fourth, a new Fed chairman should recognize the central bank's proper relationship with the White House and Congress. The Fed's independence has been crucial to the successful development and implementation of monetary policy. It must be respected and preserved. At the same time, the Fed must resist the temptation to become engaged in credit allocation and quasi-fiscal policies that are properly the purview of the Treasury and the people's elected representatives in Congress.
President Trump should not underestimate the importance of the Federal Reserve chairman to his administration's success. Ronald Reagan recognized this in the early 1980s by strongly supporting Chairman Paul Volcker's efforts to rid the economy of inflation. The combination of the Fed's sound monetary policy and Reagan's pro-growth tax and deregulatory policies produced a remarkable legacy of growth. The times are different, but the importance of the Fed to the president's success remains the same.
Let's have a Fed chief who understands the U.S. economy's potential to grow, acts to reform the institution and works to establish a sound, pro-growth strategy.
---
Mr. Shultz, a former secretary of the Treasury and state, is a distinguished fellow at Stanford University's Hoover Institution. Mr. Cogan is a senior fellow at Hoover and author of "The High Cost of Good Intentions," published last month by Stanford University Press.

Credit: By George P. Shultz and John F. Cogan
