The coalition representing Hollywood studios and streaming services made what it believes to be its best offer to striking writers Tuesday evening, releasing the terms of its latest contract proposal in the hopes of persuading the Writers Guild of America to accept the deal.
Among the concessions the studios said they offered are a guaranteed minimum length of employment, controls around the use of generative artificial intelligence, wage and residuals increases and quarterly reports on viewing hours per title for streaming shows.
The move came after a Tuesday evening face-to-face meeting between industry executives and the leadership of the WGA. The strike is approaching its fourth month, and if a deal isn't reached soon, the 2023 to 2024 television season and many high-profile movies are likely to be delayed or scrapped altogether.
"We have come to the table with an offer that meets the priority concerns the writers have expressed. We are deeply committed to ending the strike and are hopeful that the WGA will work toward the same resolution," said Carol Lombardini, president of the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers.
The alliance, which represents major entertainment companies including Walt Disney, Warner Bros., Netflix, Amazon and Paramount, said its latest offer addresses "all of the issues" the writers identified as priorities.
A WGA spokesman didn't respond to a request for comment.
Talks between the WGA and AMPTP restarted Aug. 11, creating a sense of hope in the industry that the two sides could come to an agreement which could clear the way for a deal with the Screen Actors Guild, which went on strike in July.
Instead, frustration ensued, with both sides grumbling privately that the other wasn't committed to making a fair deal. The studios initially planned to release the details of their offer last Friday but held off in the hopes that the WGA would take the proposal to its members to vote on.
Releasing the offer means that members of the WGA -- not just their negotiating committee -- will see what the studios, streamers and networks are offering. Some members of the AMPTP hope that if their offer is seen as compelling by a significant amount of the membership, it will create tension within the union.
Credit: By Joe Flint
