After decades of pitching Netflix as a technology company that happened to distribute entertainment, executives there have lately attempted to restyle their streaming behemoth as an entertainment company that happens to rely on technology.
But don't be fooled: The proprietary technology that Netflix uses to gather and analyze data remains key to the company's success. That data is used to inform decisions about what shows and movies to produce, whether to renew them, and whether to share them with any given viewer through the company's famous recommendation algorithms.
Netflix already shares some of this data privately, with those who make its content, and in the form of public weekly top-10 lists, says a Netflix spokeswoman. Depending on how the simultaneous strikes by Hollywood writers and actors go, the company, and its many imitators, may have to share more.
That's because, in the age of streaming, answering the question of how actors and writers should be compensated depends on this data, and how the company uses it to calculate whether a show was a good investment.
When residuals come up in the context of a contract negotiation, such as the one at the heart of the current Hollywood strikes, what's really at stake is data, and who possesses it, says Michael Wayne, an assistant professor of media and creative industries at Erasmus University in Rotterdam.
The Writers Guild of America and SAG-Aftra, the actors' union, didn't respond to requests for comment.
Wayne points to "House of Cards," Netflix's first big original series. Even 10 years after its debut, it still has value for the company, but how much isn't clear.
"As long as people who are making content for Netflix don't know the value of their labor, Netflix has an advantage at the negotiating table," says Wayne. "Data is central to this."
Netflix has in the past few years begun sharing more data with producers, according to a spokeswoman for the company, and a letter Netflix sent to a U.K. parliamentary committee in 2019. This data includes how many people started a series or movie in its first seven and 28 days on the service, and also how many completed it in that time.
Hollywood talent might hope to change this situation. But the current reality is that, beyond these limited disclosures, Netflix has no incentive to be transparent about its proprietary internal data, says Marshini Chetty, an associate professor of computer science at the University of Chicago who has studied how the company gathers data.
Netflix's ability to use data has helped it in the streaming game of retaining subscribers with original content, without breaking the bank.
A recent California law offers a peek into Netflix's data gathering and how it might be able to use that to its advantage with both streaming rivals and its talent negotiations.
The California Consumer Privacy Act, which took effect in 2020, requires companies to provide customers, on request, with the data it has about them. Doing so with Netflix reveals data with a surprising level of granularity, says Brennan Schaffner, a computer-science Ph.D. student at the University of Chicago.
That data includes "detailed accounts of every piece of content you've engaged with since you created your account," says Schaffner, including how long you watched, where you were when you watched, and what devices you used. Netflix also has unprecedented insight into what led you to watch something in the first place, in the form of detailed records of how you navigated the service's menus, and what you clicked on.
Netflix has explained that this data powers its recommendation algorithm. The company has also alluded to this data in past discussions about how it tests different versions of previews, thumbnails and other content.
One window into how Netflix uses data is to look at how the company decides what to renew.
On average, a show on a traditional broadcast or cable network that gets renewed goes to six seasons, says Olivia Deane, a senior analyst at Ampere, an analytics company that gathers data on media and entertainment.
At Netflix, however, shows typically only get renewed for a total of three seasons.
This suggests that titles that go beyond their third season have limited utility in terms of both attracting and retaining subscribers, says Deane.
Netflix's ongoing commitment to scripted shows -- in the last quarter, scripted titles represented two-thirds of the shows Netflix decided to renew -- suggests that the company has found that they return their investment in terms of attracting and retaining subscribers.
Given that scripted titles cost far more to produce than unscripted ones like reality shows and documentaries, this shows that Netflix's advantages in data -- which the company has said give it more confidence that audiences will show up for the company's content -- continue to pay off.
Netflix, a bellwether for the entire streaming industry, is hardly the only streaming company to operate in this way. Leaders at competing services have talked about how they use data to make decisions about what to produce. As more of these streaming services explore offering an ad-supported version, gathering this kind of data becomes mandatory, so they can provide advertisers with viewership information.
Now more than ever, series and films are expensive. This is all the more reason to have AI to inform the decision to commission them, as Netflix's own engineers explained in a 2020 blog post about how the company uses machine learning. That AI can be fed information about what titles are comparable to a proposed one, and what audience size to expect, and in which regions.
The more data Netflix has to feed such an AI, the better the results it will issue. As we've seen with the enormous volumes of data fed into today's generative AIs, sheer scale can yield surprising and useful new capabilities.
Credit: By Christopher Mims
