[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Best Buy is ready for the AI revolution, and so are its investors. What about its customers?
The retailer's shares, which surged 13% on the day it reported earnings last week, have kept rising and are up 21% since its investor call. Artificial-intelligence hype caught on after Best Buy's executives called out innovation in the latest crop of laptops.
Best Buy holds roughly a one-third retail market share of the U.S. computing industry, according to the company. Laptops account for 20% to 25% of its sales, according to a report from Citi Research. Citi went from assigning a "sell" rating on the stock at a $67 target price to a "buy" and a $100 target, citing green shoots in laptop sales trends and the current innovation cycle.
Best Buy executives said last week that the company has 40 new laptops in its lineup, out of which 40% are exclusive to Best Buy. They are made by Microsoft, Dell, HP, Lenovo and Samsung and incorporate Microsoft's new Copilot+ system, which has built-in AI functions. The products are available for preorder on Best Buy's website and will be available on June 18.
Other products driving excitement include Apple's newest iPads, which are equipped with powerful chips that enable AI, as well as Bose's new open-ear headphones and Sonos's debut headphones due to go on sale on Wednesday. Best Buy thinks these launches could whet consumers' appetite for an upgrade and help push average purchase prices up, especially during the important back-to-school season.
There are some encouraging, but not fantastic, early signs. Best Buy Chief Executive Corie Barry said new iPads are selling well and are contributing to improved sales trends in the current quarter. She said preorders on the new Copilot+ laptops were outpacing early expectations "just a bit, not massively."
It remains to be seen whether inflation-pinched consumers are willing to shell out more than $1,000 for laptops for functions that can be found elsewhere online, such as summarizing long documents or real-time translation.
The main draw is that consumers can summarize or translate more quickly and securely, without having their data exposed in the cloud.
Best Buy might have been ready for an upgrade cycle anyway. The retailer logged eye-watering growth during the pandemic as cash-rich, homebound consumers upgraded their home office setups. But that was followed by 10 consecutive quarters of comparable sales declines in its core U.S. business. Domestic comparable sales were still down 6.3% in its latest quarter ended May 4.
Consumers might finally be caving in and replacing their laptops: Year-over-year comparable sales in that category returned to slight growth over the past two quarters. If new product launches at least attract more foot traffic to its stores, it could be a good thing for Best Buy's overall business.
Can it take full advantage of this AI product excitement, though? Industry analysts note that Best Buy tends to get an extra boost whenever there is an innovation cycle in computing.
Nonetheless, the retailer has been losing market share over the past few years. This could partly be because consumers are consolidating trips to big-box retailers such as Costco or Walmart. But it is also possible that the in-store experience has worsened: Best Buy has cut its labor force by nearly one-third over the past four years. Another point of concern: Appliance sales have been very weak and there isn't a clear path of recovery given that fewer people are moving homes and upgrading them.
After the recent run-up, Best Buy's shares trade at about 0.45 times forward-12-month sales, 18% more expensive than they averaged during the five-year period leading up to the pandemic. That is a big premium for an AI upgrade cycle that isn't yet a sure thing.
Credit: By Jinjoo Lee
