OpenAI is leasing its first office in New York City, raising property owners' hopes that the budding artificial-intelligence industry will develop a bigger appetite for office space.
The maker of ChatGPT reached an agreement this month to rent 90,000 square feet in Manhattan's landmark Puck Building in the trendy Soho neighborhood, according to people familiar with the matter.
In September, OpenAI leased an entire six-story tower in San Francisco's Mission Bay neighborhood. That marked the city's largest office lease so far this year. The company also subleased two San Francisco buildings from Uber Technologies about a year ago. It is expected to announce additional offices opening soon.
Other big AI companies such as Anthropic and Palantir have also been gobbling up space in New York, the Bay Area, Denver, Atlanta, and Seattle.
After a painful period of rising vacancies, rent reductions and transactions at fire-sale prices, the office market has been showing signs of stabilization and leasing picked up in some cities, including New York, during the third quarter.
Emerging demand from a fast-growing corner of the technology industry offers another positive sign after many larger tech companies have been reducing office space this year.
"AI isn't going to be a silver bullet [for the office market,]" said Jacob Rowden, head of office research for JLL, a commercial real-estate services firm. "But it's part of the broader recovery story."
Leasing by AI businesses is particularly strong in San Francisco, the city hardest hit by the remote working trend. AI businesses have leased about 5 million square feet in San Francisco, or more than 5% of the city's total office space, according to JLL.
Overall, AI companies have signed 57 office leases in San Francisco this year, JLL said, and 40 of those are from small and midsize companies taking office space for the first time.
Demand for space is coming both from companies that are focused primarily on AI and companies such as Google, Microsoft and Apple that are investing heavily in AI.
The volume of space leased for AI "could quadruple in size in the next six years," said Chris Roeder, the head of brokerage at JLL's San Francisco office.
New York's 140-year old Puck Building, named after the satirical Puck magazine, is owned by Kushner Cos. Founder Charles Kushner is the father of Jared Kushner, who was the company's chief executive before stepping down to work for his father-in-law, then-President Donald Trump.
OpenAI was familiar with the Puck Building partly because it also houses Thrive Capital, a venture-capital firm that just led a $6.6 billion funding round for the AI company. Thrive was founded by Jared's brother, Joshua Kushner.
Credit: By Peter Grant
