International Business Machines Corp. had gains in its hardware and artificial-intelligence divisions in the third quarter but overall profit and sales declined, a sign the company's drawn-out transformation still has a way to go.
Revenue fell 0.4% from a year earlier to $19.2 billion, a minor drop but enough to make it the 22nd consecutive quarter of year-over-year declines.
Still, revenue from the hardware division, which rolled out new mainframe computers over the summer, marked its first gain from a year earlier since 2015.
Profit fell 4.5% to $2.73 billion. Margins narrowed overall and in most business units, though progressively less since the start of the year -- a hopeful sign of stabilization.
IBM's results were buoyed by currency-exchange rates that, according to David Grossman of Stifel, worked in the company's favor for the first time since 2011. IBM makes roughly half its sales outside the U.S.
"We said we'd have a better second half than first, and we did a bit better on the revenue line," IBM Chief Financial Officer Martin Schroeter said in an interview. "We're well-positioned to deliver exactly what we said in the fourth quarter."
Wall Street agreed, sending shares of Big Blue up 5.4% in after-hours trading after finishing off slightly at $146.54 during the regular trading day. The stock had fallen 12% this year, compared with the S&P 500's gain of 14%.
IBM is trying to transition from older, shrinking businesses such as building and maintaining technology on customers' premises to higher-growth operations such as delivering pay-as-you-go services over the internet.
The company has placed big bets on emerging technologies such as its Watson AI platform and blockchain, the networked ledger at the heart of digital currencies such as bitcoin.
The newer businesses IBM calls strategic imperatives, which include cloud computing and Watson-driven applications in health care and finance, grew 11% to $8.8 billion. Cloud revenue rose 20% to $4.1 billion.
Strategic imperatives are the crux of IBM's prospects for transformation. Those newer businesses accounted for 45% of total revenue in the past 12 months, up 2 percentage points from a quarter ago, and are approaching the mark where they could push the company back to growth.

Credit: By Ted Greenwald
