WASHINGTON -- Lawmakers are moving to stanch the flow of U.S. technology to foreign investors, creating potential problems for a number of American companies that have bet big on partnering with China.
The Senate and House, with the backing of the White House, are working on bipartisan legislation to broaden the authority of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S., a multiagency body that has oversight of deals that could lead to the transfer of sensitive technology to rival countries. The current CFIUS statute doesn't single out any country, but in recent years, the committee has often been focused on deals involving China.
Currently, CFIUS can recommend the president block foreign entities from buying majority stakes in U.S. companies; the new bill would let the committee make similar recommendations for deals involving minority investments and joint ventures, along with transactions that it determines involve "emerging technologies."
The scope of the proposed legislation is broad. China requires foreign investors to form ventures with local partners, and Washington law firms say they are receiving a surge in inquiries over what it might mean for the large number of U.S. firms active in China.
It isn't clear how broadly the new law would be enforced. For now, the most vocal corporate opponents are a handful of U.S. companies that have determined the new law might crimp business prospects by requiring companies to get the blessing of CFIUS for some joint ventures that involve shared U.S. technology.
IBM Corp., for instance, last year agreed with China's Wanda Internet Technology to share the cloud computing technology used in its Watson artificial intelligence system. Behind the strategy is the belief that embedding IBM's technology in China's business infrastructure would steer Chinese customers toward IBM as they seek future growth.
Other large U.S. corporations, from General Electric Co. to Microsoft Corp., see China as a crucial market for similar reasons.
IBM, among others, has said the bill -- known as the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act -- would hurt U.S. companies' ability to compete globally. "Foreign competitors that do not face similar regulatory restrictions will seize global market opportunities while American companies are left watching from the sidelines," IBM's vice president of government and regulatory affairs, Christopher Padilla, testified at a recent Senate hearing.
Supporters of the bill, who think it could be signed into law later this year, aren't convinced. "I am concerned that some of the recent witnesses before the House and Senate have major financial conflicts of interest that prohibit an objective evaluation of the security threats we face,"Rep. Robert Pittenger (R., N.C.) -- one of the drafters of the bill -- said in an email.
IBM and other opponents, while acknowledging national-security concerns, have suggested existing export controls to counter China rather than expanding the reach of CFIUS. IBM didn't respond to requests for comment.
In an email, GE said while it supports the idea of changes to CFIUS, "it's also important that any reform support America's historical leadership in attracting foreign investment, not duplicate existing and well-established export control regimes, and preserve the ability of American companies to compete globally." The company declined an interview. Microsoft declined to comment.
---
Kersten Zhang and Ted Greenwald contributed to this article.

Credit: By Heidi Vogt
