The world constantly surprises, and who would have thought that Japan would buck the developed world trend and become more welcoming to immigrants? Yet that's what Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's Liberal Democratic Party is doing as it confronts an aging society and a national labor shortage.
Companies are desperate for workers as Japan's economy pushes into its seventh year of growth. The population shrinks by more than 300,000 a year due to a low fertility rate, and a tightening labor market has reduced unemployment to 2.4%. According to Tokyo Shoko Research, bankruptcies due to staff shortages doubled between 2016 and 2017.
The Japanese Diet's lower house passed a bill last week that would offer low-skilled foreign workers a new visa under which they could work for five years. The Ministry of Justice estimates up to 345,000 newcomers would arrive during the program's first five years on top of the 1.3 million foreign workers already in Japan.
The visa would cover workers in 14 industries including an estimated 53,000 in restaurants and 36,500 in agriculture. Another 60,000 foreign nursing assistants would gain admission. Japan faces a particularly acute shortage of nursing workers as its population ages. About 28% of Japanese are 65 or older compared to 16% in the U.S.
Many lower-skilled workers are now on training visas that don't allow them to switch jobs even if they are abused or underpaid. U.S. guest-worker programs have similar restrictions. Japan's new program would provide workers with flexibility to change jobs, which would put pressure on employers to improve working conditions and raise wages.
The opposition is hammering Mr. Abe for allowing more immigrants in the famously insular nation. Worries about foreign criminals abound, and also on Japanese minds is the case of the Nikkeijin -- ethnic Japanese who live abroad. Many who had been living in South America were welcomed to Japan throughout the 1990s. But during the financial crisis the government offered them cash grants to leave lest they displace native workers.
Yet there are no good alternatives to foreign workers. Efforts to bring more women into the workforce have yielded modest success with companies offering flexible hours to new mothers. But more than three quarters of women aged 25 to 39 held jobs in 2017. Artificial intelligence is a possibility, as manufacturers in Japan rely far more on robots than those in China and the U.S. But robots can't do everything.
Although bold by Japanese political standards, the proposed guest-worker expansion still may not meet the country's labor needs. One question is whether the government will treat the estimated 345,000 workers as a cap that could artificially constrain demand for labor. Stringent guest-worker limits in the U.S. have hamstrung businesses in industries from landscaping to fisheries.
The real alternative to allowing more immigration for an aging society like Japan's is stagnation and decline, and Mr. Abe deserves credit for breaking the national immigration taboo to address the labor challenge. American nativists can learn from Japan's example.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Another Cure for Japan's Shortage of Labor" -- WSJ Dec. 10, 2018)
