ZOOM VIDEO COMMUNICATIONS
ZM +8%
Zoom's latest outlook sent its stock zooming higher. The videoconferencing company forecast higher-than-expected adjusted profit this year, and plans to buy back up to $1.5 billion of stock. Zoom said increasing sales of artificial-intelligence services helped its results. The pandemic-era darling's performance has been sluggish since lockdown restrictions eased and the world transitioned back into in-person work. Zoom's positive growth expectations are dwarfed by the headier days of 2020 and 2021. For the current fiscal year, the company projected $4.6 billion in revenue, which would amount to 2% growth. Zoom shares rose 8% Tuesday.
VIKING THERAPEUTICS
VKTX +121%
A new competitor is entering the weight-loss drug arena: Viking Therapeutics. In a new Phase II study, the biotech company said its obesity medication helped patients lose up to 14.7% of their weight after 13 weeks of treatment. The drug seemed to be more effective than similar medications: Eli Lilly's Zepbound and Mounjaro, and Novo Nordisk's Ozempic. Viking will have to replicate the results in a larger Phase III study before the medication can reach the market. Viking shares surged 121% Tuesday.
SPIRIT AEROSYSTEMS
SPR +15%
Will Boeing reunite with Spirit AeroSystems? The beleaguered jet manufacturer is in talks to acquire Spirit, the supplier of 737 MAX fuselages that Boeing split off two decades ago, The Wall Street Journal reported Friday. The talks may not result in a deal. Spirit has faced scrutiny for manufacturing problems and its role surrounding the Alaska Airlines door-plug blowout in January. Boeing accounts for nearly two-thirds of Spirit's sales, with Airbus and defense companies comprising the rest. Spirit shares leapt 15% Friday.
DOMINO'S PIZZA
DPZ +5.8%
Domino's beat fourth-quarter profit expectations, thanks to strong delivery and carryout sales. Chief Executive Russell Weiner said the results were driven by improved service time and growing membership in its rewards program, Domino's Rewards. Domino's also raised its quarterly dividend by 25% to $1.51 a share and increased its stock repurchase program by $1 billion. Domino's shares gained 5.8% Monday.
MACY'S
M +3.4%
Macy's said on Tuesday that it will close about 150 underperforming locations, or about 30% of its fleet, over the next three years. Macy's also delivered its quarterly results, reporting an earnings beat. The company will focus on upgrading its remaining 350 Macy's stores, while also opening smaller versions of its namesake chain and adding Bloomingdale's and Bluemercury locations. The company also put its San Francisco flagship location up for sale. Macy's shares increased 3.4% Tuesday.
UNITEDHEALTH
UNH -2.9%
The Justice Department launched an anticompetitive investigation into UnitedHealth, involving interviews with healthcare-industry officials in sectors where UnitedHealth competes, The Wall Street Journal reported. UnitedHealth owns the biggest U.S. insurer, a drug benefits manager and a network of doctor groups. Executives have said its various units don't favor one another, and work with competitors. UnitedHealth shares fell 2.9% Wednesday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
