The world has changed, and through necessity so has the world of investing. That has given rise to something called thematic investing.
"Unfortunately, a lot of investors have built up expectations of investing returns based on the returns of the past," says Jay Jacobs, director of research at New York-based fund-management company Global X.
He points to slowing population and economic growth in the U.S. as part of the reason that investing returns in the future likely won't mirror those of the post-World War II period. "There's a growing mismatch between expectations and what is needed to reach retirement goals," he says. Put more simply, the investing ideas that worked in the past likely need to be reworked.
For some ultralong-term investors, that means looking for decadeslong themes with the potential to change the economy across traditional industry lines.
For example, now that people are living longer, aging likely will lead to "a more proactive approach to health and wellness," says Mr. Jacobs. For investors, that may mean looking for investments centered on what is expected to be the growing need and demand for specialty health services.
There also will be a huge transfer of wealth between the baby boomer generation and their children, the millennials, says Mr. Jacobs. Such a transfer will affect many industries, including tax planning, money management and real estate. The companies in those industries that can successfully woo millennials likely will do better than those that can't.
Then there is the introduction of disruptive technologies such as robotics, artificial intelligence, the Internet of Things and lithium-battery technologies, which is a theme that crosses a number of industries. Lithium is extracted by mining companies. It is used in the automobile sector for batteries and vital for powering smartphones.
If the trend continues, resource companies that specialize in these specialty minerals stand to increase their profits, and investors that bet on them could enjoy gains.
Credit: By Simon Constable
