In October, MIT Prof. Sinan Aral warned his Twitter followers that he had discovered a video of himself that he hadn't recorded endorsing an investment fund's stock-trading algorithm. In reality, it wasn't Prof. Aral in the video, but an artificial-intelligence creation in his likeness, or what is known as a highly persuasive "deepfake."
It is striking that scammers targeted Prof. Aral, considering he is a leading expert on the study of misinformation online. It also suggests that deepfake technology is now at an inflection point: Thanks to a number of free deepfake apps that are just a Google search away, anyone can become a victim of such a scam.
The term deepfake refers to the use of AI to create synthetic media (images, audio, video) in which someone appears to be doing or saying what in reality they haven't done or said.
One solution is to detect deepfakes via machine-learning methods. For instance, while deepfakes appear highly realistic, the technology isn't yet capable of generating natural eye blinking in the impersonated individuals. As such, machine-learning algorithms have been trained to detect deepfakes using eye-blinking patterns.
A better approach with a longer time horizon is media provenance or authentication systems to verify the origins of images and videos. Under such a system, every time you watch a video of, say, the U.S. president, the technology would help your browser or media-viewing software verify the source of the video. To be effective in practice, such systems would have to be widely adopted by all content creators, which will take time.
While legislation eventually may offer protection against deepfakes, the market could be quicker -- provided we, as consumers and citizens, care.
---
Dr. Hosanagar is a professor of technology and digital business at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and faculty co-lead of AI for Business.
---
The Experts are industry and thought leaders who write about topics of their expertise. You can read this full blog post and others at WSJ.com/Experts.
Credit: By Kartik Hosanagar
