[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Amazon and Meta Platforms showed their big tech peers one way to navigate a market beset with artificial-intelligence hype: Make sure everything else is really humming.
The e-commerce titan and the social-networking giant both posted strong fourth-quarter results late Thursday. The two beat Wall Street's consensus targets for both revenue and operating income by wider margins than Microsoft and Google-parent Alphabet did with their respective December quarter reports earlier in the week. That contributed to Meta and Amazon shares surging Friday, despite already enjoying major run-ups over the past 12 months. Microsoft and Alphabet fell 2.7% and 7.5%, respectively, the day after their reports.
Apple, once the biggest big tech of all, also ultimately turned in a disappointing report. The company did manage to beat Wall Street's projections for its all-important iPhone revenue, which rose 6% year over year to $69.7 billion. But sales in its Greater China segment slid 13% year over year -- the worst drop in more than three years. That seemed to confirm growing fears about the company's weakening position in that crucial market. Apple also gave a projection suggesting overall revenue for the March quarter could come in below $90 billion -- about 6% short of Wall Street's expectation. Apple's shares slid 0.5% Friday.
The irony of Apple's stock reaction is that the iPhone maker came into the latest earnings season with the lowest expectations of the bunch. Its shares were up 28% over the last 12 months -- less than half the gains logged by fellow behemoth Microsoft and the only one of the five to actually lag the Nasdaq in that time. But Apple is also the only one that derives most of its revenue from the highly cyclical hardware market. It has also notably sat out of the race over generative AI. The biggest thing Apple has going is a $3,500 augmented-reality headset that went on sale Friday. It's generated lots of press but limited developer support.
Mark Zuckerberg even managed to steal some of that thunder on Thursday. Meta's CEO credited strong sales of its Quest VR and AR headsets for boosting revenue at its Reality Labs unit 47%, passing the $1 billion mark for the first time.
More important was the company's $38.7 billion in advertising revenue. It grew by 24% year-over-year, a percentage point better than the already strong growth seen in the prior quarter. That drove operating income to $16.4 billion, beating Wall Street's target by 7%. Meta also announced its first dividend and a $50 billion stock buyback.
Amazon, meanwhile, managed to continue its recent run of sharply improving profitability, with revenue growth also pulling out of the slump it hit a year ago. North American retail margins in the fourth quarter hit their highest point in five years. Advertising revenue growth is also picking up, rising 27% year over year to $14.7 billion.
The challenge for all five of the big tech companies will be building on a year of improved sales and profit growth while also trying to live up to the AI hype that has swelled their combined market values by 68% since the beginning of 2023. Even Apple is throwing its hat into that ring, with CEO Tim Cook describing AI as something "where we continue to spend a tremendous amount of time and effort." Meanwhile, Amazon CEO Andy Jassy on Thursday called AI "an area of pervasive focus and investment" for the company.
And what an investment it will be. Amazon, Microsoft, Google and Meta had a combined $43.5 billion in capital expenditures during the fourth quarter, up 9% year over year. All four signaled that the number is going higher this year as they work to build out AI capabilities. Meta raised the high end of its projected capex range for 2024 to $37 billion -- a record sum that could even come close to matching the outlay of its much larger rival, Google.
Investors have so far signaled a willingness to go along with such spending. As Google and Microsoft showed, though, superb results today make big investments in the future a lot more palatable.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
