Earlier in the week, I chatted about hockey on the phone with Al Michaels. At least I thought it was Al Michaels. It sure sounded like Al, who has a voice smoother than a cream-colored Cadillac. I asked him a bunch of questions about the Stanley Cup, because "Miracle On Ice" Al loves his hockey, and knows more about it than I ever will. (Low bar to clear, I know. I'm trying!)
Meanwhile, Asimovian news was on the verge of dropping: Michaels was about to be formally announced as a correspondent for NBC's Summer Olympic coverage. But not as the real Al. As robot Al. More specifically, as artificial intelligence Al, or "AI Al," a nickname amusing to technologists and a nightmare for copy editors.
What's happening is this: The nerds at NBC used old NBC broadcasts, generative AI and AI voice synthesis technology and trained it to speak like Michaels -- the indelible voice of Super Bowls, World Series, and of course that little game of shinny in Lake Placid. During the Games, Artificial Al will potentially deliver millions of bespoke recaps of Olympic coverage on Peacock.
Tell NBC you love heptathlon, canoe racing and pain au chocolat, and A.I. Al Michaels will give you a daily summary in which he rhapsodizes about heptathlon, canoe racing and pain au chocolat -- all without running up a room service bill at the Four Seasons George V.
Michaels, 79, was skeptical at first. But he came around after a demo of the technology.
"It was frightening, but amazing," he told me Wednesday. "I just felt it was a chance to be a part of something that isn't necessarily going to take over, but will become a far more instrumental part of every business."
We're just getting started on this strange journey. If Hologram Harry Caray warbling "Take Me Out to the Ball Game" was Chuck Yeager breaking the sound barrier, AI Al may be Alan Shepard at Cape Canaveral. The robots are coming for everyone, including in sports, and it only makes sense they want the greatest broadcasting voices of our time.
Frankly, I think NBC should really go nuts, make some deals with network rivals and personal estates, and call all of our legends off the bench -- even those who are no longer with us.
What about an AI Jim McKay, holding down a studio with a view of the Arc de Triomphe? Or AI Chris Schenkel, bringing the old Comaneci drama to Simone Biles at gymnastics? What about Pat Summerall and John Madden doing futbol instead of football-maybe with Keith Jackson?
Whoa, Nelly!
How about AI Chick Hearn and AI Marty Glickman courtside for Dream Team basketball? That wouldn't leave much verbal room for AI Johnny Most, so how about trying a growly AI Johnny at Olympic table tennis? (Can you smoke watching table tennis? Do robots smoke?)
Like it or not, you would need AI Howard Cosell, live from beach volleyball, the 100-meter dash or surfing in Tahiti, whatever he thinks is important. He feels essential to complete the aesthetic.
"I can play that role," said Michaels, who knew Howard well. "This is Howard Cosell, reporting from beach volleyball." (Real Al does a flawless Cosell, of course.)
Yes, absolutely: A.I. delivers a thicket of existential and legal dilemmas. In Michaels's case, Al AI is Authorized Al, done with permission. Michaels insisted on having trusted associates in place to make sure the Fake Al doesn't embarrass the Real Al. He sounded optimistic his robot will do right by him.
None of this will diminish legitimate societal worries about deepfakes, fraud and copyright infringement, to say nothing of the prospects of job elimination. Many of us are nervous about tomorrow. The moment The Wall Street Journal teaches a robot to correctly spell "Antetokounmpo" and not write so many columns about European bike racing, I'm a goner.
Optimally, the robots make a case for old-fashioned human talent. Wednesday night, I listened to a sample of NBC's ersatz Al, and I can't lie: It sounded quite real. Eerie, almost. It possessed Michaels's warm timbre and cadence and nailed a brief recap of Olympic material.
Still, there's something to be said for the real thing. Even the best broadcasters make mistakes and fumble for words. Technical perfection doesn't matter. What matters is that they feel. Michaels's voice soars because he's in the room and stunned watching Malcolm Butler pick off Russell Wilson on the goal line or a ragtag group of collegians outscore the mighty Soviets. You can train AI for Paris, and even make it sound great. But Al? He's one of a kind.
Credit: By Jason Gay
