[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The persistent strength of ASML's business in China is getting awkward.
Europe's most-valuable technology company, which manufactures machines that make microchips, reported second-quarter results on Wednesday. One crucial detail: Revenue from system sales to China rose 20% on the quarter and accounted for 49% of the total -- on a par with the record share in the January-to-March period.
Export controls imposed by the Netherlands, ASML's home country, bar the company from selling its most-advanced technology to Chinese companies. That means shipments there consist of older generations of chip-making equipment.
But Washington, which wants to limit Beijing's access to chip technology that could be used by its military, still appears unhappy. Bloomberg reported early Wednesday that the U.S. wants the Netherlands and Japan, where ASML's competitor Tokyo Electron is based, to tighten their export controls.
Shares of Tokyo Electron fell 7% in Japanese trading Wednesday, and ASML's stock was down 11% in Europe. That is despite the challenges inherent in finding a diplomatic agreement. Europe has historically favored a more open approach to business with China, on which it relies for growth.
The stock declines could be related to comments made by Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump, who told Bloomberg Businessweek that Taiwan should pay the U.S. for defense. U.S. shares of TSMC, ASML's top customer, fell 8%.
ASML's results themselves were reassuring after a softer first quarter. Both sales and orders came in ahead of expectations. The company will need a strong finish to the year to meet its guidance, but everything seems on track.
Investors like the company's long order book and high margins in an industry that is investing heavily for artificial intelligence. But the longer-term outlook gets cloudier if the relationship with China changes. On 50 times earnings, the stock doesn't leave much room for doubt.
Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
