Apple Inc. said it would let Siri connect with other apps and work on its Mac computers, moves to make the voice-activated digital assistant more useful and keep pace with rivals deploying artificial-intelligence technology.
Apple announced this and other changes at its annual developers conference in San Francisco. Usually a showcase for Apple's software updates, the conference is being closely watched after the company reported its first quarterly revenue decline in 13 years, raising questions whether its best days are behind it.
Apple said its Mac operating system, which has been called OS X for the last 15 years, will be renamed MacOS, bringing back the classic name to go with iOS on iPhones and iPads, WatchOS on Apple Watches and TvOS on the AppleTV. The latest version of the operating system will be called MacOS Sierra.
But the biggest step forward for Apple would be the release of a software development kit for Siri. That could allow, for example, iPhone users to ask Siri to book a car with a ride-sharing service like Uber or Lyft.
When Apple introduced Siri as an iPhone feature in 2011, it heralded a future of people finding information or completing tasks on their devices by speaking rather than typing or tapping. That vision of Siri hasn't fully materialized, leaving the door open for other technology companies to push into Apple's turf.
Google parent Alphabet Inc., Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft Corp. have all introduced voice-activated digital assistants that rely on artificial intelligence -- technology that allows computers to understand inferences and context so they can make decisions like a human brain instead of following programmed instructions.
The company said Siri would be available on its Mac computers through the latest version of its operating system, which it has dubbed MacOS Sierra.
MacOS Sierra would be available to developers Monday, with a public beta in July. Apple will release a finished version to the public this fall.
Siri will be an app that users can pull up on a Mac, and the voice assistant will be able to search the web and answer all the same questions you can throw at it on your iPhone or iPad. But it will have some Mac-specific features, too: You will be able ask Siri to "show the files I used last week for the off site" and follow those up with contextual queries like "just the files Ken sent me."
For Apple, connecting Siri to other apps is especially important because Alexa -- Amazon's talking virtual assistant built into the Echo and its other speakers -- already does that. Through Alexa, a person can order a pizza, check a credit-card balance or see what is on television.
The fight to become the preferred digital assistant matters to Apple. If devices are increasingly controlled by voice, Apple needs Siri to be a viable and useful option or the company risks losing its grip on the hardware market.
Ahead of the conference, Apple announced changes in how it runs the App Store to address complaints from developers. It will allow more apps to charge customers via subscriptions and reduced Apple's cut of the revenue from longtime subscribers.
On Monday, Apple also introduced WatchOS 3 -- a refreshed operating system for the wearable. Rather than featuring groundbreaking new functionality, WatchOS 3 looks like an answer to frequent complaints from Apple Watch owners.
Maybe the biggest gripe any Apple Watch user has so far is speed, or lack thereof. WatchOS 3 lets apps load data in the background to speed up launches. Apple Vice President Kevin Lynch said that update will improve app loading speeds by seven times, but "it feels a million times faster."
An addition coming in WatchOS 3 is called SOS -- a feature Mr. Lynch said he hopes Apple Watch owners won't have to use. When one needs to call 911, a long press on the Apple Watch's side button will start a short countdown to call emergency services. This will work as a cellphone call using the iPhone, or a call over Wi-Fi if near a wireless network. The watch will also notify emergency contacts and share location, medical ID with the person's name, date of birth, allergies and other medical condition. The feature is available in the U.S. and internationally.
Credit: By Daisuke Wakabayashi
