WASHINGTON -- President Biden called for the largest-ever level of military spending and increased funding for law enforcement in a $5.8 trillion budget, playing down his proposals for expanding social programs in favor of backing initiatives generally favored by centrist lawmakers.
The budget, released Monday, also seeks higher taxes on businesses and the nation's wealthiest people, part of an emphasis on reducing the federal deficit that departs from last year's budget that laid out ambitious spending increases.
The shift comes as much of Mr. Biden's agenda has been stalled in Congress, which ultimately will craft the government's spending and tax plans. The Russian invasion of Ukraine, Mr. Biden's decline in opinion polls and decades-high inflation have combined to pull many Democrats toward issues they see as better resonating with voters in a midterm election year.
"Here's what this all adds up to: Historic deficit reduction, historic investment in our security at home and abroad by modernizing our capabilities in both areas and an unprecedented commitment to building an economy where everyone has a chance to succeed," Mr. Biden, a Democrat, said of his budget in remarks Monday.
Democrats have narrow control of the House and the 50-50 Senate, and Republicans have lined up against many of the administration's proposals. Democrats are facing the possibility of losing control of either or both chambers of Congress in November elections.
The administration is seeking $813 billion for military spending in fiscal year 2023, which begins Oct. 1, a roughly 4% increase from the $782 billion enacted for this fiscal year. Budget figures aren't adjusted for inflation.
The requested increase is more than double the 1.6% boost the administration sought for military spending in last year's budget. The proposal calls for $682 million to go to Ukraine to counter Russia and shore up its security and economic interests.
The proposed military spending would be the largest ever, if enacted, but it wouldn't be the biggest one-year increase when compared with some years during the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. The U.S. ended its 20-year war in Afghanistan in August.
U.S. military spending also will likely require additional long-term investments, particularly in the Navy, to stay focused on China as the larger, more strategic threat. Officials said investments in hypersonic missiles, machine learning, artificial intelligence and other military capabilities appropriate for confronting China will require billions of dollars in new investments over time.
While top Democrats cheered the Biden administration's request, some lawmakers were critical. Sen. Bernie Sanders (I., Vt.), the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee who caucuses with Democrats, said that a large increase for the military was unnecessary.
"At a time when we are already spending more on the military than the next 11 countries combined, no we do not need a massive increase in the defense budget," Mr. Sanders said.
Sen. Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the chamber's GOP leader, said the administration's proposed increase in military funding was inadequate because it doesn't keep up with inflation. He said the administration's budget overall was a failed attempt at pivoting to the political center.
"The White House is desperately spinning to call this budget centrist, but there's nothing remotely moderate about what's in it," he said, pointing to the funding increases for non-defense agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency.
In an interview, Deputy Secretary of Defense Kathleen Hicks said the assumptions about inflation might not be accurate in the next several months. "We built this budget on the absolute best inflation information that we had at the time we built it back in the end of '21," she said, adding that some provisions were built into the budget that would make it "resilient to inflation."
Mr. Biden's budget proposes $17.4 billion for law enforcement at the Justice Department, including $1.7 billion to fight gun trafficking and for other firearm-related efforts, and provides funding for the U.S. Marshals and the Federal Bureau of Investigation to address violent crime. It also calls for funding 300 additional border patrol agent positions.
Overall, the proposal seeks $769 billion for non-defense spending and the medical care program at Veterans Affairs in fiscal 2023, versus the $691 billion Congress enacted for those items in the current year.
The administration forecasts a yearly drop of roughly 50% in the U.S. deficit during fiscal 2022, to $1.4 trillion, as spending on Covid-19 relief programs wanes and a stronger economy generates more tax revenue.
The budget plans would narrow the deficit by more than $1 trillion relative to where it would stand over a decade under current law.
Mr. Biden and other top Democrats have in recent weeks talked up the party's work to reduce the deficit as they seek to win the support of Sen. Joe Manchin (D., W.Va.) for their stalled economic agenda.
Democrats are still in the early stages of figuring out how to resurrect that agenda in a way that can win the support of centrists such as Mr. Manchin, who scuttled the House version of the legislation. Mr. Manchin has repeatedly said that he will only support legislation that reduces the deficit, a step that he sees as a way to fight inflation.
Rather than lay out possible ways to overhaul the legislation, the White House budget broadly reiterates the Biden administration's goals for the bill, listing a series of policy ideas -- including free community college -- that died during talks among Democrats last year. The tax increases most likely to pass Congress soon, including a surtax on top earners, a 15% minimum tax on corporations and higher taxes on U.S. companies' foreign earnings, would be part of this revived legislation.
The budget includes a proposal for a 20% minimum tax rate on income, including unrealized gains in assets, for U.S. households worth more than $100 million. This would apply to the top 0.01% of households, the White House said. That is likely under 20,000 households.
The Biden administration would also earmark almost $82 billion over five years on preparing for another pandemic and also for biodefense, including investing in the making of vaccines.
---
Richard Rubin, Gordon Lubold and Nancy A. Youssef contributed to this article.
Generate image description

Credit: By Amara Omeokwe and Andrew Duehren
