Tom Swift and His Giant Robot
By Victor Appleton II (1954)
1. In 1956, when I was 8 years old and attending my first sleepaway camp, I began reading the Tom Swift Jr. series. The plots, concocted by a stream of ghostwriters who published under the pseudonym Victor Appleton II, were always the same: the entire human race would get into trouble, and Tom Swift Jr. would go into his basement lab and create technologies to save the day. In "Tom Swift and His Giant Robot," Tom builds a towering remote-controlled robot to maintain and repair a radioactive atomic lab. It is an ingenious solution to a daunting challenge. In his first attempt at making the robot walk, Tom "advanced the 'walking' dial on the control board a few notches. Slowly the robot lifted his right foot. The foot moved forward, paused, and came down with a crunch. Memory tapes in the control panel sent a signal to the other foot, moving it just far enough to avoid toppling the body. Step by step, the automation moved forward." Tom is cautious and incremental in his approach. As a boy, I believed that if I too could assemble mechanical parts in just the right way, I could solve any problem.
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland
By Lewis Carroll (1865)
2. Lewis Carroll wrote with improbable logic and complete disregard for rules of reason, making "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" both whimsical and baffling. Alice's ability to grow and shrink defies the laws of physics: the Cheshire Cat disappears and reappears at will; a caterpillar talks to Alice as he smokes a hookah atop a giant mushroom. In Carroll's rabbit hole, anything is possible. I can't help but think that Carroll, the pen name of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson, a mathematician, would have appreciated the math that makes artificial-intelligence models possible, and I wonder what possibilities he would have imagined for them. Alice asks the Cheshire Cat, "would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?" To which the cat replies, "that depends a good deal on where you want to get to."
The Society of Mind
By Marvin Minsky (1986)
3. Marvin Minsky's "The Society of Mind" reads like a poem written by someone who also happens to be a math expert and a computer scientist. I visited Minsky at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for the first time when I was 15. He ended up mentoring me for 53 years. In this book, written almost 40 years ago, Minsky lays out his concept of how the mind functions, offering a framework for creating AI systems that could match human thought. At the time, many considered this science fiction. Minsky challenged the traditional assumption that the brain was a single, unified entity with a central processing unit. He saw the brain as a society of many smaller, simpler processes called agents that work together to produce complex thoughts, feelings and behaviors. This is how AI's large language models work today. In 1951, Minsky created one of the first single-layer neural networks that could train computers to think like humans. Five years later, he and John McCarthy, a fellow computer scientist, coined the term artificial intelligence. Shortly before his death in 2016, Minsky told me he had come to understand that neural networks would be the key to unlocking AI's potential. "What magical trick makes us intelligent?" Minsky asks in this book. "The trick is that there is no trick. The power of intelligence stems from our vast diversity, not from any single, perfect principle."
I, Robot
By Isaac Asimov (1950)
4. Isaac Asimov wrote 90,000 letters and wrote or edited 500 books, making him one of science fiction's most prolific and influential creators. "I, Robot" includes nine stories, featuring robots that have a profound understanding of human values and are considered human themselves -- a radical shift from the typical dystopian science fiction of its day. The robots emulate humans at their best, including Herbie, who can read minds, or more accurately, read what people want to believe is true. Susan Calvin, Herbie's robopsychologist, says that "actions such as his could come only from a robot, or from a very honorable and decent human being. But you see, you just can't differentiate between a robot and the very best of humans." Asimov proposes three laws of robotics: do no harm, obey orders and preserve yourself. It isn't clear whether following these rules will be ideal for humans. He challenges us to consider whether perfect adherence to the rules can replicate true human morality. Although his ideas were imperfect, Asimov was the first to try and formulate rules that would put humanity first.
Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea
By Jules Verne (1870)
5. While many people in the late 19th century were familiar with sea life from above the water, the creatures under the surface were as mysterious as life on other planets. In Jules Verne's tale, three members of a foiled expedition to pursue a mysterious sea monster are captured by Capt. Nemo and brought aboard his underwater vessel, the Nautilus. They embark on a grand underwater adventure. Verne took contemporary technologies and imagined what they could be: an electronically powered submarine, diving suits with illuminations and communication capabilities, underwater telegraphy and electrical navigation. His novels laid the groundwork for all science fiction and his imaginative ideas broke down barriers to creating real-world advancements. "The sea is only the embodiment of a supernatural and wonderful existence," writes Verne. "It is nothing but love and emotion; it is the 'Living Infinite.'"
Credit: By Ray Kurzweil
