On a recent Friday in Boston, Randell Sanders gave a nurse two samples of his blood, plus a sample of urine and saliva. Clinicians would test some of the samples to see how he is responding to treatment for pancreatic cancer.
But samples also were sent to a lab where computers using artificial intelligence are changing the way pharmaceutical companies develop drugs.
The idea is that machines, which are adept at pattern recognition, can sift through vast amounts of new and existing genetic, metabolic and clinical information to unravel the complex biological networks that underpin diseases. That, in turn, can help identify medications likely to work in specific patient populations, while simultaneously steering companies away from drugs that are likely to fail.
In the past, drug companies have used artificial intelligence to examine chemistry -- whether a drug might bind to a particular protein, for instance. But now the trend is to use AI to probe biological systems to get clues about how a drug might affect a patient's cells or tissues.
Biological insights driven by machine learning also could help pharmaceutical companies better identify and recruit patients for clinical trials of therapies most likely to work for them, perhaps boosting the chances of those medications' getting approved by regulatory agencies such as the Food and Drug Administration.
Data from the samples produced by Mr. Sanders, 64, a U.S. Navy veteran, will become part of the database in a $17 million, seven-year study known as Project Survival, bankrolled by Berg, a Framingham, Mass., biotech firm that is one of several companies in the U.S. and Europe using AI to make drug research and development less expensive and more efficient. Mr. Sanders says he agreed to take part in the study in hopes that it might "help the next person." Intelligent machines will scour his samples and genes, along with those of hundreds of other patients, for molecular fingerprints, or biomarkers, that could later be used to help measure a specific drug's impact and to identify patients in which such a drug is likely to be most useful.
The big difference between AI-driven drug trials and traditional ones, says Niven Narain, chief executive of Berg, is "we're not making any hypotheses up front. We're not allowing [human] hypotheses to generate data. We're using the patient-derived data to generate hypotheses."
Project Survival is part of a larger research program to develop therapies with the help of intelligent machines. Other efforts to leverage AI technology in pharmaceutical research include using it to find new drugs or new uses for already approved medications, as well as speeding up clinical trials by improving patient recruitment and site selection, according to a May 2017 report by analyst Datamonitor Healthcare.
Some companies, such as Numerate Inc. in San Bruno, Calif., and BenevolentAI Ltd. in London, are developing their own molecules and licensing them to drug-industry clients. Others, such as International Business Machines Corp., Atomwise Inc. in San Francisco and Insilico Medicine Inc. in Baltimore, are forming research partnerships with universities and nonprofits or setting up AI services aimed at drug companies.
For example, Merck & Co. is using Atomwise's deep-learning technology to identify compounds that could be developed into medications for neurological conditions, according to David Rosen, an associate principal scientist at Merck Research Labs in Palo Alto, Calif. Recently, there's been growing interest in leveraging this type of AI for health-care applications, in part due to the vast improvements deep learning has enabled in applications like machine translation and computer vision, which also rely on pattern recognition.
In January, GlaxoSmithKline PLC and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, Calif., announced a partnership to use AI for pharmaceutical R&D. The consortium is in the process of securing work space in San Francisco and signing on other collaborators, according to John Baldoni, GSK's senior vice president of platform technology and science. The aim is to use AI to cut development time down to a single year, from more than 10 in some cases, he says.
In Europe, scientists are getting ready to launch a similar initiative, which will include Johnson & Johnson's Janssen Pharmaceuticals division, plus several other drug companies and academic researchers, according to several people familiar with the matter. Janssen declined to comment on the partnership.
The uptick in interest in AI is a convergence of a few forces, says Sastry Chilukuri, a partner in the pharmaceuticals and medical-products practice at the global consulting firm McKinsey & Co. These forces include the recent availability of "enormous volumes of data," advances in computing power and AI algorithms, and the pharmaceutical industry's decadelong struggle with productivity in R&D, he says.
The rise of precision, or personalized, medicine, is also putting pressure on drug developers, steering them away from a one-size-fits-all model.
"We know that the same disease is not the same in every patient," says Andrew Stern, director of novel therapeutics at the University of Pittsburgh's Drug Discovery Institute. With care becoming more individualized, markets for some drugs are likely to "be relatively small compared to what we've seen in the past with blockbusters," he says. But development costs are "probably not going to be that different" if the R&D process stays the same, he adds.
Hence the hope that AI will reduce the cost of developing new drugs. There is scant data so far to support the premise that AI will lower costs, partly because commercializing new medications takes so long and the recent move toward AI-aided biology is relatively new.
"R&D pipelines run for about a decade," says McKinsey's Mr. Chilukuri. Thus, benefits "will play out in the next 10 to 15 years," he says.
The boost in value to the pharmaceutical industry in the medium term could be the equivalent of a 5% to 10% increase in sales, Mr. Chilukuri says, though "longer-term benefits will exceed that."
Some drug developers say they're already seeing early benefits.
Janssen uses AI in "the vast majority of projects," says Hugo Ceulemans, scientific director of discovery data sciences. AI systems trained on various data sources, including preclinical data sets, have helped make "significant performance improvements" by enabling "better selections of which compounds to . . . make and test" in the lab and by "flagging" whether compounds might have "toxic" effects or "unexpected favorable" ones, he says.
At Berg, Dr. Narain says AI has helped scientists "decide which cancers we were going to go after" by helping them understand how a drug in clinical testing might work at the cellular level. Berg's system first identifies genetic and other markers among sick and well patients by drawing on detailed medical histories as well as data from scientific publications and chemical databases. It then ranks the genes, proteins or metabolites it finds according to their relevance to a particular disease, and determines when specific genes or proteins are associated with certain patient outcomes.
Such screening is "at least 50% cheaper" than traditional methods, says Dr. Narain.
Multiple hurdles must still be overcome for AI to fulfill its potential in pharmaceutical R&D. For instance, data sets, even within the same institutions, can be fragmented or stored in incompatible ways, making it difficult for machines to make sense of them unless significant efforts are made to harmonize the data, according to Olexandr Isayev, an assistant professor in machine learning at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Data privacy is also a concern, scientists say, especially given recent cyberattacks on health systems around the world.
Then, there's the drug-approval process, which requires data from animal and human experiments, making it unlikely computers will completely replace scientists soon.
The FDA encourages companies "to improve efficiency of identifying potent and safe molecules," says Peter Stein, deputy director of the office of new drugs at the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.
But, Mr. Stein adds, FDA standards for clinical trials and the drug-approval process "are not different based upon the particular discovery strategy."
---
Ms. Hernandez is a reporter for The Wall Street journal in New York. She can be reached at daniela.hernandez@wsj.com.

Credit: By Daniela Hernandez
