The newly minted Nobel laureate Geoffrey Hinton has a message about the artificial-intelligence systems he helped create: Get more serious about safety or they could endanger humanity.
"I think we're at a kind of bifurcation point in history where, in the next few years, we need to figure out if there's a way to deal with that threat," Hinton said in an interview Tuesday with a Nobel Prize official that mixed pride in his life's work with warnings about the growing danger it poses.
The 76-year-old Hinton resigned from Google last year in part so he could talk more about the possibility that AI systems could escape human control and influence elections or power dangerous robots. Along with other experienced AI researchers, he has called on such companies as OpenAI, Meta Platforms and Alphabet-owned Google to devote more resources to the safety of the advanced systems that they are competing against each other to develop as quickly as possible.
Hinton's Nobel win has provided a new platform for his doomsday warnings at the same time it celebrates his critical role in advancing the technologies fueling them. Hinton has argued that advanced AI systems are capable of understanding their outputs, a controversial view in research circles. "Hopefully, it will make me more credible when I say these things really do understand what they're saying," he said of the prize.
Hinton's views have pitted him against factions of the AI community that believe dwelling on doomsday scenarios needlessly slows technological progress or distracts from more immediate harms, such as discrimination against minority groups.
"I think that he's a smart guy, but I think a lot of people have way overhyped the risk of these things," said Melanie Mitchell, a professor at the Santa Fe Institute, during a panel last year.
On Wednesday, other prominent Googlers specializing in AI were also awarded a Nobel Prize. Demis Hassabis, chief executive of Google DeepMind, and John Jumper, director at the AI lab, were part of a group of three scientists who won the chemistry prize for their work on predicting the shape of proteins.
Hinton shared the Nobel in physics with John Hopfield of Princeton University for their work since the 1980s on neural networks that process information in ways inspired by the human brain. That work is the basis for many of the AI technologies in use today, from ChatGPT's humanlike conversations to Google Photos' ability to recognize who is in every picture you take.
"Their contributions to connect fundamental concepts in physics with concepts in biology, not just AI -- these concepts are still with us today," said Yoshua Bengio, an AI researcher at the University of Montreal.
Hinton received the 2018 Turing Award, a computer-science prize, for his work on neural networks alongside Bengio and a fellow AI researcher, Yann LeCun. The three are often referred to as the modern "godfathers of AI."
By 2023, Hinton had become alarmed about the consequences of building more powerful artificial intelligence. He began talking about the possibility that AI systems could escape the control of their creators and cause catastrophic harm to humanity. In doing so, he aligned himself with a vocal movement of people concerned about the existential risks of the technology.
"We're in a situation that most people can't even conceive of, which is that these digital intelligences are going to be a lot smarter than us, and if they want to get stuff done, they're going to want to take control," Hinton said in an interview last year.
Hinton announced he was leaving Google in spring 2023, saying he wanted to be able to freely discuss the dangers of AI without worrying about consequences for the company. Google had acted "very responsibly," he said in an X post.
In the subsequent months, Hinton has spent much of his time speaking to policymakers and tech executives, including Elon Musk, about AI risks.
Hinton's increased activism has put him in opposition to other respected researchers who believe his warnings are fantastical because AI is far from having the capability to cause serious harm.
"Their complete lack of understanding of the physical world and lack of planning abilities put them way below cat-level intelligence, never mind human-level," LeCun wrote in a response to Hinton on X last year.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa and Deepa Seetharaman
