Meta Platforms Inc. said it would cut more than 11,000 workers, or 13% of staff, embarking on the company's first broad restructuring as it copes with a slumping digital-ad market and plunging stock price.
The layoffs add to a wave of job cuts that are roiling Silicon Valley, where tech giants that added employees by the tens of thousands through the pandemic are retrenching.
In a message to staff on Wednesday, Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said the company, the parent of Facebook and Instagram, would cut staff across all of its businesses, with its recruiting and business teams disproportionately affected. The company is also reducing its office space, moving to desk sharing for some workers and extending a hiring freeze through the first quarter of 2023.
"This is a sad moment, and there's no way around that," Mr. Zuckerberg wrote, adding that he had been wrong in assuming that an increase in online activity during the pandemic would continue. "I got this wrong and I take responsibility for that."
In a call Tuesday with hundreds of top managers, Mr. Zuckerberg said he had been overoptimistic about growth and was accountable for the company's missteps, The Wall Street Journal has reported.
The layoffs are the first broad head-count reductions to occur in the company's 18-year history and a signal of the increasing competitive and regulatory challenges facing Meta. The tech industry more broadly is grappling with rising inflation and sluggish demand from advertisers.
Meta's stock has fallen more than 70% this year. The company has pointed to worsening macroeconomic trends, but investors have also been alarmed by its spending, particularly Mr. Zuckerberg's multibillion-dollar bet on the metaverse as the next digital frontier.
In his message, Mr. Zuckerberg expressed confidence in the company's strategic direction. "I believe we are deeply underestimated as a company today," he said. "Our core business is among the most profitable ever built with huge potential ahead. And we're leading in developing the technology to define the future of social connection and the next computing platform."
Some investors have recently called for Meta to trim staff to cut costs. Meta's share price climbed 5.2% on Wednesday after the layoffs were announced.
Meta's broader cost cutting will "add up to a meaningful cultural shift in how we operate," Mr. Zuckerberg said in his memo. He said he would monitor business performance and other factors before deciding how quickly to resume hiring. He said the company's spending on infrastructure related to artificial intelligence, which can require heaving computer-processing loads, could become more efficient.
Meta also faces threats to its core social-media business from other apps such as ByteDance Ltd.'s TikTok.
On Wednesday, Mr. Zuckerberg referenced stiff competition, as well as Apple Inc.'s requirement that users opt in to tracking of their devices, which has hurt Meta's ability to target ads.
Mr. Zuckerberg has been signaling for months that more fiscal discipline is coming and at times has adopted a tough tone, saying at a June company town hall that "there are probably a bunch of people at the company who shouldn't be here."
On Wednesday, he took a softer approach, saying repeatedly in the blog post that he takes personal responsibility for the company's missteps and expressing gratitude for the contributions of the departing employees. Mr. Zuckerberg reiterated those points in two live streams on Wednesday, one for laid-off employees and another for current staffers, according to people who attended the streams.
Mr. Zuckerberg gave only limited insight in his message on Wednesday into which areas of the company would be reduced, apart from citing recruiting and business teams. People familiar with the matter said the cuts would in part affect staff with overlapping job responsibilities.
U.S. staffers who are losing their jobs will receive 16 weeks of severance plus an additional two weeks for each year of employment at the company, and their stock options set to vest in mid-November will still vest. Meta will cover healthcare costs for those affected and their families for six months, he said.
Meta reported more than 87,000 employees at the end of September. Company officials already told employees to cancel nonessential travel beginning this week, the Journal previously reported.
---
Salvador Rodriguez contributed to this article.
Credit: By Sam Schechner and Newley Purnell
