Singapore's top financial regulator has lost patience with the city-state's largest bank after repeated disruptions to its digital-banking services this year.
The Monetary Authority of Singapore on Wednesday barred DBS Group from acquiring new business ventures and making "nonessential" IT changes for six months, in effect stopping the bank from rolling out new technology initiatives until it proves its systems are in order.
DBS, which is also Southeast Asia's largest bank, has been working with customers and partners including Chinese fintech giant Ant Group and U.S. bank JPMorgan on various digital-technology projects. Those projects are expected to be put on hold following the regulator's order, people familiar with the matter said.
DBS Chairman Peter Seah said on Wednesday that senior management will be held accountable for its digital-banking disruptions and that their compensation would be affected. The bank apologized for the mishaps and said fixing the problems would be its priority.
The regulator's penalty is a blow for a financial institution that has focused heavily on digital banking under the leadership of Chief Executive Piyush Gupta, a longtime Citigroup executive who took the helm of DBS in 2009. The bank, which had the equivalent of around $553 billion in assets at the end of June, has hired more than 10,000 technology specialists and invested in artificial intelligence, cloud computing and blockchain technologies.
Its recent problems are more prosaic. During a weekend in mid-October, DBS's mobile and online-payment services went down for more than half a day. Some of the bank's automated-teller machines also went offline. DBS said at the time the outage was caused by a problem at a data center. Citibank also had some Singapore digital-banking disruptions around the same time.
The MAS told both DBS and Citi in September to investigate why they couldn't fully recover their services within a four-hour window permitted for outages, and warned it could take regulatory action.
DBS's service disruptions were the latest in a series of issues this year that have affected its online-banking services, digital payments and securities trading. The regulator earlier ordered DBS to increase its regulatory capital by the equivalent of $1.2 billion, following the "widespread unavailability" of its digital-banking services.
The regulator's latest directive for DBS requires it to stop launching new digital products or add new features to its mobile apps, digital-payment platforms or its websites unless the updates relate to security concerns.
It also prevents DBS from going ahead with new technology infrastructure for its external clients. The freeze is expected to last until April, with the potential for MAS to extend it if it isn't satisfied with DBS's progress.
Credit: By Weilun Soon and Rebecca Feng
