NEW DELHI -- As TikTok -- the wildly popular video-sharing app from China -- encounters suspicion in Washington, regulators and users are unfazed in its largest international market: India.
The app has blown up in the South Asian nation more than anywhere else outside of China. India's TikTok fans are young, new to the internet and largely unemployed. They don't have much privacy in their small homes so they have popped up in parks and parking lots across the country, shooting 15-second videos that often mimic the dominant form of entertainment in India, Bollywood.
Their enthusiasm has become increasingly critical to TikTok's prospects for continued growth, as politicians in the U.S. become concerned about the app's ties to China. To keep its momentum in India, TikTok, owned by Beijing-based Bytedance Ltd., has been investing heavily and backing government initiatives to raise its profile.
"The sheer momentum has been immense," said Sachin Sharma, director of sales and partnerships at TikTok India. "There are farmers [using the app], and there are those people who are showing off their Lamborghinis."
The app is an apt match for Indians, now getting online for the first time thanks to cheap data plans. They tend to avoid English and the typing that dominates Facebook and Instagram feeds. They are uncomfortable with searching for content or friends, so TikTok's algorithm that serves them curated clips has proven particularly potent, prompting more than 400 million downloads in less than two years.
The app has become one of China's greatest crossover hits, gaining popularity with teens world-wide. Its popularity, combined with Washington's tensions with Beijing, have made the app a target in the U.S.
America has undertaken a national-security review of TikTok, after U.S. senators expressed concerns that the Chinese-owned company was censoring content to appease Beijing, according to a person familiar with the matter.
TikTok at the time said it couldn't "comment on ongoing regulatory processes," but that it "has made clear that we have no higher priority than earning the trust of users and regulators in the U.S."
Its success in India -- where it has had close to four times as many total downloads as the 120 million in America, according to mobile-analytics firm Sensor Tower -- will help determine whether Bytedance can continue to grow and challenge for the title of world's biggest startup, with an estimated value of more than $70 billion.
"The prize for [TikTok] long term really is emerging markets, so winning India or winning markets like that is important," especially if the app is having problems in the U.S., said Ben Cavender, the Shanghai-based managing director at China Market Research Group.
On a recent Sunday, the sidewalk outside an H&M store in New Delhi buzzed with clusters of wannabe TikTok stars shooting video. They brainstormed ideas, downloaded music or movie lines, and filmed repeatedly until they got it right. Then it was on to the next video, in hopes of harvesting 15 seconds of fame.
Similar scenes play out across India, from Mumbai's Marine Drive to the Victoria Memorial in Kolkata.
In India, filming at home is difficult for most. Family often doesn't approve, and frequently three generations will share a room or two. The shopping area around the H&M store has space and cool backdrops, and is devoid of prying relatives, said 18-year-old TikTok enthusiast Shiva Chauhan.
"We get more views when we shoot at modern places," said the student, who spends three hours a day on the app. "That adds a Western feel."
In a country of 1.3 billion people, more than 40% of whom are 24 and under, all the dancing and lip-syncing has adults confused and concerned. Parents say they don't understand why their children spend so much time performing for their phones and worry it leaves them exposed.
There has been some cultural backlash. Some Hindu nationalist activists have said the service undermines Hindu values. An Indian court in April halted downloads of the app amid concern it could be used for child exploitation, but lifted its ban after an outcry from users and clarifications from the company about measures it has taken to prevent abuse.
The company has tightened its monitoring of content -- tweaking its algorithm to catch someone who looks too young or a photo that is too revealing. It has hundreds of people monitoring content in 15 Indian languages to prevent abuses. It often retrains its artificial intelligence to spot other problems that, in a country as diverse as India, can be region- and caste-specific, the company says.
A TikTok campaign known as "Wait a Sec' to Reflect" seeks to teach those new to the internet to be more careful about what they post, and the company has worked with government organizations to raise awareness about pollution, skills training and mental-health issues. Bytedance has pledged to invest $1 billion in India over the next few years.
New Delhi sees the company's troubles in the U.S. as politically motivated and not something India needs to match. While Indian regulators are formulating tougher restrictions for foreign companies concerning access and censorship, those rules aren't aimed at Bytedance alone.
Bytedance says it continues to grow in the U.S. despite concerns, and expects more growth in India. "There is an enabling environment for any company to have an India-first approach," said Nitin Saluja, public-policy director at TikTok India. "Bytedance actually wants to further make big announcements and put more investments in the country."
---
Vibhuti Agarwal and Rajesh Roy contributed to this article.

Credit: By Eric Bellman
