The future of startup OpenAI was in jeopardy Monday, as nearly all its employees threatened to quit if the board that fired its CEO, Sam Altman, didn't resign itself and restore him to power.
Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella said late Sunday that it was hiring Altman and Greg Brockman, OpenAI's president who resigned in protest after Altman was ousted, and was opening its doors to more joining from the company behind viral chatbot ChatGPT.
Some top investors were still pushing to reinstate Altman to his CEO role as of Monday, according to a person familiar with the matter. In interviews later in the day, Nadella left open the possibility that Altman could return to OpenAI in his former role, adding that his goal is to work with Altman in either scenario.
More than 700 employees of OpenAI have threatened to leave the company in a letter to the board of directors. OpenAI has about 770 workers.
One surprise signer was Ilya Sutskever, the company's chief scientist and one of the members of the four-person board that voted to oust Altman. On Monday morning, Sutskever said he deeply regretted his participation in the board's action. "I will do everything I can to reunite the company," he posted on X.
Sutskever flipped his position following several hours of intense deliberation with OpenAI employees as well as a heated conversation with Brockman's wife, Anna Brockman, at company offices, according to people familiar with the matter.
Sutskever arrived at OpenAI's headquarters Sunday night with Emmett Shear, a former Twitch chief executive picked by the board to be interim CEO of OpenAI, people familiar with the matter said. Shear was there to meet employees who had gathered there earlier, but few stayed to see him, the people said.
It isn't clear what else influenced Sutskever's decision to reverse course. Sutskever was the officiant at the Brockmans' wedding in 2019.
OpenAI is governed by a nonprofit with a board devoted to advancing artificial intelligence for humanity's benefit over profit. By that measure, the board acted as it was designed and ethically obliged to do, people familiar with the board's thinking said.
One factor driving the board's decision last week to oust Altman was the members' lack of clarity around his pursuits outside of OpenAI and whether there was a risk that the company's intellectual property could be used in ways that made the board uncomfortable, the people said.
Over the weekend, OpenAI's senior leadership repeatedly asked the board to explain what prompted its apparently sudden decision to eject Altman. In the employee letter made public Monday, OpenAI's leaders said the board failed to give them an explanation.
"You also informed the leadership team that allowing the company to be destroyed 'would be consistent with the mission,'" the letter said.
In a message to employees Sunday, the board reaffirmed its decision. It said the firing was "not about product safety or security, the pace of development or OpenAI's finances. This was not about any singular incident," according to the message, which was reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.
"We know that removing someone with Sam's high profile in our industry comes as a shock, but he lost the trust of the board of directors," the message said.
In the months leading up to his dismissal, Altman had been spending more time exploring two new business endeavors. The first was a new consumer hardware device that he would create with Apple's former chief design officer, Jony Ive. The second was to make low-cost chips that OpenAI could use to train its AI models. Altman had spent weeks in the Middle East trying to raise money for this second endeavor.
This isn't the first time Altman has been asked to depart a company. A few years ago, senior leaders at Y Combinator, the venture firm Altman used to run, asked Altman to leave his role as president following mounting concerns about the time he was spending on other business endeavors, including at OpenAI, according to investors briefed by the venture firm's executives.
Nadella said Sunday that Altman and Brockman would be joining Microsoft to helm a new advanced artificial-intelligence research team. The move came after Altman's bid to return to the company he co-founded fell apart, with the board that fired him declining to agree to the proposed terms of his reinstatement.
The OpenAI employees wrote in their letter that they might leave the company and join Altman and Brockman at Microsoft if their demands aren't met, adding that Microsoft had assured them that there would be jobs available for all of them. Microsoft has invested $13 billion in OpenAI.
Microsoft, which owns about 49% of OpenAI and has no control over its governance, is already putting the structure in place to take on existing OpenAI employees in a new organization. The AI team would report directly to Microsoft's chief technology officer, Kevin Scott, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Microsoft shares dropped Friday amid the initial chaos following Altman's ouster. The stock reversed course Monday after Nadella's announcement, reaching a record high as investors cheered the possibility that Microsoft could end up owning the talent and technology behind ChatGPT outright.
Before the drama of the past few days, OpenAI had been in talks to complete a sale of employee shares with outside investors that would have roughly tripled the stock's value to almost $90 billion from earlier this year. The abrupt firing of Altman has paused the share sale.
In addition to Sutskever, the OpenAI board member who said he regretted his vote, the panel consists of Adam D'Angelo, a former Facebook executive and the founder of question-and-answer website Quora; Tasha McCauley, an adjunct senior management scientist at Rand; and Helen Toner, a director at a Washington nonprofit.
---
Tom Dotan contributed to this article.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman, Berber Jin and Keach Hagey
