Venture capitalists are increasingly targeting deals in Seattle, where they say a burgeoning startup ecosystem holds the potential to support more enterprise software innovation.
Deal activity in the Seattle region has grown in recent years. The number of venture investments in startups in the region rose to 433 in 2019, up 18% from 367 in 2015, according to PitchBook Data Inc. -- the third-sharpest increase among majorU.S. hubs for venture-capital investment, after Philadelphia and Denver. The combined value of deals in the Seattle region climbed to $3.7 billion from $2.1 billion over that period, the data provider said.
Local investors are set to pump more capital into the region. A former partner and a former principal at Ignition Partners, a Seattle-based venture firm, in July announced the launch of a new fund called Fuse Venture Partners to make seed and Series A investments in Seattle startups.
Fuse founding partners Kellan Carter and Cameron Borumand declined to comment on how much they have raised, but said they expect to invest roughly $100 million over the next three to four years. Investors in the fund include current and former executives at Pacific Northwest companies, including Microsoft Corp., Amazon.com Inc., Nike Inc. and Starbucks Corp., Fuse said.
Despite being home to Amazon, with Microsoft in nearby Redmond, Wash., Seattle has lagged behind in venture-capital activity. Between 2015 and 2019, it vied with Washington, D.C., for fifth place in PitchBook's deal count, behind Silicon Valley, New York, Los Angeles and Boston.
"I'm kind of surprised that the startup ecosystem is just coming into its own. It's kind of a late bloomer," said Parker Barrile, a partner at Norwest Venture Partners, a Palo Alto, Calif.-based venture-capital firm. One reason could be that Microsoft and Amazon earlier on had consumed the local talent, Mr. Barrile said.
Another reason could be that angel investing didn't take off in Seattle as it did in Silicon Valley, said James Newell, managing director at Voyager Capital, a Seattle-based venture-capital firm that last year launched a fund targeting startups in the Pacific Northwest and western Canada.
But in recent years, more people brought to Seattle by Microsoft, Amazon and others have formed their own startups, which are in some cases now producing a new generation of entrepreneurs, said Tim Porter, a managing director at Madrona Venture Group, another Seattle firm.
Seattle startups founded by alumni of Microsoft or Amazon include digital freight broker Convoy Inc., sales-management software provider Outreach Corp. and identity-authentication software provider Auth0 Inc. They all raised funding at valuations over $1 billion in 2019.
One of Madrona's past investments was buuteeq Inc., a software provider for the hotel industry. Founded in 2009 by Forest Key, a Seattle-based entrepreneur who left Microsoft after working in its Seattle and Beijing offices, buuteeq was sold in 2014 to Priceline Group Inc., the travel-site operator now called Booking HoldingsInc.
Mr. Key said he had considered basing the startup in the Bay Area, but chose Seattle for its lower cost of living. He stayed there and now runs a new startup -- backed by Madrona, among other venture firms -- called Voodle Inc., which sells a short-video communications app for businesses.
Mr. Newell of Voyager said Microsoft and Amazon have also contributed to the ecosystem by letting startups use their cloud platforms in exchange for credits, hoping they will eventually sign up as customers.
The presence of local institutions such as University of Washington's computer-science program and the Allen Institute of Artificial Intelligence has also cultivated innovation, Mr. Porter of Madrona said.
Investors are taking notice. As well as local players, firms outside Seattle are increasingly active. The number of deals in the Seattle metropolitan area completed by non-Seattle investors increased by 40% from 2015 to 2019, according to PitchBook.
Mr. Barrile said his firm, Norwest, added six Seattle startups to its portfolio in the past four years. "If you really had to make a long-term bet on a region, any region, you'd bet on the region with the best talent," he said. "And that's what makes me so bullish on Seattle."
Seattle would remain a draw for venture investors if the altered working patterns caused by the coronavirus pandemic prove to be permanent and people continue working from home, Mr. Barrile said. Startup founders will still want to meet with employees in person, and Seattle is an attractive place to live given its climate, the quality of its schools and its tax system, he said.
And with engineers drawn in by Microsoft and Amazon, the region is positioned to develop software to serve the changing needs of companies during the pandemic, the founding partners of Fuse said.
"There's a massive behavioral shift that's happening right now for all enterprises, and software is going to be a key enabler of that," Mr. Carter said.

Credit: By Elaine Chen
