Kristin Hart was surprised when her daughter started calling her Okaa-san.
That's "Mother" in Japanese, and it's among the words Aimee, 12, has been increasingly using at home since she started watching anime -- Japanese cartoon shows -- including "My Hero Academia," a TV series about superheroes in training.
Aimee says she got hooked on the series and used YouTube to learn more about anime and Japanese culture and language. "I would remember the sounds and the subtitles and I'd start speaking it to my friends," she says. "They wouldn't understand, but I thought it was really funny."
Then Okaa-san got hooked, too. Mrs. Hart, a 39-year-old New York office manager, says she finds herself exchanging words with Aimee such as sumimasen ("excuse me") and musume ("daughter").
A growing fringe of Americans like Aimee and her mother are sprinkling Nihongo into conversations, inspired in part by the popularity of anime and manga, Japanese comics. Many are finding the language more difficult to learn than they expected, and some of the slang they pick up in cartoons isn't always appropriate for polite conversation.
One incentive for Mrs. Hart to keep up on her Japanese is knowing when Aimee is trying to pull a fast one. Mother now understands when daughter says things like urusai -- roughly, "shut up."
Japanese was the fastest-growing language in the U.S. and U.K. last year among Duolingo's users, according to the language-learning company's 2021 Language Report.
Duolingo credits younger generations' interest in anime and, more broadly, in Japanese pop culture through fashion, food, music and travel.
Cindy Blanco, a senior learning scientist at the company, says many of the new Japanese-language learners are age 13 to 17. For the 18-to-29 group, Japanese trails Spanish, English and French.
Andrew Li, a Georgia Institute of Technology senior studying chemical engineering, started learning Japanese after watching "Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba," an anime TV show about teenagers who fight demons with swords, during the pandemic. "I thought it would be great to know what they're saying," he says.
The 22-year-old found learning the language helped him to understand Japanese pop music better and to find more-authentic recipes for ramen using a broth based on tonkotsu, or pork bone. A Japanese-language recipe put his skills to the test when it appeared to instruct him to grind pork bones with a blender.
Worried his fledgling Japanese might be leading him astray, he checked a ramen channel on the Discord messaging platform. The noodle-dish recipe did, indeed, call for grinding softened bones.
The enthusiasm is particularly strong among young people, says Ramona Handel-Bajema, chief program officer at the Japan Society, which aims to connect American and Japanese people through culture.
She attributes her students' Japanese pronunciation to their knowing the names of the cartoon characters and their catchphrases. "All of these kids love anime and manga," she says. "We don't need to convince them to learn."
Colloquial Japanese words making their way from cartoons into American adolescent usage range from kawaii, or "cute," to baka, which means "idiot."
Eddie Stemkowski, a 42-year-old stepfather of two who says he began watching anime at age 13, started studying the language in college. He says he realized that some words he often heard protagonists shouting in action anime were largely meaningless outside the show.
Characters in the anime series "Dragon Ball Z" -- about a young monkey-tailed boy and a teenage girl who are in search of mystical dragon balls that grant any wish when brought together -- yell "genki-dama!" when using a technique to generate a powerful sphere of energy. Outside the show, genki-dama means, roughly, "energy ball," a phrase not often used in real-life Japan. That hasn't stopped Mr. Stemkowski, a digital marketing manager in New York, from shouting it to his Japanese friends.
One challenge is navigating real-life Japanese with words from cartoons, as 17-year-old Andy Puebla of New Jersey found. He thought doki-doki meant simply "heartbeat" when he heard it in a Japanese animated romantic TV comedy, "Girlfriend, Girlfriend."
He was close. Doki-doki is onomatopoeia for a heart pounding -- with anticipation, say, or fear. The technical term for heartbeat, he found, was the less-fun shinpaku.
Julian Murray, 24, started learning Japanese two years ago hoping to understand what happened in an anime show, "Vivy -Fluorite Eye's Song-," even if he missed a subtitle. Mr. Murray says he thinks the jokes and puns in the subtitles of the show -- in which a singing autonomous artificial intelligence tries to save the world -- and anime in general make more sense if one understands the language.
Mr. Murray, a package handler in Maryland, found Japanese harder than anticipated because some phrases he picked up watching anime weren't appropriate in polite conversation. Kuso was a word he heard anime characters using often. He looked it up and found it translated as "crap" and an expletive of the same meaning. He saw in YouTube videos that the word was rude if directed at others and that characters often muttered it under their breaths in frustration. He decided not to use kuso with other people.
Credit: By Stephanie Lai
