Shares of Intel Corp. hit the skids Wednesday after it reported growing losses on its semiconductor foundry business. Politicians of both parties tout the U.S. chip maker as a national champion, but these days it looks more like an emblem of dubious government industrial policy.
Investors are getting their first close look at Intel CEO Pat Gelsinger's ambitions to compete with TSMC and Samsung in chip manufacturing. They apparently didn't like what they see. The Silicon Valley giant disclosed in a securities filing that it lost $7 billion on its foundry unit last year on $18.9 billion in sales, following roughly $5 billion in losses in each of the prior two years.
Vertically integrated Intel has fallen behind in chip design and manufacturing. Most chip makers only do the former. Intel made a major bet on expanding its foundry business amid the pandemic chip shortage. Meanwhile, Nvidia surged ahead in designing artificial intelligence chips, which are upstaging Intel's server semiconductors.
Mr. Gelsinger was among the loudest advocates for Washington's $280 billion chips bill in 2022 to boost domestic chip manufacturing, though the U.S. leads the world in semiconductor research and design, which account for most value-added. No surprise, the chips bill has turned into a feeding frenzy for corporate rent-seekers.
After the Biden Administration in February awarded New York-based GlobalFoundries $1.5 billion, Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer crowed: "I have long said my CHIPS & Science Law would deliver big for New York, and I meant big with a capital 'B.'" It was his bill, got that President Biden?
Mr. Schumer added: "When I wrote the CHIPS & Science Law, I made sure there was funding especially for the feature-rich, legacy chips that GlobalFoundries produces in Malta." Recall that Members of Congress claimed the bill was needed to boost advanced, not legacy, chips. As usual their unexpressed purpose was to boost themselves.
Ohio's House delegation and Sens. Sherrod Brown and J.D. Vance lobbied the White House to bankroll Intel's Buckeye State foundry expansion. Last month the Administration announced $8.5 billion in direct funding for Intel, plus up to $11 billion in low-cost loans for projects in Ohio, Arizona, New Mexico and Oregon.
Intel says it also plans to pocket federal tax credits from the chips bill that could offset up to 25% of its estimated $100 billion U.S. expansion. "It's going to transform the semiconductor industry," Mr. Biden said at Intel's campus in Arizona when he announced the taxpayer gift alongside Mr. Gelsinger.
"In January of 2022, Pat came to the White House, where we announced the historic investment to build a state-of-the-art semiconductor factory in Ohio," Mr. Biden said. In March 2022, "Pat was my guest at the State of the Union" and that September "I joined Pat in Ohio and -- to break ground for the new factory." How could Pat say no to the new boss?
---
It's a shame to see Intel, a legendary U.S. company, being captured by government like this. All told, Intel could pocket some $50 billion in federal subsidies. Yet Mr. Gelsinger wants more. American chip manufacturing "doesn't get fixed in one three- to five-year program," the CEO said last month. "I do think we'll need at least a CHIPS 2 to finish that job."
Maybe two or three more chips funding bills will be needed if Intel foundries keep bleeding red ink. On Tuesday Intel disclosed that it doesn't expect its foundry business to break even until "midway" between now and the end of 2030. One problem is demand for Intel's server and PC chips is slackening as more tech investment flows into AI.
Earlier this year Intel said it is delaying work on its Ohio plant owing to "business conditions" and "market dynamics." The factory -- which is also getting up to $2 billion in state subsidies -- now isn't expected to be operational until 2027 or 2028, two to three years later than projected.
Industrial policy sounds nice when it's sold as patriotic nationalism, but it typically ends in special-interest pleading with business answering to politicians. Capital is steered for political reasons, rather than for its most productive use. Its proponents on the right are now all but conceding this, though they claim they would be smarter than Mr. Biden at handing out government money.
Politicians always think they're better stewards of capital than business. They never are.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Intel Replies on Semiconductors in America" -- WSJ Apr. 10, 2024)
