One of the latest innovations at artificial-intelligence chip maker Nvidia has nothing to do with bits and bytes. It involves liquid.
Nvidia's coming GB200 server racks, which contain its next-generation Blackwell chips, will mainly be cooled with liquid circulated in tubes snaking through the hardware rather than by air. An Nvidia spokesman said the company was also working with suppliers on additional cooling technologies, including dunking entire drawer-sized computers in a nonconductive liquid that absorbs and dissipates heat.
Cooling is suddenly a hot business as engineers try to tame one of the world's biggest electricity hogs. Global data centers -- the big computer farms that handle AI calculations -- are expected to gobble up 8% of total U.S. power demand by 2030, compared with about 3% currently, according to Goldman Sachs research.
The Nvidia GB200 series is likely to be sought after as technology companies race to deploy AI in content creation, autonomous driving and more.
Data centers, housing as many as tens of thousands of servers, tend to be cacophonous and chilly places. At older facilities that use fans and air conditioning, cooling accounts for up to 40% of power consumption, a proportion that could be reduced to 10% or less with more advanced technology, according to Shaolei Ren, associate professor of electrical and computer engineering at the University of California, Riverside.
Liquid cooling has become a common feature of high-end gaming computers, but on a larger scale has traditionally been limited to the hardest challenges, such as nuclear power plants. The upfront cost of circulating liquid through delicate electronics can be many times the cost of installing AC and fans. Some parts are in short supply.
Leakage is the biggest risk.
"If a single drop of water falls onto a server, such as the million-dollar GB200, it could cause catastrophic damage," said Oliver Lien, general manager of Forcecon Technology, which works with semiconductor makers on cooling.
More than 95% of current data centers use air cooling because of its mature design and reliability, according to a recent Morgan Stanley report.
Nvidia both makes its own servers and supplies chips to other server makers that build devices for tech giants working on AI applications. Decisions on cooling tend to be made jointly by those companies.
Taiwan-based contract manufacturer Foxconn is taking a leading role in manufacturing the Nvidia GB200 series in Taiwan and Mexico, according to people involved in the plans.
The sensitivity of the cooling issue was highlighted in late July when shares of Foxconn and two suppliers of cooling components fell more than 5% following social-media posts suggesting the GB200's cooling system had leaks.
People familiar with the production said suppliers were working through normal issues that arise in preproduction testing. They said the cooling system issues weren't likely to significantly affect the GB200's shipping schedule. Shares of Foxconn and the suppliers quickly recovered. Nvidia declined to comment and Foxconn didn't respond to a request to comment.
Many in the business think the next step could be total immersion in heat-absorbing fluid, although the technology faces skepticism because the fluid and custom tanks are costly and maintenance is messier.
Credit: By Yang Jie
