On a bustling street corner in the middle of downtown San Francisco, Adrian Aoun is trying to build the doctor's office of the future.
On Tuesday, the former Alphabet Inc. executive took the wraps off his stealth health startup, Forward. In the works for a year, the startup has collected high-profile venture backers, including Khosla Ventures, Founders Fund and First Round Capital, not to mention such prominent angels as Alphabet Executive Chairman Eric Schmidt and Salesforce Inc. Chief Executive Marc Benioff.
In essence, Forward will offer concierge medicine for yuppies: pay a flat $150 a month and get unlimited access to your doctor, in the office and via the company's mobile app. The special sauce, says Mr. Aoun, is artificial intelligence, taking the copious amounts of data the company hopes to collect on its patients and feeding it through machine learning algorithms on the back end to make better diagnoses and offer more effective medical recommendations.
It doesn't take insurance. And the high price doesn't mean doctors will typically follow up personally with specialists or hospital medical staff, something other concierge primary-care physicians may do. Mr. Aoun says Forward has a "network of advocates" that can "go on-site when needed" and that its doctors have reached out to hospitals in "cases where it's been helpful."
Data capture is the company's unique pitch. Patients sign in up front and head straight for a special digital scale in the center of the waiting room that Forward calls its "body scanner." The scanner is outfitted with other sensors such as a pulse oximeter to measure blood oxygen levels. Forward grabs the info and adds it to your patient record, the way a nurse might before seeing your doctor in a regular office.
Next to the scale is a display with various medical sensors, including a glucometer for diabetics and a blood pressure cuff, some of which the company plans to give its patients free so they can feed data back to its servers from home.
Forward tries also to wow members with giant screen displays, one attached to the scanner and another on the wall of the exam room that walks patients and their doctor through an extensive consultation. This one also has a microphone, which Mr. Aoun says will enable the computer to take notes, freeing the doctor to speak directly to the patient.
The high price buys some free gynecological services for women and travel medicine like vaccines. Also there is an on-site pharmacy that will dispense some meds free. Those it doesn't stock it will have delivered via third-parties that will bill a patient's prescription drug insurance.
Of Forward's 40 employees, more than half are engineers, says Mr. Aoun. It has four doctors.
Mr. Aoun isn't the first to try to disrupt the traditional primary care model. For starters there are urgent care clinics popping up all over the country to help patients get a same day strep test or address other immediate needs.
Another startup, One Medical Group, has opened offices in seven metro areas around the U.S. It charges up to $200 a year for membership, far cheaper than Forward, for a service that gives patients access to same-day or next-day appointments. One Medical also charges copayments, however, and other fees not reimbursed by insurance.
Credit: By Rolfe Winkler
