A few weeks ago, Astro Teller and his staff at Alphabet's X, the research-and-development lab formerly known as Google X, were getting ready to celebrate the Day of the Dead. They weren't observing the Mexican holiday in the traditional way, to pay tribute to late friends and relatives, but to honor failed company ideas. "We're . . . building an altar to help people celebrate their failure process and to do a little bit of grieving for the projects that they really cared about that we had to stop," says Dr. Teller, 46.
X, which is located in Mountain View, Calif., calls itself a "moonshot factory," and Dr. Teller encourages the company's employees, who range from engineers to philosophy majors to musicians, to come up with as many wild ideas as possible. (He won't say how many people work for X or what its budget is.) He has written that the company has "hundreds of ideas that last for a few hours, dozens for a few weeks, handfuls for months."
Current projects include self-driving cars, high-altitude balloons that offer internet connectivity to users below and a new kind of wind turbine. The goal is for a project to leave X and become a stand-alone business or part of another business at Alphabet. One of the most successful projects so far is Google Brain, an effort hatched in 2011 that aims to make machines more intelligent and is now part of Research at Google. Its technology has been used to improve the company's maps as well as its search and translation functions.
There have been false starts, too. Google Glass, an internet-connected headset that launched in 2014, was taken back to the development stage the following year after criticism over privacy concerns and technical shortcomings. Google is working on a new version.
Dr. Teller, who joined X in 2010 and took the helm in 2012, tries to foster a spirit of playful invention among his staff in various ways, right down to job titles such as Queen of Procurement. His own title is Captain of Moonshots.
"I certainly encourage low deference to authority here," he says. "Humor and creativity are inexorably linked. It's very hard to be sad or serious . . . and to come up with really different perspectives." He believes that the sillier, happier and more naturally childlike people are, the more they are able to shift perspectives and come up with innovative ideas. To that end, Dr. Teller often gets around the office on Rollerblades.
A healthy amount of failure is expected. Recent ideas that were killed include putting a large copper coil around the North Pole to generate electricity with the help of the Earth's magnetic field (ultimately deemed too expensive) and an extremely lightweight cargo ship that could transport goods more quickly and with a lower carbon footprint (also determined to be too expensive).
Dr. Teller was raised in Evanston, Ill.; his father was a philosopher of science who retired two years ago. His mother, once a buyer at Sears, works on education and mental health issues in Cambodia. The physicist Edward Teller, who helped to develop the hydrogen bomb, was his grandfather.
His given name is Eric, but he picked up the nickname Astro after his high-school friends thought a haircut he got made his hair look like AstroTurf. He graduated from Stanford University with a degree in computer science and then earned a Ph.D. in artificial intelligence at Carnegie Mellon.
He then ran a string of his own companies, including a fitness-device maker and a hedge fund. When he started his first company, a technology incubator, at age 28, he spent the first few months trying to prove how smart he was to his employees. "I figured if I could do all of their jobs better than them all at the same time, I would be a good CEO," he says. It didn't work.
"I had to decide whether I wanted to define myself by how smart I was . . . or whether I wanted to win as an entrepreneur, and I decided I wanted to win. So I kind of packed up my ego and put it in a box," he says. "I just decided that listening to other people and finding ways to amplify them starting from the premise that I was wrong was just a more productive way to be a manager and a leader."
Today he tries to encourage employees' own creativity by showing them "a couple points outside the box that they're stuck in," he says. His approach is: "You didn't think that you were thinking inside the box, and I just showed you how much weirder you could be thinking."
Dr. Teller lives near his office with his second wife, Danielle Teller. In 2014, the two wrote a self-help book titled "Sacred Cows" about marriage and divorce. They examined, among other things, why people might feel pressure to stay in an unhappy marriage. Real failure, Dr. Teller says, is when people "double down on things we know we shouldn't double down on," whether it's in marriage, business or life.
To make sure he is "hyperpresent" and ready to connect with his staff, he sleeps six or seven hours every night, exercises regularly and limits work to 60 hours a week. "I'm really good at understanding people," he says -- but that's the easy part. Technological breakthroughs are "hard to predict. I don't think anyone's particularly good at it."
Credit: By Alexandra Wolfe
