Levi Strauss & Co. has joined a wave of companies developing new digital interfaces based upon the fusion of messaging and machine learning.
Levi last week announced the release of its artificially intelligent Virtual Stylist, which converses with online shoppers to offer jean recommendations based on style preferences and fit, similar to the way a human stylist would help customers at a store.
"One of the biggest barriers to buying apparel online, specifically denim, is fit . . . and we came up with a unique way to help consumers solve that problem," said Marc Rosen, Levi's executive vice president and president of global e-commerce.
Levi joins many other companies in building virtual assistants that make it possible for people to interact with computers in more lifelike ways, talking or texting as they would with another person. These chatbots allow consumers to do things ranging from tracking bank account balances to checking in for flights.
Levi's tool is currently available on the company's website and on Facebook Inc.'s Messenger platform in the U.S. Developers have created tens of thousands of chatbots for Facebook's Messenger service since it became available in 2016.
Mr. Rosen and Zack Chang, global e-commerce product manager for Levi, came up with the idea for chatbot late last year. Mr. Chang worked with Levi's merchants and store stylists to understand how they find the right size and style of jeans for individual customers. The idea was to replicate that experience on the company's website with a virtual assistant, Mr. Chang said.
Instead of an online shopper having to guess which pair of jeans might fit their body type, the chatbot helps customers find a pair that suits them by asking key questions such as "Do you like stretch or no stretch?" and "How would you like the rise?"
It also serves up images and descriptions to help customers understand different types of fits, such as tapered and straight. The chatbot uses natural language processing, a subfield of artificial intelligence, to help extract meaning from user requests, such as "I'm looking for a pair of black men's skinny jeans" or "I'm looking for selvedge denim," Mr. Rosen said. Levi also worked with Mode.ai to power the chatbot.
A machine learning-based data and analytics platform made by venture-backed Massachusetts startup True Fit Corp. is also integrated with the chatbot to help give customers personalized size recommendations based on their height, weight and age group.
True Fit's algorithms match the fit and style preferences for each online shopper to the specific attributes of garments, WSJ has previously reported. It can then recommend a size in each garment, describing how it expects the item to fit.
True Fit has worked with more than 120 retailers such as Macy's Inc., Kate Spade and British department store chain House of Fraser, said William Adler, True Fit's chief executive.

Credit: By Sara Castellanos
