Nvidia reported another quarter of record sales and gave a strong revenue outlook, pointing to red-hot demand for chips that underpin the artificial-intelligence boom.
Huge investments in AI by tech giants from Microsoft to Amazon.com and by other large corporations have helped propel Nvidia's sales to unprecedented levels in recent quarters.
In its latest period, its fiscal third quarter, sales more than tripled to $18.1 billion, well above Wall Street forecasts in a survey of analysts by FactSet. Profit also surged, rising to $9.2 billion compared with $680 million a year earlier and above estimates.
Sales for the current quarter would be around $20 billion, Nvidia said, above expectations of about $18 billion.
Nvidia Chief Executive Jensen Huang said the strong growth reflected a transition into a new era of computing and a surge in generative AI -- systems such as OpenAI's ChatGPT that can generate convincing language and images with minimal prompting.
Nvidia's shares fell 1.7% following the earnings announcement after the bell.
The boom in generative AI starting late last year surprised many chip-industry executives and led to a flood of demand for Nvidia's chips, the most adept at creating complex AI systems.
Companies are so eager to get their hands on Nvidia's chips that a shortage has taken hold, even for AI systems that can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars each. OpenAI, which has been rocked in recent days by the ouster of its CEO and a potential employee exodus, needed tens of thousands of Nvidia's chips to train its most advanced AI systems, analysts say.
Nvidia had significantly increased supply of its chips each quarter and was expecting to continue to do so next year, Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress said in a call with analysts. The company also will release new types of chips faster to meet growing AI opportunities, she said.
Competitors are circling Nvidia, including Advanced Micro Devices, which recently forecast $2 billion of sales next year for its newest AI chips. Despite the emerging rivals, the AI moment has largely played into Nvidia's hands, sending sales in the division that houses its AI chips to about $14.51 billion in its latest quarter from about $3.8 billion a year before.
It hasn't all been smooth sailing. Concern about AI's utility in spying, cyberwarfare and advanced weaponry has led the U.S. to restrict exports of Nvidia's most advanced chips to China.
Nvidia executives have said they don't see a significant near-term impact on sales, although Kress said in June that restrictions in the long run could lead to a "permanent loss of opportunities" for U.S. chip companies.
Nvidia has responded to successive rounds of U.S. export curbs by making lower-performance versions of its chips catering to the Chinese market.
In October, the U.S. barred Nvidia from selling China-specific chips it developed last year without first obtaining a license from the Commerce Department. That move put in jeopardy about $5 billion of Chinese orders for chips to be delivered next year.
Nvidia is now working on a new lineup of chips for the Chinese market that fall below new performance thresholds that would require U.S. government oversight. In addition, Kress said the company was working with some customers in China and the Middle East to get export licenses from the U.S.
China and other export-controlled countries have contributed between 20% and 25% of the company's data-center revenue in the last few quarters, Kress said. She expects sales to those destinations to decline in the current quarter, "though we believe the decline will be more than offset by strong growth in other regions."
Regulators in China had inquired about Nvidia's sales and efforts to supply the Chinese market, Nvidia said in a regulatory filing.
The latest results follow an unprecedented rise in sales. In May, Nvidia projected that sales would be $11 billion in its fiscal second quarter, far above Wall Street expectations. Then, in August, the company said sales totaled more than that -- $13 billion -- and projected another record quarter ahead. The company crossed a $1 trillion valuation in June and was worth about $1.23 trillion at Tuesday's market close.
While sales have rocketed, a large portion of the company's revenue derives from two unnamed end customers, Nvidia said in a regulatory filing. The end customers represented 28% of revenue in the fiscal third quarter, the company said. That would equate to around $5 billion of sales.
Nvidia started out as a computer-graphics chip company in the 1990s and grew into a leading designer of hardware that made videogames look crisper and run more smoothly. Over the past decade and a half, Huang, the CEO, has sought new applications for those chips' circuitry, leading to their adoption by cryptocurrency miners and AI researchers.
The company has done well even as many other chip makers wade through a postpandemic downturn in purchases of personal computers and smartphones that has only recently begun to reverse.
Even with its challengers, Nvidia is expected to have more than 85% of the market for generative-AI chips even next year, Raymond James analyst Srini Pajjuri said in a note on Monday.
Nvidia's data-center division has become by far its largest segment amid the boom in generative AI systems, which are built in massive server farms filled with the company's chips. Its gaming segment, which had until recent years been its largest, reached $2.86 billion in sales for the company's latest quarter, up from $1.57 billion a year earlier. Nvidia's chips are prized by PC gamers and feature in Nintendo's Switch game consoles.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
