Stocks bounced back on Monday after last week's dismal performance.
The S&P 500 gained 0.9%, ending a six-day streak of losses, with each of the benchmark index's 11 sectors finishing the day in the green. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite advanced 1.1% after falling 5.5% last week. The blue-chip Dow industrials added 0.7%, or 254 points.
Easing tensions between Israel and Iran helped restore some market confidence. Brent crude oil slipped 0.3%, to $87 a barrel, and gold futures slid 2.8% after rising to a record on Friday.
The market faces a string of tests in the coming days, however.
The first-quarter earnings deluge begins this week, with more than 30% of S&P 500 companies set to report results, according to FactSet. Investors will be paying particular attention to results from big technology companies, after the Magnificent Seven stocks shed nearly a trillion dollars in market value last week.
"Earnings from the megacap tech stocks will be more important than the inflation data this week," said Jay Hatfield, chief executive of Infrastructure Capital Advisors.
Shares of Tesla fell 3.4% ahead of its earnings results due out Tuesday. The other tech giants reporting this week are Google parent company Alphabet, Facebook owner Meta Platforms and Microsoft. Hatfield expects big tech companies to post solid earnings growth, helping lift the broader market.
Artificial-intelligence standouts were among the stocks that recovered Monday from last week's fallout. Alphabet added 1.4%. Chip maker Nvidia rose 4.4% after its biggest one-day decline on record.
Shares of Verizon Communications, which helped kick off this week's earnings, fell 4.7% after revenue missed Wall Street's expectations.
For the year, the S&P 500 is hanging on to a 5% gain, after falling 4.6% this month.
Stocks have pulled back and bond yields have climbed in April after resilient economic growth and firmer-than-expected inflation data cast doubt on the chances that the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates this year.
The yield on benchmark 10-year Treasury note edged higher to 4.622% on Monday from 4.613% on Friday.
New data on the economy this week could offer more clues on whether the central bank cuts rates in coming months.
Investors on Thursday will get a look at how the U.S. economy fared in the first quarter, followed by the latest reading on the Fed's preferred inflation gauge on Friday.
A Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta model for inflation-adjusted gross domestic product is forecasting first-quarter growth at 2.9%. Hotter-than-expected retail sales for March suggest a strong reading is in the cards.
Bitcoin climbed to $66,602, according to the CoinDesk Bitcoin price index, following the token's halving event.
The U.K.'s FTSE 100 rose 1.6% to a record for the first time since Feb. 20, 2023. At midday Tuesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.3%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 1.5% but the Shanghai Composite was down 0.6%. S&P 500 futures were flat.
Credit: By Eric Wallerstein
