By Thanksgiving, University of Pennsylvania trustees thought they had weathered the worst of an aggressive campaign that rich alumni mounted to fire President Liz Magill over concerns about antisemitism on campus. That hope died when Magill appeared before Congress last week.
Magill said context was needed to determine whether calling for the genocide of Jews would be considered bullying or harassment at Penn. The clip went viral, drawing millions of views. Pennsylvania's governor called the comments "shameful." The Penn president rushed out a video backtracking her remarks. By the weekend, Magill and board Chairman Scott Bok resigned.
At Penn, the university's response to the Oct. 7 attacks in Israel was the final straw for a largely Jewish group of prominent alumni who felt the school wasn't adequately protecting Jewish students. They campaigned behind the scenes and publicly for the president and chairman to step down, threatening to withhold millions of dollars. They took a playbook from the business world, approaching the typically genteel world of higher education like activist investors.
Since September, marquee donors have huddled in dozens of private meetings, exchanged scores of letters and taken to the airwaves in an effort to combat antisemitism on campus and, eventually, to force a leadership change.
This account of the rupture at Penn is based on conversations with more than a dozen current and former trustees and longtime university donors.
Magill, a North Dakota native and constitutional-law scholar who clerked for Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsberg and worked at Stanford University and the University of Virginia, took over as Penn's president in July 2022.
The beginning of the end for Magill came this summer, when ads went out for the Palestine Writes Literature Festival, billed as a celebration of Palestinian writers and artists and set to take place on campus. Cosmetics tycoon Ronald Lauder, who has a university degree program named after him and is president of the World Jewish Congress, visited Philadelphia to relay his concerns to Magill about speakers at the event espousing antisemitic views. In two follow-up calls, he urged her to cancel the festival.
Alumni hold views across the political spectrum. An important faction is associated with the Wharton School, one of the top business programs in the country. Each school within the university has an advisory board, and then the university has a formal board of trustees. That universitywide board has roughly 50 members, but the center of power is its executive committee.
Marc Rowan, CEO of Apollo Global Management, who had given Wharton more than $50 million over the years, helped organize an open letter expressing concerns about the festival's content. Rowan left the Penn board this year when he became chair of the UJA-Federation of New York, a Jewish philanthropy, but remained chair of Wharton's board of advisers.
Investor Ross Stevens and a few current and former trustees signed on. Eventually, over 4,000 others signed the letter too. Top school officials released a statement condemning antisemitism ahead of the festival, but allowed it to proceed.
"It was weird they had this platform to criticize an event," said history and sociology of science professor Harun Kucuk, who at the time ran the university's Middle East Center, which supported the festival.
The fight over the festival caused a rift within the board. Bok asked trustees why they had signed the letter against the festival, and asked the ones currently on the board to consider if they could continue to serve, given their public disapproval of the school's leadership decisions.
One trustee put the public spat in a corporate context: "It's like running a proxy fight against your own company."
The conflict might have fizzled out. But on Oct. 7, Hamas attacked Israel. Three days later, Magill released a statement that called the assault "horrific" but didn't explicitly condemn Hamas as a terrorist organization. Rowan called the statement inadequate and urged Bok and Magill to step down.
Bok and Rowan met for an awkward breakfast at the Peninsula Hotel in New York the following morning. Rowan then headed to the CNBC studios, where he again called for Bok and Magill to be fired. "Microaggressions are condemned with extreme moral outrage and yet violence, particularly violence against Jews, antisemitism, seems to have found a place of tolerance on the campus," Rowan said on the air.
Other big donors promised to close their checkbooks to Penn, including diplomat Jon Huntsman Jr., TV producer Dick Wolf and Lauder. Rowan started sending daily emails at 7 a.m. to the entire Penn board of trustees, typically forwarding messages from angry alumni. The board remained firmly behind Magill and Bok.
Meanwhile, students on campus arranged walkouts, staged a rally outside a board meeting, and donned kaffiyehs to mark their support for the Palestinian cause. A group of Penn staffers received emails that threatened violence against members of the Jewish community, which the school said was reported to the FBI as a potential hate crime.
Kucuk, the history professor, resigned from the Middle East Center after he helped a left-leaning Jewish student group book a room to show a film about American Jews who become sympathetic to Palestinians and the university tried to postpone the screening for security reasons.
Wharton's board of advisers -- whose members include top executives at Blackstone, McKinsey & Co., Moelis & Co. and Related Cos. -- started taking a more activist role in mid-November. Some members also serve on the main board of trustees.
The agenda for a regularly scheduled board meeting Nov. 16 initially included a conversation about artificial intelligence. According to a person in attendance, Wharton Dean Erika James ticked off examples of the reputational damage the Magill saga was taking on the school: hundreds of negative media mentions, unknown impact on applications, a 28% decline in giving that would result in $100 million in lost donations within five years.
The board tried to proceed quietly, sending letters privately to trustees and Magill.
In November, the Wharton group suggested a change in leadership and encouraged the university board to update Penn's code of conduct to explicitly state that it would discipline students, faculty and employees who "celebrate or advocate for the murder, killing, genocide, or annihilation of any individual classmate or any group of individuals in our community."
Last Tuesday, one trustee watched the House Committee on Education and the Workforce hearing in the morning, then turned back to work in earnest when, after four hours of testimony, the committee recessed to take some House votes. The fireworks hadn't even started.
Rep. Elise Stefanik, a high-ranking Republican from New York, directed a seemingly simple question to all three presidents who testified that day -- Claudine Gay of Harvard University, Sally Kornbluth of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Magill. They all gave similar answers.
"Does calling for the genocide of Jews violate Penn's rules or code of conduct?" she asked.
Magill said it could be, depending upon if it turns into harassment.
"It's a context-dependent decision? That's your testimony today, calling for the genocide of Jews is dependent upon the context? That is not bullying or harassment? This is the easiest question to answer yes, Ms. Magill," Stefanik said.
University trustees and members of the Wharton board began trading stunned messages. A day after the testimony, the Wharton board drafted a letter to Magill.
Again, they privately called for a change in leadership. Most wanted Bok to go, but they were more split on Magill's fate, said a person familiar with the conversations. Irate at the lack of response from the university's trustees, they used a strategy well-worn by activist investors and took the letter public Thursday night.
Pennsylvania Gov. Josh Shapiro condemned Magill's testimony as "absolutely shameful" and accused the school of a failure of leadership. Bok arranged for a Zoom meeting Thursday morning. A representative for Shapiro was in attendance. Trustees agreed there was a need for some action, but no consensus on exactly what.
The group remained broadly supportive of Magill, according to multiple trustees in attendance. They discussed options like putting out a board statement and reviewing school policies on harassment, one of the trustees said.
The Penn board's executive committee had a five-hour marathon session Thursday afternoon. Their last formal meeting, in September, lasted 11 minutes, according to board records. That same afternoon, Stevens threatened to rescind a 2017 gift that he said was now worth $100 million.
Friday and Saturday went by in a flurry of meetings, with small subsets of the board discussing what a leadership change might look like and reviewing board statutes for details on how exactly they could remove the president.
People familiar with those conversations said they weren't sure they had the votes to oust Magill, but they were hoping the threat of calling a vote would force her to resign.
With 30 minutes notice, Bok called for a virtual board meeting Saturday afternoon. He spoke first to the executive committee, then to the entire board, explaining that Magill had agreed to resign, according to a member of the executive committee.
Credit: By Melissa Korn, Rachel Louise Ensign and Douglas Belkin

ERIC Subject: Governing Boards; Leadership; Alumni; Meetings; Presidents; Jews; Donors; Activism; Trustees; School Policy; Death; Bullying; Violence
