Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. on Wednesday reported its first increase in sales in nearly a year due to continued improvements in its advertising business, as the company continues to pare back spending in what Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg has called a "year of efficiency."
Mr. Zuckerberg attributed some of these gains to Reels, the company's short-form video product. Mr. Zuckerberg said that Reels is increasing overall app engagement and that the company believes it is gaining share in the short-form video market.
"When we started this work last year, our business wasn't performing as well as I wanted. But now we're increasingly doing this work from a position of strength," Mr. Zuckerberg said in a call with analysts.
The company reported revenue of $28.6 billion, up 3% from a year prior and ahead of expectations of nearly $27.7 billion, according to analysts surveyed by FactSet. That snapped a streak of three quarters in which Meta's revenue had retreated from the year prior, the only time that has occurred since the company went public in 2012. Shares surged by more than 10% in off-hours trading, as the company also forecast that second-quarter revenue could reach as high as $32 billion.
A tough economic climate, an increasing number of regulations limiting personalized ads and the fallout from Apple Inc.'s ad-tracking changes in 2021 have weighed on the digital-ad market. Meta has faced growing competition from TikTok, which in February reached 150 million monthly users in the U.S.
The 3% increase is an improvement from the 4.5% drop in revenue that the company posted in the final quarter of 2022. Meta has invested heavily in artificial-intelligence tools to improve its ad-targeting systems.
Those efforts in AI, along with shifting to forms of advertising less dependent on harvesting user data from its platforms, are essential to the company's plans to bounce back. Meta has made progress in overcoming an Apple privacy change that restricted Meta's capacity to gather information about what its users do outside its platforms' walls, The Wall Street Journal reported in January.
Mr. Zuckerberg theorized that generative AI could help marketers more easily create advertisements for Meta's services, power chatbots for businesses on Messenger and WhatsApp and help metaverse users more easily create avatars and virtual worlds.
The company said its operating margin would have been 4 percentage points higher if not for restructuring charges that Meta undertook related to three rounds of layoffs that it announced in March. These layoffs, which will be completed in May, are expected to result in the elimination of 10,000 employees, and they come after Meta laid off 11,000 employees in November.
Meta's family of apps, which includes Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, incurred a restructuring charge of $934 million for the first quarter. Reality Labs, the division tasked with building the hardware and software underpinning Meta's ambitions to build a platform in the metaverse, incurred a $210 million charge.
Reality Labs posted revenue of $339 million for the quarter, a decline of 51% compared with a year prior. The unit, which makes Meta's Quest virtual-reality headsets, posted an operating loss of $4 billion.
Horizon Worlds, the company's flagship metaverse offering for consumers, fell short of internal performance expectations, according to internal documents from October obtained by the Journal. The company had initially set a goal of reaching 500,000 monthly active users for the service by the end of 2022, but the tally in October was less than 200,000, the documents showed. The figure rose to just above 200,000 in January, reached following the holiday season when many consumers purchased new Quest headsets and played with them while on break from school and work, the Journal reported.
The company reported a net profit of $5.7 billion for the first quarter. That represents a roughly 24% decline from the year-ago period, but it is up from $4.7 billion in the October-to-December quarter.
Credit: By Salvador Rodriguez
