As much as the world heralds the rise of China tech, its success is confined largely to consumer business. Where the U.S. has Facebook, Amazon and Google, China has Tencent, Alibaba and Baidu -- companies good at developing applications that help hundreds of millions of consumers shop, pay, chat and play games.
In the enterprise-application market, it's a different story. China has nothing comparable with Oracle, SAP or Salesforce.com.
In fact, the Chinese enterprise market looks like the tech consumer market in the country 10 years ago. Customers -- in this case, companies -- are reluctant to pay for software and pirate it when they can. They'd rather throw labor at problems because investing in technology is expensive and doesn't always work.
Those attitudes are changing as labor costs rise and app options multiply. Many companies now want to tap into the power of artificial intelligence and cloud computing to increase efficiency and cut costs.
That spells huge opportunity in a growing market devoid of a dominant player. Investors and startups are betting there's a chance to create a Tencent, Alibaba and Baidu for the enterprise market. As with the consumer internet sector, foreign players are expected to encounter barriers to market access, including rules for localizing products and local control of cloud services.
Businesses and government departments in China spent 122 billion yuan ($18.5 billion) on software in 2016, compared with $245 billion in the U.S., according to Forrester. While Salesforce has a market capitalization of $78 billion, its dozens of Chinese wannabes are startups, with none valued at $1 billion.
At this point, investors see the fragmentation as a plus, setting the stage for a fast uptake in enterprise applications. More businesses are turning to cloud-based services for data storage and software applications. In a Deutsche Bank survey this year of chief information officers at about 50 Chinese companies in a variety of sectors, 84% of respondents said they plan to make "heavy use of cloud services" by 2019, up from 4% in 2016. Alibaba Cloud, the biggest in China by market share, doubled its revenue last quarter from a year earlier.
As small- and medium-size businesses move to the cloud, they're less likely to pirate software. Cloud-based services are usually much cheaper than traditional enterprise software. And, as companies accumulate customer data and move to the cloud, they're looking to artificial-intelligence technologies for help.
An AI startup boom is under way. In the first five months of this year, 175 AI-related startups received 15.2 billion yuan in venture investing, close to the total for 2015, which was nearly triple the amount for 2014, according to Beijing-based Zero2IPO Group. While not all these companies aim to serve enterprises, announcements of financing suggest those that do outnumber mobile-internet startups, the hottest sector in recent years.
At the forefront of the battle for the enterprise market is the chatbot, a software program that answers questions. For many companies, a boom in consumer business means heavy demand for customer service. These companies are finding that it's cheaper and easier to train a machine to interact with customers.
One chatbot maker, Shenzhen-based ZhuiYi Technology Co., received $21 million in series B funding this month. Founded 18 months ago by a group of former Tencent programmers, ZhuiYi already counts as customers ride-sharing giant Didi Chuxing, China's biggest online travel site, Ctrip.com International, and China's biggest credit-card issuer, China Merchants Bank.
When China Merchants Bank went looking for a chatbot for its credit-card business, ZhuiYi outperformed IBM's Watson software, says Chen Kunde, the bank's chief information officer. Yibot demonstrated better understanding of the Chinese language, he says, and the bank is now looking to expand chatbot services to customer relations. IBM says it doesn't comment on the specifics of customer engagement.

Credit: By Li Yuan
