Martin Sorrell is the ultimate dealmaker. He went on a global acquisition spree over three decades to build the world's largest advertising company, WPP, scooping up iconic agencies like J. Walter Thompson and Ogilvy & Mather through hostile takeovers.
Now, Sorrell finds himself in an unfamiliar role: He is the one being hunted.
These days, the 79-year-old Madison Avenue veteran is running a different ad firm, S4 Capital, whose clients include many well-known companies, such as BMW, Amazon, Facebook and Google. With his business under stress and its stock price plunging, Sorrell has received several merger offers from Stagwell, an ad firm led by former Clinton adviser Mark Penn, according to people familiar with the matter.
Sorrell rebuffed the offers because in his view, they undervalued the company and Stagwell wasn't a good strategic fit. One proposal, made last fall, was worth nearly $700 million, some of the people said.
Even though S4 is publicly traded, Sorrell has effective veto power over most deals because he has voting control. His reluctance to entertain offers has frustrated senior executives, some of whom are looking to facilitate a sale.
Sorrell founded S4 in 2018 following an acrimonious exit from WPP. Motivated partly by a desire for vindication, he set out to build a smaller, nimbler competitor to the ad giant, and one with a different profile.
He began acquiring companies with expertise in digital marketing and data and developing capabilities in artificial intelligence, rather than buying traditional creative ad agencies that often have lower profit margins.
Sorrell said the ensuing rivalry with WPP is part of what fuels him. "I had a point to prove," he told The Wall Street Journal in a 2021 interview.
The approach initially worked, particularly during the pandemic, as brands shifted more of their ad dollars online. More recently, the company suffered from a combination of industrywide challenges and self-inflicted problems.
S4's stock price has dropped by about 75% in the past year, leaving it with a market value of less than $300 million. S4 is expected to report a decline in annual like-for-like net revenue next week, and Sorrell has cautioned that the 2024 outlook for ad spending remains subdued.
The stock decline has left Sorrell vulnerable, said Greg Paull, co-founder of R3, a consulting firm that helps match advertisers with agencies.
A sale would mark an ironic twist for Sorrell because he "is usually the one leading the way in the acquisition space," Paull said.
Sorrell has a strained relationship with Penn, the founder of Stagwell, that goes back to their previous work relationship. Penn worked for Sorrell for years after WPP bought a research and polling consulting firm that Penn co-founded. He left in 2012 to work for Microsoft.
Stagwell, whose clients include Bud Light and the National Football League, owns agencies such as Code and Theory, 72andSunny and Anomaly. Penn has long had a keen interest in acquiring S4 because of its expertise in areas such as app development, data marketing and helping companies with their digital transformations. However, Stagwell's interest in S4 is waning given Sorrell's reluctance to negotiate, some of the people said.
New York private-equity firm New Mountain Capital held exploratory talks with S4 last year about a possible acquisition, according to people familiar with the discussions. New Mountain remains interested in buying some parts of S4. New Mountain Capital declined to comment.
Some interest in S4 has been driven partly by senior executives who are disgruntled and have reached out to bankers to drum up interest, some of the people said. Many of the top executives are shareholders in the company, because most of the deals S4 has struck to buy agencies included 50% cash and 50% stock, leaving those executives holding shares that have significantly dropped in value since they were issued.
Sorrell's career in the ad business began in the 1970s when he joined Saatchi & Saatchi's finance department. Though he never penned a jingle or crafted a TV commercial, he used his micromanagement skills and an accountant's attention to detail to rise to the top of Madison Avenue, transforming a little-known U.K. manufacturer of wire shopping carts called Wire & Plastic Products into WPP, a global advertising empire.
Sorrell emerged as the de facto voice on the ad economy for Wall Street.
Sorrell has tried to climb back to the top echelons of the sector after a bitter and public breakup with WPP. He resigned in 2018 after the company completed a probe into what it described as "an allegation of personal misconduct." The probe looked into whether Sorrell used company money to pay for a sex worker, The Wall Street Journal previously reported. Sorrell rejected the allegation of misconduct "unreservedly."
Credit: By Suzanne Vranica and Patrick Coffee
