After last year's infant formula fiasco, Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Robert Califf said his agency needed more money to do its job. So why is his agency now arrogating to itself vast new regulatory power?
The FDA recently proposed regulating as medical devices the tests that are developed, manufactured and performed by labs. Such tests are used by doctors to identify prenatal genetic abnormalities, predict cancer risk and select therapies, among other things. They are increasingly important in this era of personalized medicine.
---
The FDA claims it has long held authority to regulate such tests under the 1976 Medical Device Amendments, but that it has exercised "enforcement discretion" by not requiring labs to clear tests with the agency. That's doubtful, especially given that Congress in recent years has debated legislation that would give the FDA authority it now claims.
Under the 1976 law, the FDA can regulate diagnostic devices such as blood-glucose monitors or materials used in tests. But lab-developed tests aren't devices under any English definition because they aren't physical products. They are processes that use analytical methods to generate clinical information.
Such tests are becoming increasingly complex, as the FDA notes. Some utilize machine learning and algorithms. The FDA claims that risks from high-tech tests are growing and cites anecdotes about patients allegedly harmed by inaccurate test results.
One patient described "a false negative result from a BRCA test marketed to predict one's risk of breast cancer," but "was later diagnosed with breast cancer and found to be BRCA1 positive by another test." FDA "also received a report regarding a blood-based test for lung cancer that underestimated cancer in about 40 percent of patients."
No doubt inaccurate results can result in unnecessary or improper treatments, or delayed or wrong diagnoses. But doctors order the tests because they think patients will on the whole benefit. Most cancers aren't diagnosed until patients experience symptoms, so the benefits of a blood test that catches some early-stage cancers but misses others may still exceed the risks. Test design also typically involves a trade-off between false negatives and positives: Fewer of the former results in more of the latter, and vice versa.
Labs that design tests carefully weigh the different risks, but now the FDA wants to substitute its judgment. Under its proposal, at least half of tests now on the market would have to be cleared by the agency before patients and doctors could use them.
FDA regulation would effectively prevent labs from using real-world patient data to continuously improve results. Bureaucratic review, which can take years of back-and-forth with agency staff, could discourage labs from developing tests.
Academic and hospital labs lack the resources to hire lawyers to pore over FDA submissions. Neither do biotech startups that are developing liquid biopsies to identify early-stage cancers, Alzheimer's, and auto-immune rheumatic diseases. The FDA would have to hire hundreds or thousands of new employees.
The public-health left has been pressing the FDA to regulate lab tests by flogging the example of Theranos, which claimed to have developed a test that could detect diseases with a finger prick of blood. But stopping fraud or fly-by-night test purveyors doesn't require sweeping new regulation.
Labs are already overseen by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) under the 1988 Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments. The 1976 law also allows the FDA to regulate devices like Theranos's Nanotainer, and the FDA and CMS inspected Theranos's facilities. Doctors sounded the alarms about Theranos's inaccurate test results.
That's why founder Elizabeth Holmes deceived patients and investors by running tests on Siemens's commercial equipment. It's unlikely the FDA's proposed rule would have prevented Theranos's fraud. The FDA in 2015 had even approved a Theranos test, which gave the startup an air of credibility.
Perhaps the FDA is trying to expiate for those lapses. Another goal appears to be containing healthcare spending, which may grow as doctors order more tests to diagnose diseases early or to predict risks that patients will develop them.
In the late 1990s, the FDA claimed authority to regulate tobacco because nicotine was a "drug." The Supreme Court rejected that land grab, and the FDA's lab rule will probably fail in court for the same reason: Congress didn't authorize it. But Dr. Califf, like other Biden agency heads, is taking power in his own hands.
