TOKYO -- Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. cut its capital expenditure forecast by about 10% this year, despite reporting a record quarterly profit surge, responding to headwinds including slowing global chip demand and rising costs.
The world's largest contract chip maker on Thursday posted an 80% increase in net income for the July-to-September quarter, mainly due to strong sales of its cutting-edge chips used in smartphones and other devices.
However, management flagged a likely decline in the whole semiconductor industry in 2023. "TSMC also is not immune," Chief Executive C.C. Wei said during the earnings call on Thursday.
TSMC lowered its capital expenditure forecast to $36 billion for 2022, compared with an earlier goal of at least $40 billion set three months ago. TSMC executives said the spending cut resulted from adjusting its plans to expand capacity because of factors including weaker global demand for semiconductors and rising costs caused by inflation.
Signs of the semiconductor industry's slowdown follow a period of soaring sales during the pandemic, which created extra demand for personal computers, gadgets and data servers. PC sales have slumped in recent months. Mr. Wei said some of the company's capacity wouldn't be as fully used in the October-to-December quarter, compared with the same periods in the previous three years.
But he also cited the consistent demand from sectors such as autos and high-performance computing that processes data and calculations at high speeds, to support the company's outlook for continuous growth in the next few years.
Other semiconductor companies are facing tough conditions. Samsung Electronics Co., the world's biggest chip maker by revenue, last week projected third-quarter operating profit would drop almost a third from a year earlier. Advanced Micro Devices Inc. last week lowered its revenue forecast for the third quarter, after issuing a subdued outlook. AMD said the PC market has weakened significantly in recent months.
TSMC and its rivals are also caught in the crossfire of Washington's measures targeting China's growing semiconductor industry, which the U.S. views as an arena of increasing strategic competition. TSMC shares fell to an almost two-year low this week as investors weighed the impact of the widening U.S. restrictions on exports to China of high-tech chips and the tools needed to make them.
Last Friday, the U.S. unveiled strict export controls, with applications for exemptions dealt with on a case-by-case basis. TSMC, together with Intel Corp. and South Korea's Samsung and SK Hynix Inc., secured exceptions to keep their China-based facilities running.
Mr. Wei said the new regulations aimed at targeting supplies to the very high-end applications such as artificial intelligence and supercomputers. "Therefore our initial assessment is that the impact to TSMC is limited and manageable," he said.
When asked about long-term strategy with China, Mr. Wei said the company would continue to serve "all the customers all over the world" under the condition of "complying with all the rules and regulations."
The majority of TSMC's revenue came from customers in North America, accounting for 72% of the third-quarter total, up from 64% in the second quarter; revenue from China accounted for 8%, down from 13% in the previous quarter.
TSMC said that net income for the quarter ended Sept. 30 rose to 280.87 billion new Taiwan dollars, equivalent to 8.83 billion U.S. dollars, from NT$156.26 billion a year earlier. That beat the estimate of NT$267.31 billion taken from a poll of analysts by S&P Global Market Intelligence.
Third-quarter revenue increased 48% from a year earlier to NT$613.14 billion. Operating profit margin improved by 9.4 percentage points from a year earlier to 50.6%.
Credit: By Yang Jie and Kosaku Narioka
