[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Microsoft's deal makers finally landed on a target they can hit. They sure aren't getting a bargain.
The past several months have seen the software giant reportedly go after TikTok, Pinterest and videogame social network Discord. The first two would likely have been the company's most expensive deals ever. Monday's announcement of a $19.7 billion agreement with Nuance Communications might seem tame, though it ranks as Microsoft's second-largest acquisition behind the $26 billion for LinkedIn in 2016.
TikTok, Pinterest and Discord all would have put Microsoft deep into the social-networking space, where it has little presence. Nuance plays more in the company's corporate-technology wheelhouse, with speech recognition and artificial-intelligence capabilities targeted at the healthcare market. Nuance's systems are used in about 77% of U.S. hospitals, and Microsoft said Monday that Nuance's healthcare cloud revenue grew 37% in its fiscal year ended in September.
Nuance's other businesses have struggled. Overall revenue fell over the past four years, mostly due to sharp declines in the company's software-licensing business. But the stock is up 168% over the past 12 months before Monday, with a big jump after the company's fiscal-year results in mid-November when it announced the divestiture of its medical transcription and electronic health record services. That put the stock in a record range of about 60 times forward earnings even without Microsoft's offer -- earning Nuance a place on a list of "Expensive Tech Stocks With Low Quality Scores" compiled by Bernstein Research last month.
With more than $75 billion in net cash, Microsoft has the third-largest war chest in tech after Google parent Alphabet Inc. and Apple Inc. Its strong record in cloud computing also earns the company some benefit of the doubt. And compared with chasing a high-profile social network, purchasing Nuance will be much less likely to buy Microsoft a new kind of trouble.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
