TOKYO -- Honda and Nissan said they plan to merge in 2026, a move Honda's chief executive said isn't a rescue of troubled Nissan but a recognition that developing new technologies is too hard to do alone.
The companies said they intend to create an automaker that, combined with Nissan partner Mitsubishi Motors, would be the third-largest in the world, after Toyota and Volkswagen, with more than eight million vehicles sold annually.
The announcement came at the end of a year in which Nissan's profit has tumbled in part because of a dated model lineup in the U.S. Both companies have cratered in China, where electric vehicles and plug-in hybrids are growing quickly. Last year, China surpassed Japan as the world's leading auto exporter by number of vehicles.
With the car industry moving toward autonomous vehicles driven by artificial intelligence, the companies said they need to combine research and cut costs to survive.
Still, completing the merger successfully will be a challenge. Honda and Nissan share similar model lineups and a focus on the U.S. market, so they face a choice of either eliminating one brand's models or leaving duplicated product and marketing teams in place.
The power balance is tilted in Honda's favor because it has a higher stock-market value. The companies said Honda would nominate a majority of the directors of the combined company, and its top executive would come from Honda.
Detailing plans they first disclosed last week, the carmakers said they aim to reach a definitive agreement next June and create a listed holding company in August 2026 that would wholly own Nissan and Honda as subsidiaries.
Honda's chief executive, Toshihiro Mibe, repeatedly batted back suggestions that his company was being railroaded into a deal by Japanese officials concerned about the survival of Nissan.
"This is not a rescue," Mibe said at a news conference in Tokyo.
Citing the high cost of developing intelligent cars and electric vehicles, he said, "It would be rough to do that by ourselves."
Mibe struggled when asked what attracted him to Nissan as a partner, stressing that Honda would remain an independent brand in the merged company. He concluded, "I don't know if that was an answer."
Nissan shares have rallied more than 30% since last week's announcement as investors have welcomed the emergence of a stronger peer to help it through its restructuring.
Honda, which expects a net profit of about $6 billion this fiscal year, has been doing better, and on Monday said it intends next year to buy back up to $7 billion of its own shares, or up to 23.7% of its shares outstanding. Honda shares rose nearly 14% Tuesday morning in Tokyo on the buyback news.
The companies described the merger as a way to boost efficiencies, saying they would share production lines, buy the same parts in bulk and combine R&D projects. They said the merger wasn't about making big job cuts in the U.S. or closing factories, but didn't rule out such steps.
Japan's government has left no doubt about its support for a merger.
"We should take a favorable view when companies cooperate to strengthen their competitiveness," Yoji Muto, head of the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, said on Friday. Muto, while declining to discuss the merger plan specifically, said such industry realignments are "one effective method for fostering innovation and raising corporate value."
Honda's Mibe and Nissan Chief Executive Makoto Uchida visited government ministries together Monday morning ahead of their announcement, in a symbolic show of deference to their regulators.
Carlos Ghosn, the former Nissan chairman who was arrested in Japan in 2018, said on Monday that the merger "makes sense politically" because the industry ministry wanted a rescuer of Nissan to be Japanese.
"Do they force somebody? No, they won't force, but they can give you arguments that you cannot refuse," Ghosn told reporters in Tokyo, speaking from Lebanon, to where he escaped five years ago after being charged with financial crimes he denied.
Ghosn, who no longer has any ties to Nissan, said the merger plans "do not make sense" and won't work because "there is duplication everywhere."
Under Ghosn in 2016, Nissan became the top shareholder in Mitsubishi, and it currently holds a 26.7% stake. Mitsubishi said it wanted to cooperate with the merged Honda-Nissan company, assuming the deal goes through, and would decide by January what form the cooperation would take.
China has been encroaching on areas that Japan once dominated -- both cars and components such as batteries -- worrying Japanese officials.
About 8% of Japan's working population is involved in automotive and related jobs, according to the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association. Last year, the industry overall -- including makers of cars, trucks, motorbikes and components -- accounted for more than a fifth of Japan's total exports, the association said.
---
Yoko Kubota contributed to this article.
By Peter Landers
