Nearly $1 trillion in market value across the Magnificent Seven evaporated last week, part of a dayslong stock selloff. This past week, the highflying group of tech companies gained most of it back, leading a broad rally.
Their gains accelerated Friday after Microsoft and Alphabet posted quarterly earnings that beat Wall Street's expectations. At the sound of Friday's closing bell, the Magnificent Seven had collectively added $654 billion in market capitalization, the largest weekly sum since November.
That helped all three major indexes log weekly advances. On Friday, the Nasdaq Composite recorded a 2% gain. The S&P 500 added 1%, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 0.4%, or 154 points.
Friday's leg higher came despite another round of federal data suggesting that inflation remains hotter than the Federal Reserve would like and that the interest-rate cuts investors hope will arrive in the coming months are slipping further out of reach. That has dragged on stocks lately, with all three indexes in the red this month.
The darkening outlook for rate cuts has also pushed up bond yields -- and, with them, borrowing costs across the U.S. economy. While 10-year Treasury yields ticked lower Friday, to 4.668%, the benchmark remains near its 2024 high.
"The bond market is waking up to the fact that inflation is stickier than we thought," said Phillip Colmar, managing partner at the research firm MRB Partners. "That is causing a lot of volatility in equities."
Whereas optimism for a so-called soft landing of the economy buoyed a broad array of stocks starting late last year, Colmar expects choppy waters ahead. "It is not a buy-everything rally now," he said.
Some investors have argued in recent weeks that tighter financial conditions, coupled with overly optimistic projections around artificial intelligence, would take some of the glimmer out of big tech stocks. On Friday, however, two of the world's most valuable companies surprised to the upside.
Alphabet stock surged 10% after the Google parent posted a jump in quarterly profit and announced its first cash dividend. At Microsoft, artificial intelligence bolstered demand for software and cloud services. Its shares rose 1.8%.
Facebook parent Meta Platforms, the lone member of the Magnificent Seven to fall this week, eked out a 0.4% increase Friday. The other members of the Magnificent Seven -- Tesla, Apple, Nvidia and Amazon.com -- joined Alphabet and Microsoft in rising for the week.
One of Friday's biggest laggards was Intel, which notched a 9.2% decline after reporting a first-quarter loss and disappointing outlook. Shares have slumped 37% this year amid the chipmaker's turnaround bid.
The S&P 500 energy sector also edged lower. Exxon Mobil and Chevron raked in $13.7 billion in total first-quarter profits, but their run of record-setting results appears to be tapering off due to lower refining margins and some of the cheapest natural-gas prices on record. Exxon stock retreated 2.8%, while Chevron ticked 0.4% higher.
Some traders had bet that an expanding conflict between Iran and Israel would disrupt global crude supplies, pushing up commodity prices and energy stocks. But the war fears that jolted oil markets last week, briefly cascading into other asset classes, have since cooled. Benchmark U.S. crude rose 0.3% Friday to $83.85 a barrel, just above where it changed hands at the beginning of the month.
Next week, many traders will look to a Fed meeting at which Chair Jerome Powell could provide hints about the potential for rate cuts this year.
Credit: By David Uberti
