Hardly a day goes by without news of another cyberattack. Supposedly well-guarded corporate, government or consumer data land in the wrong hands thanks to crafty hackers who attack allegedly impenetrable networks in search of valuable data. On Jan. 30, Yahoo surfaced as one of the latest victims when the company disclosed that its users' email accounts had been compromised. In 2013, Target, Neiman Marcus, the U.S. Navy and even Internet companies like Twitter and Living Social, were victims of major cyberattacks.
So it should come as no surprise that U.S. intelligence officials ranked cybersecurity as the number one threat to U.S. interests during a recent congressional hearing. Despite years of widely reported and costly break-ins, we are still woefully deficient when it comes to protecting our digital assets.
The problem is that the systems and safeguards currently in use have not kept pace with the rapid technological changes. Traditional security mechanisms, such as firewalls and antivirus systems, are static, difficult to configure, and even tougher to update as new threats emerge.
Most successful attacks today are based on so-called zero-day exploits, meaning that the attacks have never been seen or used before. They are also able to adapt quickly, so if one approach is blocked by a firewall or antivirus system, the exploit repackages itself so as to be undetectable. What's more, breaches today are persistent, meaning that once attackers get into a system, they are able to hide software carefully that waits for instructions on how to proceed. In the recent Target case, the malware was installed through a previously unknown hole in an HVAC provider's system, and it remained inside the point-of-sale system for months, quietly collecting the personal and credit-card data of millions of customers. Investigations into how this breach occurred are still ongoing.
There is some good news: Entrepreneurs have paid close attention to these scary scenarios, and thanks to them, better cybersecurity measures are on the horizon. From June 2012 to June 2013, venture capitalists, angel investors and private-equity funds in the U.S. alone pumped an estimated $1.4 billion into the sector -- a 29% jump from the previous year, according to research firm CB Insights. A well-funded new generation of young private companies is taking cutting-edge technologies pioneered at places like Facebook, LinkedIn and Google, as well as top universities, and turning them against hackers.
By relying on machine learning, virtualization and big-data-analytics techniques, these startups are able to watch in real time for patterns or anomalies that shouldn't be there and, for the first time, protect against novel attacks before they happen. Many next-generation approaches to thwarting computer break-ins are already in advanced trials.
One company based in Silicon Valley, Shadow Networks, creates a shadow network full of fake machines that act like honey pots, attracting and detecting malicious intrusions. Another, Bromium, has developed a technique to virtualize every process running on enterprise computers to isolate them and prevent a single infection from taking over an entire machine or network.
Still others are working on bringing massive data-processing capabilities to bear on detecting malicious players based on patterns in their behavior. Lastline, backed by our firm, relies on next-generation cloud-based emulation technology to detect previously unseen malware when it attempts to enter an enterprise's network.
The results of these advances are promising. For example, over a recent 30-day period, one of Lastline's customers, a large school system in the U.S. with more than 70,000 desktop computers, experienced nearly 10,000 attempted attacks that passed through the existing firewall and antivirus systems undetected. Lastline was able to use its technology to identify and block every one of them.
The continued evolution of cybersecurity innovation is essential if we ever hope to gain the upper hand in this virtual war. We know that because it has worked before: In the 1990s, for example, the most common attacks were buffer overflow attacks, where an attacker takes advantage of the fact that a program expects an input to be no longer than a certain length. By moving to higher-level programming languages with built-in protections against these attacks, such as Java and C#, these attacks were rendered moot.
In the 2000s, intrusions called SQL injections became hackers' most common tool. The two largest public hacks of the 2000s, where more than 100 million credit-card numbers were stolen from retailer T.J. Maxx and payment processor Heartland, were direct results of these types of intrusions. Security researchers quickly responded, founding companies like Imperva to defend against these SQL injection attacks.
With all the recent high-profile infiltrations, we might be tempted to lose faith that anything can stop the incessant and sophisticated schemes being aimed at our networks. That would be a mistake. Yes, plenty of the strategies in the works today will fail, and new methods of attack will surely emerge. But if we maintain our investments, we have a real shot at ensuring that our digital information is secure and cyber criminals are shut out.
---
Mr. Walecka is a founding partner at Redpoint Ventures, a venture-capital firm in Silicon Valley.
Credit: By John Walecka
