NEW DELHI -- As President Donald Trump tightens restrictions on immigration, Indian outsourcers are applying for fewer U.S. work visas, bringing employees home and trying to automate much of what they do.
Mr. Trumplast monthsaid he wants to alter rules for accepting high-skilled foreign workers under the H-1B visa program, which he said is a victim of "widespread abuse," signing an executive order calling for a governmentwide review aimed at stricter immigration enforcement and closing loopholes that undermine his "Buy American" initiatives.
The visas should be granted to the "most-skilled and highest-paid applicants," he said. Indian outsourcing companies are the largest employers of H-1B holders, while U.S. technology companies such as Microsoft Corp. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google also use the visas but usually to recruit employees with rare skills that attract higher wages.
Indian companies that send tens of thousands of workers to the U.S. annually applied for fewer visas this year "due to the fear and uncertainty surrounding the Trump administration's stance on immigration," said Shanon Stevenson, who works with large Indian information-technology firms as an immigration attorney for Fisher & Phillips, an Atlanta-based law firm.
Some of the firms, which she declined to name, are sending home Indian recruits who are already in America.
The number of H-1B applications fell 16% this year, the first dropin five years. About 85,000 of the visas are allotted each year by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, with many going to Indians in lotteries triggered by overwhelming demand. The visas are good for three years and can be extended, meaning likely over half a million H-1B holders are in the U.S., according to analysts' estimates.
Meanwhile the volume of applications from U.S. tech companies appears to be holding steady, immigration attorneys said.
In an example of how Indian firms are reacting to potential immigration changes, Infosys Ltd., India's second-largest outsourcer by sales, on Tuesdaysaid it is opening a new development center in Indiana in August where it hopes to create some 2,000 jobs for Americans by 2021.
However, skeptics say Indian firms have long said they are trying to hire more Americans while still overwhelmingly employing Indians.
Some Indian firms see opportunities from immigration restrictions. If Indian workers are forced to return home, outsourcing firms "are not going to be able to go out and suddenly replace all those people," so the tech work will be forced offshore to India, said Anand Mahindra, chairman of Tech Mahindra Ltd., one of India's largest IT companies. "It is a chance for Indian software companies to change the model," which has depended on sending armies of Indians to America, he said.
While Indian outsourcers say they can't find the talent they need with the right skills in the U.S., some analysts say they aren't really trying to do so, driven instead by a desire to pay lower wages, and that new restrictions could force them and other tech firms to hire more Americans.
"The Indian firms at the end of the day are a labor arbitrage business,"said Rod Bourgeois, who studies outsourcing trends as head of research at Old Greenwich, Conn.-based DeepDive Equity Research. "They use low-cost labor to solve technology problems."
Scrutiny under Mr. Trump is just the latest challenge facing Indian firms. Artificial intelligence, cloud technologies and bots now allow computers to do many routine tasks traditionally done by low-level IT workers such as monitoring servers, resetting passwords and providing tech support.
The trend toward doing more offshore and through automation has been emerging slowly in recent years but is accelerating thanks to Mr. Trump's stance, analysts say.
Visa requests from Indian firms "will likely drop further," said David Rutchik, executive managing director at Vienna, Va.-based Pace Harmon, which helps companies pick outsourcers. "We expect to see accelerated automation to help them deliver client work."
Outsourcing companies had been reluctant to embrace the changes until now because sending people to companies in the U.S. is a high-profile business, and their clients often request having employees on-site, analysts said.
The White House singled out India's two largest IT firms by sales, Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. and Infosys, along with Teaneck, N.J.-based Cognizant Technology Solutions Corp. -- which has most of its employees in India -- last month as potential targets of the crackdown.
The companies pay their employees wages that are well below average levels in the U.S. and flood the government with applications to "get the lion's share of visas," said a senior administration official last month in a press briefing.
TCS and Infosys declined to comment on their plans to deal with more onerous visa regulations. A Cognizant spokesman cited comments Friday from company President Rajeev Mehta, who said on a call with analysts that the company is applying for fewer H-1B visas and aiming to ramp up hiring in the U.S.
Credit: By Newley Purnell
