On movie night, you could peel yourself off the couch to turn off the lights. You could also churn your own butter for the popcorn. In 2017, I just say, "Alexa, turn off the lights in the living room."
OK, it's a first-world solution to a first-world problem. But take it from a guy who tests a lot of gadgets: The future involves talking to your tech, and the lights in your home are ready to make the leap.
Internet-connected lights have been tech for geeks. Bulbs and outlets were connected to apps, so you had to fiddle with your phone just to flip on a light.
Amazon changed that with Alexa, the voice assistant in its $180 Echo speaker that is learning to operate a house full of connected appliances. Last year, Google got into the game with Home, its $130 talking speaker. Apple upped Siri's domestic competence in domestic affairs with the Home app in the latest iPhones and iPads.
Connected lights can do all kinds of things to make your house more beautiful and useful. Mine dim with a warmer tone near bedtime, and gently wake me up with cooler light on dark winter mornings. But there are right ways and wrong ways to attempt smart lighting, and I've lived through both -- so I made a plan of attack.
Smart bulbs vs. dumb switches
The low-effort, low-commitment way to get started is with smart bulbs. They are mostly low-power LEDs but come in different flavors -- the fanciest can change color to make your house look like the "Trolls" movie. I use Philips Hue: The $15 white variety is all you'll need at first, but many have become inexpensive and dependable.
Here's the appeal: It's all wireless. You screw these bulbs into regular sockets on regular lamps, and they connect to a wireless hub (usually sold in a bundle) or directly to your home's Wi-Fi, so you can turn them on and off using your phone.
You can have the same effect using regular bulbs by plugging lamps into connected outlet adapters, like ones made by Lutron, Belkin and Insteon.
Then, you put your lights on schedules -- on at sunset, off at midnight. It's like the old clackety Christmas tree timer, only now the timers are in apps, and it's easier to experiment. You can combine lights and change the brightness, creating scenes.
You don't have to dive into the deep end. Start with accent lamps and ambient lights on bookshelves and in corners. Hue even comes in light strips that can brighten hidden spots.
Your house will look bigger and more beautiful. Don't do this to frequently used lights, or any you're in the habit of turning on and off manually.
If you can help it, don't put smart bulbs in lights operated by a dumb wall switch. If somebody flicks the switch, the bulb loses its connection. Put a piece of tape over it to remind people not to touch, if you must. (Tacky, I know.)
Tape or no tape, people will get annoyed that they can't operate a light the way normal humans have for more than a century.
Get Alexa and Siri involved
In my house, nobody else would touch a smart light until Alexa came along. Now, with an Echo speaker in the living room and Echo Dots in other rooms, Alexa is part of the daily routine: "Alexa, turn on the lights in the office."
Amazon's Alexa app can automatically find and control bulbs and connected plugs from Philips Hue, Lutron Caseta, Belkin Wemo and others. You can group them and command Alexa to turn them on and off, or dim them.
Alexa manages all of this behind the scenes: You don't have to have an Echo in the same room with the lights you want to control, though it makes life easier.
Alexa isn't perfect. I could start a Twitter feed for all the hilarious ways she mishears people, or thinks you're calling her name when you aren't.
Still, I find the Echo, which has fancy far-field microphones, to be the fastest and most accurate way to turn on a light when I'm stumbling to the bathroom in the middle of the night, for instance.
Alexa is the most responsive, but not the most capable of assistants. That would be the iPhone and iPad's Siri, which connects to Apple's home-operation software HomeKit.
With the latest iOS update, there's a Home app you can use to program lighting scenes and set automated programs, even with lights and switches from different makers -- a skill Alexa has yet to acquire.
Two caveats: Until Apple makes a home speaker of its own, Siri lives on your iPhone, iPad, Apple Watch and Apple TV; the Mac Siri can't do this. HomeKit-compatible hardware is limited, but growing.
What about Google Home? It works, too, but with even less stuff.
My advice is to invest in lights that work with as many systems as possible, especially in a mixed Amazon, Apple and Google household. So far, only Philips Hue works with all three. Lutron is great, but currently works only with Alexa and Siri.
Take the plunge with switches
Ready to go all in? Replace your built-in light switches with smart switches that still look and work like regular ones, such as Lutron's $55 Caseta dimmers. It's progress that won't make any family members grumpy.
I feared this would be a major, costly operation, but I was wrong. Using professional-finder website Thumbtack, I found an electrician who installed six dimmers in one hour. Now my chandelier, porch light, bathroom fixtures and other lights are in on the action, and we use Alexa even more.
To confuse burglars, I can turn lights on and off at random times when I'm away from home. I make all my lights turn on when I get close to the house. When I tell the house "good night," everything turns off.
Installing smart switches meant I could now use all my lights to create scenes.
That's how, in my living room, the overhead lights dimmed to 50% and a slight red hue on accent lamps came to be known as "Austin Powers mode."
Credit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler
