Chinese authorities have asked smartphone maker Xiaomi Corp. to list its shares on the mainland, according to people familiar with the situation. They said the company is considering doing so with a dual listing, as it already plans a Hong Kong initial public offering for the second half of the year.
Beijing-based Xiaomi aims to raise at least $10 billion, according to people familiar with the matter, which would make the IPO one of the largest globally this year. The company is targeting a valuation of $80 billion to $100 billion, one of the people said.
Xiaomi was valued at nearly $46 billion when it last raised funds privately in 2014.
A Xiaomi spokeswoman declined to comment. Representatives of the China Securities Regulatory Commission didn't return requests to comment.
A dual listing would be a win for Chinese regulators, which have been trying to get large homegrown companies to participate in the country's capital markets. A string of large tech companies have listed their shares elsewhere: Internet companies Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Baidu Inc. went public in New York, and Tencent Holdings Ltd. listed in Hong Kong.
There have been few concurrent dual listings by Chinese companies that included their home market. The most recent was in 2010, when state-owned Agricultural Bank of China Ltd. raised $22 billion in an IPO on both the Hong Kong and Shanghai stock exchanges, according to data provider Dealogic.
Some market participants and analysts say regulators could encourage more technology companies by loosening listing rules. Only companies that have been profitable for three consecutive years, or that obtain special approval from a state council, can apply to go public.
Foxconn Industrial Internet Co., a subsidiary of Taiwan-based electronics contract manufacturer Foxconn Technology Group that was established less than three years ago, recently won approval from the state council to seek a Shanghai IPO.
The participants and analysts say securities regulators could also expedite the IPO review process, which takes as long as 18 months, for companies that are industry leaders.
After a meeting in early January with internet, artificial intelligence and biotech companies, Zhang Shenfeng, assistant chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission, said the agency aims to "keep the good companies at home" and allow them to go public as soon as possible, according to a statement. Three weeks later, commission Chairman Liu Shiyu said at a conference that China's listing rules could be changed to help support more technology and new-economy companies.
A dual listing could benefit Xiaomi. The company, founded in 2010, sells its phones mostly in China, and could draw interest from the many domestic investors familiar with its brand.
Xiaomi has increased its global smartphone market share by expanding into new markets such as India and Spain. In China, it fell from the top spot in 2014 and 2015 to fourth place the past two years, trailing Huawei Technologies Co., Oppo Electronics Corp. and Vivo Electronics Corp., according to Counterpoint Research. But after declining in 2016, Xiaomi's China market share rose last year.
---
Stella Yifan Xie contributed to this article.

Credit: By Julie Steinberg, Liza Lin and Dan Strumpf
