It was an interesting week in spin, and I don't use the term lightly since spin and reality can become intertwined to create new realities.
Take Donald Trump. He is famous for being unbounded in his spinning about his wealth. It was Forbes magazine -- not a New York Supreme Court judge last week trying to strip Mr. Trump of his property rights -- that pointed out to Mr. Trump and its readers that what he consistently claimed was a 30,000-square-foot triplex apartment in Trump Tower was 11,000 square feet.
Mr. Trump, in the case brought by New York's highly partisan attorney general Letitia James, testified that everybody knew the valuation method employed was worthless (his word). He pointed to the standard disclaimer that such claims shouldn't be relied upon. He might have added: No counterparty with which he dealt -- bank, insurance company, independent appraiser -- could have been in any doubt that Donald Trump is Donald Trump, notorious purveyor of bombast and, early in his career, of banner-headline bankruptcies.
So informed, his counterparties didn't fail to write contracts that were realistic, even conservative, as testified by Mr. Trump's never defaulting on an obligation or missing a payment. Even the judge admits as much: "Defendants correctly assert that 'the record is devoid of any evidence of default, breach, late payment, or any complaint of harm.'"
Judge Arthur F. Engoron engages in some spin and labored breathing of his own, nevertheless finding in Mr. Trump's hyperbolic real-estate puffery the crime of the century. The judge calls for Mr. Trump to be relieved of personal control of his assets, including his namesake Fifth Avenue tower, for the sin of overpraising them.
Happily, not everyone in the press was buying. As the New York Times's laudable Peter Coy points out, such an outcome would seem to "bump up against the layperson's standard of 'no harm, no foul.'"
Elsewhere in the world of spin, the Hollywood writers' strike ended this week after both sides admitted it was doing neither any good. As a membership organization, one whose leaders must submit to election, the union naturally proclaimed itself a winner. Trump-like, it even produced numbers, claiming the final outcome was worth $233 million a year versus the studio's initial offer of $86 million.
Uh huh. Actually proved was the uselessness of the strike weapon to grapple with the challenges facing Hollywood workers. The writers will get a bump in their pay rate along with minimum staffing and job-duration guarantees for the biggest shows. These increases won't remotely compensate them for the slowdown in production due to the streaming bust, only exacerbated by their own strike.
Every writer thinks his next show will be a "Seinfeld." The union was strangely determined, in the streaming era, to shift more risk to its members by tying pay to a program's success. But streamers not only closely control the data revealing whether a show is popular. Their algorithms will let them dial that popularity up or down based on whether they feel like making the desired "residual" payments.
As everybody from this column to Barry Diller pointed out, a work stoppage solves nothing. Streaming, digitization, the rule of the algorithm and artificial intelligence will still have to be endured and adapted to. Compounded by the still-unresolved actors' strike, the writers' walkout left all concerned only worse off.
No frantic campaign of spin has been more consequential, however, or less likely to convince, than the White House's spin about why Joe Biden is running for re-election. A deluge of disheartening polls has undercut the claim, once made openly and which the White House still quietly implies at the risk of ridicule: Mr. Biden is the only person who can beat Mr. Trump.
The obvious and irresistible rejoinder: Mr. Trump increasingly appears to be the only Republican Mr. Biden might be able to beat.
Even that's rapidly becoming less of a sure thing. Mr. Biden, among possible Democratic alternatives, seems the candidate most likely to hand the White House back to Mr. Trump. In clinging to his desire to be a two-term president, Mr. Biden threatens to be the agent of a Trump restoration even as he desperately portrays himself as the antidote to Trumpism.
Spinning this reality under the rug will be a tall order for the White House, even with the help of a compliant and blinkered national media. Convincing America that Mr. Biden is doing the country a favor by running will, I predict, become harder and nigh impossible in the 11 months between now and next year's Democratic National Convention.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
