Facebook Inc. on Wednesday posted more than $1 billion in quarterly profit for the first time, showing the social network's mobile strength as advertisers increasingly look to reach younger users.
Investors drove shares up nearly 13% in after-hours trading, to $106.62, giving the 12-year-old company a market capitalization greater than $300 billion.
Mobile ads accounted for 80% of Facebook's ad revenue in the fourth quarter; three years ago, mobile-ad revenue accounted for just more than 20%.
RBC Capital Markets analyst Mark Mahaney said, "2015 was the year that Facebook went from being an experiment to a must-buy for advertisers."
For most of past year, Facebook's spending outpaced its revenue growth, as the company accelerated hiring and invested in projects such as virtual reality, artificial intelligence and delivering Internet access to remote areas.
In the latest quarter, however, that dynamic reversed: Revenue rose 52% to $5.84 billion, from $3.85 billion. Costs, meanwhile, rose 21%.
Advertising revenue jumped 57%. Excluding the effects of the stronger U.S. dollar, Facebook said ad revenue would have increased 66%, marking the fastest quarter of ad revenue growth since the first quarter of 2014, when revenue was less than half as much, Mr. Mahaney said.
Quarterly net income crossed the $1 billion threshold for the first time, roughly 3 1/2 years after Facebook's 2012 initial public offering. By comparison, Google parent Alphabet Inc. first posted quarterly net income of $1 billion in late 2006, less than 2 1/2 years after its IPO.
Facebook's strength on mobile is a sharp turnaround from the time around the IPO, when mobile was considered a weakness. "There was a long time when people thought, you know, our business might not be as good because we had no ads on mobile," Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said Wednesday.
But as users shifted to mobile devices, Mr. Zuckerberg told his product team to prioritize mobile-first products. "If you come in and you try to show me a desktop product, then I'm going to kick you out," Mr. Zuckerberg said he told the team at the time. "You have to come in and show me a mobile product."
During the past two years, the number of people who tap Facebook exclusively through mobile devices has nearly tripled. In the fourth quarter, 823 million mobile-only users accessed Facebook, or its Messenger app, at least once a month.
Facebook said ad prices rose 21% in the fourth quarter, compared with a year earlier, largely due to demand for mobile ads. Mobile newsfeed ads fetch higher prices than ads on desktop, Chief Financial Officer David Wehner told analysts.
Advertisers say they are willing to pay up. "Facebook is by far the most effective mobile channel for us," said Andrew Blachman, chief operating officer of e-commerce company Tophatter Inc. He credits Facebook ads in part for Tophatter's "explosive growth" during the past year. "We've shifted more of our spend there."
For the fourth quarter, Facebook's net income totaled $1.56 billion, or 54 cents a share, up from $701 million, or 25 cents a share a year earlier. Excluding certain expenses, Facebook said it would have earned 79 cents a share, up from 54 cents on that basis a year earlier. Analysts had expected earnings of 68 cents a share on that basis.
Beyond mobile, analysts say Facebook still has many untapped revenue drivers at its disposal, including video, messaging and virtual reality. Facebook users watch 100 million hours of video on the social network daily, Mr. Zuckerberg said.
For 2016, Facebook expects expenses to rise 30% to 40%, and that capital spending would rise to $4 billion to $4.5 billion, from $2.5 billion last year.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman
