TORONTO -- Canada is seeing a resurgence in its tech sector that has caught the attention of Microsoft Corp., Facebook Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google, which have recently acquired local firms or pledged big projects here.
Yet that has left Canadian policy makers with a dilemma: How to encourage investment from big-name companies while at the same time nurturing homegrown, Canadian firms?
On Thursday, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau was traveling to Silicon Valley to promote Canada's virtues as a global technology hub, an official said. Mr. Trudeau planned to meet with Amazon.com Inc. Chief Executive Jeff Bezos as well as executives from Salesforce.com Inc., AppDirect Inc. and eBay Inc.
Ahead of Mr. Trudeau's visit with Salesforce, the company said Thursday it would invest $2 billion over the next five years in its Canadian business aimed at boosting head count and expanding its office footprint to reflect its growing customer base in the country.
Mr. Trudeau has lamented a "brain drain" of Canada's best tech minds, saying at a recent Google event in Toronto, "Quite frankly, we're tired of Google poaching our best graduates from the University of Waterloo and sucking them down to California."
He is encouraging foreign tech firms to open up shop in Canada instead. Toronto is the only non-U.S. city to make Amazon's shortlist of 20 places to host the company's second headquarters, and Sidewalk Labs LLC, the city-building unit of Alphabet, announced last year it will join with the city on a high-tech waterfront development. Last year, Mr. Trudeau wrote to Mr. Bezos, asking him to consider Canada because of its inclusiveness, single-payer health-care system and immigration policies designed to attract high-skilled talent.
The moves come as Canada is widely considered to be at the nucleus of some world-leading research in areas such as machine learning and artificial intelligence.
Seminal work published by University of Toronto's Geoffrey Hinton, University of Montreal's Yoshua Bengio and others has spawned advancements in voice recognition and automated driving. Mr. Hinton published breakthrough research on "deep learning" in 2007 and 2012 that ushered in a new wave of AI and the potential it could have for smartphones, self-driving cars and other devices.
An AI gold rush followed as tech companies embarked on an acquisition spree, including Google buying DNNresearch, Mr. Hinton's own company, in March 2013.
A record 447 million Canadian dollars (US$356 million) in startup venture-capital financing poured into the country's AI and machine-learning startups over the past three years, according to recent Thomson Reuters data. Canada's AI talent pool is also the third-biggest in the world behind the U.S. and the U.K., with about 1,100 researchers in the country, according to a study released by Element AI on Wednesday.
Even if more big U.S. tech firms open units in Canada, as Mr. Trudeau would like, some say it still threatens Canadian companies. Giants such as Google and Uber Technologies Inc., which opened an AI center in Toronto last May, can easily outflank smaller firms with salary and cachet as they compete for talent.
Inmar Givoni, an autonomy-engineering manager at Uber, joined the company's AI research lab in Toronto in October after a year at a Toronto-based AI robotics startup.
She said she joined the U.S. ride-sharing company because she wanted to be part of the breakthrough in self-driving car technology, and the company had more resources and financing than a traditional startup. "The chance of success is very tangible here," Ms. Givoni said.
An Amazon move to Toronto might also end up being a "Trojan horse" that would draw Canadian workers to the company's Seattle base rather than improve Canada's economy, said Toronto-based venture capitalist Anthony Lacavera, who launched the country's fourth wireless company a decade ago.
"The best and brightest Canadian engineers or marketers that operate under Amazon Canada will see their career path head down to Seattle, not in Canada," Mr. Lacavera predicted.
Facebook's chief AI scientist, Yann LeCun, believes the argument that companies like his are siphoning off talent as "misguided." He says companies like Facebook have different needs than startups, noting that staff at Facebook's AI lab in Montreal are focused on more advanced research.
---
Paul Vieira contributed to this article.

Credit: By David George-Cosh
