PELOTON INTERACTIVE
PTON -23%
Peloton has a tough ride ahead. The fitness-equipment maker reported another decline in paying subscribers and posted a larger-than-forecast loss due to a costly equipment recall. The onetime pandemic darling continues to struggle with flagging demand and high inventory levels after business boomed during Covid lockdowns and then slowed when people returned to gyms and other in-person activities. Peloton also issued unexpectedly weak sales guidance and said it likely wouldn't be cash-flow-positive for the next two quarters. Peloton shares sank 23% Wednesday.
UBISOFT ENTERTAINMENT
UBSFY +8.1%
Microsoft has a new proposal for buying Activision Blizzard to win over British regulators. Under the plan, the tech giant agreed to forfeit most cloud-streaming rights for Activision games -- including its hit franchise "Call of Duty" -- to rival games giant Ubisoft Entertainment. The U.K.'s competition authority has so far rejected the planned $75 billion deal. In the U.S., the Federal Trade Commission is still fighting in court to block the deal. American depositary shares of Ubisoft gained 8.1% Tuesday, while Activision shares added 1%.
MACY'S
M -14%
Department stores' sales are drying up after a pandemic-era flood of spending. Macy's on Tuesday reported declining second-quarter revenue as consumers bought fewer goods at its stores and delinquencies rose among its credit-card holders. Chief Executive Jeff Gennette noted additional challenges are on the horizon for American shoppers as federal student-loan payments are set to resume in September. Macy's shares plunged 14% Tuesday.
NVIDIA
NVDA +3.2%
Surging AI interest is propelling Nvidia's business to new heights. The graphics-chip maker posted record sales that doubled from a year ago, beating estimates. Nvidia is at the center of the artificial-intelligence arms race, as its chips are behind many popular AI tools, such as OpenAI's ChatGPT. The buzz around the technology made Nvidia a $1 trillion company this year. Nvidia has invested in making chips and software for AI for more than a decade and has no competitors who can yet match it. This year, Nvidia's stock has more than tripled. The company's shares rose 3.2% Wednesday.
WARNER BROS. DISCOVERY
WBD -3.4%
The writer and actors strikes are causing delays of big-budget Hollywood releases. Warner Bros. Discovery said Thursday that "Dune: Part Two," "Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire" and "Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim," would now be released throughout next year. The "Dune" sequel was set to open this November, but the studio said it decided to "delay the release to a time when the film's global cast and filmmaking team are more likely able to support it promotionally." Warner Bros. Discovery shares fell 3.4% Friday.
RITE AID
RAD -51%
Rite Aid is preparing to file for bankruptcy. The pharmacy chain is expected to file for chapter 11 in the coming weeks to address mass federal and state lawsuits over its alleged role in the sale of opioids, The Wall Street Journal reported Friday. The filing would cover Rite Aid's more than $3.3 billion debt load and pending legal allegations that it oversupplied prescription painkillers. Opioid manufacturers also face lawsuits accusing them of fueling a U.S. drug abuse crisis. Rite Aid shares plummeted 51% Friday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
