Questa Capital has raised $397 million for its largest venture fund targeting growth-stage healthcare companies, including ones focused on connected medical devices and those seeking to prod the medical system toward value-based care.
Questa's third investment pool closed under its $400 million fundraising goal but topped the $348 million raised for its second fund in 2020. Questa, which has offices in Washington and San Francisco, secured $199 million for its debut partnership in 2018.
Questa, which invests in medical devices and healthcare technology and services, seeks growth-stage companies with $5 million to $40 million in revenue, said Managing Partner Bradley Sloan.
Healthcare venture investors are amassing funds quickly even as financing for startups has slowed this year. U.S. healthcare venture capitalists rounded up $13.7 billion in the first half of this year, according to Silicon Valley Bank. That is a similar pace to 2021, when medical venture investors gathered a record $28.3 billion for the full year, according to SVB.
Limited partners are looking to the long-term potential of technology to improve medical care. Questa's team, for example, sees opportunity in sectors such as connected medical devices that wirelessly transmit data, said Managing Partner Ryan Drant, who previously led the healthcare practice of venture firm New Enterprise Associates.
Questa-backed Avive Solutions said in January that it has received Food and Drug Administration approval for an automated external defibrillator used to treat sudden cardiac arrest. The device has cellular, Wi-Fi, GPS and Bluetooth connectivity and is designed to integrate with 911 centers, according to Avive.
Connected devices are drawing increased investor attention because of the potential to use data to enhance the value of the product and generate new revenue streams, said Brad Flint, who co-leads the venture-investing and emerging-company practice of law firm Ropes & Gray.
Another theme Questa is pursuing is value-based care, in which healthcare providers are rewarded for improving outcomes. Most U.S. healthcare operates under fee-for-service, in which providers are paid according to volume, but some healthcare startups are striking value-based agreements with insurers.
One portfolio company moving toward value-based care is Cortica, which operates centers offering comprehensive services to autistic people and their families. Most of Cortica's services are paid for through fee-for-service, but the company aims to sign more insurers onto value-based deals, co-founder and Chief Executive Dr. Neil Hattangadi said.
San Diego-based Cortica's value-based clinical care delivers services through various types of clinicians, including pediatricians, nurse practitioners, speech therapists and behavioral therapists, Hattangadi said, adding that he started Cortica in 2017 to provide an alternative to what he saw as a fragmented model in which families travel to various providers to get services.
By coordinating services through its care team, Cortica aims to deliver the optimal level of care, Hattangadi said. For example, Cortica physicians often prescribe less antipsychotic medication than patients would receive under a conventional model because its centers can offer various other services, such as behavioral, occupational and speech therapy, first, he added.
"What we wanted was a company that could really offer better outcomes at lower cost," Questa's Drant said.
Cortica, which operates 23 centers in seven states, has four health plans contracted for value-based care and expects six to 10 more such agreements in the next 18 months. "Ryan and Brad were really thoughtful about seeing this five years ago, before health plans saw it, before the rest of the industry saw it," Hattangadi said.
Questa-backed VyncaCare, which has value-based and fee-for-service contracts, provides home-based services to seriously ill people, tending to medical, behavioral health and social needs. San Francisco-based VyncaCare uses devices that transmit data, such as blood pressure cuffs, to help gather information on patients.
Through data and machine learning, it can identify trends that signify a patient's health is worsening and could lead to a costly intervention, such as a hospital visit. This enables it to take measures such as adjusting medication, said CEO Dr. Darren Schulte.
"The technology allows us to be smarter about providing the actual care itself," Schulte said.
Credit: By Brian Gormley
