SHENZHEN, China -- U.S. tech giants and Chinese state-backed companies showed off the future of policing in this technology hub as they vie for a slice of the world's largest surveillance market.
Companies from across the globe packed one of the world's biggest surveillance trade shows to demonstrate the latest gizmos and algorithms powering the industry's high-tech revolution. Tools being hawked included facial-recognition cameras, software that can read a subject's mood, and cameras that can scan license plates in the dark.
The surveillance-equipment market in China was valued at $6.4 billion last year, according to IHS Markit. China is a big buyer of surveillance technology as Beijing steps up its efforts to better monitor its 1.4 billion people. That is providing a boon for equipment makers. But it has also sparked concern from rights activists about how the authoritarian government is using the souped-up "Big Brother" technology.
Seagate Technology PLC, Qualcomm Inc. and United Technologies Corp. were among the foreign companies to show their wares at the 16th China Public Security Expo, where prospective customers included Chinese police, government officials and businesses.
"Ninety percent of the companies here have some kind of facial-recognition products, and they all want to sell it to the police," said Jiang Jun, an executive of CloudWalk Technology Co., a two-year-old startup from Chongqing. A spinoff of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the company counts police units in 23 provinces, as well as more than 50 banks, as customers of its facial-recognition algorithm.
Qualcomm booked rooms at the nearby Ritz-Carlton hotel to demonstrate its latest tech: not-yet-released tools that, when plugged into security cameras, recognize not just faces but offer a judgment on the subject's demeanor, such as "calm" or "happy." The technology was made in partnership with Chinese facial-recognition pioneer SenseTime, the company said.
"Internet of Things is just blowing up, and one of those key areas is cameras," said Danny Petkevich, product-management director for Qualcomm's connected-cameras business. "As we were looking at the areas of growth, security cameras is obviously a big portion of that market."
At a booth hosted by Dahua Technology Co., a Chinese maker of surveillance equipment, a live camera projected the faces of passersby on the screens alongside text describing their gender, age range and expression.
The demo wasn't a hit with everyone: It described Peng Xue, 27 years old, as young and sad. "My first impression is this is an overexpose of my information," she said. "And it doesn't seem to be right. I am actually happy."
Also on display by Dahua was a big-data platform that enables the police to piece together a target's social network by scooping up information from China's prolific personal-data records, from national identification numbers and marriage records to Wi-Fi log-ins. "This is already in use in Zhejiang," Dahua's home province on China's eastern coast, a company representative said.
Most products shared a common thread: a combination of artificial intelligence, such as facial-recognition software, with increasingly high-powered surveillance devices.
"The purpose to come here is to find innovation. You realize how far behind Western countries are," said Mark Raine, managing director at CCTVdirect, a U.K.-based distributor of surveillance equipment. He was watching a gadget demonstration by the Chinese appliance maker Haier Group. "What starts here ends up in homes, airports and businesses back in America," he added.

Credit: By Dan Strumpf and Wenxin Fan
