Every parent I know fantasizes about adding another parent to the mix to help out with the children. I have found that fantasy co-parent in a tidy package: our Amazon Echo.
Like Google's Home device, the Echo is a voice-controlled assistant that sits in the corner of the room, springing to life when requested. For our family, the Echo has evolved into a tool that helps handle everyday parenting jobs, like managing screen time, as well as more complex ones like giving the children a hand with homework and helping put them to bed.
Using a voice assistant to keep track of all our children's deadlines and to-dos lets me get the same kind of efficiencies on the home front as I do using technology tools for work.
The Echo is also the perfect solution to our biggest shortcoming as parents: chronic forgetfulness. My husband and I have always been challenged by the administrative side of parenting -- all the homework to remember, the doctors' appointments to make, the teacher emails to follow up on.
In fact, that is exactly how the Echo evolved from its original mission in our home. I initially got it simply to keep track of our shopping list, then began using it to leave reminders and timers for myself -- and quickly realized that I could be using it for jobs involving the children, too.
The secret is Echo's nonjudgmental tone. Unlike a human parent, these voice-controlled assistants -- which we've put in all the bedrooms -- don't get angry or frustrated when a child fails to listen, making them the ideal backup for parents who may be weary of their admonitions going unheeded.
The Echo isn't without its frustrations. Sometimes it takes a few tries before Echo can understand what you're saying. Parents may also want to manage their Echo's shopping settings so that their child can't trigger a massive toy shipment without permission.
Here is how we use the Echo to lighten the parenting load.
Bring game time to an end
Whenever my son gets out the Wii or the PlayStation, we set a couple of Echo timers that let him know when game time is almost up and then when it is time to shut off his console. If we run into trouble prying him away, I ask him how much time he needs (usually he says three minutes, five minutes or 10 minutes) and then set an Echo timer for the amount he has requested. He finds it much easier to end screen time when Echo reminds him -- unlike Mom, the Echo can't be badgered or tricked into further extensions -- especially when he has played a role in choosing how much time he has left.
Adjust screen-time limits
We use a number of different parental-control tools to manage our children's screen time, including Circle, a device that lets us set limits on which websites our children can access and when they are allowed to be online.
Now that we have Circle integrated with the Echo, I can use a voice command to extend my children's screen time -- or turn it off. Because I don't have to keep my phone close at hand to give screen-time extensions, I am less likely to get tempted into distracted Facebooking.
Simplify decision-making
If you and your child are having difficulty making a decision, ask Echo to lend a hand. When my son can't decide between oatmeal or pancakes for breakfast, he asks the Echo to flip a coin or roll a die, and lets it make the decision for him. If you have a child who gets stressed or stuck on small decisions, this is a simple way to resolve the problem.
Automate bedtime
My youngest likes to fall asleep by listening to an audiobook -- while blasting himself with a fan. Thanks to a smart plug, a smart light switch and our Amazon Echo, I've now smoothed that process. All I have to say is, "Echo, put Peanut to bed," and his light switches off, his fan switches on, and his audiobook starts playing. Instead of hopping up and down to turn off the lights, turn on the fan, find the audiobook and so on, I get to focus on my core bedtime mission: delivering cuddles!
Stop yelling
If there is anything I hate more than a child yelling at me from another room or floor, it is having to yell back.
Thanks to a house full of Echo devices, we can use them as intercoms using the drop-in feature, which lets the devices communicate with each other, rather than yelling from room to room.
And when the children make the mistake of yelling anyhow, I've got a routine prepared. When I say "Echo, tell Peanut to stop yelling," the Echo in Peanut's room reminds him, "Peanut, if you would like something, you need to come downstairs or come out of your room and talk to us. We will not reply to yelling."
Nightmare relief
We're lucky to live in a house that gives us a little breathing room from the children -- but that doesn't feel so lucky when our youngest has a nightmare and wants to wake us up.
By the time he makes the trek to our bedroom, he's wide awake and impossible to get back to sleep. Happily, he has figured a way out of this dilemma: He uses the drop-in feature to ask us to come comfort him -- so he's still in bed, and sleepy, when we reassure him.
And if that doesn't work, he uses our smart lighting system to turn on the lights in our bedroom!
Help with homework
Whether it is a quick fact check or a full-strength prep quiz, Echo makes it easy to help our children with their schoolwork.
We've installed a range of skill-building software on our Echo that the children can use to answer math questions or pick up some Shakespearean insults to impress their teachers. We're not entirely liberated from the job of test preparation, but it helps.
Echo is also a big help with homework reminders. My teen hates it when I nag about assignments -- but is downright appreciative if I set an Echo reminder like "remind me to study for my Spanish test on Tuesday at 5 p.m." Those Echo reminders help make up for teenage forgetfulness, without turning every homework prompt into a Mom vs. Teen showdown.
---
Ms. Samuel is a technology researcher and author of "Work Smarter With Social Media." She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Alexandra Samuel

ERIC Subject: Parents; Homework; Child Rearing; Test Preparation; Audio Books
