SoftBank Group Corp.'s plans for a second technology megafund focused on artificial-intelligence startups is poised to enter an already-hyped sector as skepticism mounts about investor exuberance for such companies.
At a targeted $108 billion, Vision Fund 2 would be more than five times the total dollar amount that privately backed AI companies raised from all investors globally last year, when equity investment hit a record $20 billion, according to data firm CB Insights. The average deal size for AI startups almost tripled from 2013 to 2018.
SoftBank's cash infusion would likely pump up valuations and bring more excess to a market that many experts and investors say is already overheated. AI tech has thus far "overpromised and underdelivered," said Darrell West, director of the Center for Technology Innovation at the Brookings Institution think tank.
The new fund arrives amid an AI arms race, led by China and the U.S., as governments around the globe recognize the economic gains from the automation of tasks previously done by humans, and the military gains from surveillance, facial recognition and more-sophisticated weapon technology.
The White House issued an executive order in February to maintain "American leadership in artificial intelligence," while China has pledged to be a world leader in the technology by 2030.
"The fund could tip the balance depending on where they place their bets," Mr. West said.
The first Vision Fund, a two-year-old pool of capital that also reached about $100 billion, invested in some AI companies, but the sequel is a more focused realization of SoftBank Chief Executive Masayoshi Son's longstanding fixation on the technology. Of the first fund, about $70 billion has been spent.
Funding for privately held AI companies soared 72% in 2018 over the previous year. The global interest in funding AI has pushed startups and public companies to start touting themselves as AI services -- even when they might not have more than a simple chatbot, said Philipp Gerbert, an AI expert with Boston Consulting Group.
"It's very clear that it has become a marketing thing," he said.
A study this year by London-based MMC Ventures and Barclays UK Ventures found just 60% of 2,830 European companies purporting to be developing AI technology actually had any AI of value.
The study also found companies that position themselves as AI raise more money than traditional software companies.
Flooding a particular sector with cash can be bad news for investors, because it creates more competitive financing deals, pumps up valuations and can depress returns.
A deluge of cash often means many copycat companies get created and the underperforming startups get financed alongside the quality startups.
The allure of AI has brought commitments to Vision Fund 2 from more than a dozen investors that have signed memorandums of understanding, ranging from Microsoft Corp. to Kazakhstan's sovereign-wealth fund.
However, these early discussions with investors remain fluid, and it isn't clear how SoftBank will reach its $108 billion target. Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund will likely provide only a fraction of the $45 billion it invested in the first Vision Fund, while Kazakhstan's contribution will also be limited, according to people with knowledge of the matter.
A SoftBank representative said the fund commitments were an encouraging indication of investor interest and reflect a shared belief that AI is creating exceptional opportunities for investment.
"I have no doubt this new fund will accelerate the development of AI," said Chris Nicholson, co-founder and chief executive of San Francisco-based Skymind, an AI startup that provides deep-learning tools.
"The question is, who is going to value these startups higher than SoftBank? What's the exit plan?"
SoftBank has defied venture-capital norms by writing checks for billions of dollars in quick succession, driving up valuations higher than many companies would receive in an initial public offering.
But its deep pockets might just help more AI companies take a slice of market share from the tech giants.
"Now we have $100 billion that are set to chase and support AI, and they obviously won't be investing in Google and Microsoft," Mr. Nicholson said. "So this will create new centers of AI progress. And that's healthy."
SoftBank said that as of the end of March, the return on its first Vision Fund is 29%, accounting for the fund's large amount of debt.
The AI fund will likely include debt from Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Standard Chartered PLC, among others.
Most of the first Vision Fund, which has a minimum 12-year lifespan, is tied up in private technology companies whose futures are uncertain, but whose early results are encouraging.
SoftBank's investment in messaging company Slack Technologies Inc. is up more than 200%, and its stake in health-care company Guardant Health Inc. has gained about 700%.
Those two investments accounted for less than 1% of the fund, according to an analysis from EquityZen, an online platform for pre-IPO equity trading.
Uber Technologies Inc., one of its largest investments at roughly $8 billion, represents about a 13% gain. SoftBank hasn't sold shares in the companies since their public offerings.
"I'm not sure that many people know how to value this thing," Morningstar's director of equity research, Dan Baker, said of the Vision Fund. "I find the strategy not all that predictable."
---
Liz Hoffman contributed to this article.

Credit: By Heather Somerville
