WASHINGTON -- A low-profile government committee that reviews business deals for national security concerns is receiving expanded emphasis as part of the Biden administration's plan to compete with China.
The Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S., or Cfius, is looking to share information with similar review bodies set up by allies and is paying closer attention to Biden priorities, including securing supply chains. In June, Cfius ordered a hold on a Chinese investor's planned acquisition of South Korean-based semiconductor maker Magnachip Semiconductor Corp. to review the deal.
Cfius's wider purview expands on the strengthened authority and sharper China focus it was given during the Trump administration, which used the panel to examine data privacy issues for TikTok app users and squelch Chinese investment in U.S. technology.
The evolving mission means the multiagency panel led by the Treasury Department is set to be a linchpin in the Biden presidency's plans to square off with the world's second-largest economy and potential peer competitor of the U.S., current and former officials said.
"The decisions they make on any given transaction will be a reflection of [the Biden administration's] views of what national security means," said Aimen Mir, a former Treasury official who helped run the panel's investigation process from 2008 to 2018.
For much of its existence, Cfius only reviewed deals that were voluntarily submitted for scrutiny. Its more assertive course began under the Obama administration, which grew alarmed at Chinese buying sprees of tech companies, and accelerated during the Trump administration.
Congress in 2018 expanded the committee's powers with bipartisan legislation that gave it more power to look for deals that could potentially harm U.S. national security but weren't submitted for review. The Biden administration continues to add staff to seek out those cases that it deems should be scrutinized.
The Magnachip review is one such case. Cfius hasn't said publicly why it is looking into the company's acquisition by a Chinese private-equity firm; the Treasury Department declined to comment. Magnachip is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, and Washington is increasingly concerned about maintaining the edge the U.S. and allies have in semiconductors over China. Magnachip officials said the deal doesn't deserve U.S. scrutiny because its operations are in South Korea and almost all of its sales and employees are in Asia and Germany.
"Biden is actually accelerating the U.S. focus on trying to retard China's buildup of semiconductor production," said Harry Broadman, a former member of Cfius now with consulting firm Berkeley Research Group LLC. "Not only will he likely be more aggressive, but as the Magnachip matter shows, he is multilateralizing Cfius among U.S. allies."
The administration is also working to create a process for sharing information on potentially troubling investments with foreign allies. One channel will be via a joint U.S. and European Union Trade and Technology Council, launched during President Biden's Europe trip last month. The U.S. also elevated investment screening cooperation in discussions with its partners in the Quad, a grouping that includes Japan, India and Australia, officials said.
Allies in Europe and elsewhere have been strengthening their oversight of foreign deals, prodded by the U.S. moves and by China's hunt for acquisitions. Last year, Germany passed a law allowing the federal government to block investment in key industries -- especially new tech industries like artificial intelligence, semiconductors, and quantum computing -- for national security reasons.
Japan adopted a new law that requires foreign investors to formally notify the government before acquiring 1% or more of a listed company, up from the previous threshold of 10%.
Australia has progressively tightened scrutiny of foreign investment in recent years.
How these new systems will work together remains to be seen. Mr. Biden raised China issues during his trip last month to Europe and received a mixed reception from leaders in the Group of Seven wealthy nations who look to China for investment and markets.
Under Mr. Biden, Cfius is expected to continue to give tough scrutiny to deals involving sophisticated technology, personal data and semiconductors. Deals the panel blesses are likely to come with safeguards, such as data protections and corporate structure requirements that involve U.S.-based leadership, according to people familiar with the discussions.
The approach, with its heavy focus on China, mirrors other recent actions that build on steps taken under Mr. Trump. In recent weeks, the Biden administration has expanded a prohibition on Americans investing in Chinese companies with purported links to China's military and mandated a broad review of apps controlled by foreign adversaries to determine whether they pose a security threat to the U.S. TikTok also remains under review by Cfius, administration officials said.
---
Alice Uribe in Sydney, Chieko Tsuneoka in Tokyo, Daniel Michaels in Brussels and William Boston in Berlin contributed to this article.
Generate image description

Credit: By Alex Leary and Katy Stech Ferek
