Ships carrying Iranian crude have long used tactics like changing their flags of registration or switching off their radio signals to avoid detection amid Western sanctions.
But when a new U.S. oil-export ban begins on Nov. 5, many of the tricks of seaborne oil smuggling are less likely to be effective at helping Tehran circumvent the trade barriers.
That is thanks to improved satellite tracking and big-data technology that weren't widely available just a few years ago, according to current and former Western officials focused on sanctions.
"Iran's ability to turn its tankers truly into ghost ships will be more limited," said Richard Nephew, former deputy coordinator for sanctions policy at the U.S. State Department.
On a typical day last year, Iran exported some 2.2 million barrels a day of crude. U.S. officials have said their new ban is intended to stop every barrel of Iranian oil leaving the country. For that strategy to work, authorities are likely to rely on information from companies like Israel's Windward Ltd. Windward, along with firms such as U.S.-incorporated TankerTrackers.com and Paris-based Kayrros, track suspicious movements as part of a broader effort to assess global oil supplies.
For example, in September, Windward said its technology detected a tanker leaving an Iranian port and turning off its radio signal, and it was followed by two other tankers that also turned off their radio transmitters. Days later, Windward said, the ships returned to Iran, empty. The Wall Street Journal has confirmed Windward's findings.
These ship-tracking firms count government bodies, shippers, vessel owners and insurers as clients. Windward says one of its clients is the United Nations panel that polices North Korean sanctions, but it declines to disclose other customers.
Apart from providing information directly to clients, these firms also can circulate reports that are widely read. U.S. officials say those reports make up an important part of their sanctions-enforcement efforts.
Iranian oil and shipping officials didn't respond to requests for comment.
Windward used machine learning to calculate a ship's distance and speed to understand if the vessel had stopped broadcasting from its radio transmitter to conceal its behavior. Ships send wireless signals, called automatic identification systems, to help avoid collision and allow rescuers to locate distressed ships. A ship with its signal switched off raises suspicion.
While alerts about suspicious actions may not stop illicit deliveries at the time, those reports could be used to show a pattern of inappropriate behavior.
Kayrros relies on Copernicus, a European Earth observation program established in 2014 that continuously updates images of vast swaths of ocean waters. "Before you could only have an update every six months," said Kayrros's co-founder and President Antoine Rostand.
These companies are combining satellite images with other tools that can identify suspicious movements, spot decoys and track ships making transfers of cargoes to other vessels.
Windward and TankerTrackers.com use imaging from San Francisco-based Planet Labs Inc., which has launched 337 mini-satellites in the past six years, making it possible to run a daily scan of the world's most strategic oil-shipping routes.
Still, the cat-and-mouse game that smugglers and sanctions enforcers have long played on the high seas isn't likely to come to an abrupt end soon.
For instance, there are still gaps in satellite coverage, "dark" spots, that smugglers can identify and exploit.
"Compared to 2012, there has been a step-change in commercially available maritime tracking and data analysis technologies," said Hugh Griffiths, coordinator of the United Nations' North Korea sanctions panel.

Credit: By Benoit Faucon
