Technology companies' leasing of office space jumped in the third quarter to its highest level in nearly three years, reflecting the growth of artificial-intelligence firms and job growth in the tech industry.
Tech firms leased 9.9 million square feet of U.S. office space during the third quarter. That was up from about eight million in the second quarter and the highest amount since the fourth quarter of 2021, according to a new report from commercial real-estate services firm CBRE Group.
Hiring by tech companies has also edged higher, resulting in an uptick in office demand.
Job growth was up 1% through July, compared with all of 2023 when it rose 0.3%.
That is still well off the 5.4% growth in 2021, CBRE said.
The U.S. office market remains in a glut, in part because many tech companies are taking less space when signing new leases because of hybrid workplace strategies.
About 30 million people in the U.S., or 19.5% of employed people, worked remotely at least some of the time in 2024, said the report.
That was nearly double the 10% who worked remotely in 2020.
"Some companies are moving [to new locations] to create more efficient space," said Colin Yasukochi, head of CBRE's Tech Insights Center. "But they're taking less of it."
Tech companies have been the dominant tenant in West Coast cities such as Seattle and San Francisco.
By 2021, these companies came to rival those in the finance industry as Manhattan's biggest user of office space. That demand continued even during the pandemic but began to wane last year.
A growing slice of office-leasing demand is coming from new AI companies like OpenAI and Anthropic that are growing in cities such as San Francisco, New York, Seattle and Boston.
AI firms backed by venture-capital firms have leased 6 million square feet in the top six markets since 2019, said Yasukochi.
That figure doesn't include expansion by AI businesses that are part of big technology companies like Google and Microsoft, he said.
"We see AI as a huge catalyst going forward," Yasukochi said.
In recent months, some high-profile companies such as Amazon.com have called workers back to offices five days a week. But so far there have been few repercussions from that change in office leasing markets, Yasukochi said.
"Right now, because the economy is a little bit tenuous, companies aren't going out and leasing more space in anticipation of more people coming back," he said. "They're going to see how it goes."
Credit: By Peter Grant
