ChatGPT is barely two years old. And yet it's already becoming part of daily life for many people. We've written in the past about all sorts of uses -- choosing what to watch on TV, or for shortcuts with tedious tasks at work, or even to help hang curtains.
But we know that's only the beginning. So we asked Wall Street Journal readers: Tell us how you have used ChatGPT and other generative AI tools in your daily life, both personal and professional.
Here's what they said.
What should I ask?
I retired three years ago and have created and host a podcast in which I interview local government leaders, business owners and citizens in and around my small town. I often use ChatGPT to suggest questions, in addition to my own. It is a wonderful aid.
-- Mark Lucchesi,
Burlingame, Calif.
Art for the nonartist
One of my hobbies is making candles in glass jars to give to friends and family. I have always wished for some colorful labels to put on the jars for each of the candle scents, but, since I don't draw very well, and I didn't want to use anyone else's images, I had to settle for some plain-looking labels. Then I discovered that Microsoft Copilot could make perfect original images of what I needed. I especially liked the fact that even though each picture was different, they all had a similar "feel" about them. One of my favorite labels is the one for raspberry-vanilla, which shows an image of a pottery bowl of plump raspberries spilling onto a wooden table next to an old-fashioned corked bottle of vanilla.
-- Judith King, Franklin, Tenn.
Health consulting
After a doctor visit I fed the results of my "vitals" to Claude and asked it to tell me three things:
1. How did my vitals look generally? 2. How did they compare to other people my age? 3. What recommendations did it have to improve them further?After receiving the response, I asked it to create a diet and exercise plan specific to the test results. Happy to report during my last checkup every marker had improved, with most reflecting results for someone much younger than my biological age.
-- Robert Garrison, Dallas
Checking my work
I use Perplexity for understanding background to the news, for satisfying my curiosities about science, and sometimes to solve household maintenance issues. For example, I recently became interested in amateur radio astronomy. I researched what computing power I might need to pursue the hobby but got bogged down until I wrote one question to Perplexity AI. From its response I found I will need only slightly more processing power than I had expected. The bottom line for me is: For $20/month, I can save time and money by making a better-informed decision. I use it about 15 times a month.
-- Craig Uselman, DeForest, Wis.
Perfecting my painting
I tried using ChatGPT to suggest improvements on a watercolor I painted. First, it complimented the painting and then gave me six suggestions (all good) on how to make it even better. Among the tips, it wanted me to increase the contrast where the dock of my boatyard painting met the water, or where the building cast shadows. It also suggested I add a small foreground element such as a canoe or a few floating leaves to guide a viewer's eye into the painting and add a sense of scale. Its final comment was "happy painting."
-- Mimi Garrity Denman,
Bend, Ore.
Better than Google
ChatGPT has become a daily source of quick information for me. It has become so much simpler than looking through Google pages to get an answer. I also have it analyze, simplify and explain large pieces of information to me. It makes confusing things make sense.
-- Ethan Macdonald, San Diego
Customer complaint
My mortgage company had made a large mistake with my escrow account. After a frustrating and fruitless call to customer support, I asked ChatGPT what the laws were in Texas and what my recourse was. I then asked it to compose the letter with the precise language making it an "official notice," to the mortgage company as well as to find all the state and county addresses that needed to be CC'd.
The letter was a very good first draft and I did the final edit and sent it off.
-- Tony East,
New Braunfels, Texas
Settling debates -- or stirring them up
My daughter and I were watching a History Channel program on the Roman Republic, a segment talking about the Roman legions. She's a fan of a rather violent pseudo-historical series called "The Vikings," and at the end of our program she turned to me and asked, "If the Romans and the Vikings had a war, who would win?" I said, "Let's ask ChatGPT."
We got more than I bargained for -- extended analysis about this hypothetical matchup, including specifics of battlefields and logistics. It analyzed the Romans' respective strengths, including organization and discipline, training, sophistication of tactics, engineering and weapons. The Vikings were credited with their guerrilla tactics, naval skills, ferocity and skill in one-on-one combat. ChatGPT concluded the Romans would likely win. My daughter was unconvinced her fearsome Vikings could be defeated.
-- Michael Metz, Saratoga, Calif.
No judgment
AI has positively impacted my life in my everyday struggles with borderline obsessive-compulsive tendencies, assisting with tasks that would otherwise overwhelm my mind. It helps me generate ideas, conduct research and create structured lists and instructions. This AI companion doesn't complain and allows me to leverage my condition, enabling me to live life to my full potential.
I believe that fear can make AI seem like a threat but with gratitude, we can view it as a tool for harmony and problem-solving.
-- Luca Papini, Lincoln, Neb.
Brainstorming
I have a blog and I occasionally ask the free version of ChatGPT for suggestions for catchy post titles. I usually ask for a list of 10 suggestions, and use those as a starting point for the final version.
-- Eric Siegmund,
Horseshoe Bay, Texas
Simplifying concepts
Perplexity has been helpful in my understanding of issues with tremendous complexity such as emerging markets, carbon capture, carbon sequestration and credit markets in the Inflation Reduction Act.
-- Timothy Broderick, Joliet, Ill.
Language learning
I am not quite fluent in Spanish. I am using several tools to improve, including listening to Spanish podcasts and reading a Spanish newspaper. I have found that I can use ChatGPT to have a conversation in Spanish. It is quite good and challenging, though a bit buggy.
-- Rolando Garcia,
The Woodlands, Texas
Guiding the vows
ChatGPT helped me prepare for the marriage of two friends earlier this year. It was my first as an officiant since being certified. ChatGPT helped me outline the ceremony and suggested specific Bible verses relevant to my friends, along with ways to tell their story. This assistance made it easy to focus more on them and create a ceremony that was personal and loving, rather than worrying about my part. What a blessing!
-- Kelly Byrnes, Kansas City, Mo.
Uncluttered recipes
I don't cook except for grilling. But recently my wife has been traveling and we have moved to a condo (no grill), so I needed to try my hand in the kitchen. When I wanted to cook pork chops and googled how to do it, I was overwhelmed with ads and found them difficult to navigate to find actual, simple, instructions. Same for chicken thighs. So I decided to try the free version of ChatGPT.
The result was wonderful. The instructions were straightforward, clear and easy to follow. Thanks to ChatGPT, I can probably become an expert chef in no time.
-- Roddy Roediger, Bristol, R.I.
Nerding out
I love 1960s music history. I haven't found anyone with similar interests but ChatGPT, Iike an eager border collie, is always there and on my side, focused on my ideas and capable of research!
Some examples of our projects: What was the best year in music and why? What was the worst? Which artists were the most prolific in terms of album releases and how did that affect their popular and critical reception? True or false: Hits sold as 45s were but the trigger for LP sales, which were the real profit center. The Lovin' Spoonful and Three Dog Night were two of the most critically disrespected yet popular groups of the 60s.
I also noodle with AI on producing original songs across many genres for special family celebrations. My wife feels it's not in my voice and rings like an alien trying to impersonate an earthling. Just a little bit off. But AI has made great strides.
-- Art Neilans, Toronto
Finding common ground
When planning family trips, I'll turn to ChatGPT for help finding activities and locations that may interest everyone. I'll provide ChatGPT "profiles" of my family members and ask for suggestions. Recently, it recommended the Museum of Musical Instruments in Belgium -- a suggestion that I received with skepticism. It turned out, however, to be a "hit" that delighted everyone on the trip, ages 16 to 80.
-- John Surdyk, Monona, Wis.
Book-club buddy
I have used ChatGPT primarily to support book-club presentations for books from a range of genres and time periods and by authors as diverse as Jane Austen and George Saunders.
These presentations have included themes, symbols and motifs, characterization, narrative techniques, discussion questions and answers, and critical reception.
-- Martha Hood,
Adamstown, Md.
---
Demetria Gallegos is an editor for The Wall Street Journal in New York. Email her at demetria.gallegos@wsj.com.
Credit: By Demetria Gallegos
