[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Low expectations make for unfamiliar ground at Salesforce. Given the uncertainty artificial intelligence has cast over the cloud software industry, they may be welcome.
As Salesforce kicks off its annual confab known as Dreamforce this week, the pioneer of the software-as-a-service, or SaaS, category finds itself with a lot to prove. Years of turbocharged revenue growth through sales deals and acquisitions has slackened, with revenue expected to rise at a single-digit percentage for the first time ever in the current fiscal year. That has put a bit of a cloud over the stock price, which is down about 2% since the start of the year.
At least Salesforce has plenty of company. Adobe, Workday, Atlassian and Snowflake are a few of the SaaS providers that saw shares take a hit; the BVP Nasdaq Emerging Cloud Index shed more than 10% so far this year. Like Salesforce, many are struggling with slowing growth rates, causing investors to worry that the sharp rise of generative-AI investments is squeezing other categories on corporate budgets, making major sales deals harder to close.
Some generative-AI proponents believe the technology will supplant prewritten software. Klarna CEO Sebastian Siemiatkowski reportedly told a group of the buy-now-pay-later provider's investors last month that the company was shutting down its use of Salesforce and Workday because it feels it can use AI tools to replicate those services. That could turn out to be a stretch, especially for a company working in the highly regulated field of consumer finance. Still, the few SaaS stocks that have done well this year, such as ServiceNow, have done so by maintaining strong growth and deal-closure rates.
Salesforce is placing a major bet on a new offering called Agentforce. This is a set of so-called AI "agents" that can be easily programmed by customers using Salesforce's existing software tools to automate things such as customer service, marketing campaigns and business procurement. ServiceNow unveiled its new AI-agent tools last week.
But Salesforce seems to have pivoted quickly to the technology. The company first discussed Agentforce in its earnings call three weeks ago and announced the service last week. Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff told a Goldman Sachs investment conference last week that Salesforce will be hosting 25 events between now and the end of the year to push Agentforce to its customer base.
Salesforce needs to sell hard. While its financial performance improved in the latest quarter compared with a disastrous report three months prior, Salesforce expects revenue to grow by less than 9% in the fiscal year ending in January -- half the growth rate it averaged over the previous three years. The company sharply improved its adjusted operating margins, but single-digit growth is a tough pill to swallow -- especially with Microsoft and Oracle accelerating past it.
And, relative to other AI-hyped companies at least, the bar for Salesforce may be low. "At this point, we believe very little optimism is priced into the shares as it relates to the company's AI opportunity," wrote Kirk Materne of Evercore ISI.
Having nowhere to go but up isn't always a bad place to be.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
