In 2015, Elon Musk said self-driving cars that could drive "anywhere" would be here in two or three years.
In 2016, Lyft chief executive John Zimmer predicted the vehicles would "all but end" car ownership by 2025.
In 2018, Waymo CEO John Krafcik warned they would take longer than expected.
In 2021, some experts aren't sure when, if ever, individuals will be able to buy steering-wheel-free cars that drive themselves off the lot.
In contrast to investors and CEOs, academics who study artificial intelligence and autonomous technologies have long said that creating a fully self-driving automobile would take many years, perhaps decades. Now some are going further, saying that despite investments already topping $80 billion, we may never get the self-driving cars we were promised. At least not without major breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, which almost no one is predicting will arrive anytime soon -- or a complete redesign of our cities.
Even those who have hyped this technology most -- in 2019 Mr. Musk doubled down on previous predictions, and said that autonomous Tesla robotaxis would debut by 2020 -- are beginning to admit publicly that naysaying experts may have a point.
"A major part of real-world AI has to be solved to make unsupervised, generalized full self-driving work," Mr. Musk recently tweeted. Translation: For a car to drive like a human, researchers have to create AI on par with one. Researchers will tell you that's something we haven't got a clue how to do. Mr. Musk, on the other hand, seems to believe that's exactly what Tesla will accomplish. He continually hypes the next generation of the company's "Full Self Driving" technology -- actually a driver-assist system with a misleading name -- which is currently in beta testing.
As deadlines for the arrival of autonomous vehicles have slipped, people within the industry have begun to redefine the term, writes Melanie Mitchell, a computer scientist and professor of complexity at the Santa Fe Institute. Since these vehicles require a geographically constrained test area and ideal weather conditions -- not to mention safety drivers or at least remote monitors -- makers of these vehicles have incorporated all of those caveats into their definition of autonomy. Even with all those asterisks, Dr. Mitchell writes, "none of these predictions has come true."
In vehicles you can actually buy, autonomous driving has failed to manifest as anything more than enhanced cruise control, like GM's Super Cruise or Tesla's Autopilot. In San Francisco, GM subsidiary Cruise is testing autonomous vehicles with no driver behind the wheel but a human monitoring the vehicle's performance from the back seat. There's only one commercial robotaxi service operating in the U.S. with no human drivers at all, a small-scale operation limited to low-density parts of the Phoenix metro area, from Alphabet subsidiary Waymo.
Even so, Waymo vehicles have been involved in minor accidents in which they were rear-ended, and their confusing (to humans) behavior was cited as a possible cause. Recently, one was confused by traffic cones at a construction site.
"I am not aware we are struck or rear-ended any more than a human driver," says Nathaniel Fairfield, head of the "behavior" team at Waymo. The company's self-driving vehicles have been programmed to be cautious -- "the opposite of the canonical teenage driver," he adds.
Chris Urmson is the head of autonomous trucking startup Aurora, which recently acquired Uber's self-driving division. (Uber also invested $400 million in Aurora.) "We're going to see self-driving vehicles on the road doing useful things in the next couple of years, but for it to become ubiquitous will take time," he says. Aurora will operate its self-driving trucks with a safety driver on board with commercial partners on highways in Texas starting this year, says a company spokeswoman.
Aurora's initial rollout will operate only on highways where the company has already created a high-resolution, three-dimensional map, says Mr. Urmson. Aurora's eventual goal is for trucks and cars using its systems to travel farther from these highways.
The slow rollout of limited and constantly human-monitored "autonomous" vehicles was predicted years ago. But some CEOs and engineers argued that new self-driving capabilities would emerge if these systems could just log enough miles on roads. Now, some are taking the position that all the test data in the world can't make up for AI's fundamental shortcomings.
Decades of breakthroughs in the part of artificial intelligence known as machine learning have yielded only the most primitive forms of "intelligence," says Mary Cummings, director of the Humans and Autonomy Lab at Duke University.
To gauge today's machine-learning systems, she developed a four-level scale of AI sophistication. The simplest kind of thinking starts with skill-based "bottom-up" reasoning. Today's AIs are quite good at things like teaching themselves to stay within lines on a highway.
The next step up is rule-based learning and reasoning (i.e., what to do at a stop sign). After that, there's knowledge-based reasoning. (Is it still a stop sign if half of it is covered by a tree branch?) And at the top is expert reasoning: the uniquely human skill of being dropped into a novel scenario and applying our knowledge, experience and skills to get out in one piece.
Problems with driverless cars really materialize at that third level. Today's deep-learning algorithms aren't able to achieve knowledge-based representation of the world, says Dr. Cummings. And human engineers' attempts to make up for this shortcoming -- such as creating ultra-detailed maps to fill in blanks in sensor data -- tend not to be updated frequently enough to guide a vehicle in every possible situation, such as encountering an unmapped construction site.
Machine-learning systems, which are excellent at pattern-matching, are terrible at extrapolation -- transferring what they have learned from one domain into another.
"When you're a toddler, you're taught the hot stove is hot," says Dr. Cummings. But AI isn't great at transferring the knowledge of one stove to another stove, she adds. "You have to teach that for every single stove that's in existence."
Some researchers at MIT are trying are going back to basics. They have launched a huge effort to understand how babies learn, in engineering terms, in order to translate that back to future AI systems.
"Billions of dollars have been spent in the self-driving industry and they are not going to get what they thought they were going to get," says Dr. Cummings. This doesn't mean we won't eventually get some form of "self-driving" car, she says. It just "won't be what everybody promised."
But, she adds, small, low-speed shuttles working in well-mapped areas, bristling with sensors such as lidar, could allow engineers to get the amount of uncertainty down to a level that regulators and the public would find acceptable. (Picture shuttles to and from the airport, driving along specially constructed lanes, for example.)
A growing number of experts suggest that the path to full autonomy isn't primarily AI-based after all. Engineers have solved countless other complicated problems -- including landing spacecraft on Mars -- by dividing the problem into small chunks, so that humans can craft systems to handle each part.
This is the primary strategy Waymo has pursued to get its autonomous shuttles on the road, and as a result, "we don't think that you need full AI to solve the driving problem," says Mr. Fairfield. He says his team sees no fundamental technological barriers to making self-driving robotaxi services widespread. Mr. Urmson of Aurora says that his company combines AI with other technologies.
Raj Rajkumar, a professor of engineering at Carnegie Mellon University with a long history of working on self-driving cars, is optimistic about a path that isn't primarily AI-based: "It's not going to happen overnight, but I can see the light at the end of the tunnel."
Credit: By Christopher Mims
