Prudential Financial Inc. agreed to pay $2.35 billion for an online startup as traditional life insurers seek to reach digital-savvy customers who shop on the internet.
Executives of Prudential said Assurance IQ Inc., a three-year-old company based in Bellevue, Wash., can help it solve a decades-old problem bedeviling many of the biggest names in life insurance: selling to middle-class clients. The 144-year-old Prudential is the nation's largest life-insurance company by assets.
The deal is part of a trend in which traditional life insurers are pairing with what are known as insuretech firms to reach new audiences and benefit from data analysis driven by algorithms.
At the same time, venture-capital checks are being written to small companies in nearly every category of the insurance industry. SoftBank Group Corp. led a $300 million investment round in April for Lemonade Insurance Co., which sells renters' and homeowners' policies online. Clover Health, a San Francisco startup that sells Medicare Advantage health-insurance plans, raised $500 million in January.
Assurance sells life, health, Medigap and auto policies online, and it has agents available by phone to help consumers with buying decisions if they want a human to answer questions. The privately held firm currently offers products from more than 20 providers, not including Prudential.
The Newark, N.J., insurance giant plans to make money initially from the commissions and other fees that Assurance receives from providers, while adding its own products, including life insurance and annuities, to the mix over time.
"We think Assurance has cracked the code" to reach consumers whose business is typically too small to make it worthwhile for agents to seek, Prudential Chief Executive Officer Charles Lowrey said in an interview.
Assurance uses online advertising and other marketing to attract consumers to its online platforms. The company uses data science and machine learning to assess needs, guide customers to products they can afford and speed up the application process. Those comfortable with buying online can make a purchase that way, or the firm will route customers to an agent if preferred.
Prudential executives said Assurance can help ramp up sales to a wider selection of households while Prudential's network of financial advisers will continue focusing on more affluent clients.
Shares of Prudential rose 2.9% to $81.92 on Thursday. The broader insurance sector rallied on the outlook for longer-term interest rates.
Some Wall Street analysts cautioned that the $2.35 billion price tag seemed high but said the transaction diversifies Prudential away from the risks in its core insurance and retirement-income products by delivering a potentially fast-growing stream of fee income. Prudential said it would provide up to $1.15 billion in additional cash and equity if Assurance meets certain growth objectives.
Sales of individual life-insurance policies have fallen about 45% since the mid-1980s to hold steady in recent years at about 9.6 million policies annually, according to Limra, an industry-funded research firm.
Many life-insurance agents have left the business over the past couple of decades because of the difficulty of identifying potential buyers for low-cost, term-life insurance.
Assurance says its model overcomes this obstacle by linking potential buyers to agents, who can work remotely and with flexible hours. The agents earn lower commissions than if they prospected for customers themselves, said Michael Rowell, CEO of Assurance, but they have "higher, much higher productivity" because they aren't out hunting for customers.

Credit: By Leslie Scism
