SHANGHAI -- When Anbang Insurance Group Co. paid about $2 billion to buy New York City's Waldorf Astoria Hotel three years ago, the deal seemed to define an era for China Inc. President Xi Jinping shortly afterward dropped in to stay at the Park Avenue landmark.
China's business priorities have since changed, turning real-estate trophies into symbols of risk. Regulators in Beijing on Friday said they seized control of Anbang to keep the closely held insurer from collapsing, while prosecutors in Shanghai said they indicted Wu Xiaohui, Anbang's swashbuckling ex-chairman, for alleged fraudulent fundraising and abuse of power.
China's government makes no secret of its penchant to guide commerce, even with private companies, but the boardroom takeover still rattled analysts used to Beijing's applying its influence more quietly. "This is an unprecedented step, putting into receivership a Chinese company in such a public direct way," said Scott Kennedy at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies. "They are so worried about risks that they will stop at nothing to avoid them."
The move, which some view as a quasi-nationalization of Anbang, sheds light on how far these companies have fallen out of favor with President Xi's government. Other high-profile private businesses were already signaling strategy shifts by selling assets and restructuring debt. They included real estate developer-turned-Hollywood producer Dalian Wanda Group; HNA Group Co., a conglomerate founded from an airline; and Tomorrow Group, a warehouse of financial businesses that has donated millions of dollars to institutions such as Harvard University.
Anbang declined to comment on the latest government statements, but in recent months it has said its business remained solid. Mr. Wu was first detained last June and hasn't made any comment. It isn't known if he has a lawyer.
Authorities began leaning on companies such as Anbang, Wanda and HNA -- dubbed "gray rhinos," or obvious-but-ignored risks -- in late 2016, after the central bank spent some $1 trillion in about 18 months to offset the effects of capital flight.
Insurers, some of which had turned to selling investment deals rather than traditional insurance, faced special scrutiny. One company's chairman was banned from the industry for a decade. Anbang, which will now be run by a working group led by a China Insurance Regulatory Commission official, has been guided by regulators since Mr. Wu's departure last June.
Even before regulators swooped down on Mr. Wu, Anbang was adjusting its sales practices and reporting good results. Regulatory filings also show that beginning last year it had pared its shareholdings in major Chinese banks, though according to the latest filings, it indirectly still held more than 15% in China Minsheng Bank in September and nearly 11% of China Merchants Bank Co.
Anbang now faces prospects of unwinding international holdings -- possibly the Waldorf in a sort of echo of a Tokyo developer's exit from New York's Rockefeller Center within seven years of its 1989 investment.
Chinese authorities allege companies such as Anbang got big through "regulatory arbitrage" -- taking advantage of incomplete financial oversight to raise money in gray markets -- and that a heavy hand is needed now to eliminate big threats to the broader financial system.
Pressure has been mounting for years on corporate China to manage debt, which International Monetary Fund analysts recently pegged at 135% of the underlying economy.
The new plan for Anbang aims to keep it from collapsing, according to the insurance regulator. But few analysts said they believe its potential demise would threaten China's financial system, the way regulators in the U.S. feared American International Group Inc. was "too big to fail" before rallying an $85 billion bailout in 2008. A report last August from UBS pegged the Chinese insurer's assets at 2.5 trillion yuan ($393.8 billion) at the end of 2016, or 3.4% of gross domestic product, but played down its potential systemic risks since all but 11% of that was in liquid investments such as stocks.
Beijing is allowing some debt fallout elsewhere in the economy, such as by permitting an increasing number of corporate-bond defaults and even publicly admonishing provincial governments for doctoring economic growth statistics.
"The case could be a signal for other investors that regulators are tightening," says Tiecheng Yang, a financial regulatory lawyer at Han Kun Law Offices in Beijing. Next, Mr. Yang says, authorities could restrict deal making between bank, securities and insurance firms that share an owner. Last month, China's banking regulator outlined new shareholder limits, including requiring permission for purchases of 5% or more in a commercial bank.
At its peak, Wanda, controlled by billionaire Wang Jianlin, had more than a half-dozen real-estate projects in development across the globe. Its overseas portfolio included the AMC movie-theater chain, Hollywood producer Legendary Entertainment, British yacht maker Sunseeker and the Ironman Triathlon.
But since mid-2017, Wanda has been in retreat, selling property projects in the U.K. and Australia, plus its Chinese theme parks, movie theaters and film sound stages.
Not long ago, Anbang's hotel purchases, Wanda's forays into Hollywood and HNA's logistics bids around the world appeared to fit Beijing's desire to own brands. Now, China's political priorities have shifted toward technology such as artificial intelligence and electric vehicles.
---
Chao Deng and Wayne Ma contributed to this article.

Credit: By James T. Areddy
