TOKYO -- Toyota Motor Corp. intends to make its top executives mind the company's stock price more closely.
Executives at Japan's largest car maker are paid almost entirely in cash, but Chief Executive Akio Toyoda hopes to use awards of restricted stock to encourage longer-term thinking.
Toyota plans to ask shareholders to approve raising the cap on board members' aggregate compensation to 7 billion yen ($63 million), from the current 4 billion yen. Of the new total, up to 3 billion yen can be paid in cash and 4 billion yen in share allotments.
A Toyota spokesman said the total cap was rising to give the company the flexibility to attract talent.
Chief Financial Officer Koji Kobayashi said the proposal aims to keep everyone's compensation amounts essentially the same, while shifting toward stock compensation to foster "longer-term strategic thinking."
Currently the only non-Japanese executive in the topmost ranks is Didier Leroy, the chief competitive officer. Mr. Leroy, who is French, made 1.03 billion yen ($9.3 million) in the year ended March 31, 2018, the most recent figure available, compared with 380 million yen for his boss, Mr. Toyoda.
In general, pay for executives and senior managers is low in Japan compared with the U.S. That can hinder efforts by Toyota and others to attract top talent in robotics and artificial intelligence. Mr. Toyoda is focusing on next-generation battery-powered vehicles and driverless cars.
However, the country is sensitive about hefty paychecks.
One of the charges against former Nissan Motor Co. Chairman Carlos Ghosn is that he was angling to receive more than $80 million after retirement and didn't disclose the plan in order to avoid public scrutiny. Mr. Ghosn has declared his innocence, saying no promises were made about any possible postretirement pay and that he had no obligation to report it.
Toyota's restricted-stock plan will apply only to top executives who are also members of the company's board. Currently, six executives hold board seats.

Credit: By Sean McLain
