Facebook Inc. on Wednesday reported an 11% increase in third-quarter earnings as advertisers directed more of their spending to the social network.
Revenue rose a more-than-expected 41% to $4.5 billion, from $3.2 billion in the same period a year earlier.
Total costs and expenses increased even faster, 68%, reflecting Facebook's heavy spending on a range of projects, including artificial intelligence, virtual reality and bringing Internet access to emerging markets.
The results reflect the company's ability to win new advertisers who are spending more on digital advertising overall. In September, Facebook said it had 2.5 million advertisers, up 25% since February. Companies turn to Facebook to target specific groups of people and deliver ads to their news feed, especially on mobile phones.
"Facebook is your first port of call if you're a digital advertiser and if you have money to spend," said Pivotal Research analyst Brian Wieser.
For the third quarter, Facebook reported net income of $896 million, or 31 cents a share, up from $806 million, or 30 cents per share a year earlier.
Analysts expected Facebook to report third-quarter net income of $776.5 million, or 27 cents a share, according to data compiled by S&P Capital IQ.
Excluding some expenses, Facebook reported earnings of 57 cents a share, above the 52 cents a share projected by Wall Street analysts.
Shares of Facebook rose 2% to $105.97, an all-time high, in after-hours trading.
Facebook said 1.55 billion people tap the social network at least once a month, up from 1.49 billion in the second quarter. About 1.01 billion people checked the social network at least once a day in September, the company said.
Most of the new users come from outside North America and Europe. But those regions still deliver the bulk of Facebook's revenue: Average revenue per user in the U.S. and Canada grew 42% to $10.49, more than three times the global average of $2.97, which rose 24%. In the Asia-Pacific region, revenue averaged $1.39 per user.
Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg described growing in India and China as "long-term efforts." More than one billion people in India aren't on the Internet. Facebook is extending Web access in the country through its Internet.org initiative and there is a lot of room to expand its efforts there, Mr. Zuckerberg said. He added that China is one of the company's largest advertising markets even though the site is blocked in the country.
On a conference call, executives regaled analysts with statistics about the service: On average, videos are viewed on Facebook more than eight billion times a day, up from four billion a day in April; more than 500 million people watch daily; more than 9.5 billion photos are sent monthly on the Messenger texting app.
Facebook is thriving by grabbing a bigger share of a growing digital-advertising pie. Digital-ad spending is projected to increase 18% to $170.2 billion this year, according to consultancy eMarketer. It says Facebook will win 9.6% of the spending, up from 8% last year.
RBC Capital Markets says 61% of marketers surveyed in September said they plan to spend more on Facebook ads next year.
Advertising-technology company SocialCode says its clients' spending on Facebook video ads tripled during the first three quarters of 2015 compared with the same period in 2014. Facebook Chief Financial Officer David Wehner said ad prices rose 61% from the same period a year earlier.
Facebook said ads on mobile devices accounted for 78% of advertising revenue, up from 66% a year ago.
At the same time, Facebook is spending big to develop and expand its mobile properties. Facebook's third-quarter operating margin, excluding certain expenses, slipped to 54% from 57% in the same period last year.
Spending on new property and equipment in the first nine months of the year totaled $1.83 billion, matching what the company spent all of last year. For the year, Mr. Wehner projected capital spending would total $2.5 billion to $2.7 billion.
Facebook's family of apps includes Instagram, which Facebook bought for $1 billion in 2012, and messaging apps Messenger and WhatsApp, which Facebook bought last year for $22 billion.

Generate image description

Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman
