In the U.S. labor market, demand is holding up for food and hospitality personnel, less so for software developers. That has startup Gigs thinking now is its moment.
Launched this year, the Los Angeles-based job-posting site is tailored to the hourly-pay workforce. Job seekers enter their ZIP Code and see listings for everything from delivery drivers, construction workers and repair and maintenance personnel to coffee-shop baristas, retail clerks, child-care teachers and pet groomers. The company uses artificial intelligence to weed out salaried jobs, but includes both full- and part-time jobs, while about 20% of the jobs currently listed on the site are gigs, the company said.
Gigs' focus on jobs that pay by the hour could be well-timed: America's smallest employers -- bars and fast-food restaurants, for instance -- are hiring. Establishments with one to nine employees accounted for nearly 20% of job openings in October, their second-highest share on record dating back to 2000, according to Julia Pollak, chief economist at jobs website ZipRecruiter. In her analysis of Labor Department data, the only higher period was the previous month.
At the same time, software development postings fell 66% from the start of 2022 to Dec. 8, according to data from hiring powerhouse Indeed. The number of construction jobs declined 14% over the same period.
That dynamic reflects new, broader economic conditions as pandemic-era shocks fade, said Nick Bunker, Indeed's director of economic research for North America.
Meanwhile, household consumption is still healthy. "That's why you're seeing stronger demand for lots of positions linked to services that people are still spending money on," Bunker said.
Existing job sites are frustrating those on the hunt for a paycheck by showing them postings for "ghost jobs." On the other side of the equation, employers are inundated with applications from unqualified candidates, Gigs Founder and Chief Executive Allen Narcisse said.
Gigs says it wants to make it easier for job seekers and employers. The company uses AI to screen the jobs employers post to make sure they are relevant to the particular applicant. For job seekers who lack the necessary skills for a specific job, Gigs' AI will direct them to others that are a better fit based on their resume, Narcisse said.
Gigs charges job posters for each application they get. The price is determined by the size of the job's market and the level of experience or skill the post requires.
"If there are fewer workers that fit, we charge more because it's harder to find that worker that fits the needs," said Narcisse, who worked previously as chief operating officer at energy company Workrise and before that as head of market strategy for ride-hailing company Lyft.
To be sure, Gigs faces rough competition from entrenched giants such as Indeed and Craigslist. Startups such as venture-backed BlueRecruit, which matches employers with skilled trades workers, are also grappling for market share. Narcisse, however, believes employers will opt to list on Gigs because it will bring them applicants who more closely meet the job requirements -- and save time, he said.
"We've designed Gigs to feel like platforms that younger job seekers use already," Narcisse said. "One of the arguments we've made with employers is that we're focused on acquiring the younger job seekers that you need for your businesses."
Credit: By Marc Vartabedian
