The world's biggest contract chip maker is reshaping its business to respond to the artificial-intelligence boom, including doubling capacity for a type of chip technology in demand from companies like Nvidia.
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Chief Executive C.C. Wei said Thursday that he expected a major category of AI-related chips that includes the type made by Nvidia to account for more than a 10th of the company's revenue this year, with the proportion rising to one-fifth within four years.
"AI-related demand is very, very strong," he said on an earnings call. "We have done our best" to ramp up capacity, but "it's still not enough," Wei said.
TSMC grew into one of the world's most important companies largely on the back of its business of manufacturing chips in smartphones, particularly for Apple's iPhones. But that business has cooled as the smartphone market grows saturated.
One of TSMC's biggest customers is Nvidia, the U.S. company that designs AI-related chips and entrusts the manufacturing to contractors. That has helped TSMC shares rise 36% this year, despite lackluster demand in some non-AI parts of the chip market
The chips in the big computers that handle the voluminous calculations needed by AI chatbots such as ChatGPT have different requirements from the chips inside a smartphone. That is pushing TSMC to invest more in technologies needed in AI applications, including what the industry calls advanced packaging.
TSMC calls its flagship version of advanced packaging "chip on wafer on substrate," or CoWoS, which refers to stacking chips in layers to save space and reduce power consumption.
In some versions, these packages can bundle both logic and high-end memory chips, enhancing data transmission speed. That is a key requirement for AI applications such as those handled by Nvidia's new chip, Blackwell.
Nvidia's AI-related chips rely heavily on CoWoS and account for about half of TSMC's CoWoS capacity, according to research firm TrendForce.
Wei said TSMC is doubling some advanced packaging capacity this year. "Almost all the AI innovators are working with TSMC to address the insatiable AI-related demand for energy-efficient computing power," he said.
Until last year, industry skepticism about the staying power of the AI boom held back TSMC and others from rushing into substantial investments, but recent moves show they are confident now, said Brady Wang of Counterpoint Research. At one point, major customers had to wait nearly a year for deliveries of Nvidia's flagship H100 chip, according to TrendForce analyst Frank Kung. He said that has fallen to around four months as TSMC and its partners lift capacity.
Chip packaging has shifted from being a backwater in the semiconductor industry to a hot area of investment and global competition. Last year, the U.S. government said it would invest around $3 billion in the field.
In addition to TSMC, other major chip manufacturers including Samsung Electronics and Intel offer their versions of advanced packaging.
So far, the technology is mainly used in chips that go into million-dollar servers or other computers at data centers. The advanced-packaging technology is too expensive to use for chips in everyday products such as smartphones, computers or electric vehicles.
TSMC said it was putting about 10% of this year's capital spending -- which it estimates at $28 billion to $32 billion -- into the category that includes advanced packaging. It said last year that it would spend some $2.9 billion on an advanced packaging plant in Taiwan that it expects to start mass production in 2027. Last month, top Taiwanese officials announced plans for two additional TSMC chip-packaging and testing plants in southwest Taiwan.
Chiang Shang-yi, the brain behind the technology and a former TSMC executive, said last year that the CoWoS advanced packaging effort initially struggled to get support and customers after starting a decade ago. "I was in a tough spot, becoming a bit of a joke at the company," Chiang said in a television interview in Taiwan.
Nvidia's graphics-processing units were initially designed for graphics-heavy applications such as videogames. Those GPUs turned out to be well-equipped to handle AI calculations, helping Nvidia become a $2 trillion market capitalization company and pushing supporting technologies such as Chiang's to the forefront.
Samsung's planned $45 billion investment in chipmaking in Texas includes an advanced chip-packaging facility. The Biden administration is hoping to bring more of the semiconductor supply chain to the U.S.
For now, all of TSMC's advanced-packaging capacity is in Taiwan. It is making a $65 billion investment in three chip-making facilities in Arizona, with $6.6 billion in support from Washington, but the company hasn't released any plans to include advanced packaging there.
Wei, the TSMC chief executive, was noncommittal when asked Thursday whether such plans were forthcoming.
He said his company was happy to work with Arizona-based Amkor Technology, which plans to build a $2 billion advanced-packaging facility in the region that is partially funded by Washington. Amkor said it would package and test chips produced for Apple at the TSMC Arizona plant.
Generate image description

Credit: By Yang Jie
