Can anyone explain why Illinois continues to own this hopelessly complicated bunch of hedge funds? That's the question I asked the state's Board of Investment, which oversees $22 billion of pension assets, when I became its chairman two years ago.
I had been reviewing the board's portfolio and noticed a lot of holdings labeled hedge funds. They were run by something called a "hedge fund manager," whatever that was. Most bought and sold stocks -- but so did other funds we owned that showed up under the category "stocks" and were run by "equity fund managers."
One difference was that some of the hedge-fund managers showed up on television, winning publicity by waging shareholder proxy battles. But such fame didn't translate into better returns.
Not that it was easy to tell. Even though the hedge funds invested in stocks, their returns weren't benchmarked against the overall stock market. Instead their returns were compared with those of other hedge funds, a much lower bar. Once we applied the proper benchmark, their underperformance became apparent. We were paying them hundreds of millions of dollars, yet index funds were getting better returns. So we fired nearly all of them.
The few surviving stock-picking hedge funds were moved into our equity asset class, exactly where they belonged. But we weren't finished. We also owned hedge funds that bought and sold things other than stocks, portfolios with lots of trading bets using derivatives on currencies, commodities and other financial instruments.
Though these funds performed better than other hedge funds, absolute returns were disappointing, barely more than cash. Industry "experts" suggested we keep these investments to diversify our holdings and reduce overall risk. Yet we already owned bonds for that purpose. Our Procter & Gamble bonds made sense to us. I'm pretty sure my children will brush their teeth tonight. But I don't have a clue about that long-lumber, short-sugar trade.
These funds' managers also loved being on television. They talked about algorithms and artificial intelligence, subjects that might be fascinating but that didn't tell us much about returns.
Our board began to question the conventional wisdom. Did anyone at the table really understand what these hedge funds were doing? Should we be putting the retirement funds of Illinois state employees into investments that not a single trustee, consultant or staffer could explain?
If they had been earning double-digit returns, that might have motivated us to spend more time trying to understand their strategies and risks. But for 2% returns? That was less than investment-grade bonds were earning.
After firing these fund managers, our $1.5 billion hedge-fund asset class was reduced to zero. No more illogical benchmarks, no more illusory risk reduction. Now we understand what we own.
The $3 trillion hedge-fund industry will have to move on without us, though its investment strategies seem better suited to generating publicity than great returns.
---
Mr. Levine is chairman of the Illinois State Board of Investment.
(see related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Hedge Funds Aren't for All But They're Right for Some" -- WSJ February 12, 2018)

Credit: By Marc Levine
