One of Fidelity Investments' star stock pickers left the firm in 2017 following allegations of sexual harassment. Nearly two years later, he is attempting a comeback.
Gavin Baker, who denied the allegations, spent 18 years at Fidelity, rising to become one of the mutual-fund giant's best-known fund managers. The 43-year-old was one of the earliest mutual-fund managers to invest in fast-growing private companies.
In the past month, Mr. Baker has launched hedge fund Atreides Management LP, with more than $300 million under management, said people familiar with the Boston fund. Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Morgan Stanley signed up to serve as prime brokers for Atreides, clearing trades for the fund while also lending it cash and securities. Some investors in hedge funds view funds' counterparties as proxies for their caliber.
Fidelity also was a prime broker for Atreides. But after an inquiry from The Wall Street Journal Tuesday about the firm's relationship with Mr. Baker's new fund, Fidelity severed that tie.
"Given the appearance that Atreides's use of our prime brokerage services could be seen as an endorsement by Fidelity of the hedge fund, we've decided to terminate our relationship," said a Fidelity spokesman on Wednesday. "We do not endorse specific hedge funds."
Mr. Baker was pushed out of Fidelity in 2017 for allegedly sexually harassing a junior female employee, according to an attorney for the woman and other people familiar with the matter, The Wall Street Journal reported at the time. Fidelity Chief Executive Abigail Johnson made that decision, according to those people.
A spokesman for Mr. Baker disputed the allegations at the time and said Mr. Baker had left Fidelity "amicably a few weeks before planning to become engaged to his longtime girlfriend who is an analyst and fund manager there, as he believes his new fiancee and he should not work at the same firm." People close to Mr. Baker said he continues to deny the allegations and that he resigned from Fidelity.
Mr. Baker assembled a double-digit investment record at Fidelity at the $17 billion OTC Portfolio fund he helmed.
Riding the wave of rising technology stocks that has driven the market to new highs in recent years, he notched an average 19.3% a year after fees at the OTC fund from July 1, 2009 to Sept. 15, 2017. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite, in comparison, earned an annualized 17.8% during that time, including dividends.
Private companies Mr. Baker invested in while at Fidelity included Facebook Inc., The Honest Co., Uber Technologies Inc. and WeWork Cos. He purchased Tesla Inc. shares when they traded below $30. Mr. Baker told the Journal in an early 2017 article, "What matters the most in venture capital and private investing is whether you're invited to play."
Fidelity's Ms. Johnson didn't object to the firm's renewed relationship with Mr. Baker after an internal committee that decides whether to accept a firm as a prime brokerage client decided to add Atreides, said people familiar with the matter.
Ms. Johnson was involved in the decision this week to sever ties with Atreides, one of the people said.
Mr. Baker has remained active in the investing world since his departure from Fidelity. He has blogged about how artificial intelligence and autonomous transportation are among the most important technology trends in the coming decades. He also drilled down to offer a bullish defense of graphics chip maker Nvidia Corp. He has continued to network in Silicon Valley and scout for new investments, according to people familiar with these discussions.
Before launching Atreides, he advised chief executives at private and public tech companies, these people said.
Atreides focuses on technology and consumer companies in both the public and private markets. Its team includes former employees of Boston hedge funds Highfields Capital Management and Frontlight Capital LP, as well as former Fidelity employees.
The OTC fund under Mr. Baker at Fidelity invested a maximum of roughly 3% of its assets under management in private companies. Atreides can invest up to 24% of its investors' money in private companies in certain scenarios, though clients can choose to have Mr. Baker invest their cash in only publicly traded stocks, said one of the people familiar with the firm.
Generally, investors who agree to keep their money at the firm for three years pay lower fees at Atreides than those who choose to have a shorter lockup. A small group of investors are paying higher fees to be able to withdraw their money with fewer restrictions.
Mr. Baker is trying to succeed when even veteran hedge-fund managers have struggled in recent years, with complaints about low interest rates and the rise of algorithmic and passive trading common among stock pickers who disappoint.
Still, Mr. Baker has landed as investors the founders and chief executives of several private companies he grew close to during his time at Fidelity, said people familiar with the matter. A university endowment also invested after hiring a private investigator to vet Mr. Baker, some of the people said.
Another investor, concerned by the allegations of improper conduct, took what he described as the unusual step of interviewing dozens of Mr. Baker's former co-workers and colleagues before committing money. Those interviews confirmed for the investor that Mr. Baker had a high level of personal integrity, he said.

Credit: By Juliet Chung and Corrie Driebusch
