Patents are the lifeblood of biotechnology, the force that motivates companies to develop innovative medical treatments and bring them to market. The trouble is that these patents must be enforced in a court system that isn't set up to adjudicate highly technical matters -- resulting in rulings that seem arbitrary or even scientifically suspect.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit last year invalidated a patent held by the biotechnology firm Sequenom for a new technique in prenatal testing. The company had years earlier discovered the presence of fetal DNA in once-discarded maternal blood plasma. Testing that DNA would allow a doctor to diagnose such things as Down syndrome in utero, using only the mother's blood instead of an invasive procedure.
Sequenom secured a patent, and when another firm began duplicating the technique, the company sued. But the court ruled that while "Sequenom's invention is truly meritorious," it would cancel the patent because the technique for testing the DNA was already "well-understood, conventional and routine."
In July a different panel of the same court ruled on
In Vitro v. Cellzdirect, upholding a patent for refreezing certain liver cells used in research. The court acknowledged that the "individual steps of freezing and thawing were well known" but said that "repeating those steps was itself far from routine and conventional."
The decisions in these two cases seem diametrically opposed. Yet the U.S. Supreme Court, which refused to consider Sequenom's appeal during its most recent term, has yet to clear up the confusion.
Other rulings make little sense from a scientific perspective. Myriad Genetics isolated gene sequences that indicated increased risk for breast and ovarian cancer. In 2013 the Supreme Court ruled that those genes were "a product of nature and not patent eligible." But in the same decision the justices ruled that complementary DNA, a slightly altered form, can be patented because it is synthetic. Scientists scoffed. "This is a bit like taking a copyrighted photograph, cutting several chunks out of the middle, and calling the result a new product that is eligible for copyright," an MIT doctoral candidate wrote at the time in Scientific American.
Why such confusion surrounding biotech patents? For one thing, courts have little to no technical expertise. Judges, who seldom have laboratory experience, are having to determine what constitutes a novel, and therefore patent-eligible, innovation. An idea that appears obvious to a legal expert might be revolutionary in the scientific community. The opposite can also be true.
The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office also might have been overeager when it first began issuing biotech patents as a burst of new technology became available. Courts now seem to be swinging the other way to balance earlier permissiveness.
Whatever the case, until these issues are resolved biotechnology patents will likely be difficult to protect. For some players this could be a positive development: The patents that do survive will have increased value, and truly innovative startups will have less to fear from the "big patent stick" wielded by established players.
Yet raising money in this risky industry, an already difficult process, has become that much harder. But there is a way to provide the legal certainty needed for innovative companies, especially those in biotechnology, to flourish: Congress ought to create a court that focuses specifically on patents that involve extremely complicated technology.
Such a court would be staffed with judges and experts who have backgrounds in software, artificial intelligence, nanotechnology, biotechnology and other scientific fields. This would ensure that the complex decision of whether a patent should stand is made by people with the years of experience needed to fully understand the implications of their rulings.
Despite the confusion and uncertainty, biotech has been booming. Venture-capital firms invested $8.9 billion in biomedical companies in 2015, more than double the figure for 2009, according to Nature Biotechnology. But this windfall can't last forever. While it is impossible to completely tame the business cycle, legal uncertainty can be mitigated by creating a consistent and efficient patent-litigation system. Focused judicial reform would be a good place to start.
---
Mr. Berezow is a senior fellow at the American Council on Science and Health. Mr. Mody is managing director of Zoic Capital, a venture-capital firm in Seattle.
Credit: By Alex Berezow and Neal Mody
