Cyberattacks are becoming more common for small businesses, and many aren't prepared to deal with an attack.
As small businesses have accelerated their adoption of new technologies for remote work, communication, production and sales during the pandemic, their expanded computer networks have created new vulnerabilities to phishing and ransomware attacks. But many small businesses still don't expect to be targeted by hackers, so preparing for a cyberattack is well down their list of priorities.
The risk of an attack has grown dramatically for small businesses over the past couple of years. "During the pandemic, small businesses were attacked at twice the rate of larger organizations," says Ajay Bhalla, president of cyber and intelligence at Mastercard Inc.
During 2020 and 2021, data breaches at small businesses globally jumped 152%, compared with the two prior years, according to RiskRecon, a Mastercard company that assesses companies' cybersecurity risk. Breaches at larger organizations rose 75% in the same period, according to RiskRecon.
But many small businesses are more focused on keeping their heads above water amid the many other problems that have arisen or grown during the pandemic than they are on cybersecurity. "My clients are worried about the ongoing effects of the pandemic, labor and supply shortages and inflation," says Marilyn Landis, owner of Basic Business Concepts Inc., a company that acts as a chief financial officer for small businesses. Cybersecurity isn't top of mind for her clients, she says.
Some businesses are aware of the threat but don't realize they aren't insured against it. "Too many small businesses incorrectly still expect to be covered for cyber risk under their property and liability policies," says Loretta Worters, a spokeswoman for the Insurance Information Institute. General commercial business insurance tends to exclude items like additional legal fees due to a cyberattack, and the cost of repairing digital infrastructure and restoring data.
According to a WSJ Pro Cybersecurity survey of cybersecurity professionals published in December, 52% of small businesses (those with less than $50 million in annual revenue) have insurance coverage for cyber risks, compared with about 75% of larger businesses.
Great Northern Docks in Naples, Maine, only had a commercial insurance plan when hackers drained almost $250,000 from the company's bank account in 2020. The insurance didn't cover most of the attack, which ended up costing Great Northern $218,000, including money lost, legal fees for negotiations with the bank, the hiring of forensic specialists to figure out what had happened and how it could be prevented in the future, and the cost of new IT infrastructure.
Dawn Merriam, who co-owns Great Northern Docks with her husband, says that in addition to the financial loss, figuring out next steps in the attack's aftermath was difficult and she felt like there was no one to shepherd them through the nightmare. "The episode took a few years off our lives," she says. The company now has cyber insurance.
In comparison, MI Metals Inc., an aluminum-manufacturing company based in Oldsmar, Fla., had cyber insurance that covered a ransomware attack on the business last July. The insurance company dispatched experts to MI Metals' plants and headquarters, who quickly determined that the attackers hadn't compromised any sensitive information, like employee records or customer accounts. Aware that nothing valuable had been compromised, Brook Massey, the company's owner, says he was able to rely on a backup of the company system he had on his hard drive at home, and he rejected the attackers' ransom demand for $2.4 million in bitcoin. The insurance company ultimately paid MI Metals about $180,000 to cover attorney fees, hard-drive replacements, forensic experts and the cost of new software.
While cyber insurance can be vital for a small business in the aftermath of an attack, it is becoming more expensive and difficult to obtain. "Pricing for small-business cyber insurance has gone up between 10% and 15% annually since the pandemic began," says Brian Thornton, chief executive of ProWriters, a wholesale insurance company. And pricing isn't the only obstacle. "More small businesses on a percentage basis are being turned down due to tighter underwriting requirements," Mr. Thornton says.
Lisa Dickinson, executive liability and cyber practice leader for Marsh McLennan Agency's Southeast region, says underwriters had previously required larger businesses to meet cybersecurity protocols before they could buy coverage, but are now increasingly putting smaller businesses to the same test.
For example, companies may now be required to have multifactor authentication for system administrators and other employees, as well as vendors or other third parties with access to the company's network, as a requirement for buying cyber insurance. Multifactor authentication reduces the risk of stolen credentials being used by cybercriminals to access a network. Insurers may also require small businesses to encrypt backup data and come up with a response plan for a cyberattack.
This is especially the case for companies with revenues between $25 million and $50 million, where the likelihood of an attack and the potential dollar amount of a claim are higher than for smaller companies, and for those operating in industries hit hard by cyberattacks during the pandemic, like manufacturing, Ms. Dickinson says.
Small businesses may be able to skip some underwriting requirements by purchasing a policy from a technology company that sells insurance, known in the industry as insurtechs.
Insurtechs automate underwriting to a large extent by using artificial intelligence, which can help lower costs. For example, the AI looks at companies' networks to assess their security risks automatically. Specifically, the AI looks for software that is out of date or contains known vulnerabilities to hacking, and analyzes the security of the organization hosting the company's website.
But there are hurdles here, too. Cyber policies issued by insurtechs often have less onerous underwriting requirements upfront, making it easier to obtain a policy, but instead ask small businesses to regularly improve their cybersecurity as a condition for maintaining coverage. That could help a company shore up its defenses, but Ms. Dickinson says it could be a tough sell for small companies more focused on other areas of their business.
---
Ms. Ward is a writer in Vermont. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Lisa Ward
