Facebook parent Meta Platforms reported its largest quarterly revenue since going public more than a decade ago as demand for advertising picked up and the company continued to reap the benefits of cutting costs and developing new AI technology.
Meta's sales increased to $34.1 billion, up more than 23% compared with a year ago. That represents Meta's third quarter in a row of rising revenue after the company saw its business shrink for most of 2022. The 23% increase is Meta's largest year-to-year growth in revenue since the third quarter of 2021.
The company's fortunes have begun to turn around during what Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg has called a "year of efficiency." Investors have been encouraged by improvements to its ad-targeting capabilities and advancements in artificial intelligence. Its turnaround in advertising has been a key factor in its rebound after Apple in 2021 implemented privacy changes that erased $10 billion of revenue for Meta in 2022.
AI will be Meta's biggest investment area in 2024 in terms of engineering and computing resources, Zuckerberg said. To avoid allocating a lot of new employees, the company will deprioritize a number of non-AI projects and shift people toward working on AI endeavors, he added.
Microsoft and Google parent company Alphabet both reported surging revenue, with Google noting acceleration in ad growth though it was weighed down by lower-than-expected growth in its cloud-computing unit. Growth in the business, which oversees the servers powering the company's artificial-intelligence programs, slowed to 22%, and Alphabet shares fell almost 9%. Microsoft's growth rate in Azure, its cloud unit, exceeded expectations, buoyed in part by demand for AI services. Microsoft shares rose 3% Wednesday.
Meta shares initially rose in after-market trading before falling after Chief Financial Officer Susan Li warned that the company had seen softer advertising spending in the fourth quarter that correlated with the start of the Middle East conflict. That is captured in the company's revenue outlook for the October-to-December period, she said.
Thus far in 2023, Meta has seen its shares more than double as of Tuesday's close. That put it on pace for its best year on record as Zuckerberg has focused on cost-cutting, developing new generative AI technology and the introduction of Threads, a microblogging app the company launched to compete with the business formerly known as Twitter, which billionaire owner Elon Musk rebranded as X.
Meta posted a net profit of $11.6 billion for the third quarter -- more than double its net profit from a year prior and up from $7.8 billion in the April-to-June quarter.
Advertising made up 98.5% of Meta's revenue in the quarter. The company's advertising revenue rose to $33.6 billion. Meta said its average ad price fell 6% year over year. In the same quarter last year, the average price per ad decreased by 18%.
Meta said it expects its 2023 total expenses to be in the range of $87 billion to $89 billion, narrowing from a previous forecast of between $88 billion and $91 billion. The company said it estimates its 2024 total expenses to be between $94 billion and $99 billion.
Meta's Reality Labs, the division building the hardware and software of its metaverse effort, posted sales of $210 million for the quarter, a decline of 26.3% compared with a year ago. Wall Street was expecting Meta's hardware division to report revenue of $319 million for the quarter, according to analysts surveyed by FactSet.
Credit: By Salvador Rodriguez
