FREMONT, Calif. -- Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and X Corp. owner Elon Musk met in northern California on Monday, a chance for each to address recent public controversies amid a broader conversation about artificial intelligence.
Musk addressed his continuing battle with an American Jewish group over accusations about antisemitic content on X, the renamed Twitter, and Netanyahu talked about his judicial overhaul plans, which have sparked mass protests in Israel.
Musk has been in a row with the Anti-Defamation League, a Jewish civil-rights organization, which has accused the X owner of allowing antisemitic and other hate speech to proliferate on the social-media platform.
"I hope you find it within the confines of the First Amendment to stop not only antisemitism, or roll it back as best as you can, but any collective hatred of a people that antisemitism represents," Netanyahu said to Musk. "I know you're committed to that. I hope you succeed."
"I'm sort of against attacking any group. Doesn't matter who it is. I'm in favor of that which furthers civilization and which ultimately leads us to become a spacefaring civilization," Musk said.
"We can't do that if there's a lot of infighting, hatred and negativity. So obviously I'm against antisemitism. I'm against really anything that promotes hate and conflict," he said.
Jonathan Greenblatt, CEO of the ADL, said he appreciated Netanyahu for raising concerns of antisemitism on X. "We hope that Mr. Musk takes Mr. Netanyahu's concerns seriously so that X/Twitter can become a safer and more welcome place for all," Greenblatt said.
Some in the Jewish community criticized Netanyahu's decision to meet with Musk amid his battle with the ADL.
"Choosing to pal around with Elon Musk at a time when antisemitism runs rampant on X not only sends the wrong message to Jews around the world, but puts them at risk," said Yizhar Hess, vice chairman of the World Zionist Organization.
"Today's talk served at the very least to legitimize inaction," he said.
Musk told the Israeli leader he saw protesters outside the Tesla factory where their conversation took place and said he "probably got the most amount of pushback from people at Tesla about this interview than anything else I've ever done." Musk is Tesla's chief executive.
Netanyahu faces intense criticism in Israel over his controversial plans to overhaul his country's judicial system. He declared that Israel "will always be a democratic country" and that he is currently trying to find the right balance of powers between the three branches of government after Israel's court assumed more powers for itself three decades ago.
Netanyahu said he believed the original judicial overhaul proposal, which would have given coalition lawmakers the power to unilaterally appoint judges and override the supreme court, "was bad," and would have created more imbalance in the system. He said he now is seeking a broad consensus change on how judges are chosen.
---
Alexa Corse contributed to this article.
Credit: By Dov Lieber
