Researchers claimed a major artificial-intelligence breakthrough on Wednesday, unveiling a software program that taught itself to beat a top human player of the board game Go, considered a milestone challenge in the field.
Researchers at Google parent Alphabet Inc.'s DeepMind unit said the program, AlphaGo, beat European Go champion Fan Hui five games to zero on a full board during a recent competition at DeepMind's London headquarters. Previously, the best programs have defeated Go professionals only on smaller, unofficial boards.
A computer beat the world's top chess player in 1997. But Go, in which players place "stones" on a square 19-by-19-line grid, is a bigger challenge because there are far more possible moves -- 361 possible openings alone. The game, which originated in ancient China, has been a target of artificial-intelligence research because mastering it requires more humanlike skills of pattern recognition and intuitive judgment.
The advance, published in the journal Nature, impressed artificial-intelligence experts and revived a debate about whether limits should be placed on computer programs that gain humanlike abilities to learn by themselves.
"One couldn't help feel for the poor human getting beaten," said Tanguy Chouard, an editor at Nature who monitored the AlphaGo match in London.
AlphaGo uses two so-called deep neural networks, computer programs with millions of connections that loosely mimic the structure of the human brain. This approach has produced several artificial-intelligence breakthroughs in recent years, including computers that can identify objects in images more consistently than humans can.
AlphaGo's first network was shown about 30 million Go moves made by human players, to teach it what move to make next. Engineers directed the training during this so-called supervised learning.
The second network played thousands of Go games against itself to learn, without human help, to evaluate board positions and estimate the likelihood of each move ultimately winning the game.
The latter, unsupervised, approach is more cutting edge. David Silver, a DeepMind researcher who worked on AlphaGo, said the system learned to discover new strategies itself.
Remi Coulom, who spent 10 years developing one of the smartest Go-playing computers, said he had thought it could take another decade for computers to beat top Go players. "For many years they've been saying that the game of Go is special because machines can't beat humans," Mr. Coulom said. "But that's not the case anymore."
In chess, computers pick the best moves from a finite set of options. In Go, however, the possibilities are too numerous to compute, so the system must recognize patterns -- an ability far more useful in the real world, said Jeremy Howard, chief executive of Enlitic Inc., which uses artificial-intelligence techniques to read medical images.
AlphaGo's creators say it can be set to work on problems beyond game play. That is a contrast to the International Business Machines Corp.'s Deep Blue, which was designed only to play chess and beat chess master Garry Kasparov in 1997.
Still, experts cautioned that AlphaGo is far from a high-level, "general" artificial-intelligence program that can solve virtually any sort of problem -- a goal researchers have been chasing for years.
DeepMind Chief Executive Demis Hassabis said products and services fueled by AlphaGo could begin to appear in one to two years. That could include a more sophisticated version of a smartphone-based intelligent personal assistant that Google already offers, or software that helps doctors diagnose illnesses.
The advance rekindled concern about potential uses and effects of artificial intelligence. Andrew McAfee, co-founder of Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Initiative on the Digital Economy, said programs capable of humanlike combinations of insight, pattern matching and intuition -- such as AlphaGo -- have the potential to replace higher-skilled workers.
"The radiologist, the tax adviser, the customer-service rep, these are pattern-matching exercises performed by talented, well-trained, very experienced people," he said. "That sounds a lot like the Go master who just got beat by DeepMind's program."
Mr. Hassab is said DeepMind is "thinking very carefully about how to ethically use and responsibly deploy" the technology. When DeepMind was acquired in 2014, its founders required Google to agree not to use the technology for military purposes. Google has created an ethics committee to ensure such benefits "accrue to the many, not the few," he added.
Credit: By Alistair Barr and Jack Nicas
