Businesses are using a relatively unknown technology called vector databases to help solve the problem of using their private data with generative artificial intelligence. And it is turning the tool, and its makers, into some of the AI boom's biggest winners.
Vector databases have been around for decades but are now emerging as something of an industry standard for AI businesses to use alongside a technique called retrieval-augmented generation, or RAG.
When combined, businesses can link their private data with large-language models like OpenAI's GPT-4, allowing the AI to perform data analysis, summarization and other tasks on their data. Without them, AI models are limited to what they have learned from their initial training on public data online, up to a certain point in time, and are more prone to factual errors called "hallucinations."
New York-based startup Pinecone was an early entrant in the vector database AI space. Valued at $750 million after raising $100 million from Andreessen Horowitz and other investors last April, Pinecone has been building its vector database since 2019 -- a fortunate few years before OpenAI's ChatGPT kicked off the AI gold rush in late 2022.
"We hit the inflection point with ChatGPT and OpenAI and all the tools that exploded with it," said Edo Liberty, Pinecone's founder and chief executive. "This happened just as we had matured our platform, and we were well ahead of the competition."
Spurred by the wave of interest, the company grew from just a few hundred customers to over 5,000 last year, Liberty said. Its head count also multiplied nearly four times, to more than 100 employees. "We were really the only true viable option for a very long time," he said.
Arun Chandrasekaran, an analyst at market research and consulting firm Gartner, said Pinecone's success is tied to its early entry in the market, that it manages the product for customers in the cloud, and its integration with AI models and other developer tools.
Chandrasekaran said Pinecone's success is tied to its early entry in the market, its integration with AI models and other developer tools, and the fact that it manages the product for customers in the cloud.
But Pinecone is no longer alone.
At least eight vector-database startups have entered the market since 2022, according to data provider Crunchbase. Investors have put nearly $1 billion into vector-database startups in that time, $73 million of which has been invested so far this year across eight deals, Crunchbase found.
Existing database vendors such as Oracle, MongoDB and Redis also have released their own vector databases, and tech giants Amazon, Microsoft and Google have added similar capabilities to their products. There are also open-source contenders.
More may be coming. The global vector-database market is expected to grow to $4.3 billion by 2028, from $1.5 billion in 2023 to, according to Markets and Markets, a research firm in India.
While fewer than 2% of enterprises were using the technology in September 2023, that number will grow to over 30% in the next two years, Gartner predicts.
Vector databases have been around for decades but are finding a new use by enterprise and AI developers because they power the RAG technique.
Originating from a 2020 paper by an AI research group at Meta Platforms, RAG is commonly used by enterprises to build chatbots for employees to reference company policies, or for customer service and salespeople to pull information from knowledge bases.
Vector databases are different from traditional databases with columns and rows because they are designed to store a massive amount of data as vectors, or numerical representations of the raw data. That makes them ideal for RAG, the process where generative AI models pull from large amounts of vector data to improve their responses with the additional information.
Compared with fine-tuning -- a technique used to create a custom AI model based on an existing large language model -- RAG is cheaper because it doesn't require massive amounts of computing power and advanced AI expertise, and is easier and faster for developers to implement. Roughly 80% of enterprises are using RAG, compared with 20% using fine-tuning, Chandrasekaran said.
Cristina Pieretti, general manager of digital insights for Moody's, said the rating firm's financial intelligence group used RAG to connect its research and ratings data with a model from OpenAI. RAG helps the AI model provide up-to-date financial information when customers ask its research assistant to assess investments and compare entities.
Many enterprises are using RAG whether they're aware of it or not, Gartner's Chandrasekaran said.
Microsoft's Copilot for Security, which aims to help cybersecurity pros with tasks like incident management, relies on RAG to link the AI with customers' own security data, said Vasu Jakkal, the company's corporate vice president of security, compliance, identity, management and privacy.
Many of Pinecone's clients are "AI builders" -- the developers and companies making generative AI-based products -- who use RAG with vector databases under the hood for their customers, Liberty said.
Notion, maker of the popular productivity tool of the same name, uses Pinecone's vector databases to store its nearly 100 million users' data for use with AI, said co-founder and Chief Operating Officer Akshay Kothari.
The company's Q&A product, unveiled last November, lets users ask questions about their Notion data, such as, "When was the last time I met with this person?" Notion uses OpenAI's GPT-4 or Anthropic's Claude as its underlying AI model.
Pinecone's new serverless product, made fully available on Tuesday, separates data storage from the computing to lower data costs. The product reduced Notion's data costs by 60%, Kothari said.
Still, there is uncertainty over vector databases' long-term usefulness for enterprises.
While companies are able to quickly experiment with RAG now, they are more likely to purchase a custom data search or Q&A function from enterprise AI vendors in the future, said Forrester analyst Mike Gualtieri.
At International Business Machines, RAG is "the number one use case when we're working with clients," said Chief Commercial Officer Rob Thomas.
But with hundreds of choices for vector databases, Thomas said IBM doesn't consider the technology a differentiator.
Recognizing that enterprises are likely to purchase AI tools from vendors rather than build them on their own, Pinecone's Liberty said enterprises will still need to shore up their internal engineering to infuse AI into their own products -- and that requires investing in databases and other platform tools.
"We see a lot of larger companies actually invest in learning how to build those products because they want to have the talent, the capabilities and the stack in-house," he said.
Credit: By Belle Lin
