When Katie Ledecky swims the 1,500-meter freestyle, her competition is usually so far behind her by the halfway mark of the race that they might as well not be in the pool. Eight years into dominating women's freestyle by margins that are almost comical, she says she doesn't mind "swimming her own race."
But when it comes to practices, especially the mind-numbing endurance sets that prepare her for the longer races, she would much rather have training partners. Since the 2016 Rio Olympics, she found that in a pair of All-American distance swimmers on Stanford's men's varsity team -- among the only people in the world capable of sometimes keeping up with Ledecky during training sessions.
Then the pandemic hit -- leaving Ledecky all alone for one of the most grueling training regimens in sports.
"I've been swimming in a lane by myself for over a year now," said Ledecky in an interview with The Wall Street Journal.
The 24-year-old Ledecky has done more solo training in the past year than ever before.
It makes the already unusual run-up to the Tokyo Olympics, now scheduled for this July, even more so for the most dominant swimmer on the planet.
When the world turns its attention to the pool during the Olympics, every four years, they see each athlete swimming in their own lane.
But that's not how they train. The majority of their preparatory work is done with several swimmers to a lane. Putting multiple long-limbed humans in a 10-foot wide strip of water makes practice equal parts contact sport and hydrodynamic puzzle, with swimmers drafting off of their faster teammates with an intricacy you would find in the Tour de France peloton.
Big facilities like the Avery Aquatic Center at Stanford boast 20 50-meter lanes for men's and women's teams of about 22 each, giving swimmers the luxury of spreading out. But they still train in small groups, minding their teammates and the pace clock during interval workouts.
Ledecky being Ledecky, there are no female swimmers in the world capable of keeping up with her for longer than 400 meters of racing, let alone an entire two-hour distance-oriented practice.
That's why for the majority of the last five years, she's trained alongside men's milers Liam Egan and True Sweetser every Tuesday and Thursday.
"Training with Katie introduced a variable of sort of looking back over your shoulder like 'oh my God, oh my God, oh my God, here she comes,' " said Egan, who graduated from Stanford in 2018 and now works at enterprise artificial intelligence firm DataRobot. "We didn't want to talk trash to her, because then she would beat us."
Although both Egan and Sweetser, a senior, have swum faster times in races than Ledecky by margins of 3% to 5%, the trio was relatively even during practices.
"There are plenty of times where I have swum a solid practice and I've had a good workout and she has been able to keep up with me the whole time or even beat me," said Sweetser, a former U.S. national champion in the 1,500. "If I'm having a bad day then it's just going to be embarrassing."
NCAA rules prohibit men and women from training together if their programs don't share a head coach, as is the case at Stanford. The hard core distance trio got away with it by putting Ledecky in the lane adjacent to the Stanford men until Ledecky turned professional in 2018 and NCAA restrictions no longer applied.
What sets Ledecky apart, according to her sometimes training partners, is her ability to stare down her limits of speed and pain and not blink.
"We were always really shocked by her intensity," said Egan. "Katie would come into the wall, her face would be completely purple, she would be breathing ridiculously hard, her cap is falling back and she just doesn't say anything. She is focused on the next rep already."
Ledecky shined brightest on the hardest sets, including one dubbed "the broken mile," which actually entails swimming three miles at a pace approaching your personal best time. Each of the three rounds includes three 500s with progressively shorter rest periods, followed by 150 yards all out.
One of the several times the trio did the set together, Ledecky completed all nine 500s in under four minutes and 38 seconds, making her composite 1,650 time on each round faster than her American record time of 15:03.31 in the mile, which she set at the women's NCAA championship meet in 2018.
In another practice of descending 300-meter efforts, Ledecky swam faster than her 1,500 world record pace for more than 5,000 meters.
"There is no man in the world [who] could do the equivalent of that in a practice," said Sweetser.
Her singular focus proved more important than ever last spring, when the pandemic took away Ledecky's access to Stanford's state-of-the-art pools and world-class training partners. Ledecky and teammate Simone Manuel scrambled to find water as Northern California went into lockdown, eventually settling in the two-lane, 25-yard backyard pool of Tod Spieker, a former All American backstroker at UCLA in the 1970s and Masters swimming record holder.
It was supposed to be a temporary solution. "It turned out to be three months," said Ledecky.
During that time, Ledecky was mostly training by herself, because Manuel, the defending gold medalist in the 100 freestyle, is a pure sprinter whose range only overlaps at the 200 free. It was a slog, if only because the challenges of distance sets aren't entirely physical.
"There is mental fortitude required to stay focused," said Egan. "A lot of that becomes really difficult when you don't have someone who is going to start pushing you when things get tough on the back half of the set."
Sweetser, who last spring was also training alone in a backyard pool in Orlando, Fla., remembered commiserating with Ledecky about swimming in suboptimal conditions. Variables like pool depth and water temperature can drastically affect baseline paces and target heart rates distance swimmers build their practices around and, in turn, shake a swimmer's confidence.
"She was like, 'oh I'm going five-minute 500s all out, what the heck is wrong with me?' It was tough for her mentally," said Sweetser.
Ledecky acknowledged as much. "We weren't getting massive, great training in or making huge strides," she said. "I think more than anything it was just good for us mentally to have a routine."
Stanford reopened its facilities over the summer only to be unable to use them in August and September due to wildfires in Northern California. The smoke made the air quality unsafe for outdoor training, so Ledecky bought an exercise bike for her one-bedroom apartment.
Since the fires abated, her training has resumed normally, mostly without hiccups. Pandemic-related health protocols remain, however, so she is still swimming alone in her lane. It isn't all bad, though.
She joked, "actually it has helped me improve my straight swimming at meets. I used to circle swim."
Credit: By Laine Higgins
