Several low-key sectors have been leading the stock market higher in recent weeks. Their gains will soon be put to the test.
The S&P 500 has advanced 19% this year, driven higher in the first half of 2024 by tech titans and their artificial-intelligence ambitions. Since the start of the third quarter, a less-glitzy group of sectors -- including utilities, materials and industrials -- has picked up the baton to broaden the market's rally.
The coming earnings season could offer evidence of whether the widening advance is sustainable.
Wall Street expects earnings for the Magnificent Seven group of tech giants to rise 17.5% in the third quarter from a year earlier, compared with a 1.1% climb in profits for the rest of the S&P 500, according to John Butters, senior earnings analyst at FactSet. That would be the smallest earnings gap between the groups since the first quarter of 2023.
"The Magnificent Seven and their profits are decelerating from a pretty high base. The rest of the market, their earnings are accelerating," said Lauren Sanfilippo, senior investment strategist at Bank of America's Chief Investment Office.
Optimism about the economy has been helping fuel share gains across industries.
For the third quarter, companies in the S&P 500 overall are expected to report a fifth straight quarter of earnings growth, with profits projected to have climbed 4% from a year earlier, according to FactSet.
Some of the country's biggest banks and asset managers are due to report results this week, including JPMorgan Chase, Wells Fargo and BlackRock. Investors also will get fresh inflation data, which could influence the Fed's path on interest rates.
Tech stocks overall are still expected to be top earnings contributors for the quarter.
The information-technology sector, home to Nvidia and Apple, is expected to report earnings growth of 15% from a year earlier. The communication services sector, which includes Meta Platforms and Alphabet, is forecast to post a 10% rise.
Credit: By Hardika Singh
