Apple Inc. has purchased Emotient Inc., a startup that uses artificial-intelligence technology to read people's emotions by analyzing facial expressions.
It isn't clear what Apple plans to do with Emotient's technology, which primarily was sold to advertisers to help assess viewer reactions to their ads. Doctors also have tested it to interpret signs of pain among patients unable to express themselves, and a retailer used it to monitor shoppers' facial expressions, the company had said.
Improving image recognition is a hot topic in Silicon Valley, where Apple rivals Facebook Inc., Alphabet Inc.'s Google and others are investing heavily in artificial-intelligence techniques.
An Apple spokeswoman confirmed the purchase, but declined to elaborate.
Emotient, based in San Diego, previously had raised $8 million from investors, including Intel Capital. The company had been seeking a new round of venture-capital financing, but wasn't able to secure it on favorable terms according to a person familiar with the matter.
Emotient Chief Executive Ken Denman declined to comment. The company this week revised its website and removed details about the services it had been selling.
Apple has expressed interest in the field. In a 2014 patent application, it described a software system that would analyze and identify people's moods based on a variety of clues, including facial expression.
In October, Apple confirmed that it had acquired another artificial-intelligence startup, VocalIQ Ltd., which aims to improve a computer's ability to understand natural speech.
In May, Emotient announced that it had been granted a patent for a method of collecting and labeling as many as 100,000 facial images a day so computers can better recognize different expressions.
Its technology leaves some skittish, including Paul Ekman, a psychologist who pioneered the study of reading faces to determine emotions and is an adviser to Emotient.
In an interview with The Wall Street Journal last January, Dr. Ekman said he was torn between the potential power of software that can read emotions and the need to ensure that it doesn't infringe on personal privacy. He said the technology could reveal people's emotions without their consent, and their feelings could be misinterpreted.
An Emotient spokeswoman says the company doesn't reveal information about individuals, only aggregate data.
Credit: By Rolfe Winkler, Daisuke Wakabayashi and Elizabeth Dwoskin
