Amazon.com Inc.'s decision to split its new headquarters exposes a secret known to many companies: It is tough to find top tech talent.
The move stems from Amazon's need for that talent, so spreading the number of locations will provide better access.
The competition for high-tech workers spans all of Corporate America. Companies from auto makers to insurers are duking it out with West Coast tech firms to attract and retain people with expertise in fields like software development, machine learning and big data.
Even though colleges and universities have raced to boost their offerings in hot tech-related fields, it isn't enough. Combined, computer and information sciences and engineering accounted for just 9% of the 1.92 million bachelor's degrees awarded in 2016, according to the latest figures from the Education Department.
Deciding on two, rather than one, headquarter locations gives Amazon more leeway. "They have to not only move to a place with a lot of workers they can pull from, but they'll have to continuously pull from a region" to account for turnover, said Andrew Gadomski, who helps large employers execute recruiting campaigns.
Amazon said early on in its extended search that it was interested in locations with a concentration of universities that could help supply technology workers. The shortlist includes Dallas; New York City; and Crystal City, Va., a suburb of Washington, D.C. All have several higher-learning options.
The labor market for tech talent has tightened since Amazon started its search for another headquarters location a year ago, said Jed Kolko, chief economist at Indeed.com.
Existing tech hubs have had stronger job growth with more expensive housing markets, so trying to attract or hire 50,000 workers to one place puts a strain on both the labor and housing markets, he added.
"One thing to watch is, if two places are ultimately chosen, how similar or different are they?" Mr. Kolko said. "If they are quite different in their housing costs or workforce, that would be a strong sign that Amazon is looking to put different functions in these different locations. If they are similar markets, then it may just be to avoid pushing up the cost of labor and having a large enough pool of workers to choose from."

Credit: By Lauren Weber
