[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Central banks are priming the pump again. Investors who smartly reshuffle their portfolios could benefit disproportionately.
This month, the Federal Reserve delivered a jumbo, half-point cut in interest rates. Then, several days later, China's central bank went all in with measures to jolt its economy and the stock market. In the eurozone, lackluster surveys of purchasing managers have sparked hopes that the European Central Bank will soon follow suit.
The S&P 500 hit a record last week. The consumer-discretionary sector, which was previously in the doldrums because of its being particularly exposed to economic booms and busts, has taken over leadership and is up 7.3% month to date. It includes carmakers, leisure companies, apparel companies and home builders. Home Depot, Booking.com and McDonald's have been among those bolstering the sector's gains.
The market's message seems clear: Lower borrowing costs should allow consumers to unlock new sources of credit, and this is a good thing. But does the rotation have room to continue?
It might surprise many investors that consumer-discretionary stocks are doing so well in the first place. Historically, they have done best when the economy is heating up and interest rates and bond yields are rising -- a pattern that also applies to cheap "value" stocks and to equal-weighted indexes.
But that pattern is backward now because high rates have been used to battle supply-driven inflation. When that happens, it also increases something called dispersion between different sectors in the market. Investors who rotate their portfolios more often tend to do better during such periods.
One such tidal shift happened in July, when a mix of concerns about overvaluation and a slackening economy triggered a move into stocks that had been laggards and away from the artificial-intelligence-linked names that had been powering the market. Consumer-discretionary stocks did poorly then. The big winners were real-estate investment trusts, which had so far had a dismal 2024.
Surprisingly, these REITs, which gain a lot from lower rates, have taken a breather during the rotation that started earlier this month as traders reacted to the Fed's rate cut, while tech has started rallying again. Those wanting to chase the low-rate trade might wonder if much of it has already been priced in.
Past patterns of what happens after the Fed starts a rate-cutting spree imply that a lot of the action might still be in store. Outcomes vastly depend on whether the economy manages to keep expanding or instead goes into a recession. In the former case, the S&P 500's total return in the following six months was on average twice as large as usual, according to data by the economists Kenneth French and Robert Shiller going back to 1926. In the latter case, investors suffered big losses.
The consumer-discretionary sector has neatly followed this trend, too. Rate peaks followed by "soft landings" led to an 8.6% gain, while those followed by "hard landings" led to a 9.3% loss. The chemicals, financial and tech sectors have historically behaved in a similar way.
So the current wave of cyclical bets actually follows previous patterns. There are reasons to jump in. The U.S. economy, while going through a soft patch, seems unlikely to implode fully with weekly jobless claims at a four-month low.
Compared with the past, it is cheap and easy for individual investors to rotate their portfolios with all sorts of tailor-made exchange-traded funds and nearly free trading in brokerage accounts. Caveat emptor, though: What is on the label can be misleading. Take ETFs that track the S&P 500 consumer-discretionary sector. Shares of Amazon.com currently make up about 22% of their holdings, and that stock trades more on AI hype than economic considerations.
A better way to benefit from the easing cycle might be through the nondurable-goods sector, which has tended to outperform its consumer-discretionary counterpart in any scenario. This was the case after Alan Greenspan started cutting rates in 1995 in an environment that many on Wall Street consider analogous to today's.
The concern that analysts have with staples -- despite their doing well in the post-July rotation -- is that lower-income Americans have been feeling the pinch much more than the affluent. That bodes poorly for the pricing power of the likes of Coca-Cola, Walmart and General Mills.
Yet this is precisely the cohort that should benefit the most if the Fed's actions have an impact.
Staples have historically managed to eke out a positive return even after recessions. Other "defensive" industries such as healthcare and telecommunications have also had excellent postpeak performances, even during soft landings. Counterintuitively, many cyclical ones haven't.
Following central banks down the rate curve doesn't have to be a rough trip.
Generate image description

Credit: By Jon Sindreu
