The Perfect Bet
By Adam Kucharski
Profile, 271 pages, GBP 12.99
Lady Luck has left the house. Computers are beating us at our own games. From quiz shows to foreign-exchange trading, from poker to arbitrage, artificial intelligence is winning.
The story begins 500 years ago, when Gerolamo Cardano leapt up from a card game in Venice to stab a cheating opponent. Wondering if there might be a less bloody defense against card sharps, Cardano began mathematically analyzing games of chance and working out the laws of probability. Thus commenced the long tradition of gamblers as godfathers to statistics, chaos theory, artificial intelligence and scientific systems for predicting the world financial markets.
Adam Kucharski, a young Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge who specializes in the mathematical modeling of infectious disease, provides an elegant and amusing account of these developments in "The Perfect Bet: How Science and Math Are Taking the Luck out of Gambling."
Mr. Kucharski interviewed some of the key figures in recent schemes, and he does a good job of describing in general terms how they work. Anyone planning to enter a casino or place an online bet would be advised to keep this book handy.
I should mention that I appear in Mr. Kucharski's account. Featured in his narrative is the work of Eudaemonic Enterprises, a scientific commune in Santa Cruz, Calif., that built toe-operated computers into shoes and beat the game of roulette in the late 1970s. Proceeds from this venture went into a communal pot, known as the Eudaemonic Pie, which was the title of the 1985 book I wrote about my alternating roles as Eudaemonic scribe and high-stakes bettor. Mr. Kucharski brings the story up to the present. He describes a successful computer-aided attack on London's Ritz casino in 2004, and recent work by Doyne Farmer, Norman Packard and other Eudaemons on building models for market prediction.
Science and gambling are "intertwined," Mr. Kucharski says, with wagers being "windows into the world of chance." Statisticians are getting good at predicting sports scores. Intelligent algorithms can beat human poker players. Lottery games have been picked off by brute-force attacks (buying up large combinations of numbers). Using customized computer models, Bill Benter, an American gambler who moved from card counting to horses, has gained an edge in betting at race tracks in Hong Kong and elsewhere. Sports betting pools are now being designed for pension funds; Mr. Kucharski quotes a financial planner saying that gambling is "the missing asset class."
Many of these strategies rely on teams of players or syndicates. There is also a move toward cutting out the middleman. Online exchanges such as Betfair are handling millions of bets a day. Betfair's founder, Andrew Black, launched his site in 2000 with a mock funeral procession through London's financial district, which included, says Mr. Kucharski, "a coffin announcing the 'death of the bookmaker.' "
In a chapter called "Rise of the Robots," Mr. Kucharski talks about automated strategies for arbitrage, a practice he dates from 1844, when Samuel Morse sent his first telegraph message up the line from Washington to Baltimore. Once cables had been stretched around the world, it was possible to buy pork bellies in Chicago and sell them in Beijing or vice versa. Since then we have witnessed the rise of automated gamblers, artificial arbitragers and algorithmic trading that depends on lightning-fast execution, measured in milliseconds.
Here Doyne Farmer enters the picture again. After beating roulette, he and Norman Packard founded a statistical-arbitrage operation called the Prediction Co. that successfully applied nonlinear dynamics to the movements of futures, currency and other financial markets. After being bought out by the bank UBS, Mr. Packard moved into modeling the origins of life, while Mr. Farmer delved deeper into modeling financial markets. If one thinks of markets not as static sets of rules but as evolving ecosystems, one can imagine how biology and finance might eventually unite in a grand unified model. Mr. Farmer, who is currently a researcher at Oxford, speculates in "The Perfect Bet" that smart machines might eventually get too smart, creating a future where "humans are unable to participate in real time, and, instead, an ultrafast ecology of robots rises up to take control."
Along with finance, Mr. Kucharski takes us through the world of poker, where bots now infest online high-stakes tables. Checkers and chess have fallen to computers, and the programs keep getting stronger with the addition of artificial intelligence, particularly in areas known as "opponent modeling," or knowing when to bluff. In 2011, an IBM computer, Watson, beat the game show "Jeopardy!" Watson has since become key to IBM's strategy to profit from "cognitive computing," and a new manager for Watson has just been brought in from the Weather Co. (Weather, with its complex systems and big data, is another fruitful area for developing predictive systems.)
"Machines take me by surprise with great frequency," said mathematician Alan Turing. With computer programs competing against one another at 2,000 games per second, no wonder our machines are getting smart. We design them to surpass us, and they do.
Mr. Kucharski ends with a discussion of whether poker is a game of skill or chance. This is a practical as well as a theoretical issue, since the laws covering Internet gambling are different from those covering games of "skill," such as stock trading or horse racing. A U.S. court ruled in 2012 that poker is a game of skill, which means that it doesn't count as gambling under U.S. law. "The line between luck and skill -- and between gambling and investing -- is rarely as clear as we think," Mr. Kucharski says. Now that the bots are combining mathematics, physics and psychology, let the games begin. Or should I say -- with perfect bets and winning strategies played by superfast computers -- the games are over?
---
Mr. Bass, a professor at SUNY Albany, is the author of "The Predictors: How a Band of Maverick Physicists Used Chaos Theory to Trade Their Way to a Fortune on Wall Street."
Credit: By Thomas A. Bass
