World stock markets edged down Monday and early Tuesday, giving back some gains after a recent strong performance.
On Monday, the pan-continental Stoxx Europe 600 declined 1%. Asian stocks broadly fell, with Japan's Nikkei 225 retreating 1%, and Chinese shares also declining. U.S. markets were closed for a public holiday and major index futures inched down.
The selloff continued early Tuesday with the Nikkei down a further 0.6%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index down 1.4% and the Shanghai Composite down 0.4%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.2%.
"It's just the market taking a breather. It's a down day after a blistering few weeks," said Fahad Kamal, chief investment officer of Kleinwort Hambros.
European government bonds sold off, pushing up yields. Prices for shorter-dated British bonds slumped, with the 2-year yield settling above 5% for the first time since 2008. The Bank of England is widely expected to raise interest rates again this week to combat persistently high inflation, and market pricing shows investors have shifted to expecting the central bank will have to keep rates higher for longer.
In continental Europe, the yield on 10-year German government bonds rose to 2.517%, from 2.475% Friday.
Stocks have rallied in recent days, with the S&P 500 rising 2.6% last week to notch its biggest weekly gain since late March. Earlier this month, the broad index climbed into a new bull market, as optimism about a boom in artificial intelligence boosted big technology stocks and traders bet the Federal Reserve was nearly done raising interest rates.
Chinese stocks drifted lower, as investors dialed back expectations of what measures Beijing might take to support the economy. The CSI 300 index of mainland Chinese stocks slipped 0.8%, while Hong Kong's benchmark Hang Seng Index fell 0.6%, despite the start of a new program allowing investors to trade stocks in yuan as well as Hong Kong dollars.
Economists at Goldman Sachs recently cut their forecast for economic growth in China, saying the country's "post-reopening recovery appears to have fizzled out." The Goldman team now sees gross domestic product expanding 5.4% this year, rather than the 6% they had previously expected.
Chinese Premier Li Qiang said at a Friday meeting of China's State Council, the country's cabinet, that the government was studying the economic situation, but didn't provide specifics.
"The expectation gap might have been relatively large last week, given that there was a lot of hype about possible nationwide policy stimulus," said Raymond Cheng, Standard Chartered's chief investment officer for North Asia. He said the bank still expects more stimulus from Beijing, but said this was likely to be targeted at particular sectors.
Investors were also focused on a meeting in Beijing between U.S. Secretary of State Anton`y Blinken and China's foreign minister. "Any sign of collaboration or even friendship is certainly market positive. A big tail risk has been U.S.-China relations worsening," Kamal at Kleinwort Hambros said.
In Japan, Monday's modest pullback came after stocks surged to multidecade highs last week, boosted by a solid earnings season and a stamp of approval from billionaire investor Warren Buffett. After Monday's market close, Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway said it had lifted its stakes in five large Japanese trading firms, including Itochu and Marubeni, to more than 8.5% on average.
Credit: By Anna Hirtenstein and Weilun Soon
