Uber Technologies Inc. is getting real about artificial intelligence.
The ride-hailing service is creating a division to develop the technology, which attempts to teach computers to think like humans, after agreeing to acquire Geometric Intelligence Inc., a fledgling artificial-intelligence startup founded by academics and based in New York.
Uber said it would move Geometric Intelligence's 15-person staff to its hometown of San Francisco and form Uber AI Labs to improve its ride-hailing service, including by more accurately estimating rider locations and travel time. In particular, the new unit is focused on software for self-driving autos, which Uber hopes to roll out broadly in the coming years.
"Driverless cars are going to be at the center of what we do," said Gary Marcus, Geometric Intelligence's chief executive and a professor of psychology at New York University. Dr. Marcus, who will lead the new Uber unit, and Uber both declined to disclose terms of the sale.
Silicon Valley technology companies have been doubling down on artificial intelligence in the hope of automating more software so they can more accurately anticipate customers' needs and, say, dispatch more taxis to certain neighborhoods, filter news stories, order more inventory or improve search results.
Experts in artificial intelligence are coveted by tech companies, which are mining universities and competitors for talent.
Uber AI Labs' mission will be to develop technology that makes self-driving cars more efficient. That includes improving traffic prediction, language comprehension and visual understanding. Of late, machines have become adept at characterizing objects, said Dr. Marcus, but they aren't so good at understanding the changing conditions of a scene -- a capability that will be crucial to achieving fully autonomous driving.
Uber, which this year was valued by its investors at $68 billion, has been testing self-driving autos with regular customers in Pittsburgh, where it has a lab focused on developing the technology. In August Uber acquired Ottomotto LLC, a startup known as Otto that is making self-driving long-haul trucks.
Uber, and others, believe autonomous vehicles can eventually replace those helmed by human drivers, reducing labor expenses and making routing more efficient.Knowing a rider's pickup location to within just a few feet can help drivers shave valuable time off a ride, facilitating more fares throughout the day.
Uber AI Labs will start hiring "aggressively," Dr. Marcus said. Eventually, it might open an office in the U.K., he said. Uber AI Labs will begin recruiting this week at the Neural Information Processing Systems conference, a widely attended machine-learning meeting in Barcelona.
"We're going to have the opportunity to do basic research that dovetails with [Uber's] mission. That's what gets academics like us excited," said Dr. Marcus, who is moving to San Francisco but will retain his affiliation with NYU.
Credit: By Greg Bensinger and Daniela Hernandez
