Patch Makes Rebound
After Split From AOL
On the morning of Jan. 29, 2014, "hyperlocal" online media service Patch employed nearly 540 people. The following day, just 98 remained.
Turnaround specialist Hale Global had purchased a majority stake in Patch from AOL, and initiated what it called a "hard reset," which included hundreds of layoffs. The plan was to overhaul Patch's business and install what it had lacked previously: a sustainable business model.
"Our job was to fix what made this such a money-losing business," said Hale Global Chief Executive Charles Hale.
Fast forward two years, and Hale Global says its turnaround efforts are bearing fruit. Patch attracted over 23 million users in January, according to internal data, up from 10 million in August 2014. What's more, the company says it is profitable and plans to expand in 2016.
Patch's network now consists of over 900 community-specific sites in 23 states, featuring everything from local news and weather updates to announcements from local schools. It employs a total 125 full-time staffers. "In January, we will do more traffic with 70 full-time editors than AOL did with 700 for most of 2013," said Warren St. John, Patch's editor in chief.
Hale Global is now running Patch independently, with some strategy support from AOL.
-- Jack Marshall
IBM's Watson Aids
Kia's Super Bowl Pick
At first glance, Kia's Super Bowl advertisement was standard big-game fare: a well-known celebrity, Christopher Walken, hawked a midsize sedan to millions of viewers hooked to their television sets.
But for its seventh Super Bowl appearance, the auto maker tried to add some extra star power by employing some unlikely assistance. International Business Machine Corp.'s Watson helped identify "social media influencers" to buoy Kia's message before and during the 60-second spot.
Watson, the artificial-intelligence software, has the ability to parse language used on social media to determine which influencers exhibit personality traits desired by Kia, such as "openness to change," "artistic interest" and "achievement-striving."
Social-media stars chosen by Kia included actor James Maslow, who has more than three million Twitter followers, and musicians Wesley Stromberg and Drew Chadwick, who have 765,000 and 452,000, respectively. For the campaign, Kia sent colorful socks to about 100 influencers to make content and use Kia's hashtag, #AddPizzazz.
The main conceit of the Super Bowl ad, dubbed "Walken Closet," was that Kia's vehicle is the fun, multicolored sock in a world of otherwise bland, beige socks.
-- Steven Perlberg
