The founder of Google's venture capital arm, Bill Maris, is leaving the company, the latest in a series of high-level departures from parent Alphabet Inc.
Mr. Maris, chief executive of GV, which was formerly known as Google Ventures, is being succeeded by Google veteran and GV Managing Partner David Krane, effective Friday, according to a person familiar with the matter.
No explanation was immediately given for Mr. Maris's departure.
It follows word last week that Chris Urmson, chief technology officer and former director of Google's self-driving car effort, had left the project at a crucial juncture as the company tries to transition its driverless-car technology into a commercial product. He gave no clear reason for his departure or a hint of his destination.
In June, Tony Fadell stepped down as CEO of Alphabet Inc.'s home-automation unit, Nest.
Mr. Maris has no new career plans yet and plans to spend time with his family before starting something new, the person familiar with the matter said. Mr. Maris's departure and the installation of Mr. Krane to the role, which were reported earlier Wednesday by Recode, were scheduled to be announced to the GV staff on Thursday.
Mr. Krane, who has been with Google for 17 years, led the first public relations role at the search giant. He had already been effectively running the day-to-day activities of GV, with Mr. Maris somewhat stepped back in the role.
The GV venture-capital funds manage $2.4 billion and have placed over 300 bets on startups across U.S. and abroad.
Tapping Mr. Krane, a gregarious leader, could lead to a different focus on investments but would unlikely change the overall mix of investments GV makes, the person familiar with the thinking said. Mr. Krane was behind GV's investment in ride-hailing giant Uber Technologies Inc., as well as Nest and coffee maker Blue Bottle.
Mr. Krane's influence in the new role could lead to an increased focus on consumer-related technology investment, the person said.
GV's overall focus on five sectors -- life sciences, enterprise, data and artificial intelligence, robotics, and consumer -- will remain unchanged under the new chief.
Credit: By Scott Martin
