[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
If you buy bonds, make sure you do it for the right reasons.
Whereas equity investors have had a bumpy few months, believers in the venerable 60/40 portfolio should be permitted a victory lap: As the S&P 500 delivered a negative 5.1% return between the end of July and Aug. 5, a portfolio consisting of 60% U.S. equities and 40% 10-year Treasurys lost only 2.6%. Then, the 4.2% stock drawdown that happened last week translated into only a 1.9% loss for the 60/40 portfolio.
"Fixed income has finally regained its traditional hedging property," said Roger Hallam, global head of rates at Vanguard.
Nonetheless, the strongest reason to own bonds over the long term is an even simpler one: the income they generate.
Vanguard has long advocated for the benefits of mixing stocks and bonds. Such strategies hark back to the 1950s, when economist Harry Markowitz mathematically made the case that diversification improves risk-adjusted returns. The 60/40 mix has delivered negative total returns on only 23% of the years between 1872 and 2023, compared with 27% for the S&P 500, and shortened lengthy stretches of negative returns, according to calculations derived by data collected by Yale University professor Robert Shiller.
Modern investors intuitively understand why bonds -- especially those issued by governments -- are an effective diversifier: They rally whenever markets grow concerned about the economy and anticipate central banks cutting rates, which tends to make equities suffer. This is what happened this summer.
Yet before the 1970s, stock-bond correlations periodically flipped from positive to negative. And for a long stretch between then and the late 1990s, they were consistently positive: As stocks took a beating, so did bonds. This is because inflation was high for much of that period, making central banks reluctant to stimulate the economy. The post-2021 period has similarly led many on Wall Street to anticipate the demise of the 60/40 portfolio.
With inflation back under control, however, many are hoping for a return to the "lowflation" regime of the 2010s, when bonds were great cushions against volatility. This was the heyday of the 60/40 mix: Its risk-adjusted returns -- measured by the Sharpe ratio -- relative to the S&P 500 were the highest ever.
But here is the problem with relying on 60/40 or similar allocations: Those who aim to retire a few years down the line won't be able to put bread on the table from risk-adjusted returns.
Times of subdued inflation also tend to be those in which yields are low, which means that people who buy bonds then end up relinquishing a lot of income.
Someone who invested $1,000 in a 60/40 portfolio in the five years after 2009, for example, ended up with $1,439 in the bank on average, which is $1,141 less than someone who just bought the S&P 500. By comparison, the shortfall during the positive-correlation period of 1975 to 1980 was only $561.
Of course, post-2008 investors still did very well in absolute terms. Equity performance then was so exceptional that the 60/40 mix made as much money as a 100% equity portfolio has returned on average since 1871. But those who have to invest now probably won't be so lucky: Unless artificial-intelligence bets pay off handsomely, the big boom of the technology giants won't happen again.
None of this implies shunning bonds. Quite the contrary: In the past, buying 10-year Treasurys when yields were above 3% or as the yield curve uninverted -- both of which are currently happening -- has worked handsomely, delivering basically the same 10-year returns as an all-stock portfolio.
What investors need to shed is the frame of mind that entrenched itself after the global financial crisis, when bonds were bought not for coupons but to benefit from price increases during volatile days or as a result of the Federal Reserve embarking on loosening cycles. Historically, buying fixed income based on these factors has at best delivered short-term gains.
As Willem Sels, global chief investment officer at HSBC Global Private Banking, puts it: "The longer you go in your investment horizon, it is increasingly all about the entry point."
Does it matter that the Fed is set to cut borrowing costs on Sept. 18, and that this may put an end to extra-high deposit and money-market rates? Yes, but mostly in the sense that bonds currently offer high returns that investors may want to lock in. Long-maturity U.S. investment-grade paper yields above 5% with little default risk. With equity valuations stretched across the board, this is particularly attractive for those with investment horizons of five to 10 years.
Thinking about it in these terms, rather than sticking to 60/40 under all circumstances, makes sense for most investors. Reducing the short-term volatility of a portfolio is rarely worth having a much smaller nest egg.
Generate image description

Credit: By Jon Sindreu
