Ben Fried is the chief information officer at Google Inc., and Vijay Gurbaxani is a professor of business and computer science at the University of California, Irvine.
They sat down with Nikki Waller, editor of live journalism at The Wall Street Journal, to discuss the expanding role of the chief information officer and why companies today need to commit fully to technology to remain competitive.
Edited excerpts follow.
MS. WALLER: I think it's safe to say that the main business objective for most of the CIOs here, whether they admit it or not, is outrunning Google or Amazon. Do they have what it takes?
DR. GURBAXANI: I run a CIO round table with about 28 members and I think some of the capabilities we need in old-line companies to beat the platform companies are, for the most part, lagging behind in a variety of dimensions. So the short answer is, we have a lot of work to do at more-traditional companies to outrun the Googles and Amazons.
MR. FRIED: I'm a CIO, and I'd like to think that we don't have to outrun each other so much. There's an awful lot of universality in being a CIO, whether you work at Google or somewhere else.
But in terms of skills, there may be this perception that the role of the CIO is one that requires solely deep understanding of technology. And while that's incredibly important, CIOs are business leaders, as well.
As a business leader, especially in an era where there's such a great demand for talent, you have to be able to inspire followership. You have to be able to design and change organizations. You have to be able to communicate really, really well. You have to put the business first and how you think about the mission of your organization. Those are universal skills for business leaders.
In addition, as a CIO, you are the person responsible for the shape and quality of technology in the company you work in, so you need to own that.
MS. WALLER: Ben, how do you ask for resources for projects you need, especially if they're risky or unproven?
MR. FRIED: I look at investment through a number of lenses. I have one set to keep the business running. What I want to do is invest and drive down unit costs, drive down marginal costs, allow us to scale better. And because an awful lot of my problems come from a growing business in every dimension -- it's a first-class problem to have -- unit cost reduction is incredibly important.
There's another set of conversations around improving efficiency and automation among the functions that we support. How do we partner with the finance organization to develop more efficient finance processes and create more opportunity and automation and so on. We also have a pretty big team focused on what we can do to make all of Google more productive.
MS. WALLER: What's the No. 1 thing you've done to make all of Google more productive?
MR. FRIED: Everyone complains about meetings, but no one does anything about them. So we made a bunch of technology investments starting with computer/human interaction, user-experience research, and understanding, "Well, what goes on in meetings? What's an effective meeting? What's not? And what are the tools actually doing versus what could they do?"
So to give you an example of a crazy "only at Google" thing we've done to make people more productive is we have a batch optimizer that runs every night. It looks at everyone's schedules and where they'll be through the course of the day, and optimizes the meeting schedule to reduce walk time between meetings. And we actually have metrics for how much walk time we've saved over the course of the day.
MS. WALLER: It's like a reverse FitBit.
MR. FRIED: Well, I did get some snide remarks about driving up health premiums. But I like to say it allows people to be more intentional about exercise and prevents meetings from running late or starting late because people need to come from far away.
MS. WALLER: Let's talk about machine learning and AI. Vijay, how can people learn what they need to know and bring it into their organizations right now?
DR. GURBAXANI: The chief competitive resource that we all have today is know-how. When you start getting into what distinguishes your company from other companies, it has to be based on what you know how to do that is better than how your competitors know how to do it. Traditional software has codified what we know how to do because you have to specify the rules, the policies, the procedures.
The harder part is developing new knowledge, and that's where machine learning comes in. But new knowledge actually comes from data. If you look at how many hours of self-driving cars Waymo has data on, it's in the hundreds of thousands, and if you look at the next best, it's in the four digits. The company with the most data wins. And I have found that many companies struggle with how to acquire more data, [whether it be on their own or through partnerships and acquisitions].
In terms of skills, getting the right talent around machine learning is a challenge. It's the hottest field there is. Every graduate student in machine learning stops their Ph.D. and makes a few hundred thousand going to work for companies like Google.
MR. FRIED: I've been working in technology since around 1980, and I've seen many, many times when a technology revolution upended what we do. But never has there been one like machine learning, because of the depth of experience it requires on the part of participants.
As a result, the difference between the people who can take advantage of the leading edge of what's happening in that field and the rest is the greatest I've seen in any of these technology revolutions.
DR. GURBAXANI: If you fall behind your competitors in developing this new know-how and leveraging, you're going to fall further and further behind. And we've seen that the platform companies are winning and they're winning big. So my message to you would be get out there in a hurry.

Credit: By Nikki Waller
