Crypto venture firm Arche Capital Management aims to raise a debut fund of up to $100 million, the latest firm to test the crypto waters as the sector attempts to rebound after a bruising couple of years.
Arche co-founders Vanessa Grellet and William Wolf were crypto investors at different firms when the industry was hammered by a downturn that started in 2022. But their belief in crypto hasn't wavered, they said, and they think limited partners that invest in venture funds are eager to jump back into the sector even if they suffered losses.
A growing crop of investors share that sentiment. In June, crypto-focused venture firm Paradigm said it raised its third fund, an $850 million vehicle focused on crypto startups. Axiom Venture Partners, a venture firm focused on crypto startups, said in July it was seeking $75 million for a sophomore fund. This year, Ego Death Capital, a venture fund focused on investing in bitcoin technology startups, said it was raising a $100 million second fund.
As more crypto funds spring up, the number of funding deals is growing. There were 992 funding rounds for crypto startups from the start of the year through July, 32% more than during the same period last year, according to analytics provider CryptoRank. The total value of the deals stayed roughly level over the two periods.
Robert Le, a crypto analyst at data provider PitchBook Data, said the crypto venture market is getting a boost from the rise in the price of bitcoin this year and the increasing availability of crypto-focused exchange-traded funds. In May, the Securities and Exchange Commission approved the first U.S. ETFs holding ether, the largest cryptocurrency behind bitcoin.
"The sentiment has changed since last summer, but really this year, once the [ETF] approvals happened, we saw a lot of growth and traction for the startups," Le said.
While niche crypto investors are driving the bulk of dealmaking, some mainstream institutional investors are backing deals. In July, crypto-related financial technology startup Partior raised a $60 million Series B round led by Peak XV Partners. Investors including Valor Capital, JPMorgan and Temasek, an investment firm owned by the government of Singapore, participated in the deal.
Arche's Wolf said he is ready for a rocky road. "There's going to be volatility -- nobody's going to be able to avoid that entirely if you're investing in this space," he said. "We're not trying to time bottoms or tops of cycles, but instead strategically partner with folks that are building things that we think are going to accrue value through cycles."
Austin, Texas-based Arche will target crypto startups including blockchain-related infrastructure projects in the financial services sector, security companies and crypto projects implementing artificial intelligence, Wolf said.
Grellet said she is interested in startups using crypto technology to solve digital identity challenges. "When we're on a call, how do I know that it's you and I'm not speaking with an AI?" Grellet said. "I think blockchain could have a role to play."
Credit: By Marc Vartabedian
