President-elect Joe Biden may change the tone of Washington's relationship with Beijing, but business leaders and Democratic advisers say he is likely to push back on China's aim to become a global technology leader.
Containing China's technological clout has been a pillar of President Trump's tech policy -- and one area where there is little evident division with his successor. As a candidate, Mr. Biden said he would invest in bolstering American technology and work with allies to confront Beijing on trade, two initiatives industry officials are banking on.
"We expect that a potential Biden administration will take a tough stance on China," said Rob Strayer, a former Trump administration official who is now executive vice president at the Information Technology Industry Council, a trade group that represents U.S. tech giants including Apple Inc., Intel Corp. and Microsoft Corp., speaking last Thursday.
He particularly pointed to expected efforts to challenge discriminatory licensing practices, cases where Beijing requires data to be held locally and instances where American companies are pressured to transfer intellectual know-how to do business in the country.
Microsoft declined to comment after this article was published. Apple and Intel didn't respond to requests for comment.
Many of the policies enacted in the past few years, including export controls against Chinese companies -- notably telecom-equipment maker Huawei Technologies Co. -- and tariffs on made-in-China goods could continue in a Biden administration, analysts and industry officials say.
The American campaign to hinder Chinese technological advances has been among Washington's few bipartisan efforts of the past several years. Leading Democrats and Republicans say Beijing unfairly supports Chinese tech companies, and American lawmakers on both sides have broadly agreed that Huawei is a security threat around the world -- a charge the company has repeatedly rejected.
Mr. Biden and his advisers said during the campaign that he is concerned about China using technology to advance state control, rather than empower citizens.
"As the vice president sees it, there's a division in the world between techno-democracies and techno-autocracies," Antony Blinken, a former Obama administration official who served as the Biden campaign's senior foreign-policy adviser, has said. The Biden campaign didn't respond to requests for comment regarding its China strategy.
As the new administration moves to strengthen the U.S. position, domestic investments in tech could be more decisive than foreign-policy moves. Biden advisers have signaled they plan to give priority to keeping the U.S. ahead in artificial intelligence, semiconductors and 5G-network equipment.
The U.S. chip industry, which is lobbying for billions of dollars in incentives for domestic factory-building and research spending, hopes to capitalize on such investments, which have widespread support in Congress.
"We don't manufacture enough semiconductors here in the U.S.," said John Neuffer, chief executive of the Semiconductor Industry Association, citing recent statistics showing U.S. factories make just 12% of chips while about three-quarters are made in Asia.
Tech executives are split in their policy wish lists. Some chip-company leaders say export controls designed to cripple Huawei and other Chinese companies have cut into their own sales, leading them to reduce research-and-development budgets while doing little to protect national security.
Some telecom-equipment companies support the measures, saying they help offset advantages that Beijing gives to Huawei and other Chinese companies.
One departure from the current administration, industry officials and analysts say, is that they may know what is coming.
Some of the Trump administration's moves, such as certain export restrictions, caught companies by surprise, leaving them little time to adjust. Many in the industry say they now expect a stronger voice in defining policies.
Ajit Manocha, chief executive of SEMI, an industry group representing manufacturing equipment makers and other companies in the industrial supply chain, said concerns about China would remain under Mr. Biden, "but the path of policies will not necessarily be the same as the Trump administration."

Credit: By Stu Woo and Asa Fitch
