The use of artificial intelligence to aid in companies' sensitive decision making has long made U.S. regulators wary, particularly for its potential to supercharge human bias.
But as worker shortages prompt widespread recruitment pushes, AI proponents say the technology, far from being risky, could help companies make hiring decisions fairer -- not just faster.
A recent jump in resignations, a mass restructuring of the workforce that coincided with the coronavirus pandemic, continues to loom large for companies, with surveys of corporate leadership showing staffing issues remain among the most pressing near-term risks. Many have turned to AI to bulk up their recruitment muscle, despite perennial warnings from regulators and experts of the potential for algorithms to effectively learn from and then magnify human biases.
Proponents, though, argue that removing the human element can actually help. Output from AI can be readily audited, and computers stripped of some of the hidden biases that can lurk in a person's mind. A computer doesn't have a hometown, didn't go to college and doesn't have hobbies, so won't unconsciously warm to a friendly candidate the way a real recruiter might.
"One candidate might talk about their varsity lacrosse team, and when they were a captain of the team, and another candidate, 'I watched the football game last night,'" said Kevin Parker, who is transitioning into an executive advisory role at hiring technology company HireVue Inc. after serving as chief executive. HireVue offers software that can automate interviews.
"When you can ask the candidates exactly the same question about the skills associated with their job, you get a much fairer outcome . . . and diversity improves as a result of that," Mr. Parker said.
Many conversations about AI intervening in important decisions have focused on their potential to amplify biases, an outcome that can occur when a data set used to teach an AI system was itself the product of bias.
"There's a growing realization that these tools can exacerbate bias," Matissa Hollister, a McGill University assistant professor of organizational behavior. "I don't know how many times I've heard, 'Keep the humans in human resources.'"
"Even tools that are not super sketchy can create significant backlash," said Dr. Hollister, who recently collaborated with the World Economic Forum on a "tool kit" for AI in HR.
Some companies have had notable AI missteps. Amazon.com Inc., for example, reportedly scrapped an algorithm meant to aid the hiring of top talent when it learned that its tool would pan candidates who listed on their resume that they went to women's colleges or participated in women's clubs.
The tool, according to a Reuters report, learned what Amazon sought in a candidate by looking at the backgrounds of candidates who submitted resumes in the last decade, a group that heavily skewed male. Amazon told The Wall Street Journal that the project was only explored on a trial basis and scrapped because the algorithms were too primitive.
Credit: By Richard Vanderford
