SEOUL -- Humanity didn't stand a chance.
South Korean Go grandmaster Lee Se-dol on Tuesday lost the final round of the chess-like game -- and the match -- to AlphaGo, an artificial-intelligence machine developed by Alphabet Inc.'s Google.
Mr. Lee, the 33-year-old representing human intelligence, had on Sunday mustered his first victory in the five-game match, which gripped many in Asia by juxtaposing the swift progress of computer intelligence and humanity's struggles to outwit advancing technology against the backdrop of a slow-moving ancient game that hasn't changed much in millennia.
But despite high hopes, he was unable to record another win.
Go, hugely popular in China, Korea and Japan, where most of the board game's 40 million players live, was in many ways an ideal testing ground for artificial intelligence. Played on a 19-by-19 grid, players place stones on each intersection and try to claim the most territory.
Experts say the game relies as much on intuition as on calculation, putting it beyond the reach of supercomputers that attempt to overwhelm their human opponents with brute-force computing power.
AlphaGo uses programming modeled on neural processes to replicate human instincts, and has also learned through millions of matches against itself.
Mr. Lee's loss Tuesday capped a humbling week for the player, who came into the $1 million match on March 9 confidently predicting a 5-0 victory over the machine. The prize money is earmarked for charities and Go organizations.
Instead, Mr. Lee eked out just one win, and joined Russian chess legend Garry Kas-parov -- who was bested by International Business Machines Corp.'s Deep Blue computer in the closely watched 1997 chess match -- in the annals of artificial intelligence's advance.
Demis Hassabis, the head of the U.K.-based team that developed AlphaGo, earlier described Go as the "Mount Everest" challenge of game-playing for artificial-intelligence developers.
Facebook Inc. has been developing its own artificial intelligence program for playing Go.
Unlike chess, which has a finite number of possible moves at any given moment that a computer can quickly crunch, Go presents a nearly boundless range of possible moves.
"It's the deepest and most profound game that mankind has devised," Mr. Hassabis said on Tuesday.
As Mr. Lee struggled to scratch out a victory, he attracted viewers in South Korea and in neighboring China and Japan for his determination against a faceless opponent. Go fans had believed a victory of machine over human was perhaps a decade away.
"I don't think Google realized how much of a shock wave that this was for a massive cultural institution out here in Asia," said Andy Okun, the American Go Association's president, who was in Seoul to watch the match. "Google thought they were beating a hobby game, like 'Snakes and Ladders.' "
The match, dubbed "the showdown of the century" by the South Korean press, adorned the front pages of almost all of the country's newspapers for most of the past week, with some of them featuring move-by-move recaps of the games, while the country's major television networks devoted hours of live news coverage to the match. In all, more than 100 million people tuned into the match, Google said.
App Annie, which tracks mobile app downloads, reported a surge in downloads of Go games on smartphones, with one game leaping to the No. 25 position among most-downloaded apps, from No. 1,109 just a week earlier.
With AlphaGo's victory, the focus will turn to other potential targets for artificial intelligence, from the real-time computer strategy game StarCraft to real-world problems, like health care and robotics.
In view of the massive public interest in the match, the South Korean government scrambled on Tuesday to show that it was keeping up with advances in artificial intelligence, announcing that it would set up a new research center dedicated to artificial-intelligence development projects, and dispatching its science minister to the headquarters of Samsung Electronics Co. and LG Electronics Inc., the country's best-known technology companies, to quiz them on their progress in artificial intelligence.
Mr. Lee didn't emerge diminished by the thrashing he received from AlphaGo. The weeklong match has turned Mr. Lee, already a legend among Go players, into a household name in South Korea. Fans relished details of his life story, including his childhood on a remote island and his struggles with a neurological disorder called aphasia.
As the shock of AlphaGo's victories sank in among the Go community, Mr. Lee tried to play down the implications of his loss.
"I wasn't able to win, but I don't think my defeat is a defeat for humanity," Mr. Lee told a packed ballroom of reporters after the final game. "It's my weakness, not the weakness of humanity."
---
Min-Jeong Lee contributed to this article.
Credit: By Jonathan Cheng
