[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Broadcom has firmly gotten in on the action of artificial-intelligence chips. But the company is also learning that volatility is the price of entry.
The chip maker first made clear to investors in early March that need for generative AI capabilities was driving up demand for its networking chips used in data centers. That was nearly three months before Nvidia issued its own blowout sales forecast that turned it into the first chip maker with a market value exceeding $1 trillion. Broadcom isn't at that valuation level, but its stock price has surged 38% since those fiscal first-quarter results in March and 22% since Nvidia's report in late May -- with both performances well exceeding the PHLX Semiconductor Index's performance over that time.
But this run has also made Broadcom more vulnerable to perceived weak points in the armor. The company's fiscal third-quarter report late last month sent the stock down more than 5% after projected revenue for the fiscal fourth quarter was merely in line with Wall Street's forecasts -- following 12 consecutive quarters of beating analysts' targets, according to FactSet. Then came a report last week by The Information that said Google was planning to ditch Broadcom as a supplier for custom data-center chips called tensor processing units, or TPUs, because of frustration with Broadcom's high prices. That report knocked nearly 3% off Broadcom's share price the next day.
The stock clawed back those losses on Friday, after several analysts cast serious doubt on the idea that Google could easily pull its business from the chip maker. Google for its part said that "we see no change in our engagement" with Broadcom, even though it noted that it is talking with "multiple other suppliers for the long term."
Stacy Rasgon of Bernstein estimates Broadcom's "compute offload" business, which primarily serves Google, will generate about $3 billion in revenue for Broadcom's fiscal year ending in October, which would represent a gain of about 50% from the prior year. Such growth is an important offset to other areas of Broadcom's business that are feeling the weight of the chip downturn. Analysts expect the company's total semiconductor revenue to rise only 9% this year.
Broadcom is indeed known for driving a hard bargain on prices; Rasgon estimates the Google business commands gross margins in the 75% range. But that still doesn't make it easy to replace. Tim Arcuri of UBS noted Friday that the TPU chips Broadcom supplies Google include proprietary technology involving packaging, memory, connectivity and optics "that is very sticky and hard for Google to replicate internally."
Analysts agree that Google could bring in other chip vendors for facets of its TPU needs. And its substantial resources could drive Google to bring more of its chip design work in-house; parent company Alphabet's net cash balance of nearly $136 billion is the highest in tech and even more than twice that of Apple's.
But the iPhone maker's recent stumbles in developing its own modem chip stand as a good reminder that even the deepest-pocketed technology giants can't easily pull off their own designs of complex chip products.
Broadcom has a strong history of retaining business that it wants to keep -- even when customers push back on prices.
The company once seemed to float the idea of selling its radio-frequency-chip business that mainly supplies Apple, its largest customer. But the two locked in a new supply deal earlier this year, just months after reports that Apple was considering bringing that work in-house.
"Overall, we have little doubt that with each generation of products, somewhat intense price negotiations occur between [Broadcom] and its heavily concentrated customer base," Ross Seymore of Deutsche Bank wrote in a note Friday.
He added, however, that Broadcom "has succeeded in maintaining these relationships, and we would expect that conclusion to be the most probable outcome in this instance as well."
Investors shouldn't count Broadcom out of Google just yet.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
