NEW YORK COMMUNITY BANCORP
NYCB +7.5%
NYCB's stock went on a wild ride Wednesday. The Wall Street Journal reported that the troubled regional lender was seeking to raise equity capital in a bid to shore up confidence, sending shares down more than 40% during the session. Amid several trading halts, NYCB said it raised more than $1 billion from a group of investors including former U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. The company also disclosed a sweeping overhaul of its management. NYCB shares recovered once trading resumed, ending 7.5% higher Wednesday, followed by a 5.8% gain Thursday after NYCB cut its quarterly dividend.
Rivian Automotive
RIVN +13%
Rivian hopes to jump-start sales with its new, more affordable electric cars. The electric-vehicle startup unveiled two new SUVs on Thursday: the midsize R2, which is slated to go on sale in 2026, and a smaller model called the R3. Rivian didn't say when the R3 would go on sale. The R2 resembles a smaller version of Rivian's $75,000 R1S SUV, with a lower price tag of $45,000. Rivian reported a $5.4 billion net loss for last year, and in February said it would lay off 10% of its salaried workforce. Rivian shares jumped 13% Thursday.
KROGER
KR +9.9%
Kroger bagged more sales in the latest quarter. The supermarket chain on Thursday said sales rose 6% in the fourth quarter as customer visits increased. Chief Executive Rodney McMullen told The Wall Street Journal that shoppers' attitudes are improving after persistent increases in food costs. The Biden administration has criticized grocery companies for price hikes and the Federal Trade Commission sued to block Kroger and Albertsons' $25 billion merger, saying the deal would lead to higher prices. Kroger shares jumped 9.9% Thursday.
TARGET
TGT +12%
Target has its eyes set on a turnaround. The retailer on Tuesday posted stronger-than-expected profits in the holiday quarter and announced a new paid membership program, Target Circle 360. Target also introduced plans to open hundreds of new stores and to invest in improvements to most of its locations over the next decade.
Target shares jumped 12% Tuesday. making the stock the S&P 500's best performer.
SPIRIT AIRLINES
SAVE -11%
Spirit and JetBlue Airways have grounded their merger plans for good. The two airlines on Monday said they were terminating the $3.8 billion deal, after deciding that they likely couldn't overcome the legal and regulatory hurdles in the way of the merger. A judge in January ruled that combining the two airlines would reduce competition and harm cost-conscious fliers. The two would have formed the fifth-largest U.S. carrier. Spirit shares dropped 11% Monday, while JetBlue shares gained 4.3%.
BROADCOM
AVGO -7%
Broadcom's giant deal with VMware overshadowed AI appetite in its latest quarter. The chip and software maker posted weaker-than-expected quarterly profit due to deal-related costs after closing its acquisition of the software company last year. The deal, valued at $69 billion, is one of the largest-ever tech tie-ups. Chief Executive Hock Tan gave a stronger outlook for artificial-intelligence chip revenue for the fiscal year. Broadcom shares fell 7% Friday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
