[Deepfake]
In the new documentary "Roadrunner" about the life of celebrity chef Anthony Bourdain, the filmmakers made a controversial choice. The director, Morgan Neville, commissioned a software company to re-create Bourdain's voice digitally, synthesizing three lines of voice-over. The lines were statements that Bourdain wrote but never uttered before his death in 2018.
The artificial-intelligence technology used to craft the fictitious audio is called "deepfake," and it has set off a debate online since food writer Helen Rosner published a piece in the New Yorker last week, "The Ethics of a Deepfake Anthony Bourdain Voice," interviewing Mr. Neville about the decision.
While the audiovisual technology that allows this kind of trickery has long been in development, the word "deepfake" first emerged in late 2017. That was when someone on the online forum Reddit began posting manipulated celebrity videos under the name "deepfakes." Soon there was an entire (now banned) Reddit community, r/deepfakes, devoted to sharing fake videos, which often consisted of face-swapping celebrities into pornographic clips.
Since then, deepfakes have grown more sophisticated, as it becomes easier to make it seem as if a person is saying or doing whatever the creator wants. The "deep" of "deepfake" refers to "deep learning," an A.I. method that involves training a neural network to create fabrications based on existing recordings and images of a person.
The second half of the compound word, "fake," may seem omnipresent these days, but as a verb, noun and adjective used for various kinds of dishonest practices, it has only been attested for about 200 years. In sources from the early 19th century, "fake" began emerging as a piece of argot in the language of thieves.
James Hardy Vaux, a convict from England who had been sent to a penal colony in Australia, published a memoir in 1819 that included a glossary of "flash language," or secret criminal lingo. In it he wrote that "fake" is "a word so variously used, that I can only illustrate it by a few examples." To "fake" someone, Vaux explained, could refer to robbing or shooting them. But the word "also describes the doing any act, or the fabricating any thing," such as making "a skeleton or false key." And in the form of "fakement," it could mean a forgery.
The word surely existed in oral use long before, but evidence is paltry. An 1810 example from an Australian newspaper suggests criminals there were using "faik" to mean "attack" or "kill." Before that, etymologists can only speculate. Anatoly Liberman, a professor at the University of Minnesota, surmises that there may be a relationship to the older verb "feague" meaning "beat" or "whip," with a historical linkage to similar words in German and Dutch. (Charles Dickens may have been inspired by "feague" when he gave the name "Fagin" to the crooked "Oliver Twist" character.)
From its Germanic roots, "fake" may have passed into the vernacular of London's criminal underground in the 18th century. But as Mr. Liberman told Quartz, "how it got there, nobody in the world knows, and probably nobody will ever know."
Despite its shady origins, "fake" eventually made the transition to mainstream usage. The word truly took off in the 20th century, used for everything from "fake furs" to "fake tans." And the 21st century has brought us "fake news" to describe deliberate misinformation spread on media channels (favored by Donald Trump to describe negative coverage of his presidency). With "deepfakes" as the latest duplicitous trend, these days it may feel like fakery is running particularly deep.
Credit: By Ben Zimmer
