The S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite rose for a third straight session as investors looked ahead to a key inflation report.
The broad index edged up by less than 0.1%, while the tech-heavy index gained 0.3%, with both hanging not far off their record highs reached earlier this month. The blue-chip Dow Jones Industrial Average added about 0.1%, or 36 points.
The moves continued a stretch of calm for the stock market, with indexes swinging between modest gains and losses for much of the day. Some investors don't expect the muted swings to last.
"History shows that markets don't stay this calm for long periods of time," said Jeff Buchbinder, chief equity strategist at LPL Financial.
He is advising his clients to allocate to sectors that could benefit from investors' excitement about artificial intelligence, including companies that have been building out AI initiatives.
Investors will get fresh insight into the U.S. economy Friday with the release of the personal-consumption expenditures price index. The Fed's preferred inflation gauge is expected to have risen 2.6% in May from a year earlier. That would be down from the 2.7% increase in April.
The S&P 500's communication-services sector was among the index's best performers. Consumer discretionary also gained, with Amazon.com shares adding 2.2%, a day after the online retailer became the fifth U.S. company to cross a $2 trillion market cap.
Walgreens Boots Alliance tumbled 22% after it reported unexpectedly weak results, cut its outlook and outlined a strategic shift. The struggling pharmacy chain was the worst performer in the S&P 500 and Nasdaq, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
Shares of Micron Technology fell 7.1%. The chip maker gave quarterly sales guidance that disappointed investors who had hoped for a bigger benefit from the AI boom.
Investors also sorted through a fresh slate of economic data. The U.S. economy grew by 1.4% for the first three months of the year, the slowest quarterly growth since spring 2022. Elevated mortgage rates and rising home prices also continued to scare off potential buyers, with pending home sales dropping 2.1% in May to a record low, according to the National Association of Realtors.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.4%. At midday Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 1%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 0.5% and the Shanghai Composite was up 0.9%. S&P 50 futures were up 0.3%.
Credit: By Vicky Ge Huang
