[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Money and time can buy an awful lot these days. Except, maybe, an in-house modem chip.
Apple has more than $166 billion in the bank and produces just over $100 billion in annual free cash flow -- the latter sum being the highest amount of any S&P 500 company over the most recent trailing 12-month period, according to data from S&P Global Market Intelligence. It also has been working for years now to develop its own modem chip -- the processor in smartphones, tablets and other devices that manages the connections to cellular communications networks. The secretive company hasn't even been terribly discreet about this effort; Apple said it was working on its own modem chips in a late 2020 town-hall meeting with its employees.
But designing the complex chips is far easier said than done. Qualcomm, Apple's supplier of modem processors, said Monday morning that the two companies have extended their current chip-supply deal to cover iPhones launched from 2024 to 2026. That is two years past the point that Qualcomm last told investors that its iPhone business would peter out, and three years beyond the company's first projection for the end of that business when it laid out an ambitious plan in late 2021 to diversify away from smartphones.
Keeping the iPhone for a couple more years should provide more fuel for that effort. Qualcomm's revenue is projected to slide more than 19% in the current fiscal year because of a worldwide slump in smartphone sales.
But investors still seem inclined to treat Qualcomm's Apple business as already spoiled. Qualcomm's share price picked up nearly 4% on Monday, a rather anemic bounce for what has been one of the worst-performing chip stocks this year. Qualcomm was one of only five stocks on the PHLX Semiconductor Index to be negative for the year ahead of Monday's open, making it one of the few to miss out on the sector's run driven by hype over generative artificial intelligence. Qualcomm is currently trading at around 12 times forward earnings, a 20% discount to its five-year average. The PHLX index has jumped 40% this year and is now 19% above its own five-year average, according to FactSet.
Qualcomm should get more credit. Raymond James analyst Srini Pajjuri estimates that the new deal with Apple will contribute about $5.5 billion in incremental revenue and as much as $1.70 in adjusted per-share earnings to its fiscal year ending in September 2025 -- the year most thought Apple would be almost completely out of the company's business.
The latest news also should serve as a reminder that Qualcomm still has a strong lead in a crucial technology, especially in a world where more devices will be connected to global wireless networks. Apple clearly wants to control more of its own destiny in that world, so will no doubt keep at its efforts to make an in-house modem chip. But Bernstein analyst Stacy Rasgon said Monday that "the longer it takes, the harder it is likely to be as cellular technologies do not stand still." Everyone knows Apple's pockets are deep; not so many seem to understand that Qualcomm's competitive moat is, too.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
