Facebook parent Meta Platforms posted its best quarterly sales growth in more than two years and initiated its first-ever dividend, a testament to its investments in artificial intelligence that have made targeted ads smarter.
The strong results come despite regulatory challenges and child-safety concerns. At a Senate hearing this week, Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg told parents whose children were harmed by social media that he was sorry for their suffering, but he didn't say whether Meta played a role in causing harm to children.
Meta said Thursday that sales increased to $40.1 billion in the three months through December, up 25% compared with the year-earlier period. The company also announced a $50 billion increase in its share buyback authorization. In the third quarter of 2023, Meta reported record revenue of $34.15 billion, up 23%.
The latest results for Meta and other tech giants show strength across the industry as companies benefit from interest in AI and resurgent spending on everything from digital ads to gadgets. Companies have emerged leaner and more profitable after slashing jobs and other costs during the post-pandemic tech slump that started in 2021, helping send tech stocks soaring over the past year.
"Being a leaner company is helping us execute better and faster, and we will continue to carry these values forward as a permanent part of how we operate," Zuckerberg said Thursday on a call with analysts.
Meanwhile, Apple said that sales rose in the all-important holiday quarter, ending a recent slump, while Amazon reported its biggest profit in two years due to healthy online sales during the period. Earlier this week, Microsoft posted its highest profit growth in more than two years, and Google parent Alphabet marked its fourth straight quarter of accelerating sales growth, although ad sales lagged expectations.
Clouds loom. In addition to Meta's ongoing efforts to respond to harsh criticism over persistent dangers to children on its platform, it is engaged in legal battles with the Federal Trade Commission and a coalition of states, and working to comply with the European Union's Digital Markets Act. Google is fighting the first of two court battles with the U.S. government over antitrust charges, the FTC filed an antitrust lawsuit against Amazon in September, and Apple is contending with regulators and other critics on multiple fronts.
Some analysts also think the AI hype has run far ahead of its bottom-line impact. And the tech companies, bruised by the downturn, have continued to make job cuts recently that are weighing on staff morale.
Meta's cash dividend, its first ever, would be paid at 50 cents a share.
News of the dividend and the better-than-expected results lifted Meta shares in after-hours trading. The stock jumped 14% to $451. If Meta trades at those levels Friday, it would represent an all-time high.
Among the tech giants, Meta joins Microsoft and Apple in paying a quarterly dividend. Meta's dividend will cost the company about $5 billion a year, based on the company's current number of shares outstanding. Meta reported free cash flow of $43 billion in 2023.
The company's Reality Labs hardware division reported revenue of $1.07 billion in the fourth quarter, which was up more than 47% compared with a year ago. Chief Financial Officer Susan Li attributed the strong growth to sales of the new Quest 3 headset device.
This was the first time Reality Labs has generated more than $1 billion in revenue in one quarter. Despite the strong growth, the unit remains a money loser. Reality Labs posted an operating loss of $4.65 billion for the period.
Overall, Meta posted a net profit of nearly $14.02 billion for the fourth quarter -- more than triple the net profit that the company posted for the same period in 2022.
Threads, Meta's micro-blogging service that launched in July, now claims 130 million monthly active users, up from just under 100 million in the previous quarter.
Advertising made up 96.5% of Meta's revenue in the fourth quarter. The company's advertising revenue rose to $38.7 billion. Meta said its average ad price increased 2% year over year. In the same quarter last year, the average price per ad decreased by 22%.
Meta said it expects its 2024 first-quarter revenue to be in the range of $34.5 billion to $37 billion, ahead of analyst expectations of $33.9 billion for current quarter.
Meta reported 3.19 billion daily active people on average across its family of apps, which include Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, up from 3.14 billion in the prior quarter.
Credit: By Salvador Rodriguez
