Roblox is adding more protections to its platform for its youngest users, a move that comes about a month after short-selling firm Hindenburg Research accused the videogame company of favoring growth over child safety.
San Mateo, Calif.-based Roblox said new parental controls and gatekeeping features that launched Monday were planned and in development long before Hindenburg released its report. The company has denied the firm's allegations, which include that it inflates the user metrics it shares with investors.
The safeguards Roblox is adding include the ability for parents to create their own accounts that link to their children's accounts, allowing them to set daily usage limits, block access to specific game genres and more.
Games also will get ratings similar to movies that are based on the kind of content they contain so parents can more easily determine which ones they are comfortable letting their children play. In addition, users under 13 will no longer be allowed to text chat outside of games. They already can't voice chat.
Roblox said the latest updates are significant because parents will now be able to manage how their children engage with the platform on their own devices. Previously, parents needed to log into their children's accounts to adjust the settings as they saw fit. Roblox said it plans to communicate more openly about the work it does in this area to better protect its reputation from critics.
The company has defended itself against claims of failing to keep predators at bay by child-advocacy groups and others, saying that safety and civility are core to its mission and that it invests heavily in moderation technology, including artificial intelligence.
In August, Roblox was blocked in Turkey for allegedly having content that exploits children. The company has said it is working with local authorities to resolve the matter, and a spokesman said it is planning to open an office there.
Other tech companies with platforms popular among minors have recently launched safety-related initiatives. In September, Meta Platforms began automatically making youth accounts on Instagram private, and it added features that prevent younger teens from changing settings or creating adult accounts with fake birth dates.
The changes by Roblox and Meta come as legislators and regulators around the globe have been pushing tech companies to do more to protect children from predators, harmful content and addictive algorithms.
Earlier this year, the Senate passed legislation requiring technology companies to take steps to shield children from harmful content on the internet, though the bills face an uncertain fate in the House because of concerns about free speech.
The Kids Online Safety Act and the Children and Teens' Online Privacy Protection Act require companies to provide children under 17 with the strictest-possible safety guardrails on their platforms as a default. If the two bills become law, they would mark Congress's first major new regulation of children's internet use in decades.
State legislators around the country are seeking to regulate teen smartphone use and are looking at introducing bills that would require app stores to verify the age of users.
Roblox, founded in 2004, operates a free platform with millions of games and other experiences, all of which are made by its own users. The company went public via a direct listing in 2021. Roblox had 88.9 million daily users as of the end of September, with 40% under the age of 13.
Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
