Binance has invested heavily in its compliance programs over the past year in hopes it will be a competitive advantage for the cryptocurrency exchange.
The company spent about $213 million on compliance programs in 2023, roughly 35% higher than its spending in 2022, Binance Chief Executive Officer Richard Teng said Thursday at an event in Singapore.
The money has been used to increase staffing and expand artificial intelligence to help make processes more efficient, Teng said. The exchange is looking to add at least 170 people to its compliance team before the end of the year, he said.
"We have the financial ability to invest heavily in compliance programs; not many other people have the ability to do so," Teng said.
Teng spoke at an event organized by Dow Jones Risk & Compliance, which is owned by the same parent company as The Wall Street Journal.
Last November, Binance, the world's largest crypto exchange, pleaded guilty to violating U.S. anti-money-laundering laws and sanctions and agreed to pay $4.3 billion in fines.
Binance co-founder Changpeng Zhao also pleaded guilty and stepped down as chief executive. Teng, a former regulator in Abu Dhabi before joining Binance in 2021, took over in November.
Teng said the heavy penalty is part of the company's journey to maturity.
"Most financial institutions at some point of their life will choose to pay a heavy penalty. But what's important is to realize the mistakes, make the right investment and move on and become better. That's what we are doing now," he said.
Binance continues to fight a civil lawsuit filed by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission that alleges it operated a securities exchange without properly registering with the regulator. Teng said Binance believes it has a strong case.
Binance is working closely with two independent corporate compliance monitors that were appointed as part of the criminal settlement with the Justice Department and the Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Teng said.
The crypto exchange is also seeking more regulatory licenses in jurisdictions around the world, Teng said. It obtained approvals earlier this year in Indonesia, India and Thailand, bringing its total to 19, he said.
As part of that effort, Teng said Binance has held discussions with law enforcement and policymakers worldwide, where crypto regulations vary drastically. Binance has received more than 60,000 law enforcement requests for investigations and seizures every year, he noted.
Credit: By Mengqi Sun
