HONG KONG -- AstraZeneca PLC plans to raise up to $1 billion for a new fund that would invest in Chinese health-care startups, making it the latest drug giant to place a bet on the world's second-largest pharmaceuticals market.
The fund -- a joint venture between AstraZeneca and a Chinese investment bank -- has drawn interest from investors such as Sequoia Capital, the drugmaker's chief executive, Pascal Soriot, said in an interview. The fund plans to raise between $200 million and $300 million this year, and as much as $1 billion over four years.
A Sequoia spokeswoman didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.
Mr. Soriot said AstraZeneca is separately building a new research center and an artificial-intelligence lab, both in Shanghai, to develop drugs for diseases that are more widespread in China. Johnson & Johnson and Novartis AG have opened similar Shanghai-based centers in recent years.
"I think that every multinational I know" is eyeing China, Mr. Soriot said. U.S. drugmaker Amgen Inc. last week said it would pay $2.7 billion in cash for a 20% stake in Beijing-based BeiGene Ltd.
For years, foreign drugmakers were locked out of selling their most lucrative drugs in China. But a host of new policy measures there has opened the door for the world's biggest pharmaceutical companies. China is approving nongeneric drugs at a record pace, particularly those to treat cancer, while slashing import duties and placing some drugs on a national reimbursement list.
China revenue has exploded at foreign drug companies. In the first quarter of 2019, AstraZeneca for the first time earned more revenue there than in Europe, making China its second-largest market after the U.S., according to Mr. Soriot. Merck & Co. last week reported that third-quarter China sales grew by 90%.
Beijing has spent the past decade encouraging homegrown innovation. It set up a state-run program that lured back many Western-trained Chinese scientists, poured billions of dollars into technology parks dedicated to biotech startups and granted conditional approvals to promising local drugs.
Chinese biotechs focusing on innovative products have flourished under those policies, attracting investors at home and abroad. Private-equity and venture-capital funds last year poured more than $17 billion into China's life sciences sector, up from $1 billion in 2013, according to Shanghai-based consultancy ChinaBio.
Flush with cash, Chinese biotechs are increasingly recruiting U.S. talent and setting up offices from Greater Boston to Silicon Valley. The first innovative Chinese drug -- a BeiGene cancer treatment -- could be approved in the U.S. as early as next year.
Mr. Soriot said he wants AstraZeneca to be part of China's growth. The life-sciences fund -- a first for the company -- will invest in areas ranging from traditional drug development to artificial intelligence in China.
AstraZeneca also is interested in partnerships with companies the fund invests in, Mr. Soriot said. Eli Lilly & Co., Merck and J&J have struck multimillion-dollar deals to license experimental Chinese drugs in recent years.
Indianapolis-based Lilly carved out a venture-capital fund focused on investing in Asia in 2008. The majority of the fund's investments are in China, according to a Lilly Asia Ventures partner.
China has been a bright spot for AstraZeneca, which returned to growth last year for the first time since 2014. While its overall sales rose 18% in the third quarter from a year earlier, its sales in China grew 40%.
Mr. Soriot expects AstraZeneca's China sales growth to soften in the fourth quarter, as hospitals switch to Chinese copies of old multinational drugs. Beijing has been raising standards for domestic drugmakers, closing the gap in quality with multinationals. Earlier this year, the government rolled out a policy aimed at getting large public hospitals to switch to Chinese generics over multinational drugs.
Still, Mr. Soriot says he expects China to remain the company's second-largest market. "What the China team is wondering is, when can they be No. 1?" he said.

Credit: By Preetika Rana
