Like their counterparts in business, government officials are eager to experiment with artificial intelligence.
Its advocates see all sorts of potential benefits, including the ability to make government services more effective. But officials want to avoid the political potholes that could result from rushing to adopt unproven technology.
Officials in San Jose, Calif., have been exploring AI's possibilities and already have learned some lessons. For one, the city ran into controversy over the use of cameras on a city-owned car to scan for the presence of abandoned cars or other debris that might create road-safety hazards. As part of that pilot project, officials also wanted to see whether the technology could detect vehicles being used as shelter.
Advocates for the unhoused warned that such data had the potential to invade people's privacy and make their lives even more difficult. In response, San Jose eliminated data collection related to homelessness.
San Jose officials say they want to share their experiences and insights with other cities, and learn their experiences as well. In November, the city announced the creation of the GovAI Coalition to set standards for responsible use of AI in government.
Khaled Tawfik, San Jose's chief information officer, leads the city's effort to expand the coalition. He spoke with The Wall Street Journal about his vision for AI as a government tool. Edited excerpts follow.
WSJ: What are some of the most effective uses of AI by government agencies you have seen so far?
KHALED TAWFIK: In San Jose, we are doing a pilot to see how we can detect objects, for safety reasons, on the street -- things like potholes, graffiti, overgrown vegetation and cars parked in bike lanes.
The goal is to see if we can change our model from being reactive to being proactive. Can we identify potholes so we can address them before people call us to report an issue? Can we detect graffiti immediately? Studies show that when neighborhoods are clean, crime is usually reduced.
I also can see AI as a great facilitator or assistant for government staff. We can use it for note-taking, reviewing long documents to summarize them, and recommending some areas for research. It goes really from memo writing all the way to very sophisticated identification and analytics.
WSJ: Have you seen any government uses of AI that haven't worked well?
TAWFIK: There are some false expectations of what AI can do for us. We have to understand it's not really mature. And we have to use it as an adviser, not as the solution.
I've seen some cities or government agencies where they deployed it for direct interaction with the public, and in some cases provided inaccurate information. We need to verify or make sure that there's a human between the draft answer and the final answer, so that at least there's a level of review.
WSJ: Why do we need standards for how governments use AI?
TAWFIK: I think there's a big gap between how technology is evolving and how government can build the safety net and the guidelines to develop a responsible and purposeful use of AI.
In the last 25 to 30 years, if you look at all the technology that we deployed -- the internet, social media, smartphones and others -- we deployed these technologies without developing the guidelines and safety nets. As a result, we're dealing with a lot of cybersecurity issues today. Social media has been causing a lot of issues for our kids and our privacy. We have learned that we need to discuss these things before we jump into technology.
WSJ: Looking five or 10 years forward, what do you see as some of the biggest potential benefits from using AI in government?
TAWFIK: I think a lot of the repetitive services we provide today can be improved with AI. For initial reviews of some forms of building permits or other types of permits, AI can be at least a first scan to see if there is a discrepancy or inaccurate information. So when the agency receives the final submitted form, it increases the likelihood of expediting the review process.
For a lot of legal documents, AI can simplify the language for the public. So this really can increase public engagement and awareness. I also see translation, transcribing meetings and providing different channels for people to consume information in a manner that they prefer.
We can do a lot of analytics and see problems that we are not seeing today. AI has good potential for identifying potential safety issues, which would allow us to redesign or reconfigure how we do things based on actual data and patterns that a standard computer or the standard human eye cannot really see.
WSJ: Could AI be used to improve the flow of traffic?
TAWFIK: Absolutely. It could help in removing obstacles and it might highlight areas where a redesign of a road might be needed.
---
James R. Hagerty is a writer in Pittsburgh. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By James R. Hagerty
