Google is trying to quell the debates roiling its workforce by setting internal rules designed to limit offensive language and personal attacks against fellow employees.
In guidelines sent to employees, Google said it would discipline who discriminates against or attacks colleagues or engages in discussions that are "disruptive to a productive work environment," according to a copy reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.
The rules aim to curb so-called trolling -- in which people are deliberately provocative or offensive online in order to elicit strong reactions -- as well as "blanket statements about groups or categories of people."
For Google, which has long prized its culture of open debate, the rules present fresh challenges about how to police employee speech while continuing to encourage free expression and unconventional thinking.
Google, a unit of Alphabet Inc., gives its roughly 80,000 employees a number of digital tools with which to share and argue over ideas internally. Even in Silicon Valley, its Mountainview, Calif., campus is seen as a bastion of free-wheeling discourse.
Yet of late the search giant has struggled to keep those debates under control. Over email discussion groups and a message board called Memegen, employees have waged verbal wars over all manner of social and political beliefs. Many insiders increasingly see these as a drain on productivity and a barrier to conducting business.
Google has punished employees for online posts that violate its employee code of conduct, but the new community guidelines, which were sent to employees last week but hadn't been previously reported, are the first set of rules explicitly geared toward governing discussions on the forums and across the company's campus. The rules are broad, asking employees to respect one another and honor Google's values, and they leave room for interpretation about what type of conduct is prohibited, a review of the guidelines shows.
Google finds itself in a situation similar to that at many universities, which have long tried to strike a balance between permitting free speech and maintaining civil discourse, said Lisa Nishii, a professor of management at Cornell University's IRL School.
The alternative to issuing guidelines would be giving employees the impression that anything goes, which could undermine Google's efforts to promote a culture of inclusion and respect, Ms. Nishii said. "On the one hand they say inclusion is important but if on the other hand they allow incivility to continue, it would amount to inconsistent messages."
The move also follows a controversy in which some Google employees protested the company's involvement with an effort code-named "Project Maven," which involved helping the Pentagon identify and track potential drone targets through artificial intelligence. Google decided not to seek renewal of the contract, drawing criticism from some who contended the company was putting the politics of certain employees over national security.
---
Yoree Koh and Kirsten Grind contributed to this article.

Credit: By Douglas MacMillan
