Hong Kong's stock market has performed badly this year -- but its stock-exchange operator has done even worse.
The shares of Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing Ltd. are down 43% since the start of the year, even after a rally so far in November. That is a bigger drop than that of Hong Kong's benchmark Hang Seng Index, which has fallen 30% in the year to date. It also compares poorly with its global peers -- no major exchange operator has lost more value this year.
The exchange operator, known as HKEX, has fallen victim to a slump in trading activity and a sharp slowdown in new listings this year. It generated 18% less revenue and other income, equivalent to $1.69 billion, in the first nine months of the year. By Wednesday, primary and secondary listings in Hong Kong had raised $11.05 billion this year, down 71% from the a year earlier, according to Dealogic.
HKEX's headline average daily turnover -- a measure of trading volume -- fell 31% for the first nine months of the year to the equivalent of $15.81 billion. That resulted in lower trading and clearing fees for the company, while operating expenses for the period rose 13% because of higher staff costs and professional fees. Trading fees are a key source of its revenue, dwarfing contributions from listing fees.
"HKEX has demonstrated strong resiliency in recent months, despite a challenging macro backdrop characterized by global economic fragility," a company spokesman said. "Hong Kong has not been immune to the weak global market sentiment."
HKEX has plans that could increase trading activity on its exchange, but some analysts warn that those efforts could take time to substantially boost its share price.
The exchange has proposed a rule change that would allow more early-stage companies to list. The new rule, known as Chapter 18C, would allow companies in five categories -- whose sectors include artificial intelligence, semiconductors and new green technology -- that have yet to generate revenue to apply for IPOs.
The loosening of listing requirements for pre-revenue companies would help Hong Kong better compete with Shanghai's STAR Market, which launched in 2019 as a fundraising base for the country's homegrown technology champions, and promised a faster, more market-based IPO regime than China's other listing venues.
If the proposal becomes a rule in its current form, such listings would likely comprise less than 5% of the total market capitalization of stocks on the exchange for the next few years, according to an estimate by Michael Zeng, an analyst covering the stock exchange at Daiwa Capital Markets. As of the end of October, shares of securities listed on the exchange were valued at HK$26.39 trillion -- equivalent to $3.362 trillion -- compared with HK$42.13 trillion at the end of January, according to the exchange. "The 18C will be necessary for the long-term, although the revenue impact should be very small in the next few years," he said.
The loosening of revenue requirements also comes with what some say is a tall order on market capitalization, including a $1.91 billion market-capitalization requirement for companies with less than $31.8 million in annual revenue. Some market participants say that is too high. The rule would mean a limited pool of pre-revenue companies eligible to list, they say.
"Even though we have this new chapter, that doesn't necessarily mean we'll have a lot of companies fitting into that kind of category," said Howie Farn, a partner in the global transactions group of law firm Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP. "As the HKEX targets high-quality applicants, I don't think that's a large pool."
The exchange operator has a number of other ideas, including expanding the number of Hong Kong stocks that can be traded on the Stock Connect program with mainland China, increasing the number of trading days on the stock link and opening overseas offices.
HKEX is also benefiting from more trading links with China. In July, securities regulators in Hong Kong and mainland China approved the inclusion of dozens of exchange-traded funds in the Stock Connect, providing another way for international investors to bet on China's stock market. There is also a proposal to include foreign companies listed in Hong Kong in the Stock Connect.
But a major factor will be the performance of the shares listed on the exchange. The price movement of those shares correlates with HKEX's own stock performance, Mr. Zeng said. When Hong Kong-listed stocks perform well, trading volume on the exchange usually increases. Investors then expect HKEX's revenue to benefit, sending its shares higher, he said.
"The Hong Kong exchange is viewed as a proxy of the Hong Kong equity markets," he said.
There are signs the market is starting to turn. So far this month, Hong Kong's benchmark Hang Seng Index has jumped around 11%. Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing has risen 24% over the same period.
Credit: By Dave Sebastian
