Alphabet Inc.'s Google merged its two main artificial-intelligence research units, a major reshuffling as tech companies jockey for leadership in an area quickly reshaping business.
Google said the new unit, Google DeepMind, would combine the existing Brain and DeepMind research groups into one team. The unit will be led by Demis Hassabis, the co-founder and CEO of DeepMind, which Google purchased for about $500 million in 2014.
Jeff Dean, the previous head of Google Research overseeing the Brain team, will move to a new role as chief scientist. Google said he would lead the company's "most critical and strategic technical projects related to AI," including a new series of powerful AI programs.
"Combining all this talent into one focused team, backed by the computational resources of Google, will significantly accelerate our progress in AI," Google CEO Sundar Pichai said Thursday in a blog post.
Tech companies including Google and Microsoft Corp.-backed OpenAI, the creator of the popular chatbot ChatGPT, have been racing to build increasingly large AI algorithms known as large language models, or LLMs. Those programs have shown promise performing a range of tasks, such as summarizing complex documents and conducting humanlike conversations.
Google pioneered some of the technology that paved the way for recent developments in such models, but largely held back from wide public release of its most powerful image- and text-generation programs, citing the need to test the tools for accuracy and signs of bias.
In an interview with The Wall Street Journal this month, Mr. Pichai said he expected the Brain and DeepMind teams to collaborate more frequently, while noting previous shared work.
"I expect a lot more, stronger collaboration because some of these efforts will be more compute-intensive, so it'll make sense to do it at a certain scale together," Mr. Pichai said in the interview. "Being able to bring the best together, I think, will help us lead to better breakthroughs."
Google is now trying to accelerate AI efforts at the same time it is trying to be more efficient. Parent Alphabet announced its biggest job cuts ever in January and said it would limit executive bonuses amid economic uncertainty.
Finance chief Ruth Porat told employees last month to expect more cost cuts this year in areas ranging from the company's use of computing infrastructure to the availability of cafeterias.
Last month, OpenAI introduced the newest version of its AI technology, GPT-4, claiming it was more powerful and predictable than previous iterations. Google has also opened limited access for developers to one of its largest AI algorithms, the Pathways Language Model, or PaLM.
Building and running large AI algorithms require significant computational resources, a setup that has concentrated most of the work in big tech companies. Microsoft has invested at least $13 billion in OpenAI, the Journal reported, much of which has gone toward programs such as GPT-4.
Alphabet had long maintained Brain and DeepMind as separate groups, despite their significant overlap in several areas of AI research. That setup sometimes created tensions between their leaders as the units competed for resources, among other things.
The merger will mark a "dramatic shift" in the way Google's AI researchers work together given the distinct cultures of Brain and DeepMind, said Christopher Manning, director of the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
"Strategically, merging seems sensible," Mr. Manning said. "Tactically, it will be hard to manage the organizational and cultural change."
In 2021, DeepMind told staff that Google had called off talks about giving the group more autonomy from its parent company, the Journal reported. Alphabet said in February it would begin reporting DeepMind as part of its corporate costs, rather than a separate group of companies called "Other Bets."
DeepMind brought in $1.7 billion (GBP1.4 billion) of revenue from research and development work performed for Alphabet in 2021, according to corporate filings in the U.K., where the team is based.
The new AI group will be housed under Google, rather than Other Bets, the company said. No layoffs were planned as part of the reorganization.
"Working with all our fantastic colleagues across Google, we have an opportunity to build AI and ultimately AGI to benefit humanity," Mr. Hassabis said Thursday on Twitter, referring to artificial general intelligence, the idea that machines could one day perform the same tasks as humans.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
