The Dow Jones Industrial Average's ascent to a new milestone exemplifies the strength of the U.S. economy across industries.
The Dow closed above 40000 for the first time Friday, a day after eclipsing the mark on an intraday basis. Goldman Sachs, Microsoft, UnitedHealth Group and Caterpillar were the top contributors to its ascent from 30000. More than two-thirds of the Dow components have notched gains since it crossed that mark on Nov. 24, 2020.
"This movement isn't driven by one sector or one stock," said Gina Bolvin, president of Bolvin Wealth Management Group. "It's really a broad-based rally."
For the week, the blue-chip index rose 1.2%, or 491 points. The S&P 500 logged a weekly gain of 1.5%, while the Nasdaq Composite advanced 2.1%. Only the Nasdaq edged lower Friday, and all three indexes remain at or near their records reached this past week.
Renewed hopes that the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates later this year have sparked a rally in stock prices in May. All 11 sectors of the S&P 500 are up for the month, pushing the broad index to a gain of 5.3%.
Investors welcomed more signs this past week that the economy can cool gradually without any significant deterioration. A key measure of consumer-price inflation rose in April at its slowest pace since 2021, while April retail sales were unchanged from a month earlier.
"The market is very keyed in on this notion of a soft landing, and most data points we've received have been completely consistent with that," said Mike Medeiros, macro strategist at Wellington Management.
That optimism is reflected in stock and bond prices, and investors will need evidence contradicting those hopes for the rally to lose steam, he added.
A survey of fund managers found that 82% expect the Fed to cut interest rates in the second half of this year, strategists at Bank of America wrote in a research note this past week.
Among individual stocks, the week's reprisal of the meme-stock mania that characterized trading in 2021 left some investors nervous that risk-taking might be excessive. GameStop fell 20% on Friday after the company said it plans to sell additional shares. But Robinhood Markets stock rose 12% after analysts at Bank of America upgraded the brokerage, which focuses on individual investors.
"There's a lot of speculation out there, a lot of fast money looking to make a quick buck in a trade," said Eric Beiley, executive managing director at Steward Partners.
Unlike the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite, the Dow is calculated by adding the prices of the 30 stocks and dividing by a factor that accounts for changes like stock splits. Companies with a higher share price have a greater effect on the Dow's direction, whereas the other two major indexes are weighted by market value.
That has sometimes led to the Dow's missing out on rallies driven by the biggest companies in the market, which are primarily tech firms. In 2020, the tech-heavy Nasdaq jumped 44% while the Dow gained about 7%.
Other times, the Dow's share-price weighting has been its advantage. During 2022's stock-market meltdown, the Dow's percentage decline was smaller than those of the S&P 500 and Nasdaq.
Microsoft's role as a leader in the Dow reflects the increasing importance of tech stocks to the index and the market as a whole. Excitement around generative artificial-intelligence technology has fueled a furious rally in shares of several megacap tech companies, leading the major indexes to record high after record high this year.
Shares of Microsoft have nearly doubled since the Dow's 30000 mark and are up 12% this year. Microsoft's stock is among the biggest beneficiaries of the AI frenzy and viewed by investors as part of the vanguard of widespread AI adoption.
The tech sector now has a roughly 19% weighting in the Dow, compared with less than 18% when the index hit 30000, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
Goldman Sachs contributed more than 1,500 points during the Dow's march from 30000 to 40000. Shares of the Wall Street titan have roughly doubled since the Dow's last 10,000-point milestone and are up 21% this year, as the firm's investment-banking and trading divisions have boosted revenue.
UnitedHealth Group is the most heavily weighted stock in the Dow. Shares are up more than 50% from the last Dow milestone, but down 0.3% in 2024.
Of the Dow components that declined since November 2020, 3M, Walt Disney, Nike and Boeing weighed on the index the most.
The Dow in February added Amazon.com to its elite club of 30 members. That brings one more big-tech stock into an index that has been more associated with banks and manufacturers.
"It's the evolution of our economy," said Amanda Agati, chief investment officer for PNC's Asset Management Group. "Adding Amazon is a reflection of the new world order."
Generate image description

Generate image description

Credit: By Hannah Miao and Charley Grant
