Minutes after the assassination attempt on Donald Trump, Elon Musk tweeted, "I fully endorse President Trump and hope for his rapid recovery." Venture capitalist David Sacks spoke at the Republican National Convention last month, echoing investor Peter Thiel's 2020 convention speech. Netscape co-founder turned venture capitalist Marc Andreessen said he'll support Mr. Trump. Even Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg said Mr. Trump's reaction to his assassination attempt was "one of the most badass things" and told him in a phone call that he won't support a Democrat.
What's going on? Has deep-blue Silicon Valley turned conservative? Last week, J.D. Vance was shaking the money tree at a fundraiser in Palo Alto, Calif. It was reported that Mr. Musk, snubbed by President Biden over electric vehicles, would donate $45 million to a political action committee to elect Mr. Trump, although Mr. Musk later responded to this report by tweeting a meme of "Fake Gnus."
Conservative? It's a high climb. Silicon Valley keeps re-electing congressman Ro Khanna, who was co-chairman of "democratic socialist" Bernie Sanders' 2020 presidential campaign. Gov. Gavin Newsom and Democrats rule California with a progressive fist. Mr. Biden won the Golden State by more than five million votes over Mr. Trump in 2020, 63.5% to 34.3%.
That might seem strange, given that so much wealth has emerged from big tech and venture-capital investing, which relies on low capital-gains rates and anyone-can-take-on-anyone-else free-market capitalism. Why vote Democrat?
Silicon Valley leanings are beyond left and right. Forbes's then-publisher Rich Karlgaard explained to me years ago, "In Silicon Valley, everyone is a libertarian whether they know it or not. Democrat libertarians and Republican libertarians." By libertarian he means the "don't tell me what to do" kind. The "get government off my back while I invent the future" mentality.
So many wealthy young techies have been minted by free markets in the past decade, yet they fall for big-government idealism to protect "victims" and those run over by technology's disruptions. The libertarian in them means they're all for their own freedom but not yours, as they pursue their controlling progressive dreams at all costs. A little schizophrenic, no?
You can see it in action. Google admitted that if you typed "assassination attempt on tr" it autocompletes with "Truman" but not "Trump," blaming a bug. Uh-huh. Google also suggests an algorithmic error caused a search for Donald Trump to produce news about Kamala Harris, but not vice versa. Are the inmates running the asylum? Their Gemini artificial-intelligence platform was so DEI-compliant, it returned pictures of blacks in Nazi uniforms and Native American Vikings. In 2018 Google coders refused to help the Pentagon use AI to improve drone targeting, which would save lives. So that's a hard "no" on the Googlers turning conservative.
It continues: OpenAI CEO Sam Altman funds universal basic income, although recent study results, often twisted by the media, report worse outcomes for those receiving $1,000 a month. Mr. Altman also wants a "global coalition" to regulate AI. Intel CEO Patrick Gelsinger pushed for industrial policy and the Chips Act, funding that Intel gladly accepted, and now Intel is laying off some 15,000 workers.
Microsoft and Amazon, honorary members of Silicon Valley, are located in the barista-infested, CHAZ-autonomous-zone-enabling, blue-in-the-face Seattle and lean hard left. I don't see that changing.
Often there are mixed messages. LinkedIn co-founder Reid Hoffman is all in for Ms. Harris, but of Silicon Valley nemesis Federal Trade Commission chairwoman Lina Khan, he told CNN, "I would hope that Vice President Harris would replace her." Netflix co-founder Reed Hastings donated $7 million to a super PAC supporting Ms. Harris, although Netflix occasionally shows acts of defiance by not censoring or canceling comedians Dave Chapelle and Ricky Gervais. Apple CEO Tim Cook has donated to the left and right and even joined Mr. Trump's business advisory panel until it disbanded.
For now, the Valley is still a blue hue. Forget "White Dudes for Kamala." Almost 800 venture capitalists signed a "VCs for Kamala" pledge. Yes, there are way too many venture capitalists. And they invest as free-market libertarians but vote as progressives.
Confusing, right? For the most part, Silicon Valley is nonunion, has exorbitant tax rates, dabbles in crypto, hates the FTC and is against wealth taxes. Conditions are ripe to vote for a conservative candidate, if only we had one. Ripe, but there's still little change. When I meet conservatives at cocktail parties, they often whisper their views.
The monster money men may be flirting with support for Mr. Trump, but the rank and file have a long way to go. Still, as the burdens of California's brand of progressivism drive more companies to Texas, maybe Silicon Valley is becoming more conservative than they care to admit.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
