A prominent artificial-intelligence researcher says she was fired by Google after she refused to retract a research paper and complained about the company in an email to colleagues.
Computer scientist Timnit Gebru, the co-head of Google's Ethical Artificial Intelligence team, said her departure appears to have been precipitated by her email, sent last week to a wide group inside the search giant and reviewed by The Wall Street Journal. The email opened with "Hi friends," and went on to criticize her superiors. Google executives squelched her research, she wrote, and ignored her feedback on issues like the proportion of female employees in the company.
Google's head of AI, Jeff Dean, in an internal email, told staff that an internal team determined that Ms. Gebru's most recent AI research was insufficiently rigorous. He also said she encouraged colleagues not to participate in Google's diversity, equity and inclusion programs, and that he was disappointed about that.
Writing about how Google's actions made her feel, Ms. Gebru wrote: "you are not someone whose humanity . . . is acknowledged or valued in this company." Ms. Gebru, who is Black, often spoke publicly about what she called the failings of the technology industry on equality and diversity issues.
By this Wednesday, she said she was fired. "I was fired by @JeffDean for my email," she wrote in a Twitter post that tagged Mr. Dean.
In her tweets, Ms. Gebru said the company sought to characterize her departure as a resignation. Mr. Dean said that Ms. Gebru threatened to resign if he wouldn't reveal who at Google had reviewed her work. Ms. Gebru, 37 years old, didn't respond to requests for comment.
Ms. Gebru held skeptical views on artificial intelligence that were unusual inside Google, according to people who know her. She was an outspoken critic of tools used by law enforcement to predict and prevent crimes, having said she found that they discriminated against darker-skinned people. For example, she published widely disseminated research showing that facial recognition algorithms are more likely to misidentify people of color.
Ms. Gebru wrote in her email, earlier reported by technology publication Platformer, that Google told her not to publish new research and didn't provide a satisfying explanation as to why. The research concerned AI, those people say. AI is a priority of Google Chief Executive Sundar Pichai, who frequently cites it as key to the company's future.
Google, whose parent Alphabet Inc. employs more than 132,000 full-time workers, has struggled with its fractious workforce in recent years. The company, which long tolerated spirited debate among colleagues, has more recently made rules intended to curb political conversations. Google has also added corporate moderators to many of its internal affinity groups, which it says is designed to reduce strife.

Credit: By Rob Copeland
