Amazon.com Inc. reported surging growth as the tech giant rebounded from stagnant sales after a postpandemic slowdown, but its cloud-computing business showed further signs of cooling.
Stronger-than-expected performance in its advertising and international businesses was initially greeted warmly by investors.
But shares fell after-hours as the company revealed in a call with investors that Amazon Web Services, or AWS -- long a central engine of the tech company's profitability -- has seen revenue growth in April fall to about 11%, down from the nearly 16% increase in the first quarter.
The January-to-March growth rate at AWS was the lowest year-over-year increase since the company began separating out the unit's performance in 2015.
"Customers are looking for ways to save money," Chief Executive Andy Jassy said in a call with investors. "Customers want help finding ways to spend less during this challenging time, and given that it's best for customers long term, we've been actively helping customers make these adjustments
Amazon's first-quarter sales increased by 9% year-over-year to $127.4 billion, beating Wall Street projections. It posted $3.2 billion in quarterly profit, almost 50% higher than analysts expected in the January-to-March period.
The company's advertising business, which has grown quickly, grew by 21%, beating expectations.
The company's shares initially surged by more than 10% in after-hours trading Thursday before falling after the AWS figures were reported.
The results this week for other larger players show the extent to which investor enthusiasm is returning for big technology companies that appear to be leaving behind the stagnation that defined much of last year.
Microsoft Corp. shares moved sharply higher after it reported a 7% rise in sales in the January-to-March quarter, above expectations but below the company's yearslong trend of double-digit percentage growth.
Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. shares surged by nearly 14% Thursday after the social-media company reported its first quarterly revenue growth in nearly a year.
Amazon has made efforts in recent months to reduce costs and focus on profitability. The company said it would finish laying off about 9,000 corporate employees by the end of this month after cutting about 18,000 workers in an earlier round of layoffs.
Affected units have included cloud-computing unit AWS, advertising, streaming-unit Twitch and other areas. Amazon's job reductions also have targeted unprofitable divisions, such as its devices business, and the company has shut down certain projects.
In March, it disclosed it had paused construction on a large corporate real-estate project near Washington, D.C., known as HQ2. On Wednesday, the company said it was winding down its health-focused Halo division and discontinuing products that include its fitness tracker. From the fourth quarter through the first quarter, Amazon reduced its global head count by 10% to about 1.46 million employees.
Amazon Chief Financial Officer Brian Olsavsky said Thursday that the company's international and advertising businesses gained strength in the period. Beyond layoffs, Amazon has been able to save costs through its package-fulfillment network, which he said has stabilized after a period of high growth driven by higher demand during the pandemic.
"Labor has been much more predictable," Mr. Olsavsky said. "We feel better about the balancing of capacity and demand" of products.
In a recent letter to shareholders, Amazon Chief Executive Andy Jassy acknowledged that the company has faced one of its toughest challenges in recent memory but said executives are focused on investing in long-term projects, and that he remains optimistic about the future.
Mr. Jassy in his shareholder letter wrote that AWS faces "short-term headwinds right now" due to companies spending more cautiously on cloud services because of economic recession fears.
Amazon's cloud-computing peers have similarly experienced a slowdown in sales growth. Microsoft reported on Tuesday 27% growth in its Azure cloud business, while the cloud unit at Alphabet Inc.'s Google reported 28% growth.
Both companies have had higher growth rates in cloud computing than Amazon recently, but they trail the company in market share, as Amazon still holds about 34% of the cloud market, according to Synergy Research Group.
Slow growth has also affected the company's e-commerce services. Sales for Amazon's online stores segment, which includes product sales primarily on its flagship site and digital-media content, have been decreasing.
On Thursday, the company reported that its online store sales were about flat for the first quarter compared with the year-ago period. Analysts have found that the company's U.S. market share in e-commerce and Prime membership growth have stalled after years of high growth.
Amazon is attempting to ignite production by investing in noncore businesses, Mr. Jassy said. Those include its international business, chip development, advertising, its grocery business, healthcare and satellite-internet business Project Kuiper.
The company has recently been marketing its efforts in generative AI models, the technology behind the buzzy ChatGPT. Amazon recently announced new artificial-intelligence offerings that target corporate customers.
Credit: By Sebastian Herrera
