If you use a voice assistant like Amazon's Alexa, Google Assistant, or Apple's Siri, how would you feel if you thought the device's voice personality was more like yours?
A recent study suggests you'd like it better than an assistant with a less similar voice, and you'd trust it more.
"Our research shows that one voice does not fit all when it comes to voice assistants," says S. Shyam Sundar, director of the Center for Socially Responsible Artificial Intelligence at Penn State, who co-wrote the study.
The study was conducted online and surveyed 401 adults 21 to 72 years old across the U.S. The researchers created five voice profiles representing different levels of extroversion that varied by pitch, volume and speed. Each participant listened to one voice and was asked to rate the assistant for attractiveness, trustworthiness and service quality, and to rate the credibility of the information it gave them. That information was the same for every voice.
Participants who listened to voices that they felt were like their own ranked their assistants higher across the board. "The findings demonstrate that VAs have a potential persuasive effect on users," says Theo Araujo, professor of media, organizations and society at the University of Amsterdam, who wasn't involved in the study.
That has implications both for the makers of voice assistants and for consumers.
"The technology industry needs to be more aware about the psychological impact that voice characteristics have on consumers," Sundar says. "It makes sense for designers to imbue personalities in these devices to enhance user experience, but it must be done in a socially responsible way that minimizes potential for blind trust and maximizes careful consideration of content."
Eugene Cho Snyder, an assistant professor of humanities and social sciences at the New Jersey Institute of Technology, who led the study, says that "as we learn more about which VA features -- like voice matching and customization -- affect users' way of interpreting the same content, we need to think about ways to transparently and effectively inform users about those potential effects."
It is estimated that 145.1 million Americans use voice assistants today, mostly through smartphones or smart speakers, according to Insider Intelligence, a research firm that tracks digital markets.
Voice assistants currently do little to match their voices to those of users, but generative-AI technology could allow for greater customization, industry analysts say.
---
Lori Ioannou is a writer in New York. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Lori Ioannou
