"If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants," Isaac Newton wrote in 1675 to polymath Robert Hooke. That expression is often used to explain progress: inventors and entrepreneurs building on the work of many others. I don't like it. Stack too many smart folks on top of each other and things become slow-moving and get wobbly fast.
Here's a better analogy: One of the most awe-inspiring places in the world is Victoria Falls, on the Zambezi River between Zambia and Zimbabwe. The locals call it Mosi-oa-Tunya, which translates to "smoke that thunders." At 355 feet high and over a mile wide, it's the largest sheet of falling water in the world. I stood on the precipice of the falls on Livingstone Island and looked down. It scared the living daylights out of me.
In the distance was Victoria Falls Bridge, built in 1905. The bridge is 650 feet long and 420 feet above the rushing river. According to Zimbabwe Field Guide: "The ravine was bridged by firing a rocket with a thin string attached from one bank to the other which was hauled across pulling after it a thicker cord, then a rope, and finally a steel cable was hauled across. A bosun's chair was strung to the cable, which then moved engineers across the ravine taking ten minutes to cross." Then add steel trusses, railroad tracks and asphalt and you have a usable crossing. It's now frequented by bungee jumpers.
The bridge was a long shot followed by many, many, many repeated improvements. We've come a long way from Newton's being hit on the head with an apple to SpaceX rocket launches. Back in my engineering and chip-designing days, a friend was astounded: "Wait, you use computers to design new computers?" Well, yes.
The original Bell Labs transistor, patented in 1948, looked like a mutant grasshopper. Starting in 1958, Texas Instruments and then Fairchild each put eight of these transistors on one device, an integrated circuit. Thirteen years later, Intel connected 2,300 transistors together and created the microprocessor -- the brains of a computer on a chip. Around the same time, we got silicon modems to communicate over phone lines.
Then it was off to the races. Broadband over cable lines and fiber. The web with browsers and servers, cloud computing, social networks, smartphones, software as a service, Uber, Airbnb, plus neural networks, machine learning, artificial intelligence, large language models and now chatbot companions. Each had a unique business model.
Today's "bridge" is a marvel. According to Wired Magazine, just one of Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co.'s foundries delivers a quintillion transistors to Apple every six months. That's a one and 18 zeros, starting to rival the number of stars in the universe. Use AI to design new AI? Already happening. Will we have robots designing newer robots? Of course. That's progress.
What is astounding is the rate of acceptance. OpenAI's ChatGPT had a million users within five days of its late 2022 release. Five days! Two years later, it has 300 million weekly users. That's not the shoulders of giants, that's super-express lanes across a divide.
It's the same for the rest of science. The first hormones were discovered in 1902, and insulin in 1921. But it wasn't until 1984 that we saw glucagon-like peptide-1, or GLP-1, which stimulates insulin. Even then, it took roughly 20 years for the FDA to approve the first GLP-1 treatment for type 2 diabetes and another decade until approval for weight loss in 2014. Today, the number of diseases GLP-1 affects continue to grow. It took a quantum leap and then slow and steady improvements until our lives were changed for the better.
It's easy to fall off or be pushed off the leading edge. Faster productivity doesn't just happen. Government shouldn't pick winners and losers. Instead, productivity takes tireless scientists and engineers to experiment constantly with tiny improvements until the rest of us see what feels like huge gains in what we can do.
Our future depends on this model. Autonomous cars and robo-taxis, almost ready for prime time, are soaking up ever-faster chips, AI, mobile broadband and vision systems. The same is true of augmented-reality glasses, productive personal assistants, and personalized medicine.
Basic research of all types should be encouraged. Let many ideas flourish as industrial policy doesn't work. Instead, success is like throwing spaghetti against the wall, seeing what sticks. In technology, this often takes place inside big companies -- Google, Samsung, TSMC, Microsoft. In pharma, it's often government grants that drive basic research. Don't DOGE it. We need both.
Much like Victoria Falls, inventing the future is always about staring over a large precipice, with no idea how to get across. But the answer is simple. Shoot a metaphorical rocket with a thin string attached to the other side. And then send in the engineers.
Credit: By Andy Kessler
