Finance chiefs are pushing their companies to do more with less as they face another year of rising costs.
Inflation remains persistently high, though it has eased in recent months, putting pressure on companies' bottom lines. The consumer-price index -- which measures what consumers pay for goods and services -- rose 6.5% in December compared with a year earlier, the Labor Department said last month. That's down from an increase of 7.1% a month earlier and a 9.1% peak in June, the department said. The Federal Reserve in response has boosted interest rates over the past year at the fastest clip in four decades, raising the benchmark federal-funds rate last week by a quarter of a percentage point, to between 4.5% and 4.75%.
Here's what CFOs have said during the latest round of quarterly earnings calls about their spending plans and efforts to find savings.
Some responses have been edited.
Kevin Jacobsen, Clorox Co.
Typically, I'd say, in a normal environment, the work we do on cost savings is enough to offset a normalized level of inflation and allow us to build margins over time.
And that allows us to continue to invest in our brands and continue to set the company up to deliver value over the long term.
Obviously, we're dealing with a very unique environment right now with the unprecedented level of cost inflation. And so that's why we're leaning into pricing.
I'd like to believe over time, as we get to a normalized environment, we get back to more of our consistent model where we're really driving cost savings, and that's allowing us to offset inflation and build margin over time. But we're not in that environment right now.
Susan Li, Meta Platforms Inc.
We're shifting our data centers to a new architecture that can more efficiently support both artificial-intelligence and non-AI workloads. And that's going to give us more optionality as we better understand our demand for AI over time. Additionally, we're expecting that the new design will be cheaper and faster to build than previous data-center architecture.
Along with the new data-center architecture, we're going to optimize our approach to building data centers.
So we have a new phased approach that allows us to build base plans with less initial capacity and less initial capital outlay, but then flex up future capacity quickly if needed.
Todd Morgenfeld, Pinterest Inc.
Not to be too basic about it, but in a world where we have a volatile demand picture and some uncertainty on the year, generally from a top-line perspective, we know revenue needs to outgrow costs.
We talked about meaningful margin expansion a few quarters ago, and that's something we're still committed to and understand the levers that are needed to get there. Ideally, we can grow as the demand environment hopefully normalizes.
But we also know that there's another part of this equation that's on the cost side. And from a gross-margin perspective, you saw in this current quarter that our cost of revenue declined quarter-over-quarter after meaningful expansion through the year. That's a product of more discipline from an infrastructure standpoint, and we hope to continue to invest in further optimizations through the year.
Paul Jacobson, General Motors Co.
Success is going to be driven by when we look at our fixed cost lines being down $2 billion. That's what we're looking for across the board, and we can get there. And I think it comes across all areas of the business. What I would say is we're being prudent about what we see out in the macro environment.
We continue to see strength in demand for our vehicles and strength in pricing. But we want to make sure that we're driving efficiency where we can, and felt like this was the right time to be able to do that.
So we're going to be measured in how we do it. We're still focused on the growth areas of the portfolio. But we recognize that there are ways that we can do things more efficiently, and we expect to be able to drive that into margin performance.
Credit: By Kristin Broughton
