BuzzFeed CEO Prods
Facebook and Google
Tech giants Facebook Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google will have to find better ways to share revenue with media companies to support quality content, said BuzzFeed Chief Executive Jonah Peretti.
"The business model of news is changing, and if Google and Facebook take all the revenue but don't want to pay for the fact checking, the reporting, the more-intensive investigations, who does that work?" Mr. Peretti said Wednesday at The Wall Street Journal's WSJ D.Live technology conference in Laguna beach, Calif. "I think Google and Facebook are going to have to fix that."
News outlets increasingly are pursuing subscription models and putting content behind paywalls, which limits that news to a smaller portion of the population, Mr. Peretti said. Meanwhile, Facebook's news feed, in particular, tends to support low-cost content, Mr. Peretti said. He said he thinks Facebook is aware of this and will work on creating more ways for media companies to earn revenue on its platform.
More digital ad spending has been flowing to Facebook and Google, which are expected to eat about 63% of U.S. digital ad dollars this year, according to eMarketer. That means there is less money to go around for other publishers, like BuzzFeed.
Still, Mr. Peretti said BuzzFeed is confident advertising is still a good model. The company has worked to diversify its revenue streams with other business areas.
-- Laura Stevens
Tech's Power Likely
To Stir Backlash
Silicon Valley should brace for more political backlash against the tech sector as companies increasingly grow in size and power, prominent startup investors said Wednesday.
"The system is not working right," said Sam Altman, president of the tech incubator Y Combinator, at a panel at the WSJ D.Live technology conference. "I don't know if tech companies are going to get broken up, but I do know the tech backlash is going to be strong."
Driving these concerns are job losses and economic inequality resulting from advances in tech and artificial intelligence, mixed with tech giants' growing influence in Americans' lives and politics, the panelists said.
"These companies are more powerful than AT&T ever was," said Bill Maris, a venture capitalist who ran the venture-capital arm of Google parent Alphabet Inc. until earlier this year.
Beyond political concerns, the investors -- who also included Jenny Lee, managing partner of the Chinese venture-capital firm GGV Capital -- voiced concerns about the health of many large well-funded startups that are valued at over $1 billion.
In the U.S., there are well over 100 such companies, often referred to as unicorns; many raised money at high valuations based on plans for growth that haven't materialized as hoped.
'We'll see more of the unicorns die" in the coming year, Ms. Lee said.
Y Combinator's Mr. Altman had a more-measured view. He said most unicorns are overvalued, but that is normal in the startup world.
-- Eliot Brown
Oracle Embraces
Shift to the Cloud
The software services industry is in the midst of generational change, and Oracle Corp. has reacted by embracing the cloud.
The shift to selling web-based, on-demand computing services has changed the way Oracle is paid, Chief Executive Mark Hurd said in an interview. Mr. Hurd said shifting corporate software systems to the cloud provides more security for companies than they can provide by managing systems themselves.
-- Tripp Mickle
