[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Inflation failed to come down in March, dealing a blow to stocks. But taking a step back, what is remarkable is actually how resilient equities have been to a changing inflation story.
At the start of this year, inflation appeared to be fading fast. The core consumer price excluding food and energy was up 3.9% from a year earlier in December, but that was down from a 5.7% pace in December 2022. Markets were pricing in six interest-rate cuts by the Federal Reserve in 2024.
Now it is clear that the pace of disinflation has slowed, with the core consumer-price index still up 3.8% on-year in March, unchanged from February's pace. Expectations have moved to perhaps just two rate cuts this year. The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note has risen to 4.56% from 3.86% at the beginning of February.
Stocks fell on Wednesday's news. And yet the S&P 500 remains up 8.2% so far this year, with the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite up 7.7%. That is an encouraging sign that the market is being driven by strong economic fundamentals.
Expectations for loosening have been dialed back due to warmer-than-expected inflation readings, but also by surprisingly strong economic data, including last month's creation of 303,000 jobs. Economic optimism is also reflected in rallying commodities, with crude oil and copper prices both up double digits this year.
Investors are also still betting on transformative changes in the U.S. economy, most notably the rise of artificial intelligence but also surging electricity demand and new advances in biotechnology. Of the 10 biggest gainers in the S&P 500 this year, five are tech companies -- not something normally seen when interest-rate expectations are being reset higher. Super Micro Computer and Nvidia top the list with increases of 220% and 76%, respectively.
Evidently, higher-for-longer rates aren't a barrier to these trends. It is enough to remind one of the time before ultralow rates and quantitative easing, when economic optimism alone was enough to propel bull markets, even when rates were high.
Credit: By Aaron Back
