Donald Trump will enter the White House with campaign promises that aim to reshape the U.S. auto industry, such as vowing to attack Biden-era electric-vehicle policies and layer on tariffs to expand factory work in the U.S.
In this year's campaign, Trump said he would use tariffs to reduce imports and create factory jobs. He also criticized government spending on electric vehicles, causing concern among executives about the fate of tens of billions of dollars in federal tax money earmarked to support EVs.
For car buyers, broader tariffs could lead to higher prices and a shift in the types of vehicles available at the new-car lot, analysts say.
Here are some ways the Trump presidency is expected to affect automakers and car buyers.
EV subsidies at risk
Trump and Tesla Chief Executive Elon Musk have criticized federal support for EVs.
Industry executives and lobbyists see the current $7,500 retail sales credit as vulnerable to being eliminated or pared down. They say a separate credit for leasing an EV -- which has benefited Hyundai, Kia and other brands with EV imports -- also appears at risk.
Auto executives are expected to fight to keep federal money for battery manufacturing. Those subsidies are seen as harder to claw back.
Musk looms
Musk has said Tesla could do without the consumer tax credit, which other car companies fought for.
Analysts expect that Musk will push for Trump's support to advance Tesla's efforts around driverless cars and artificial intelligence. Tesla's market cap crossed the $1 trillion threshold after the election, in part because investors see the president-elect as an ally to smooth the path for Musk's planned introduction of robotaxis.
Tariff time
Trump has suggested a 10-20% tariff on all imports, a move that would affect German and Asian automakers, and said he would consider even higher tariffs on cars made in China and Mexico.
The prospect of beefing up tariffs on Mexican-made vehicles, in particular, has some auto executives concerned, given Mexico's status as a manufacturing hub for automakers and parts suppliers.
Costlier cars?
It is likely that the cost of tariffs on imported vehicles or parts would eventually be passed along to car shoppers in the form of higher vehicle prices, said Stephanie Brinley, an automotive analyst at S&P Global Mobility.
"It's hard to get around that fact," Brinley said.
At the same time, any reduction in federal tax credits for electric cars would exacerbate the affordability problem with EVs, which account for about 8% of new-vehicle sales, analysts say.
Regulatory limbo
During his first term, Trump eased stringent rules set in place by the Obama administration governing emissions and fuel economy. After President Biden entered the White House, his administration reversed Trump's changes and tightened those regulations even further.
The most recent fuel-economy requirement requires automakers to sell a portfolio of cars and trucks averaging 58 miles a gallon by 2032, up from the 49 mpg required in model year 2026.
Brinley expects the Trump administration to initially delay enforcement of targets for model year 2028 and beyond.
"It's a bit of whiplash," she said.
Credit: By Ryan Felton
