When Rana el Kaliouby was pitching investors in 2009 on her artificial-intelligence startup, Affectiva, she and her co-founder tried to steer clear of what she calls the "e-word" -- emotion.
They were both women, and though their startup was designed to detect emotion in technology, they were sensitive to how they would be perceived. They feared they might not be taken seriously because "emotion" wasn't in the traditional lexicon of many companies and funders -- and because it carried female connotations in a largely male industry.
"We danced around it," she says, adding that they called themselves a "sentiment" company instead. "Investors invest in what they know, and we were so different from what they were used to."
A decade later, that is changing. Though the field of artificial intelligence remains heavily male-dominated, female leaders have made noticeable inroads. Some say they want to build workplaces that are more inviting to diverse workforces, and help promote women in tech more broadly. Others say they want to try to address concerns with the technology, rooting out what they see as its potential biases against marginalized communities.
"Technology won't function well unless it is built by a diverse team," says Dr. el Kaliouby, adding that the lack of gender diversity in Silicon Valley came as a contrast to what she had seen as a computer-science student in college in Egypt, where the gender breakdown was almost even. "My biggest concern in AI today isn't that robots are going to take over, it's that we're unintentionally building bias into these systems."
Dr. el Kaliouby now embraces the word emotion in her description of her company, and in 2016 became the company's CEO, after years of serving as chief technology officer.
The need to address biases in AI has lately been on stark display, with Twitter saying it needed to do more analysis of its picture-cropping algorithm, after users found it occasionally seemed to favor displaying white faces in tweet previews over Black ones. The company said it hadn't found evidence of racial or gender bias in previous testing.
Given that AI requires people to grapple with issues of fairness and representation in data, Kieran Snyder, CEO and co-founder of Textio, which uses artificial intelligence to analyze language in job descriptions, says that it isn't surprising female founders and thought leaders have been especially visible in the field.
"I think people who've been outnumbered are more likely to have a sense of why an accurate, equitable data set is important, and to want to do that work," she says, adding that women may be more drawn to the field as a consequence.
The presence of women in tech has declined in recent years. In 1995, for example, women accounted for 29% of all undergraduates studying computer sciences in the U.S. By two decades later, that figure had dropped to 18%, according to the National Science Foundation. Across Silicon Valley, while the percentage of women in technical roles has in some cases risen, it remains low: In 2019, for example, women accounted for 24% of technical U.S. roles at Google, up from 17% in 2014.
As a female CEO, Alice Zhang, co-founder of Verge Genomics, which uses AI to help identify new drugs, says she sets a different tone for the company. "There's a lot of leadership styles where it's all about pounding your fists on the table -- 'We're doing so well, we're crushing it, we're killing it,' " she says. "Mine is much more based around emotional vulnerability and honesty."
Before founding her company, Node, Falon Fatemi was one of Google's early employees, where, she says, she was lucky to be mentored by women such as Stacy Brown-Philpot, her first manager and until recently CEO of TaskRabbit. Once she founded Node -- whose software platform helps businesses build and deploy AI models -- Ms. Fatemi says she was deliberate about trying to create a female-friendly workplace, offering generous fertility benefits early on and speaking frankly with co-workers about her experience freezing her eggs.
As a woman, Ms. Fatemi says certain things, like pitching to all-male rooms of investors, were harder. But others came more easily. "We always had diversity from day one -- being a female founder, you attract that," says Ms. Fatemi of her company, which has a roughly 40% female workforce, including product development and the leadership team.
---
Ms. Chen is a Wall Street Journal reporter in Philadelphia. She can be reached at te-ping.chen@wsj.com.
Credit: By Te-Ping Chen
