Facial recognition is becoming an important tool in a range of consumer, business and law-enforcement uses.
But is it accurate -- and fair?
Facial-recognition software promises to speed up the job of determining, or verifying, people's identity by rapidly checking faces against a database. U.S. Customs and Border Protection has been testing the technology at airports, using it to verify the identity of people entering the U.S. as well as departing travelers. Other law-enforcement agencies, such as local police forces, are using the technology to identify suspects or missing people.
Facial recognition is also showing up in business and consumer applications. Some airlines are using it to speed up check-in, for instance, and some electronic devices use it as a security measure.
But as the systems spread, civil-liberties advocates and other groups are calling for a moratorium on the use of the technology.
Critics point to several incidents of alleged abuse of the technology by police. Meanwhile, a far-reaching government analysis of the most widely used facial-recognition algorithms found most of them misidentified Asian-Americans and African-Americans far more often than Caucasians. The research, conducted by the National Institute of Standards and Technology -- a laboratory affiliated with the Commerce Department -- also found significant differences in accuracy when an algorithm is used to compare two photos to determine whether it is the same person.
Due to concerns about reliability, some makers of law-enforcement technology have said they aren't including facial recognition in their products. Government pressure is growing, as well, with some local lawmakers restricting use of the technology and some members of Congress voicing opposition.
---
YES:
The Technology Is Both Biased No And Prone to Errors
----
By Meredith Whittaker
Lawmakers who care about constitutional rights and widening inequality must halt the use of facial recognition in sensitive domains by government and commercial actors.
These systems are biased in how they work and how they are deployed, and they are often created and implemented in obscurity, without public review or full accountability under the law.
Most systems are developed by private companies that license them to governments or businesses. Companies hide behind claims of trade secrecy, entering into contracts that bypass public-disclosure provisions and allow facial recognition to be deployed in secret. Researchers, lawmakers and the public rarely have access to examine these systems or answer critical questions.
When researchers do get access to facial-recognition technology, they find it doesn't work as advertised. A growing body of evidence shows that facial recognition is frequently biased and error-prone, with a recent U.S. government audit confirming that some systems were 100 times more likely to be inaccurate for black and Asian people than for white people.
While some proponents of facial recognition claim these inaccuracies aren't important, since there are also systems that government tests show to be "accurate," this does not stand up to scrutiny. Government audits, like the one cited here, are performed in controlled settings in a laboratory. Real-world uses are often much messier, relying on blurry or bad images, with recent reports from the Georgetown Center on Privacy and Technology showing routine cases of use that falls outside of safe standard operating procedure.
But inaccuracy is far from facial recognition's only problem. Facial recognition is generally applied by those who already have power -- like employers, landlords and the police -- to surveil and in some cases oppress those who don't. And because there are no restrictions on data sharing between private users and government, regulations that focus solely on government use don't account for the full threat of this technology.
We already see alleged abuse of power in practice, in cases like the Baltimore Police Department and Freddie Gray protesters. The police reportedly scanned photos to target people with outstanding warrants, according to material posted on the ACLU of Northern California website -- chilling free speech and undermining the right to due process. (The Baltimore Police Department and mayor's office did not respond to requests for comment.)
While proponents of facial recognition focus on beneficial uses, often pointing to the convenience of unlocking our phones with our faces or invoking hypothetical public-safety improvements, they rarely ask what we're trading in exchange for such convenience, nor do they acknowledge the lack of evidence supporting claims that facial recognition increases public safety.
It is difficult to think of an industry where we permit companies to treat the public as experimental subjects, deploying untested, and faulty technology that has been proved to violate civil rights and to amplify bias and discrimination. The dangers of bias and error have serious implications even when the systems are automating "routine" functions like check-ins at airports.
The idea that we can continue deploying this technology, assuming "the right rules" will prevent harm, isn't supported by evidence. Technical advancement has historically outpaced the law, and these systems allow government and businesses to intrude into our lives without detection, threatening our constitutional rights and enabling suspicionless surveillance and social control.
It is time for lawmakers to halt government and commercial use of facial recognition in sensitive domains. Once this is done, research assessing facial-recognition's risks can be undertaken.
---
Ms. Whittaker is co-founder of the AI Now Institute at New York University, which studies the social implications of artificial intelligence. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
---
NO:
Despite the Cries of Alarm, Yes The Technology Is Mostly Beneficial
----
By Daniel Castro
When it comes to new technologies, it is easy to imagine the worst.
In the 1960s, for example, many people feared transistors would spell the end of privacy, with miniature electronics used to eavesdrop on private conversations.
Today, we see alarm about facial recognition. But just as transistors didn't give rise to widespread eavesdropping, neither will facial recognition lead to pervasive surveillance.
The most common facial-recognition applications are benign. Millions of Americans use facial recognition to secure their mobile phones and tag photos. Meanwhile, there are countless examples of how facial recognition is reducing financial fraud at banks, preventing medical errors in hospitals, protecting small businesses from repeated theft and robbery, and improving security and convenience at schools and airports.
The biggest area of controversy is law enforcement. Some people fear that facial recognition will supercharge surveillance networks. But Fourth Amendment protections, coupled with deeply held views about civil liberties, put limits on what government can do.
Aside from a few scenarios, such as quickly locating an abducted child or a terrorist, closely tracking people's movements isn't being considered domestically. Law enforcement is mostly using facial recognition for routine activities such as to secure ports of entry and identify victims in crimes. For example, immigration officers can check whether travelers' faces match the passports they are holding.
Charges of bias or error in the technology are overblown. Critics, for instance, say that some racial groups are misidentified more often. But some of the error rates between racial groups are so low that slight differences seem huge. Consider the results of a recent government study that found in one algorithm an error rate of 0.01% for white males and 0.79% for American Indian females -- the rate for one group is 79 times larger, but still less than 1%.
More broadly, this critique assumes that because some systems have bias, all of them must. As the study above found, some of the best-performing algorithms had lower error rates on black females than on white males. Obviously, government agencies should set standards so that they procure only the best-performing systems that have undergone rigorous public testing.
Facial-recognition detractors also point to hypothetical harms to disadvantaged communities and ignore tangible benefits, notably, better policing to address crimes that might otherwise go unsolved in those communities. One important use of facial recognition is to find victims of human trafficking, a crime that disproportionately affects people of color, immigrants and the poor.
Another target of criticism is oversight, or the supposed lack of it. But any operator of a facial-recognition system must comply with privacy laws. Moreover, every government agency that uses facial recognition is subject to accountability measures.
Could police misuse facial recognition? Of course. This calls for more oversight and transparency, not fewer resources to limit their effectiveness. Law-enforcement agencies should, for instance, be required to disclose when they use the technology, how they obtain images and how long they keep them. Lawmakers can place reasonable limits on the use of facial recognition -- such as requiring a warrant to use facial recognition to track someone.
Rather than setting down roadblocks to further innovation and use, we need guardrails to ensure the public and private sectors use the technology safely and responsibly.
---
Mr. Castro is vice president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a think tank for science and technology policy, and director of the foundation's Center for Data Innovation. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
