Data scientists at Coatue Management LLC spent the past few years digging into new data sets to gain an edge in investing. Now, the firm is betting on data science itself as hedge funds across Wall Street push into "big data" analysis to find trading opportunities.
The hedge fund led a $27 million funding round for a company called Domino Data Lab Inc., a San Francisco startup founded by Bridgewater Associates LP alumni, the companies announced Wed-nesday. Other investors in the round include Bloomberg Beta, Zetta Venture Partners and Sequoia Capital, all three of which invested in earlier rounds.
Coatue, which has $10.5 billion of assets under management, according to a person familiar with the company, is investing in Domino through a new fund dedicated to investments in private companies.
As more hedge funds dig into growing amounts of data available that can give indications on revenues at companies ahead of quarterly announcements and hints at economic growth before government numbers are published, they are hiring more data scientists to do more intensive analysis than hedge funds are used to doing.
For example, a firm could dip into location data collected by a mobile-phone app to find out if more people are visiting Nordstrom Inc. than in previous quarters.
The app likely only collects a small sample of overall visitors to the store, so without proper care a novice could find signals that aren't reliable for investing.
"The biggest challenge for hedge funds getting into these alternative data sets is analyzing the data," said Rado Lipu<scaron>, founder of Neudata Ltd., which helps financial firms find new data sets to drive investments. "It's taken some firms years to get right."
Domino's software allows data scientists to run experiments and analyze data in a collaborative program, which helps analysts at Coatue Management discover new trends and hand them to portfolio managers.
Coatue is betting Domino can beat competitors such as Cloudera Inc. and Ufora Inc.
"Data science and artificial intelligence are the most important trends in technology today," said Thomas Laffont, senior managing director at Coatue.
"But we realized in our own internal work that doing data science is very time consuming," he said.
Financial clients are a big and growing driver of Domino's business, as more investment firms delve into "alternative data," said Nick Elprin, the CEO and co-founder of Domino who previously spent seven years designing technology at Bridgewater -- the largest hedge fund in the world.
Everything from credit-card receipts to satellite images of corn crops are increasingly driving Wall Street investments in a major trend that is still in an early stage, industry observers say.
Credit: By Bradley Hope
