Some chief information officers are questioning the viability of ChatGPT maker Open-AI following the unexpected ouster of Chief Executive Sam Altman on Friday, his subsequent hire by Microsoft and an unresolved threat by hundreds of OpenAI workers to quit and follow him there.
"Long-term viability of any platform is important when making decisions," said Todd Florence, chief information officer of Estes Express Lines, a Richmond, Va., trucker. "Friday certainly calls that into question in regards to OpenAI."
Estes is still evaluating the various technology options offered by generative artificial-intelligence vendors, a process that could be influenced by the unanswered questions about OpenAI's future, Florence said.
Customers aren't necessarily racing to jump ship, and enterprises typically take a "wait and see" approach to situations like these, but the fact that Altman doesn't seem to be returning to OpenAI raises issues, said Tim Crawford, CIO strategic adviser at Los Angeles-based IT advisory firm Avoa.
"Altman is so key to Open-AI's success," Crawford said. "His departure creates concern all around."
So far, OpenAI's large language models have largely been seen as one of the top choices for businesses to use inside their organizations. Along with OpenAI, tech giant Google and AI startups Anthropic and Cohere have also led the charge in developing proprietary large language models that companies are using to boost efficiency in areas such as accounting and writing code, or adding to their own products with tools like custom chatbots. Companies such as investment bank Morgan Stanley, consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers and cloud-software giant Salesforce have all said they are using OpenAI's technology in various ways.
But now, with the potential for mass resignations, Crawford said, "It creates a real question about OpenAI's future."
OpenAI didn't respond to a request for comment.
Microsoft Chairman and CEO Satya Nadella said in a LinkedIn post that the company remains committed to its partnership with OpenAI.
But the drama could create an opening for OpenAI rivals, including a potentially more competitive Microsoft, executives said.
"The turmoil may push CIOs to consider other vendors," said Jason James, CIO of retail software developer Aptos.
Jay Ferro, chief information, technology and product officer of clinical research data-management company Clario, said the uncertainty isn't necessarily affecting short-term decisions about choosing AI vendors. But over the longer term, he said, "This situation might give competitors a chance to close the gap."
Others said that Altman's new role means it's a great time to be a Microsoft customer and that they are rallying around the tech giant as an AI leader.
OpenAI has had an awkward, symbiotic yet competitive relationship with Microsoft since the tech giant poured billions into the startup. Typically, a company like Microsoft would absorb a startup and its technology. By keeping OpenAI at arm's length, Microsoft has had influence without the kind of control that could get regulators' attention, while OpenAI got a deep-pocketed backer and retained some freedom to explore other partnerships.
"Microsoft is a big winner in the AI talent war, and it strengthens their ability to innovate for the AI enterprise market," said Larry Pickett, chief information and digital officer of Syneos Health, a biopharmaceutical services company.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
