[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Memory-chip manufacturers' annus horribilis is finally over. Artificial intelligence will give them another boost.
Memory-chip prices have more than halved from their peak last year due to an enormous pileup in inventories after rip-roaring pandemic-era demand cooled in 2022. But prices finally seem to be poised for a modest rebound. Nomura expects prices for DRAM, used as main memory, and NAND, used in storage, to rise 10% to 15% in the fourth quarter. Chip makers have significantly scaled back production.
That spells better days ahead for memory-chip makers such as South Korea's Samsung Electronics and SK Hynix. In a preliminary earnings report last week, Samsung said its operating profit for the third quarter fell 78% from a year earlier. But it tripled from the quarter before. And although smartphones and displays probably drove much of the profit increase, losses at Samsung's memory businesses likely narrowed, too. Samsung will report its detailed results later this month.
Signs of green shoots haven't gone unnoticed by investors. Shares of Samsung gained 22% this year and those of SK Hynix jumped 65%.
While production cuts stabilized memory-chip prices, demand -- especially for consumer devices -- remains lackluster. That could pressure margins, since plenty of production capacity isn't being fully used.
But a new demand driver is fast arising, thanks to the boom in artificial intelligence. AI-chip makers like Nvidia have been using a type of DRAM called high bandwidth memory, or HBM, which allows for much faster data transfers. Research firm TrendForce expects global demand for HBM to grow 60% year over year in 2023, and 30% next year.
Currently, SK Hynix is the only game in town for the most advanced generation of HBM -- which is the reason its stock has been flying. But Samsung will likely start taking a bigger piece of the pie soon with its bleeding-edge HBM chips. If Samsung's stock were to start performing a bit more like Hynix's, that would add up to a significant upside.
And HBM's higher asking price could end up as a boost to profit margins. Goldman Sachs expects HBM to make up 15% of SK Hynix's DRAM revenue and 10% of Samsung's next year.
Memory-chip titans like Samsung and SK Hynix won't get quite the same shot of adrenaline from AI as Nvidia, but they are getting pulled up in the wake of the AI bullet train just the same. Hitching a ride near the bottom of the memory-chip price cycle, rather than later on, might prove wise, too.
Credit: By Jacky Wong
