International Business Machines Corp. CEO Ginni Rometty published an open letter to U.S. President-elect Donald Trump outlining her recommendations on health care, infrastructure spending and other issues.
The letter is her first comment on the prospect of a Trump administration since Mr. Trump, shortly before the election, criticized IBM and other companies for shifting U.S. jobs overseas.
The letter offers support for some of Mr. Trump's policies and advice on national issues -- noting that IBM is the largest technology employer in the U.S. The Donald J. Trump for President organization didn't reply to a request for comment.
Silicon Valley generally has viewed Mr. Trump's victory as a blow to the tech industry, as the president-elect has been a critic of Apple Inc. and Amazon.com Inc. as well as IBM.
Among other technology executives, Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos offered Mr. Trump congratulations in a message on Twitter, as did Salesforce.com CEO Marc Benioff.
Mr. Trump,in aNov. 6campaign speech in Minnesota,said IBM had laid off 500 workers in Minneapolis and moved their jobs to other countries. Mr. Trump also called out Ford Motor Co. and MoneyGram International Inc. for laying off workers and moving jobs overseas.
"If a company wants to leave Minnesota, fire their workers and move to another country, and then ship their products back into the United States. . .we will make them pay a 35% tax," he said.
Ford Chief Executive Mark Fields, speaking to reporters Tuesday, said the company would stick with plans to assemble cars in Mexico but continue to discuss the situation with the incoming administration.
The letter from IBM's Ms. Rometty offers support for another of Mr. Trump's proposals, to end tax-code incentives for businesses to keep their overseas earnings out of the country. "Many billions of dollars of American companies' earnings do not come home because of an outdated and punitive tax system," she said.
IBM also supports Mr. Trump's proposed investment in infrastructure such as roads and other public facilities, Ms. Rometty wrote, adding the infrastructure's performance would benefit by the inclusion of networked sensors and artificial intelligence, technologies that IBM offers. She suggested reducing health-care costs through the use of information technology and data analytics.
Credit: By Rachael King
