Unlike the old days of summer reruns, there's no such thing anymore as an off-season break for the TV industry, with networks now rolling out new shows on a year-round schedule.
Contributing to the glut are the growing number of original series from Amazon, Hulu, Netflix and other streaming companies that never followed a traditional industry calendar. With the supply of series outpacing the audience's ability to watch it all, more networks are hoping to grab attention this summer with short-run, high-profile shows. They include "event" series such as "Aquarius," NBC's take on Charles Manson's origin story. In a gamble to better the chances for "Aquarius," which stars David Duchovny as a clean-cut detective, NBC will release all 13 episodes online following the show's May 28 broadcast premiere.
Below, a selection of the coming season's new shows, which will battle with anticipated returns, including NBC's stylish serial-killer series, "Hannibal" (June 4); Netflix's "Orange Is the New Black" (June 12); HBO's "True Detective" (June 21); and Showtime's "Ray Donovan" and "Masters of Sex" (July 12).
'Sense8'
(Netflix) Premieres June 5
The first TV series from siblings Andy and Lana Wachowski (and co-created by "World War Z" screenwriter J. Michael Straczynski), "Sense8" follows eight people in different cities with a shared mental connection. An anguished Daryl Hannah is the conduit that connects them and triggers their quest to understand this power. The show's scale is ambitious -- shooting locations ranged from Chicago to Nairobi -- and seemingly personal, featuring a character in San Francisco who, like Lana Wachowski, is transgender. It remains to be seen if this TV series will revive the Wachowskis' "Matrix"-era reputation after the big-screen disappointment that was "Jupiter Ascending."
'Jonathan Strange & Mr Norell'
(BBC America) Premiers June 13
It's nice to see the finely wrought period dramas of U.K. television get a big dose of fantasy with the BBC's "Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell." An alternative history in which England uses sorcery in its fight with France during the Napoleonic Wars, the seven-part miniseries is adapted from the best-selling novel of the same name, by Susanna Clarke. Norell (Eddie Marsan), England's last practitioner of real magic, does a deal with a well-coiffed spirit, brings a politician's fiancee back from the dead, and summons a stampede of horses from sand. Meanwhile, another magician emerges, Jonathan Strange (Bertie Carvel), a reckless talent who clashes with his mentor, Norell. The miniseries could vaguely be described as "Wolf Hall" meets "Game of Thrones," with production values that can compete.
'The Brink'
(HBO) Premieres June 21
This dark comedy about a crisis in Pakistan nearing the point of no return aims to be the "Dr. Strangelove" of the 21st century. Government-level ineptitude, macho buffoonery and sex jokes abound, as does a strong fear that the world could end. Jack Black stars as a low-level diplomatic official most concerned with scoring drugs and prostitutes who ends up in the thick of the brewing U.S.-Pakistan conflict, and "Daily Show" correspondent Aasif Mandvi plays his driver and de facto protector in the streets of Islamabad. Tim Robbins is the oversexed Secretary of State who hopes to avert a war, and Pablo Schreiber ("Orange Is the New Black," "Law & Order: Special Victims Unit") plays a drug-addled fighter pilot up to his eyeballs in debt and romantic problems.
'Humans'
(AMC) Premieres late June
If you've been intrigued by BBC America's "Orphan Black," Spike Jonze's 2013 film "Her," or to a lesser extent, "Pinocchio," then AMC's "Humans" is right up your alley. The show's central plot revolves around a society that has built artificial intelligence in the form of "synthetics," or "synths," souped-up computers so lifelike they trigger moral and emotional reactions in humans. The show is an adaptation of a Swedish series called "Real Humans" and will debut simultaneously in the U.S. and the U.K. The most recognizable "Humans" star is William Hurt, who plays a widower who treats his synth like a real son. He's like Geppetto, but with robotics.
'Sex&Drugs&Rock&Roll'
(FX) Premieres July 16
Four years after "Rescue Me" concluded its seven-season run, Denis Leary is back at FX as the creator and star of "Sex&Drugs&Rock&Roll." This time around, he's Johnny Rock, the washed-up frontman of early '90s band the Heathens (Leary also wrote or co-wrote several original songs for the series). With a Rod Stewart haircut and sartorial choices straight out of Aerosmith's closet, Johnny hasn't seen the glory days for about 25 years. Desperate for work but unable to get clean (or humble), Johnny is relegated to the sidelines as the songwriter for a young, gorgeous, talented singer who also happens to be his daughter (Elizabeth Gillies). But with the support of his backup-singer wife (Elaine Hendrix) and a shot at reuniting with his former bandmates (Robert Kelly, John Ales and John Corbett), there might just be a second act for Johnny. Or not.
'Wet Hot American Summer: First Day of Camp'
(Netflix) Premieres July 31
Little is known about how the 2001 cult film "Wet Hot American Summer" will translate into a TV series, but original writers David Wain and Michael Showalter managed to get the movie's cast back together for this eight-episode run. The show will take place, as the title suggests, on the first day of camp in 1981. The film took place on the last day of camp, and was filled with many up-and-comers who have since become big stars. Amy Poehler, Bradley Cooper, Elizabeth Banks, and Paul Rudd will reprise their roles. With a cast like that, how could this not be the comedy event of the summer?
'Difficult People'
(Hulu) Premieres August 5
"Parks and Recreation" fans know Billy Eichner as Craig, the high-strung Parks Department office employee. Internet denizens know Mr. Eichner as the viral-video star of his guerilla-style game show, "Billy on the Street," in which he asks unsuspecting New Yorkers and celebrities to play such challenges as "The Price Feels So Right" and "You Can't Do That on TV, Adele Edition." In this new show Eichner switches to a scripted sitcom with his "Billy on the Street" writing partner, Julie Klausner. At first, it feels like you're watching two New Yorkers complain about their tweets and less-than-desirable table-waiting jobs. But quickly, the show becomes Eichner and Klausner's exploration of neuroticism in 2015, and you learn it is likely these two who are being difficult. Klausner, Dave Becky ("Louie") and Amy Poehler executive produce.
'Blunt Talk'
(Starz) Premieres Aug. 22
News anchor Walter Blunt (Patrick Stewart) has made good on his name. The protagonist of Starz's new comedy series "Blunt Talk," created by Jonathan Ames ("Bored to Death"), has never heard the word "subtle." His only confidant is his alcoholic manservant, Harry (Adrian Scarborough), a fellow British expatriate. But Walter is right at home at an L.A. cable-news network where his co-workers -- Jacki Weaver ("Silver Linings Playbook") and Dolly Wells ("Doll & Em") -- are so dysfunctional he's the one they go to for advice. For all of his crotchety old-man behavior (don't mention the Falklands in his presence), Walter is really just a big, insecure baby desperate for affection. And with Stewart in the role, he may actually have a chance at redemption.
'Fear the Walking Dead'
(AMC) Premieres late summer
"The Walking Dead" spinoff series, which stars Kim Dickens ("Gone Girl") and Cliff Curtis ("Training Day"), recently started production, so we haven't seen much beyond a short teaser for AMC's new take on zombie life. We do know it is set in Los Angeles and producers are aiming for a completely different feel from "The Walking Dead," which started out in Georgia. The timeline will also be different, as we'll see things happen from the start of the mysterious viral outbreak. You don't even have to have watched "The Walking Dead" to know what's going on in "Fear the Walking Dead," says creator and executive producer Robert Kirkman.
-- John Jurgensen, Mike Ayers, Sarene Leeds, Michael Calia
