The U.S. filed criminal charges against a Chinese professor in Texas who had earlier been accused in a civil suit of stealing a U.S. startup's technology for China's Huawei Technologies Co., marking an escalation of Justice Department investigations into issues related to the telecom giant.
The criminal complaint against Bo Mao doesn't mention Huawei by name, but the case it lays out closely parallels a civil suit filed by Silicon Valley's CNEX Labs Inc. against Huawei. A Texas jury in June found Huawei had stolen CNEX's solid-state drive computer technology but declined to award damages.
The charging document describes the company identifiable as Huawei as having "attempted to misappropriate" technology from a company identifiable as CNEX since 2016, and it says Mr. Mao worked with the company "as part of this fraudulent scheme."
A lawyer for Mr. Mao, who was charged with conspiring to commit wire fraud, declined to comment. Mr. Mao, who worked at universities in both Texas and China, pleaded not guilty on Aug. 28 and has been released on bail.
For more than a decade, Huawei has faced a number of allegations in civil suits about intellectual-property theft. But the Justice Department's CNEX case underscores its aggressive approach to Huawei and its alleged IP theft on a number of fronts, including criminal cases accusing the company of stealing from T-Mobile US Inc., and violating U.S. sanctions on Iran.
In the new case, the Justice Department is drawing particular attention to Huawei's alleged use of university professors it funds to get access to cutting-edge tech. The charges say the U.S. unit of the company identifiable as Huawei donated $100,000 to a Texas university Mr. Mao later worked at to support related research, and it portrayed Mr. Mao as trying to use the framework of academic research to secretly further Huawei's technology.
In a statement, Huawei didn't dispute that it was the Chinese "telecommunications conglomerate" referred to as "Company 1" in the Aug. 14 federal charges.
But it denied wrongdoing, adding: "Huawei strongly disagrees that it or any of its employees were involved in any efforts to take CNEX trade secrets through a Chinese University or otherwise. Whatever arrangement CNEX may have entered into with a Chinese research institution is between CNEX and that institution -- and does not involve Huawei, and Huawei is not aware of any wrong doing of the University or its employees."
Mr. Mao was an associate professor at Xiamen University in Fujian, China, and also worked in the computer-science department at the University of Texas-Arlington since 2018, according to the university's website. In December 2016, he contacted the "Victim Company" to obtain a computer board that would enable him to test the firm's unique solid-state drive, or SSD, storage technology, according to the complaint. The technology allows massive data centers to manage the ever-growing volume of information generated by artificial intelligence and other advanced applications.
A spokesman for UT-Arlington said he couldn't comment because of the "ongoing federal investigation." A representative of Xiamen University didn't respond to requests to comment.
The case against Mr. Mao raises the possibility of further federal action targeting Huawei itself and its executives.
Since Mr. Mao's Aug. 14 arrest and subsequent court appearances in Fort Worth, Texas, the case has been transferred to federal court in Brooklyn, N.Y., where it was assigned to the same prosecutor and federal judge handling the case against Huawei deputy chairwoman Meng Wanzhou for allegedly violating U.S. sanctions on Iran.
U.S. companies for years have complained that Huawei has pilfered their technology, which Huawei has denied.
Last week, Huawei in a news release accused the U.S. government of "using every tool at its disposal" to disrupt its business.

Credit: By Kate O'Keeffe and Aruna Viswanatha
