'Software is eating the world," tech investor Marc Andreessen observed in these pages in 2011. Now software is writing itself.
Mr. Andreessen's point was that the commoditization and miniaturization of computer hardware was allowing software to run nearly everything. Since then, software has penetrated every aspect of life, from cameras to health care and even social interactions.
While software allowed hardware to be manufactured automatically, software itself continued to be built by hand. As a result, software development struggled to keep pace with demand. The cobbler's children need shoes.
But software production is beginning to benefit from the automation that has driven the production of hardware. Artificial intelligence, a broad category of software that mimics human intelligence, is being applied to basic, repetitive and time-consuming tasks. Get ready for an explosion of software-written software.
The trend is triggering a complete makeover of the information-technology industry. Writing software quickly is a critical competitive market advantage in any industry. Established companies are being eaten alive by new competitors employing automated strategies to write software faster, shipping updates every day to deliver new capabilities to customers. Netflix deploys new code an average of 4,000 times a day.
More software needs to be written in the next 10 years than there are people to write it. Research firm Gartner predicted four years ago that software-development demand will be five times development capacity through 2021. That hasn't changed. Management consulting firm Korn Ferry predicts a global shortage of 85.2 million skilled workers by 2030, including a shortfall of 4.3 million workers in the technology, media and telecommunications sector.
It takes time to train people for these jobs. Schools are struggling to find qualified teachers who want to teach instead of earning $200,000 a year or more as developers. According to global software technology company iTexico, only 35% of American high schools offer computer science as a course, though 58% of all new STEM jobs are in computing.
The result has been higher developer salaries. In 2019 an entry-level developer as a software engineer at Google made about $190,000 including stock compensation. Yet, despite being among the most expensive employees in any organization, software developers spend nearly a third of their time on ancillary tasks other than writing software.
Take software testing. As developers write programs, they must also write programs to test those programs. If there's an error in the code, it's cheaper and easier to find and fix errors while the software is still in development rather than after the software has been shipped to users.
AI tools are now automating that and other aspects of software creation and maintenance, leaving the developers freer to focus on the more creative parts of what they are hired to do: write better software, faster.
Today, the automation is focused on saving developers time so they can pay more attention to the most difficult parts of their jobs. In time, researchers believe they will be able to create software that writes software programs completely. The ultimate goal is to make it possible for anybody to write software simply by describing what they intend the program to do. Software will democratize the creation of software.
---
Mr. Kroening is a fellow at Magdalen College, University of Oxford, and a co-founder of Diffblue, an AI-automation software company.

Credit: By Daniel Kroening
