It has been six months since New York City began enforcing the nation's first law requiring companies to disclose how algorithms influence their hiring decisions. So far, disclosures are rare.
The law requires employers that use software to assist with hiring and promotion decisions -- including chatbot interviewing tools and resume scanners that look for keyword matches -- to audit those tools annually for potential race and gender bias, and publish the results on their websites. It was designed to encourage companies to identify and root out ways their technology might be unintentionally embedding bias into employment decisions.
Eighteen of nearly 400 employers analyzed in a new study had posted the information as of earlier this month, according to researchers at Cornell University who enlisted students to scour companies' websites. Among the companies with audit reports were Morgan Stanley, Pfizer, Cigna and Paramount.
The requirement, called Local Law 144, has been closely watched by legislators and industry groups as a test case for future technology regulation. Similar rules are under consideration in Washington, D.C., New York state and the European Union, among other places, and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission last year identified technology-related discrimination as a strategic priority.
Most of the 391 companies analyzed, many of which have headquarters or large operations in New York, didn't disclose information. In some instances in which audit results were posted, finding the notices was "challenging, time-consuming and frustrating," the researchers wrote. The law requires companies to post the information in the career section of their websites.
Researchers said the results demonstrate that the law has very limited value for job seekers and, at best, might offer a road map for how to improve future regulations. "We now know more of the failure points," said Jacob Metcalf, a co-author of the Cornell study and leader of an AI initiative for the nonprofit technology research group Data & Society.
One reason for low compliance: The law gives employers "almost unlimited discretion" to decide whether they are within the scope of the rule, Metcalf said. While the original rule proposed employers using most automated employment decision tools, or AEDTs, must audit them, the final version limited the scope, saying the law applied only to companies whose tools substantially assist or replace human decision-making. Business trade groups, whose members include workplace-technology makers such as Microsoft, SAP and Oracle, lobbied New York's city council to make some of the changes.
Many employers are saying, "'We use this tool but it doesn't entirely replace human decision-making so it doesn't fall under the definition of an AEDT,'" said Ben Fichter, co-founder of ConductorAI, a firm that has completed audits for a few dozen technology vendors.
A 2022 report from SHRM, a trade group for human-resources executives, found 64% of companies were using artificial intelligence or other forms of automation to review or screen applicant resumes.
Another challenge, Fichter added: Because many employers don't track the race or gender of most applicants, the results are of dubious value.
Employers that hire for New York City-based roles and are subject to the rule have to publish on their websites adverse-impact ratios, which show whether a process has a disparate effect on any race or gender. They also must include notice that they are using the tools and a way for job applicants to request an alternative to being screened or sorted by the software.
Employers that don't comply can be ordered to pay penalties of up to $1,500 per violation a day. LL 144 is a disclosure law; it doesn't require employers to change their hiring procedures.
Soon after the law went into effect, PepsiCo posted a disclosure showing the impact ratios for a group of applicants who took an assessment for supply-chain roles in its food division. Some of the ratios were below the threshold that indicates adverse impact. The link to the report is no longer working.
"We prepared the results during our process of determining whether any of our tools fell within scope of the NY AEDT law," PepsiCo said. "Upon completing our review, we found that our tools do not constitute an AEDT and subsequently pulled these results from the website."
A spokesman for New York City's Department of Consumer and Worker Protection, which is tasked with overseeing the law, said enforcement is driven by complaints, and the agency has received no complaints since the rule has been active.
"Unless there's some enforcement action, employers will probably ignore it," said Adam Klein, managing partner of Outten & Golden, a law firm that represents workers in employment litigation. If companies do conduct and disclose their bias audits, he added, "there's no way to verify the information."
Credit: By Lauren Weber
