Speaking as a robotic-equipment manufacturer, I think there has been progress in the agility of digitally controlled equipment and the range and variety of applications of the machinery leapfrogs the imagination. Concern shouldn't be that artificial intelligence will take away all the jobs -- or your job or my job. As Jerry Kaplan notes in "Don't Fear the Robots" (Review, July 22), robots leave lots of room for interesting jobs and even interesting augmentation of humans. What's problematic is that as more and more labor value is eliminated we'll reach a threshold in a race-to-the-bottom cycle that drives the value of labor itself to near zero. This economic and social threat, even if only a possibility, is why we cannot ignore the rapidly changing employment panorama and simply look back to earlier trends, hoping that enhanced robots will thoughtfully innovate new job opportunities for people.
We need a focus on robots as enablers of human utility and creativity as we seek alternative economic models that accommodate a declining role of human labor.
Ted Hall
Durham, N.C.
---
In his evaluation of how robots will affect our job prospects, Mr. Kaplan argues that robots will save us money, which can then be spent on personal services. Therefore, service jobs will increase in frequency. But a person in such a service job will likely earn a pittance, while those who own stock in companies employing robots will be the ones with money to spare. The message is: Fear the robots, unless you are one of the very few with enough wealth and education to avoid entering the service workforce.
William Vaughan Jr.
Chebeague Island, Maine
---
The potential devastation of accelerating automation on U.S. workers now and in the near future must be addressed with urgency. Even if you buy Mr. Kaplan's thesis that new service jobs will be created -- masses of masseuses -- the pain that millions of real workers are going to experience is unrivaled. We must start retraining the American worker now for jobs of the future. Predicting that everything will be just fine won't put food on the tables of countless American workers who stand to lose not only their jobs but a purpose in life as automation fundamentally changes our economy. We owe it to one another to prepare American workers for the future of work. If we don't, all of the masseuses in the world won't be able to deal with our pain.
Art Bilger
Los Angeles
