Researchers claimed a major artificial-intelligence breakthrough on Wednesday, unveiling a software program that taught itself to beat a top human player of the board game Go, considered a milestone challenge in the field.
Researchers at Google parent Alphabet Inc.'s DeepMind unit said the program, AlphaGo, beat European Go champion Fan Hui five games to zero on a full board during a recent competition at DeepMind's London headquarters. Previously, the best programs have defeated Go professionals only on smaller, unofficial boards.
A computer beat the world's top chess player in 1997. But Go, in which players place "stones" on a square 19-by-19-line grid, is a bigger challenge because there are far more possible moves -- 361 possible openings alone. The game, which originated in ancient China, has been a target of artificial-intelligence research because mastering it requires more humanlike skills of pattern recognition and intuitive judgment.
The advance, published in the journal Nature, impressed artificial-intelligence experts and revived a debate about whether limits should be placed on computer programs that gain humanlike abilities to learn by themselves.
"One couldn't help feel for the poor human getting beaten," said Tanguy Chouard, an editor at Nature who monitored the AlphaGo match.
AlphaGo uses two so-called deep neural networks, computer programs with millions of connections that loosely mimic the structure of the human brain. This approach has produced several artificial-intelligence breakthroughs in recent years, including computers that can identify objects in images more consistently than humans can.
AlphaGo's first network was shown about 30 million Go moves by humans, to teach it what move to play next. People directed the training during this so-called supervised learning.
The second network played thousands of Go games against itself to learn, without human help, to evaluate board positions and estimate the likelihood of each move ultimately winning the game.
The latter, unsupervised, approach is more cutting edge. David Silver, a DeepMind researcher who worked on AlphaGo, said the system learned to discover new strategies itself.
Remi Coulom, who spent 10 years developing one of the smartest Go-playing computers, said he had thought it could take another decade for computers to beat top Go players. "For many years they've been saying that the game of Go is special," Mr. Coulom said. "But that's not the case anymore."
AlphaGo's creators say the software can be set to work on other problems beyond Go. That is a contrast to the International Business Machines Corp.'s Deep Blue, which was designed only to play chess and beat chess master Garry Kasparov in 1997.
Still, experts cautioned that AlphaGo is far from a high-level, "general" artificial-intelligence program that can solve virtually any sort of problem.
Credit: By Alistair Barr and Jack Nicas
