Australian mining tech startup Plotlogic has raised $28 million in Series B financing as attention grows on the need for greater supply of clean-energy metals and on the environmental costs of extracting them.
The round was co-led by Tom Steyer's and Katie Hall's climate investment platform, Galvanize Climate Solutions, and SE Ventures, the investing firm backed by French energy and automation giant Schneider Electric.
Founded in 2018, Plotlogic offers technology it says can help miners better pinpoint and extract minerals and metals, increasing output and cutting waste.
The Brisbane, Australia-based startup intends to use the fundraising proceeds to help it expand in a number of markets, including in North America, founder and Chief Executive Andrew Job told The Wall Street Journal.
Plotlogic says its customers today include the world's biggest miner by market value BHP Group, Brazilian miner Vale and Australia-based mining and metals company South32, as well as Sydney-listed lithium company Pilbara Minerals.
Big miners are seeking ways to increase production of metals, including copper and nickel, that are expected to be in high demand as the world decarbonizes and electrifies. The International Energy Agency recently estimated that clean-energy demand for critical minerals could grow by up to 3 1/2 times by 2030.
At the same time, investors and others are pressing miners to find ways to lower their own environmental footprint, including cutting their greenhouse-gas emissions and reducing mine waste.
Plotlogic's first commercial product, OreSense, combines light-detection and ranging, or lidar, equipment used in self-driving vehicles, and so-called hyperspectral imaging sensors, which measure hundreds of spectral bands from visible to infrared, with machine-learning algorithms to detect mineral-rich ore among large amounts of rock.
OreSense can be used in a number of different ways, including to scan a mine face or ore as it travels along a conveyor. Job likened it to swapping out a hacksaw for a scalpel.
Credit: By Rhiannon Hoyle
