IAC is stepping up its plans for acquisitions, with additions to existing businesses and making new ones, as the internet and media holding company recently explored a bid to take over Paramount Global in a deal the troubled media giant has wrapped up with another buyer.
The New York-based company is ready to pick up the pace of its dealmaking after focusing on boosting profitability for some of its holdings. Deal activity across certain industries has been on the rebound this year from a prolonged slowdown as some companies anticipate lower interest rates and seek to boost investments in new technologies such as generative artificial intelligence.
"The last couple of years, it's been hard to get to price agreements with sellers broadly. But we're starting to get there," said Christopher Halpin, chief financial officer and chief operating officer at IAC. "There's starting to be stability in the market and more M&A, and we're optimistic about adding to the portfolio."
IAC's portfolio includes publisher Dotdash Meredith, family-care business Care.com and a majority stake in home-services marketplace Angi, along with a minority interest in MGM Resorts International and car-sharing app Turo. The company's latest major acquisition came in 2021, when it picked up Meredith, publisher of magazines including Better Homes & Gardens and People, for about $2.7 billion, and folded it into its digital-publishing division Dotdash.
Halpin said IAC is giving priority to internal M&A opportunities, or adding onto existing businesses, over making totally new acquisitions, but is considering both, which other company executives also have alluded to on earnings calls.
Dotdash Meredith struggled out the gate initially because of a global slowdown in advertising spending. But in the latest quarter, the IAC unit booked its first total revenue growth since the acquisition, at $390.5 million, up 0.8% from the prior-year period. Angi has had trouble gaining market share as a leads generator, resulting in IAC Chief Executive Joey Levin stepping in to serve as Angi's CEO from October 2022 to April of this year. Angi recorded $36 million in adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, in the latest quarter, up 21% from the prior-year period and the highest amount since 2020. Its revenue, however, fell 14% to $305.4 million.
Recovery has marked Halpin's tenure as CFO to date, largely in contrast with that of his predecessor, Glenn Schiffman, who led the spinoffs of online-dating giant Match Group and video-hosting and sharing company Vimeo in 2020 and 2021, respectively, and is now CFO of digital-sports platform Fanatics.
Halpin, a former National Football League executive, has served as IAC's CFO since 2022. During that time, IAC sold businesses such as Bluecrew, an on-demand workforce app, in 2022 and mobile-software platform Mosaic Group this year, moves to free up cash for acquisitions and share buybacks.
IAC has no plans to sell its stake in Turo if it goes public, Halpin said. The startup filed to do so in 2022 but hasn't yet pulled the trigger.
IAC is looking for acquisitions in consumer internet sectors that are large and have a tailwind, potentially in areas such as travel and leisure, Levin said at a May 22 conference.
Credit: By Mark Maurer
