Cathie Wood still expects the price of bitcoin to hit $1 million someday.
The founder of ARK Investment Management built the firm into an investor darling during the Covid-19 pandemic with successful bets on largely unprofitable, "disruptive" technology companies.
Wood, who developed a cultlike following as a fund manager, continues to be a big proponent of crypto and blockchain technology. Crypto exchange Coinbase Global is among ARK's top holdings.
Yet she was caught flat-footed once interest rates began rising.
Shares of her flagship fund have lost two-thirds of their value since November 2021, while bitcoin and Coinbase have fallen about 50% and 75%, respectively, over the same period.
Wood spoke with The Wall Street Journal on Tuesday from Cboe Global Markets' office in New York City, where she rang the bell to celebrate the listing of five digital-asset exchange-traded funds.
Here is an edited selection of highlights from that conversation:
WSJ: If interest rates remain at current levels for the foreseeable future, are high-growth tech stocks and cryptocurrencies still worthwhile investments?
A: We just got a CPI report that, I think, stunned people. They expected an upward revision because of the recent revisions to the index, and you are seeing the market respond to that.
The bigger risk here is deflation, not inflation. And we're seeing more and more signs of it.
WSJ: Did you follow the trial of Sam Bankman-Fried? What does his conviction mean for the crypto industry?
A: More people are now beginning to understand that FTX was a centralized organization with no transparency, completely opaque and ultimately fraudulent.
And what is bitcoin? What is the crypto ecosystem all about? It's about the opposite of that.
I remind people that Sam Bankman-Fried did not like bitcoin. And it makes sense. It was decentralized. It was transparent. He couldn't control it.
When FTX went down, the bitcoin blockchain didn't skip a beat, the Ethereum network didn't skip a beat. It was as though it didn't happen.
WSJ: Crypto prices have surged recently on investor expectations that U.S. regulators will soon approve spot bitcoin ETFs. Why are investors so excited about the potential advent of ETFs that directly hold bitcoin and ether?
A: It's going to be an easy way to access bitcoin. Now, it's just much more complicated to go through Coinbase, but this will be regulated and protect retail investors and institutional investors.
WSJ: How high can bitcoin's price go?
A: Our base case is around $650,000. Our bull case is in the $1 million to $1.5 million range.
WSJ: Coinbase Global is one of the top holdings in your flagship fund. Are you concerned about the Securities and Exchange Commission lawsuit that claims the crypto exchange is an unregistered broker that should be subject to the agency's oversight?
A: So far as these cases have gone before the courts, the SEC has been, by and large, not completely, but on the losing side of many of these suits. And we believe that the issue they're raising here is so important that if Coinbase were to lose, they would appeal all the way to the Supreme Court.
WSJ: Artificial intelligence is the hottest trend in tech, and many crypto entrepreneurs are pivoting to AI. Which one is a better investment?
A: They are going to rival each other mostly because AI is the biggest catalyst to innovation out there.
Credit: By Vicky Ge Huang
