TESLA
TSLA -2.4%
Elon Musk got the votes he needed to keep his contentious Tesla pay package. The electric-car maker's shareholders voted Thursday to reinstate a roughly $46 billion pay package for its chief executive that a judge had thrown out. They also approved the company's plan to move its legal home to Texas. Shareholders first signed off on the pay deal in 2018 before a Delaware judge overturned it earlier this year, concluding that the board was conflicted when negotiating it. Tesla asked shareholders to reapprove the same pay deal, saying their support would help Musk get pay that the company says he earned. Having rallied over the previous two days, Tesla shares lost 2.4% Friday.
FEDEX
FDX -1.5%
FedEx is cutting costs by cutting staff. The parcel-delivery company plans to reduce its head count in Europe by as many as 2,000 people, according to a Wednesday securities filing. The latest round of layoffs at FedEx comes as a persistent shipping slowdown weighs on the industry. FedEx's efforts to cut billions of dollars in operating expenses have included office closures and the restructuring of its Ground and Express operations. FedEx shares declined 1.5% Wednesday.
SOUTHWEST AIRLINES
LUV +7%
An activist investor wants to overhaul Southwest. Elliott Investment Management has built a stake of nearly $2 billion in the U.S. carrier, and called for replacing Chief Executive Bob Jordan with an external hire, overhauling the board, and for management to lead a comprehensive business review. Another airline, JetBlue Airways, attracted the attention of activist investor Carl Icahn earlier this year. He struck a deal for two seats on its board in February. Southwest shares jumped 7% Monday.
PARAMOUNT GLOBAL
PARA -7.8%
Former media executive Edgar Bronfman Jr., backed by private-equity firm Bain Capital, has expressed interest in buying National Amusements, the privately held Redstone family company that controls Paramount, The Wall Street Journal reported Monday. On Tuesday, the Journal reported that Shari Redstone has ended discussions with David Ellison's Skydance Media, drawing to a close months of negotiations. Paramount shares sank 7.8% Tuesday.
BROADCOM
AVGO +12%
Broadcom is following peers with a stock split. The chip maker said it plans a 10-for-1 stock split in an effort to make its shares more affordable for investors and employees. It also reported another quarter of strong demand, with about one-quarter of its sales coming from artificial-intelligence products. Broadcom's stock has risen amid surging demand for AI-related products. Nvidia, another AI chip maker, this month also implemented a 10-for-1 split. Broadcom shares soared 12% Thursday.
APPLE
AAPL +7.3%
Apple's AI is here. The company on Monday debuted "Apple Intelligence," a systemwide update to software on its devices that will offer a personalized version of generative artificial intelligence to users. The new AI system offers a voice assistant empowered with enough personal user information to meaningfully help complete an array of tasks. Apple partnered with OpenAI for some new functions. Apple stock gained 7.3% Tuesday to reach its first record high of the year.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
