The iconic white "Ghostbusters" ambulance sped down New York's Fifth Avenue on a recent Saturday morning, dodging yellow taxis and nearly colliding with a cyclist as part of the filming of a wild chase scene for a new movie.
Mixed in with the paid extras on the sidewalks during the action sequence were members of the Writers Guild of America, waving strike signs. The demonstrators had arrived before dawn in a bid to photobomb the Ghostbusters movie, and their plan appeared to work.
"They are going to have to digitally edit us out of their shots," said striker Marissa Gordon, a writer and casting director who has worked on shows for Netflix and Warner Bros.' Max streaming service, among others.
The WGA's strike, aimed at extracting contract demands from Hollywood studios including better pay, higher residual payments and protections against artificial intelligence's encroachment on the movie industry, has entered its guerrilla tactics phase.
In the six weeks since Hollywood writers' rooms closed, the union has interrupted or halted shoots from Los Angeles to New York with the help of fellow unions representing truck drivers, makeup artists and actors. The cat-and-mouse game between strikers and studios will determine how many films and TV shows reach living rooms and theaters across America in coming months.
Events such as the "Ghostbusters" photobomb and other production disruptions have caused millions in extra costs for various studios, said Warren Leight, a veteran showrunner for the NBC crime drama "Law & Order: SVU," and ringleader of the WGA's "Ghostbusters" pickets.
The Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, which represents studios, declined to comment on the financial impact of the disruptions and other aspects of this article. The organization has said its members want to reach a deal that is "mutually beneficial to writers and the health and longevity of the industry."
In New York, dozens of writers have assembled in what they call "flying squadrons," named after groups of striking textile workers in the 1930s who would swoop in on factories when word traveled that nonunion workers were staffing a mill.
Using information about call times and shoot locations leaked by sympathetic crew members from inside productions, picketing squads swarm, often on just a few hours' notice, and work in shifts to block trucks from delivering filming equipment to sets.
The Teamsters and the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, the union representing stagehands, hair and makeup, and set designers, have served as crucial allies, striking writers say. Production companies can generally shoot TV episodes or scenes for a movie without writers on set, but can't go forward without deliveries of lighting gear or camera dollies.
WGA organizers say production companies have responded to the disruptions by doling out filming information on a need-to-know basis and making last-minute changes to shoot times.
As the strike has dragged on, efforts to disrupt shoots have become more organized and targeted. The flying squadrons say they have disrupted shoots of series including Showtime's "Billions," the Apple TV+ show "Severance," Marvel Studios' "Daredevil: Born Again," FX's "American Horror Story," and DC Studios' "The Penguin."
The union has become more disciplined about casing shooting locations to set up picket lines in front of every entrance, WGA members said.
"You spend enough years as a showrunner, you realize that keeping a show up and running involves the exact same skill set required to shut a show down," Leight said. The flying squadrons are better supplied with volunteers today than in the strike's early days, he said.
WGA organizers say the recent "Ghostbusters" shoot wrapped up several hours early, after pickets blotted scenes. Public notices about the shoot said it could run as late as 3 p.m., but filming ended in the morning.
The production got all of the shots it needed that day, a person familiar with the shoot said. Celine C. Robinson, a writer on "Law & Order: Special Victims Unit" and Showtime's "American Rust," said she received a text message one May night from a flying squadron captain about a 2:30 call time the following morning for the show.
The producers of the series had repeatedly moved the call time earlier, but crew members within the production had leaked the changes to the WGA, Robinson said.
After a shortened sleep, Robinson and about a dozen other union members then blocked every entrance to the Brooklyn set. When the Teamsters and IATSE members arrived, they signaled they wouldn't cross picket lines.
Later that morning, Robinson got the following text message: "That's a wrap!" because the production had been shut down.
WGA organizers say that while they want to cause financial pain to the studios by delaying shoots or forcing them to reschedule, they want to minimize lost wages for crew members who aren't WGA members but who often help the strikers.
"How can there not be tension? We're asking people not to cross the line, and give up a day's pay," Leight said. "Someone will occasionally say to us, 'I could really use three or four more days of paid work on this shoot.'"
"But then there are some sets where you're walking away, and a crew member comes up to you and whispers, 'By the way, call time 5 a.m. tomorrow,'" he said.
Credit: By Robbie Whelan and James T. Areddy
