Walk through an airport, and you can vividly see the difference between adults and children. At your eye level, sensible adult humans are checking departure times and moving toward the gates. But look down and you see a very different kind of human: The children in the airport wriggle and wander, run off in all directions, exclaim at the miracle of flying machines, fiddle with every seat. Adults, more or less patiently, have to take care of them, keep them out of trouble and corral them onto the plane.
Why are children so weird? They behave in such random and unpredictable ways and are so helpless and needy, yet they learn so much. How does being that way help them become smarter in the long run? (It definitely does: Among animal species, the longer the childhood the bigger the brain, with humans at the top of both heaps.)
A new paper in the journal Nature Human Behaviour by Anne Giron and Charley Wu at the University of Tubingen and colleagues shows that, surprisingly, research into artificial intelligence may help answer these questions. Advances in AI depend on machine learning, but in the most effective systems, how learning takes place changes over time. The new paper shows that these changes are strikingly similar to the way human minds change as children become adults. AI programs do best if they start out like weird kids and then grow up.
AI systems can have different "temperatures." In the physical world, hotter molecules bounce around more. In the digital world, a "hotter temperature" means more randomness. If you set ChatGPT's learning module "hotter" its answers will be more creative but also weirder and more random; a "cooler" setting produces more plausible, but more banal, responses.
Which temperature is best? AI systems often use what's called "simulated annealing," like physical annealing in metallurgy. A blacksmith will heat up metal in a red-hot furnace and then gradually cool it to make it more resilient. An AI algorithm will start out "hot" learning in a more wide-ranging, random way, trying lots of unlikely possibilities. Then it gradually cools down and settles on the most likely options. Physical annealing makes metals more robust; digital annealing helps get the right balance between creativity and plausibility, exploration and exploitation.
Those unruly kids in the airport certainly seem like their brains are running "hotter" than the grown-ups, and I've suggested in my own research that childhood may be evolution's way of performing simulated annealing. In the new paper the researchers essentially tested this idea. They gave 281 participants between the ages of 5 and 55 the same problem: They saw a grid of 64 tiles on a screen, and each time they turned over a tile they got the reward that was written on it. They had 25 chances to click tiles they'd already seen or try new ones. Children were much more likely to explore new tiles and try different strategies than adults.
Suppose you plunked an AI program into this tile world. If it only acted like the "hot," more exploratory children, it would waste time trying unsuccessful strategies. If it just acted like the narrower, cooler adults, it wouldn't learn as much. The researchers found that the AI did best if it started out using the childlike strategy and then gradually moved to the adult one. This "stochastic optimization" process captured the way humans develop over time.
We need to start out as those crazy kids in the airport to become effective, intelligent adults. But, of course, the children can only thrive if the grown-ups take care of them, too.
Credit: By Alison Gopnik
