Intel Corp. is buying startup Barefoot Networks Inc. in a bid to scale up the smaller company's networking-chip technology and compete with Broadcom Inc.
While Intel is the largest computer chip maker in the U.S., it doesn't make chips that manage communication via Ethernet, a widely used technology to connect a vast network of computers and servers. That arena is dominated by San Jose, Calif.-based Broadcom.
The purchase, Intel Executive Vice President Navin Shenoy said, is aimed to address an explosion of data that has bolstered demand for computing power to analyze it and networking systems to exchange it within data centers.
Mr. Shenoy said the acquisition is expected to close in the third quarter. He declined to provide the deal's value.
Barefoot's technology stands out from other Ethernet chips because of its flexibility. Customers can program the chips to operate more efficiently according to their specific uses of it.
Investors in Barefoot before Intel's purchase included tech giants Alphabet Inc., Alibaba Group Holding, Tencent Holdings as well as Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and venture-capital firms, according to Barefoot's website.
Intel's deal follows renewed investment interest in networking technology in recent months. In March, graphics and artificial-intelligence chip maker Nvidia Corp. announced it would buy networking firm Mellanox Technologies Ltd. for roughly $7 billion.
The Barefoot deal illustrates how Intel Chief Executive Bob Swan, who became the permanent chief in January, is willing to move the company into unfamiliar territory in search of more revenue in a bigger overall market.
The urgency of Mr. Swan's efforts has intensified as Intel weathers volatility in its core chip business. Big cloud-computing companies have held off on purchases of new chips this year after a glut of buying last year, contributing to Intel's first decline in data-center chip sales in seven years during the first quarter. Intel in April also revised its revenue for this year to $69 billion from an earlier forecast of $71.5 billion.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
