Last year was when artificial intelligence appeared to come into its own, with seemingly magical bots creating images, answering questions, even writing literature.
But as with all new tools, society has to figure out which tasks AI is best for, and how to use it without breaking things. That's especially tricky when we're still trying to figure out what the technology can even do in the first place.
We set out to identify some of the thorniest questions that AI poses -- or will pose -- for all sorts of people in all sorts of fields. These are questions with no right or wrong answers, but are designed to make us think about how AI could change, well, almost everything.
For help, we tapped the minds of friends, colleagues and some leading AI experts: Mutale Nkonde, founder and chief executive of AI for the People; Sarah Myers West, managing director of the AI Now Institute; Reid Blackman, AI ethical-risk adviser and author of "Ethical Machines"; Tom Coughlin, 2023 president-elect of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers; Jelena Kovac evic, IEEE fellow and dean of the NYU Tandon School of Engineering; Karen Panetta, IEEE fellow and dean of graduate engineering at Tufts University; and Mehtab Khan, a resident fellow at Yale Law School.
Here are some of the toughest brain teasers that emerged:
1. Is it OK for AI to brainstorm ideas for projects or products that you later claim as your own? Would it change your answer if you came up with the original question? What if you fine-tuned some of the ideas?What if you give the AI some credit for helping you?
2. If a painting, song, novel or movie that you love was generated by an AI, would you want to know? Would it change your reaction if you knew the creator was a machine? Should an AI-generated piece of art be allowed to enter an art competition?
3. If an AI plagiarizes an artist and somebody uses that output, who should be blamed? Would the answer change if the user wasn't aware that the AI had committed plagiarism, and how would they prove that they were unaware?
4. Should AI tools be made free or subsidized for people who can't afford them? If not, would that disadvantage workers and students who wouldn't have access to them?
5. Unlike human thinking, machine learning is a "black box" that can't fully illustrate its rationale. Even if machine learning is right more often than humans, should we trust it more than professionals, such as doctors, who can justify their decision?
6. Assume AI is substantially more accurate than humans in life-or-death decision making, such as driving or medical diagnoses. However, it tends to fail more in certain situations, such as not recognizing children in a crosswalk. Is it ethical to use the AI because, in aggregate, many more people will be saved?
7. While today's AI isn't sentient, it can appear to be. Would it be naive or creepy to develop a sense of friendship with such an AI? What about a romantic relationship? Would the answer differ if the AI actually were sentient?
8. How do you draw the ethical line for using a chatbot like ChatGPT? Would it be OK for writing an email to schedule a meeting? A sales pitch to a client? A religious sermon? A conversation in an online dating app? A letter to a friend going through depression?
9. It isn't currently possible to copyright the output of an AI. Should it be? If so, who should own the copyright: the user, the AI provider, the people whose material trained the AI? All of them?
10. If AI systems become appreciably better at driving cars than humans are, would it be unethical for people to drive on their own, since this increases the risk of an accident and could cost tens of thousands of lives a year? What if AI was only somewhat better, but in the aggregate would still save thousands of lives a year?
11. AI improves by learning from its mistakes -- which often includes biased or hateful statements about marginalized groups. Should AI providers be responsible for rooting out these biases before releasing their products? Should affected groups be able to sue the companies for harassment if they fail to do so?
12. Given AI's potential for harm (such as being inaccurate or biased), should there be a government evaluation and approval process for major new AI developments, as there is for medications? What if this significantly delays the release of new AI tools?
13. If AI generates messages for a company's internal communications that incorporate racist, sexist, antigay or other abusive language, can employees sue for harassment? If so, who do they sue -- their employer or the tech provider?
14. Research shows that some AI-driven tasks, such as evaluating job candidates, are more prone to discrimination. But using AI also allows more applicants to be considered, since there are only so many applications that HR can read. Is that trade-off acceptable?
15. Is it ethical to restrict AI surveillance, such as facial recognition, in law enforcement to protect privacy, even if it means that fewer criminals -- including violent ones -- will be caught or convicted?
16. AI is already creating chat, audio and video representations that mimic deceased people. Willconversing with them comfort loved ones, or prolong the feeling of loss and prevent them from moving on? If the chatbots are flawed, could they warp our understanding of who the person really was?
17. AI may be able to discover new medical treatments if it can scan large volumes of health records. Should our personal health records be made available for this purpose, if it has the potential to improve or save millions of lives? How would we guard privacy in that case?
18. AI chatbot therapists have been proliferating in recent years, but therapy apps are not regulated under medical-privacy laws, and some have been shown to share information with other parties, such as advertisers. Given that,would you trust one with your secrets? What if you were assured that the AI would delete whatever you said at your request?
19. Is it OK to address a chatbot or virtual assistant in a manner that is harsh or abusive -- even though it doesn't actually have feelings? Does that change if the AI can feign emotions? Could bad behavior toward chatbots encourage us to behave worse toward real people?
20. Assuming it's possible to create a sentient AI, should society first develop a bill of rights on such issues as labor conditions, freedom of speech and association, right to privacy, even the right to die? Should the sentient AIs themselves be the ones to devise or amend this bill of rights?
21. Would it be ethical for a chatbot to write a Ph.D thesis, as long as the student looks over and makes refinements to the work? What percent of rewriting would be the minimum to make this acceptable?
22. Should content creators block AI from crawling their sites and learning from their work? What if this was the only way for important information to be accessed by the AI? What if the AI cites their work to provide adequate credit?
23. AI doesn't have moral capabilities. So is it moral to ask it for help making moral decisions?
24. Should people have the right to know when AI is used to make a decision that affects them, such as mortgage evaluations? Should anyone rejected by an AI have the right to challenge the decision and receive a re-evaluation by humans?
25. Should AI companies take extra efforts to build diverse development teams? Is it fair for AI to make decisions affecting certain ethnic or cultural groups if no one from those groups was involved in developing the AI?
---
Mr. Captain is a writer in Asheville, N.C. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Sean Captain
