In my 1965 book, "Unsafe at Any Speed," I strongly urged auto companies to accelerate their adoption of proven lifesaving technologies. A year later, Congress authorized the Transportation Department to issue mandatory safety standards. This federal program has prevented millions of fatalities and injuries, and the auto industry has prospered.
Now, the situation is reversed. The autonomous vehicle, or self-driving car, industry is moving too quickly in pending legislation to exempt itself from existing and needed regulations. A bill, the Self Drive Act (H.R. 3388), has already made it through the House. The Senate is poised to consider its version, the AV Start Act (S. 1885), after summer recess.
If this legislation, driven by Commerce Committee Chairman John Thune, is enacted, it will increase risk and recklessness and destroy the trust of the motoring public. Without that trust, you can forget about driverless cars.
Mr. Thune's bill would eviscerate vehicle regulations by allowing companies to sell potentially limitless numbers of driverless cars that would be exempt from established federal safety standards. This bill would also pre-empt states from exercising their own safety duties.
If auto lobbyists succeed, their worst nightmares will be realized as motorists become aware of the legislation's contents. Mr. Thune's bill neglects cybersecurity requirements to protect driverless cars from hacking -- the kinds of cyberattacks, malware and data breaches that have occurred in other sectors of the economy. Without critically needed protections, hackers could seize control of a driverless car. In a best-case scenario, that would result in an annoying glitch in which the infotainment screen freezes. In a worst case, a vehicle, or an entire model line or fleet, could be hijacked into an autonomous weapon, leading to highway mayhem.
So-called white-hat hackers have demonstrated that they can exploit smart features and take control of brakes in existing passenger vehicles. Driverless cars, with their tens of millions of lines of computer code and many internet-connected systems, would be much more vulnerable.
As Jeanna Matthews, a computer science professor at Clarkson University, said in a July statement: "The AV START Act would only require manufacturers to have a written plan for identifying and reducing cybersecurity risks. That is simply not enough. More substantive cybersecurity standards are only common sense before we the public -- driver, passengers, bicyclists, pedestrians -- is asked to share the road with autonomous vehicles."
Manufacturers are now prohibited from rendering safety systems inoperable without getting a government exemption. This bill would allow manufacturers to switch off safety systems related to driving tasks, such as steering and braking, during autonomous operation.
Nothing in the bill compels comprehensive crash-data collection or recording -- essential for both the Transportation Department and the insurance industry to assess on-road vehicle performance.
There isn't even a requisite safety standard covering a "vision test" for what the self-driving vehicle must be able to see and react to. Pedestrians and cyclists, beware.
Autonomous-vehicle manufacturers argue that completely driverless cars would be safer than conventional cars, in that they would eliminate driver error and never get drunk. Yet the manufacturers are inebriated with power over Congress. They tout data-starved claims of innovative, revolutionary technologies premised on "if you build it they will come."
Not so. A majority of motorists harbor deep skepticism about self-driving technology and fear losing control of their vehicles due to outside penetration or inside computer malfunctions. From their own self-interest, manufacturers are foolish to push the Senate to rush this law.
The National Transportation Safety Board has several open investigations into fatal and injurious crashes involving vehicles with automated driving systems. Why would auto executives want the Senate to rush ahead, with minimal time for debate, before the release of findings from transportation investigators?
Mandatory performance standards based on open, peer-reviewed data, with adequate budgets, continuing research, inspections and recall authority are tested ways of ensuring public safety. Whether drivers prefer to control their vehicles or relinquish control to fully autonomous technology, they prefer this kind of human intelligence over unbridled, underdeveloped artificial intelligence.
---
Mr. Nader is a consumer advocate and the author of "Breaking Through Power: It's Easier Than We Think."
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Mr. Nader Misses the Mark on Driverless Cars" -- WSJ Aug. 31, 2018)

Credit: By Ralph Nader
