Among the big names on a Zoom call last week of Hollywood actors questioning their union over lack of progress in the actor's strike was Meryl Streep. Her name jumps out because 112 days earlier she signed a letter with other major stars urging a strike at a moment when a planarian might have noticed the union's leverage was at low ebb thanks to the collapse of cable subscribership, streaming losses and the decline of movie-going.
Nanny Defarge, aka Fran Drescher, the union boss, saw the light, however, and began out-mau-mauing the letter signers. Until that moment, she had insisted talks with the studios were making "exceptional progress." Even the New York Times now says her sudden adoption of blood-curdling rhetoric has been an obstacle to a deal.
Talks with the studios were scheduled to resume Tuesday after a collapse that only illustrates the failure of the union to conjure a coherent strategy. Members lament, in the streaming age, loss of the opportunity to score big if a TV show becomes a hit and lives on in syndication. Few shows became a "M*A*S*H" or "Seinfeld," but the lucky participants were set for life.
The union wants this practice resuscitated somehow in the streaming era but companies like Netflix jealously guard their viewership data showing which movies and series are a hit. In what might seem a tolerable arrangement as a result, the streamers themselves bear most of the viewership risk at a time of pretty formulaic shows, when actors and writers at least get a predictable wage for showing up.
In any case, by the time the talks fell apart, a confused union had almost turned its ask on its head. Now it wanted a flat 57-cent per subscriber share of the streaming company revenue, to be distributed according to the relative performance of shows, even if all are meh. This, at a time when streamers increasingly are looking to sports, news, documentaries and videogaming to attract subscribers. A fixed entitlement for members of the actor's guild with the streaming profit model in such flux made no sense and the studios said so.
The union's latest fallback is unknown, but the actors have clearly lost the plot if they ever had it, just tossing random thoughts into a negotiation. Meanwhile, those on the Zoom call, including Ms. Streep, George Clooney and Scarlett Johansson, reportedly were focused primarily on the accumulating damage, offering on behalf of the highest-paid actors to pay $150 million in extra union dues to end the walkout. Actor and showbiz polymath Tyler Perry has a large studio operation in Atlanta employing hundreds. Numerous movies have had to suspend production, including the Clint Eastwood-directed "Juror No. 2." Mr. Eastwood isn't getting any younger.
Consider a very different approach. The United Auto Workers, you can bet, started planning and strategizing its current strike before the ink was dry on the last contract four years ago.
It chose its moment as vast dollops of taxpayer money were up for grabs from the Biden administration electric-vehicle subsidies. Mr. Biden is running for re-election; the race looks close; his likely opponent, Donald Trump, has working-class appeal; Mr. Biden peddles himself as the most labor-friendly president ever. The UAW saw a now-or-never opportunity to make sure future auto assembly doesn't shift out of union-organized, Big Three-owned engine and transmission plants into nonunion battery plants controlled by the likes of Tesla and Chinese and South Korean companies.
To distill one moral, Hollywood is a place of magic and also, apparently, of magical thinking. Like the French army expecting elan vital to carry the day in the place of sound strategy, the actors filled their heads with talk of fighting a war against "corporate greed" and the "rise of the machines" (aka artificial intelligence) when cold-eyed assessment of leverage and opportunity would have served them better.
A crummy global moment invites us all to put our big-boy pants back on, looking upon the world with a modicum of dispassionate cool. SAG-Aftra should try it too. By one count, the Hollywood-related workforce has already lost $5 billion in income and 45,000 jobs and an end isn't in sight. In her latest utterance, Ms. Drescher fake-roars that her members are waging a "righteous David vs. Goliath fight." In my 30 years in the opinion industry, funny how everybody makes this claim and yet nobody claims to be Goliath. The triteness of her rhetoric only accentuates how completely her union entered upon a destructive strike without a plan and without a clue.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
