There I was on my yoga mat in downward-facing dog, and my ankles were pulsating. So was my butt. And it wasn't from workout stress. The vibrations were coming from my Nadi X yoga pants, embedded at the hips, knees and ankles with five neoprene haptic sensors. The sensors were indicating that I needed to adjust my pose . . . but how?
I looked down at my iPhone's Nadi X app, which pairs via Bluetooth to the pants. The app, designed to teach you yoga poses or guide you through a flow, suggested that the gentle zapping meant I needed to ground my heels and push my tush back and up -- something patient instructors have told me without resorting to tickling my ankles. The idea is: The more you use the pants, the more you learn to intuitively respond to their buzzing cues.
The $299 Nadi X pants, which start shipping in November, are the brainstorm of Wearable X, a New York-based tech startup co-founded in 2013 by Billie Whitehouse. The young Australian designer initially thought her vibrating pants would cleverly facilitate sex. "We started as a sexting novelty pant called Fundawear, designed for couples in long-distance relationships," she said of her prototype. She pivoted to yoga pants in 2016 because, she said, "touch is so much part of the yoga experience." Wearable X's next big idea? A Nadi X bra adept at guided meditation.
This gear is part of a new wave of pricey "smart" athletic clothes that use implanted sensors to provide wearers with workout metrics such as heart rate, calories burned, breathing rhythm, running cadence, stride length, pelvic rotation, foot strike impact and more. Apps sync with the gear to synthesize the captured data into digestible info and instructions.
Meanwhile, wrist-based trackers have lost their mojo: Fitbit's stock tumbled about 75% in 2016.
"Smart fabrics can measure biological attributes at a deeper and more accurate level than a Fitbit," said Andrea Silvestrini, the CFO of Sensoria, a Washington company that makes smart shirts, socks and sports bras. "It's important that the sensors are on the more relevant areas of your body."
Like Wearable X, Sensoria is one of the tech startups that's taking the lead in the wired-workout arms race while fitness giants like Nike either sit it out or make relatively tentative moves. Neither Nike nor Under Armour has introduced sensored workout clothing for gym-goers recently. Adidas's sole offerings? A $60 heart rate monitoring sports bra and men's shirt that supports third-party fitness trackers or the one from Runtastic, an Austrian company that Adidas bought in 2015 for about $240 million.
Sabine Seymour, founder of New York-based SUPA, which launched a limited-edition heart-rate-monitoring sports bra this summer, likens the potential of the biosensing apparel she and her startup peers are producing to that of early Lycra. "No one would have thought, 'We need Lycra,'" said Ms. Seymour, an assistant professor of fashionable technology at Parsons School for Design, who's been working in smart fabrics for 20 years. "Now I don't think we have any base layer without it."
Ms. Seymour thinks her tech could one day be integrated into larger brands' products, the way Runtastic's has been embraced by Adidas. Similarly, Puma announced in August that it's teaming up with Silicon Valley-based Lumo Bodytech -- makers of sensored running shorts and pants -- on an artificial intelligence coaching product.
This wired athletic wear is, of course, designed to help people train better, live healthier lifestyles or turn their workouts into something resembling an addictive iPhone game. But does it really work, and is it worth the price?
That's what I asked myself as I strapped myself into Ms. Seymour's $180 SUPA Powered Sports Bra, billed comprehensively if not quite enticingly as "biometrics + extreme sports + fashion + artificial intelligence in a onesie at a dance party." During my first run, the heart-rate monitor did not pick up my pulse, so my super bra reported that I'd burned zero calories. I may not be a speedster, but I know I burned something.
Ms. Seymour acknowledges that today's smart clothes are "like the first PalmPilot. It's literally the first step." The next step? Perfecting the first step. She's working on developing sensorized fabric that will use artificial intelligence and information from your body and your environment to detect whether you are dehydrated or coming down with a cold.
Smart fabric is also where one Goliath is heading. Google partnered with Levi's on the $350 Levi's Commuter Trucker Jacket with Jacquard by Google that launched on Levi.com this week. Levi's Vice President of Innovation, Paul Dillinger, who led the jacket's design team, said the biking jacket allows "urban cyclists to have their most digital connectivity without taking their eyes off the road."
Levi's wove Google's conductive Jacquard yarn, made of copper alloy threading, into the jacket's lower left sleeve, creating a tech-enabled patch near the cuff. A rubber controller plugs into the patch. The cuff area acts like a middleman between cyclists and their smartphones, which tuck into the jacket's breast pocket. Bikers can program the area to respond to various gestures: Tapping or swiping with your right hand, or holding your right hand over a light on the smart patch to make your Motown playlist stop in the name of love, for example. The gestures also access other phone functions like calls, texts and maps. As with all this workout gear, the question is whether the jacket provides more than just novelty.
Just ask Frederic Chanay, the CEO and Co-Founder of Montreal-based OMsignal, which introduced its OMbra, a heart rate monitoring sports bra, in 2016. The company also worked with Ralph Lauren on the latter's PoloTech shirt, which launched for $295 in 2015 but has since disappeared from stores. "I think one of the lessons that the market is learning about all wearables is that the value you provide to the user has to go beyond the gadget layer," Mr. Chanay said. "You have to deliver something meaningful." Though the jury's out on those vibrating yoga pants, if nothing else, they might help you save money on a massage therapist.
---
THE PLAYING FIELD // WEARABLE TECH THAT HAS LEAPT OFF THE WRIST AND ONTO CHESTS, LEGS, ARMS AND FEET
FOR RUNNERS
Sensoria Fitness Running Socks and Anklet
$199
What It Does: The socks' anklet, which measures impact force, cadence, foot landing and more pairs with an app via Bluetooth to send real-time feedback into your headphones. A second-generation sock is coming soon.
Pros: The app's computer coach gave me random pacing data and spouted motivational sayings such as, "Don't be pushed by your problems, be led by your dreams!" I found the voice amusing, its exhortations a fun distraction mid-mile.
Cons: The pacing that the computer coach reported was so off I grew dismayed. I know I'm slow, but not 20-minute-mile slow! sensoriafitness.com
FOR BIKE COMMUTERS
Levi's Commuter Trucker Jacket with Jacquard by Google
$350
What It Does: The jacket's controller area, located on the left cuff, responds to four gestures that prompt your smartphone to do various tasks including fetching directions, playing or pausing songs, having texts read to you via your headphones, and sending calls to voice mail and more.
Pros: The tech allows cyclists to keep phones in their pockets while concentrating on car-door-openers, wheel-eating potholes, jaywalkers or swerving taxis.
Cons: Laundry fanatics be warned: Wearers are advised to wash the jacket only when needed, use cold water and air dry whenever possible. levi.com
FOR CARDIO WARRIORS
SUPA Powered Sports Bra
$180
What It Does: Together with the included SUPA Reactor, it measures typical heart-rate-monitor data such as beats per minute, time and heart-rate zone. If your workout is a run, it also gives you your route map.
Pros: A major plus: the built-in heart-rate monitor requires no separate chest strap. Best for a young (or young-at-heart) woman who might enjoy the unique Girl Power attitude of the app and design.
Cons: The heart-rate monitor didn't kick in on my first workout. Serious athletes might balk at the app's interface, which use apples and hamburgers to "visualize" caloric burn. shop.supa.ai
FOR YOGA FANS
Wearable X's Nadi X Yoga Pants
$299
What They Do: The pants' five haptic sensors around the hip, knees and ankles vibrate -- imagine fingers tapping your skin -- to provide feedback directing you to adjust your position. For example, if the taps progress from left to right, then that's the direction you should move your body.
Pros: These stylish pants are the next best thing to having an human instructor stand next to you and guide you via touch into proper form.
Cons: A learning curve requires you to know basic yoga and figure out how to respond to the various pulsations. Preorder at wearablex.com
-- L.D.
---
ELITE JUICED JOCKS
Why athletes in America's big five professional
leagues -- plus the NCAA -- are getting sensored
"This technology isn't the future of sports: It's here now," said John Shackleton, Villanova University's basketball strength coach. He's talking about wearable workout tech designed for elite athletes.
For three years, Mr. Shackleton, who helped Villanova win the 2016 NCAA men's championship, has worked with the Polar Team Pro system, used by more than 150 NCAA teams, 50 pro soccer teams, 13 NFL teams, five NBA teams and five NHL teams. The platform's piece de resistance is the new sensor-embedded Polar Team Pro Shirt, which sends live metrics to an iPad so coaches can see which players are over- or under-working, among other data. "It has allowed us to gain quantifiable data," said Polar-user Chandler Geller, the strength and conditioning coach for the MLB's Texas Rangers.
Polar has competitors galore: Catapult, Whoop and Zephyr Performance Systems, to name a few. And coaches don't always use just one system. University of Minnesota strength and conditioning coach Cal Dietz has an arsenal that includes a $20,000 heart-rate-monitor, a GPS system that emits a million data points per practice per athlete, and Athos sensor-implanted clothing, which determines how muscles are firing. "We'll throw different things on different athletes," said Mr. Dietz, who cautions that the key to all this gear "is the coach has to be able to make actual decisions with the data."
-- Jessica Flint

Credit: By Lucy Danziger
