Billionaire Jack Ma said China's government didn't push him to step down as head of Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., blaming rumors emanating from outside China for fueling such speculation.
Alibaba's executive chairman told investors at an event in the e-commerce giant's home city of Hangzhou on Tuesday that his coming retirement had been planned for a decade. The timing of the announcement earlier this month that Mr. Ma, 54 years old, would hand over the reins to Chief Executive Daniel Zhang next September caught many by surprise.
Chinese government officials, he said, called him to ask "'Are you crazy?', 'What happened?', 'Is it something painful?', 'Or some disease, or what?' I said, 'No!'" he said during a speech at Alibaba's headquarters. "I've also got rumors from outside China, saying, 'It's because the government wants to push you down.' Nobody can, if you don't want to leave, right? I know it's nothing about the politics or government."
The timing of Mr. Ma's retirement prompted speculation that his stepping aside was linked to closer government scrutiny of China's biggest technology companies, part of Beijing's tightening of its grip on private enterprises. A day before the Hangzhou speech, Mr. Ma signaled frustration with bureaucratic meddling, telling a government-sponsored forum in Shanghai that regulators should take a lighter touch in dealing with technology companies and allow the market to decide how new industries such as artificial intelligence develop.
The founder led Alibaba's growth from a domestic wholesale website in 1999 to an internet conglomerate with interests in e-commerce, mobile payments, cloud services and digital media. Mr. Ma, one of China's richest people, with a fortune estimated at more than $36 billion, is no stranger to the limelight, often speaking his mind on topics such as U.S.-China trade or government-business relations.
The internet billionaire also said Tuesday that his departure had nothing to do with the trade friction between the U.S. and China. Mr. Ma said he was giving up his position after having groomed a team of senior leaders at Alibaba driven by a similar mission and values as the company's original team of founders.
The timing of the announcement, he said, was decided when he realized he had spent at least 60 days away from the company, pursuing his own philanthropic causes such as education and promoting entrepreneurship, without receiving a single phone call from the office. Mr. Ma will remain on the company's board until its annual shareholder meeting in 2020.
Operating conditions for China's largest technology companies have become increasingly restricted in recent years as internet companies have grown in influence in China. In the past year, Tencent Holdings Ltd., China's biggest social-media network and game company, has been caught in a regulatory clampdown on excessive game playing, a move that has seen it remove games from circulation. Alibaba's mobile-payment affiliate, Ant Financial Services Group, has come under heightened scrutiny from regulators. It was singled out in January for violating national standards on the protection of personal data.
Fast-growing technology startups haven't been spared. Beijing Bytedance Technology, which runs popular apps such as the news aggregation platform Jinri Toutiao, was taken to task twice over the summer for spreading content that insulted national heroes.

Credit: By Liza Lin
