LinkedIn is testing how generative artificial intelligence could help employees and external suppliers get answers about cybersecurity policies within seconds, potentially cutting wait times for business deals or decisions to implement new tools.
The Microsoft-owned professional networking platform has developed a chatbot that responds to employees' questions on cybersecurity. LinkedIn's security team spent around four months this year building a first version of the chatbot using OpenAI's large language models and, recently, the company started experimenting with it.
LinkedIn is testing a similar tool with suppliers, said Geoff Belknap, chief information security officer.
Response times to employees' questions on the chatbot were found to be about five seconds or less, which compares with around 15 minutes when a human helper responded, according to a spokeswoman for the company.
Early tests show the chatbots are around 90% accurate.
By speeding up the process of answering cybersecurity questions, the new tool helps other teams such as marketing, sales or product management, Belknap said.
"Security has to be a business differentiator, security has to be part of your strategic plan to grow your business," he said.
Belknap said he is looking into other ways generative AI could help his cybersecurity team defend the company against hackers, such as by detecting malware.
Cybersecurity leaders at other big companies have been dabbling with generative AI since it emerged last year. Toy maker Mattel is experimenting with using generative AI to help cybersecurity staff do tedious tasks like parse large data sets. Some companies have banned or restricted employees' use of generative AI because of security risks.
Samsung temporarily banned employees from using OpenAI's ChatGPT after it found that staff had leaked sensitive information to the platform in April.
Cybersecurity leaders that do experiment with generative AI need to double down on making sure employees review any outcomes and are provided with training on the risks, said Ari Lightman, professor of digital media and marketing at Carnegie Mellon University. "CISOs need to keep their guard up," he said.
LinkedIn employees outside the cyber and tech groups sometimes struggle to understand what is allowed under corporate security policies, Belknap said. The chatbot makes it more likely that employees won't skip required security steps because it speeds up the process, he said.
"Our internal customers are big fans of getting easy, quick questions answered this way because it limits the amount of things that you have to meet with an expert about now," he said.
When the final version of the chatbot is released, LinkedIn plans to track how many of its interactions with employees require little to no human engagement, according to the spokeswoman for the company.
About a dozen LinkedIn cybersecurity workers interpret internal policies and make sure colleagues in other departments implement them properly. The chatbot helps ensure that staff get consistent answers to their inquiries, Belknap said.
LinkedIn uses a similar AI tool to help suppliers and business partners get faster and more consistent security information. Compliance experts typically need to complete long questionnaires before companies agree to work together.
"If we give an inconsistent answer, or if we give an incomplete answer, it might result in a deal being delayed for weeks or months or maybe a deal falling through," Belknap said.
Generative AI could relieve pressure on employees and help with repetitive, menial tasks, freeing workers to do more challenging things, Belknap said. But for now, employees need to oversee how it works to make sure it doesn't create problems like giving out wrong information.
"The risks are still high," he said. "I don't want my AI that's talking to customers to give out racist answers or wrong answers."
Credit: By Catherine Stupp
