Marketing technology company Zeta Global is buying LiveIntent, another marketing tech provider, for $250 million in cash and stock.
New York-based Zeta, which went public in 2021 and employs about 1,900 people, offers a platform that aims to help large marketers such as Motel 6, Rent-A-Center and Citizens Financial acquire, keep and expand business from their customers using artificial intelligence and data.
Clients can use its data to see what behaviors their customers engaged in before they made a purchase, then use the platform's AI to find consumers with similar behavior to target, according to the company.
Zeta said the acquisition will let the company integrate LiveIntent's database of consumer information into its own and add new capabilities to its portfolio.
"AI is going to become more and more ubiquitous. It's going to be the data that you feed into it that's going to be a differentiator," said David Steinberg, Zeta's co-founder, chairman and chief executive.
The deal comes as marketers seek to better control and organize the so-called first-party data they have gathered on current or potential customers, partly spurred by Google's long effort to eliminate third-party tracking cookies from its Chrome browser. Google ultimately abandoned that plan but said it would make other changes.
"They're simply going to make it easier and easier for consumers to opt out" of tracking cookies, Steinberg said. "And they're already doing that."
LiveIntent's other services include helping publishers generate revenue and setting up retail media networks, in which businesses such as grocery and big-box chains offer advertisers ways to reach consumers using customer data.
Its acquisition expands Zeta's services, whose range analysts cite as an asset.
Zeta's price for LiveIntent includes $77.5 million in cash and $172.5 million in stock. The agreement also provides for a potential earnout of 50% cash and 50% stock tied to certain performance targets in the next few years. The deal is expected to close before year-end.
Credit: By Megan Graham
