BEIJING -- Baidu Inc. founder Robin Li is shifting operational command to a former top executive with Microsoft Corp., as the Chinese internet giant seeks to double-down on its advances in artificial intelligence and move past a string of controversies.
The new president, Qi Lu, was a key deputy to Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella and oversaw the Office products and Bing search engine.
"I want to gradually shift the day-to-day management work from my own shoulders," Mr. Li, 48 years old, said at a press conference on Wednesday. He said he planned to spend more time on general strategy and investment decisions for the company.
Mr. Lu, 55, will be tasked with helping to turn around a flagship Chinese tech company that has China's most advanced artificial-intelligence and autonomous-car technology, but which has lagged in launching mobile initiatives compared with rivals Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Tencent Holdings Ltd. Baidu started in internet search, but has branched out into maps, images, cloud storage, and more recently, artificial intelligence and autonomous vehicles. Analysts say that while Baidu has strong research capabilities, its corporate culture has prevented it from rolling out as many popular products as Alibaba and Tencent in recent years. "They are the old guard," said Chris DeAngelis, general manager of consultancy Alliance Development Group. "Their DNA is a bit more like a state-owned entity. Alibaba and Tencent are more market-driven."
Baidu's new focus, artificial intelligence, is about building computer programs that can do things more intelligently than humans can by mining huge fields of data. The company is using it to make their search engine and other products more efficient, and is working on smart robots and self-driving cars.
Mr. Lu said he joined Baidu because its focus on AI aligned with his own interests.
A naturalized U.S. citizen, Mr. Lu earned a Ph.D. in computer science from Carnegie Mellon University in 1995, then worked at International Business Machines Corp., Yahoo Inc. and Microsoft.
At Microsoft, Mr. Lu led a team that worked on next-generation helper bots that can converse with people.
Baidu's stock, which is listed on Nasdaq, closed up 0.3% at $176.96 on Tuesday after the new president announcement. Its shares are up 6.6% during the past year.
A key challenge for Baidu will be moving beyond several controversies that occurred last year that sparked widespread criticism about the company's business standards.
---
Yang Jie contributed to this article.
Credit: By Eva Dou
