Amazon.com Inc.'s plans to add twin new regional headquarters will intensify already deepening rivalries between the Seattle giant and U.S. defense firms.
Amazon's short list includes a site in the Crystal City area of Arlington, Va., on the doorstep of the Pentagon and the Washington defense establishment, where companies such as Boeing Co. employ thousands of staff.
The emergence of Dallas as a contender would put Amazon into another big industry cluster that includes Lockheed Martin Corp., which produces F-35 jet fighters and missiles in the region.
Amazon plans to establish twin headquarters that would grow to 25,000 staff apiece in each of the two chosen locations, The Wall Street Journal reported this week. The company was also in late-stage discussions with New York City, the Journal reported.
While the e-commerce giant hasn't revealed what type of work it plans to pursue, Amazon is also chasing more deals related to the defense and intelligence sectors, according to industry executives.
Amazon declined to comment. The availability of trained workers, transport links and other infrastructure have been central to its search.
Defense companies already face a tough labor market, especially in northern Virginia, home to most of the headquarters of the nation's military contractors and intelligence agencies.
"The competition for talent is now much broader," said Horacio Rozanski, chief executive of Booz Allen Hamilton Holding Corp., the government-services specialist based in McLean, Va., just north of Crystal City.
"When a cyber person at Booz Allen gets pinged, it's not just by the usual suspects. Bank of America will call them, Google will call them, Amazon Web Services will call them," he said at a recent investor event.
"We have been competing for technology talent now for a while, and we are, I think, more than holding our own," Mr. Rozanski said separately, in a recent earnings call when asked about Amazon's potential arrival.
Other established defense players with a big presence in the region declined to comment on the potential impact of Amazon's move.
Amazon is already in competition for sought-after workers because of its own push into Pentagon contracting. It is the front-runner for the Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure contract, a $10 billion cloud-computing deal expected to be awarded in the next few months, according to people familiar with the situation.
Silicon Valley behemoths such as Facebook Inc. and Google parent Alphabet Inc. also are vying with defense contractors and government agencies to tap the same small pool of expertise in fields such as cybersecurity, artificial intelligence and autonomy.
A big hurdle for Amazon and any company looking to expand in the Washington, D.C., area is the huge backlog of almost 700,000 workers awaiting security clearances to enable them to work on sensitive projects.
If Amazon wins the Pentagon's JEDI contract, it will need hundreds or thousands of vetted staff, industry experts said.
Jon Barney, a senior client partner at recruitment specialist Korn Ferry LLC, said some defense companies have had to skip bidding on certain contracts because of staff shortages, even before Amazon makes any new moves into the area. "D.C. is such a competitive market now," Mr. Barney said. "Hiring enough cleared people is a real barrier for growth for many companies with government business."

Credit: By Doug Cameron
