Short-selling firm Hindenburg Research said in a report released on Tuesday that the videogame platform Roblox reported inflated user metrics to investors and has favored growth over child safety.
Hindenburg alleges Roblox has been exaggerating daily user and engagement figures to investors since it went public in 2021. The firm also accuses Roblox of giving priority to growth over measures that would better protect children from pedophiles and mature content. The firm said its research is based in part on interviews it conducted with multiple former Roblox employees and firsthand experience on the platform.
A spokeswoman for Roblox said the company rejects the claims made in Hindenburg's report, saying they are "simply misleading" and the authors of the report "have an agenda."
"We firmly believe that Roblox is a safe and secure platform and in the financial metrics we report," the spokeswoman said.
The company previously defended itself against claims of failing to keep predators at bay by child-advocacy groups and others, saying safety and civility are core to its mission and that it invests heavily in moderation technology, including artificial intelligence.
The Wall Street Journal hasn't independently verified the report's allegations.
Shares of Roblox fell sharply Tuesday morning but regained some ground to finish 2.1% lower.
Roblox is free and populated mostly with games made by its own users, many of whom are under the age of 13. The company, which is unprofitable, has a market value of $27 billion and generated $2.8 billion in revenue last year. The spokeswoman said its bookings, a figure it has emphasized with investors, grew more than 20% in the past 12 months.
In August, Roblox was blocked in Turkey for allegedly containing content that exploits children. The company has said it is working with local authorities there to resolve the matter.
Hindenburg's business is designed to generate profits both from bets against their targets' shares as well as awards paid by the Securities and Exchange Commission's whistleblower program, which offers tipsters up to 30% of penalties the agency collects from an investigation.
Roblox generates revenue mainly from sales of virtual currency and advertising, where the measure of daily active users is a key metric.
Roblox most recently said it had 79.5 million daily active users on its platform who spent 17.4 billion hours during the quarter ended June 30.
Hindenburg's Roblox report points out the company attracted high-profile investors such as Cathie Wood's ARK Invest.
The firm accuses Roblox of telling investors and the SEC contradictory information about how it measures users and engagement -- essential numbers for showing the platform's popularity.
Hindenburg estimates that for years the company has been inflating its daily user numbers by 25% to 42% and its engagement hours by 100%. Hindenburg said it hired technical consultants to design a system to monitor Roblox game servers over a 10-day period to test its thesis and found many games that remained active for more than 24 hours straight without interruption.
In one example, the report says Roblox's second-most-visited game, "Blox Fruits," was dominated by traffic from Vietnam, where numerous Facebook groups -- each with tens of thousands of members -- run more than 20 Roblox bots at a time.
"A former data scientist told us that activity in Vietnam 'inflated a lot of our numbers. Like crazy, insane,'" the report says, referring to daily user engagement.
The firm claims Roblox has been counting bots as users and treating multiple accounts made by the same individuals as unique users. It further accuses Roblox of telling investors and advertisers that its daily-active-user figure represents unique people, while telling the SEC it can't measure the number of unique individuals on its platform.
Hindenburg said it registered itself as a child under the age of 13 and claimed to find chat rooms with tens of thousands of users openly soliciting sexual favors and trading child pornography. It said it was able to access games such as "Escape to Epstein Island" and "Diddy Party," a reference to rapper Sean "Diddy" Combs, who was indicted last month on sex-trafficking charges.
The firm said Roblox's social-media features allow pedophiles to "efficiently target hundreds of children."
With its child account, Hindenburg said it conducted a search of the word "adult" and the results led it to an experience on Roblox called "Adult Studios" with 3,334 members openly trading child pornography and soliciting sexual acts from minors.
The experience is now marked as "blocked."
Hindenburg said it tracked some of the members and found 38 more groups -- one with 103,000 members -- doing the same. It said chat rooms trading in child pornography had no age restrictions.
Generate image description

Credit: By Ben Foldy and Sarah E. Needleman
