Artificial intelligence may be tech's hottest sector, and Chinese internet giants and startups alike have been engaged in fierce competition to poach top talent from Google, Facebook, Microsoft and elite universities around the world.
Few of these hires had the status of Andrew Ng, whom Baidu Inc. recruited in 2014 as its chief scientist to oversee AI research. One of the top brains in the field, Mr. Ng formerly led Google's deep-learning project Google Brain. He has also taught a machine-learning course at Stanford University that more than 100,000 students have taken online, ensuring his influence for years to come.
That is why his resignation as Baidu's chief scientist this week deals such a blow -- not only to Baidu, but to efforts of Chinese tech companies to compete against their U.S. rivals.
As ambitious as they are, China's tech firms are behind the likes of Google, Facebook Inc. and Microsoft Corp. when it comes to AI, so they have had to rely on free-agent talent to help lead and inspire their engineers. Now their ability to retain top foreign talent is in question. Will they ever be able to get a top AI scientist like Mr. Ng?
"There's very little high-level AI talent at Chinese companies. Many are just so-so and not original," said Dong Jielin, an adjunct professor at the Research Center for Technological Innovation at Tsinghua University in Beijing. "They won't be able to produce first-class work without the guidance of high-level talent."
The next big money-making opportunities in tech include driverless cars, industrial robots and preventive health care, and they all hinge on AI in one way or another. That is why Baidu and other Chinese companies are making such big bets there.
In China, AI research didn't become a big focus at top universities until recent years, said Kai-Fu Lee, chief executive of venture-capital firm Sinovation Ventures. As a result, Chinese companies like to hire Chinese-born engineers who studied at U.S. universities, he says, many of whom have worked with big-data infrastructure at companies such as Google and Facebook, a rare experience in China.
When Baidu hired Mr. Ng in 2014, it was struggling to recruit AI talent in Silicon Valley after opening its deep-learning research lab there in 2013.
"Having Andrew really helped," said a Baidu executive. A Baidu engineer from a Nordic country told me last October that he joined the company to learn from Mr. Ng, even though his family and friends had never heard of Baidu. Mr. Ng, born in the U.K. to parents from Hong Kong, split his time between Beijing and Baidu's offices in Silicon Valley.
It remains unclear why he left after less than three years, and he didn't say what his next step would be, except that it is AI-related. Baidu said its efforts would continue: "We have a deep bench of talent," the company said.
Baidu was among dozens of Chinese companies that opened up AI research labs in Silicon Valley or Seattle because many of their hires, including those born in China, prefer to live in the U.S. But according to executives and investors, they are too far removed from the company's core decision makers and product teams to contribute much. Baidu usually gives 15% more in compensation to AI staff willing to move back to China, according to the executive there.
Baidu's main competitors, e-commerce company Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and game and social-media company Tencent Holdings Ltd., are hiring aggressively from U.S. companies, too. Alibaba recently announced a long-term strategy to develop technologies including AI and vowed to hire top tech talent globally.
Jinri Toutiao, an AI-driven news feed with more than 63 million daily active users, has hired AI scientists and engineers from Microsoft, Facebook and other Western companies, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Toutiao is known for its aggressive tactics in hiring AI talent. Its packages for AI-related staff start around 800,000 yuan ($116,000) in cash, plus stock options, and can easily go over one million yuan in cash, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Besides money, Chinese companies have another edge against their U.S. competitors: the vast amount of data they have to work with -- created by 731 million online users. In China, people use their smartphones to a much greater degree than in the U.S., and that has created a much richer trove of data for researchers.
This leads some observers to believe that despite the loss of a big name like Mr. Ng, rising stars will still look to China to make their mark.
---
Follow Li Yuan on Twitter @LiYuan6 or write to li.yuan@wsj.com.
Credit: By Li Yuan
