TIhe next wave of 5G service is fertile ground for controversy, but in one respect, most observers agree: America needs faster, more accessible mobile internet service -- and the U.S. military controls many airwaves that are well-suited to that task.
How should the Pentagon share? Some want to tap the traditional U.S. model and auction the spectrum to the highest bidder. Others say a new approach is called for: Let the government continue to own the spectrum rights while letting private companies rent it out, allowing more users to tap the spectrum at once.
The Wall Street Journal invited two experts to debate the issue. Jonathan Spalter is president and chief executive of USTelecom, a trade association whose members include AT&T Inc. as well as small operators. Eric Schmidt is the former chief executive of Google and former chairman of the Defense Innovation Board, which advises the Pentagon. He is now the chairman of the National Security Commission for Artificial Intelligence and co-founder of Schmidt Futures, a philanthropic initiative. Mr. Schmidt noted he isn't speaking for Alphabet Inc.'s Google or the defense board, though he remains an Alphabet shareholder.
Here are edited excerpts of the conversation.
WSJ: What is the best way to tap this resource?
MR. SCHMIDT: If for some reason China becomes the leader of 5G, then there's an awful lot of tools, technology and startups that will not happen [in the U.S.]
There is generally an accepted sweet spot for 5G, which is frequencies below 6 gigahertz. It's a trade-off, because the higher the frequency, the more bandwidth that you can provide, but the less capable it is to go through walls -- furthermore, the more towers that you need, because the waves are essentially shorter. So the way to think about it is that you're looking for the right frequencies, and in China, they gave the 3.5-gigahertz frequencies to the 5G companies, and in America we didn't because the military occupies them.
I have proposed, and others have proposed as well, that the military share that spectrum using dynamic spectrum sharing. We now know how to make that available, and have the [telecom companies] be able to access that without owning the frequency. The military should continue to own the frequency.
MR. SPALTER: It is absolutely clear that we need to make more midband spectrum available. In the solution that we're proposing, we maintain the trajectory of innovation that has allowed us to become the world leaders in broadband deployment through a battle-tested methodology, which is using the Federal Communications Commission's spectrum auction process. I'd note that the most recent Nobel Prize in economics was just conferred to Paul Milgrom, who designed the first such auction, and his design principles provided a sophistication that has stood the test of time.
There still is a lot of uncertainty in terms of the path of progress for dynamic spectrum-sharing technologies.
WSJ: What does history tell us about spectrum auctions and the proper role for government versus the private sector?
MR. SCHMIDT: The spectrum auction started more than 20 years ago and produced billions of dollars for the federal government, which is always a good thing. They conferred essentially a right of use, a license in perpetuity, which is an asset that the telecom companies could put on their books. This sounded like a pretty good deal, except that there was not a build-out requirement for that and it's also an inefficient use of the spectrum, because it's not being shared.
So under the Obama administration, I and a number of others worked hard on a proposal, which ultimately became known as dynamic spectrum sharing. The way this works is you have a spectrum access server that essentially knows roughly where things are. It's run as a community service, and then the radios check and see, 'Is anybody in this space?', and then they use it. This is a much more efficient use of the spectrum, which remains a scarce resource. There's a program called CBRS which uses this technology, which has shown that it works.
MR. SPALTER: History tells us that it's our private-sector-driven wireless network evolution that won the global race to 4G. We were able to deploy 4G LTE to 98% of America in 18 months. It also tells us clearly that experiments that have been introduced to advance government-mandated or government-franchised wholesale networks oftentimes have been proven inefficient.
I'm also highly concerned that if we were to franchise the Department of Defense to be in the driver's seat, it could delay all of our goals of speed, efficiency and security.
WSJ: That's a good segue to the question of speed. Why would the approach that you're suggesting be the best option in terms of how quickly consumers could get access to this?
MR. SCHMIDT: We've looked at the length of time that it takes to clear the airwaves in order to provide the asset that is then auctioned. The typical process is about 10 years. We don't have 10 years to wait. By implementing a spectrum-sharing agreement, we don't have to clear the airwaves.
MR. SPALTER: Eric is right. It has heretofore taken too long, and it's been too complicated in many instances, to push spectrum through our pipeline. But there are new models that are considerably truncating that time. Right now, through the partnership that our broadband providers have forged with the Pentagon, we are repurposing 100 megahertz of midband spectrum, 3.45 to 3.55 gigahertz, through a process at the FCC to make it commercially available and auctioned within two years.
While we need access to the spectrum assets quickly, building and deploying and managing a national network is hard work.
There have been many private entrants that have sought to get into the broadband deployment arena. Many of them have decided to throw in the towel because of the challenges of doing so. To [build and bring to market] a Defense Department-led network will be not only ill-advised, but potentially can be counterproductive.
MR. SCHMIDT: Jonathan's created a couple of straw men that are not correct. In a proposal that I have made, you would create a public-private partnership, not unlike what we've done with [nationwide first-responder network] FirstNet, which has worked pretty well. No one is suggesting that the DoD itself should operate anything here.
The problem with the status quo is that it will probably take a couple of years to do the 100-megahertz auction. More than one company will compete in the auction. Any one company probably won't get all of the spectrum. We'll have 5G, but our 5G will be deficient relative to what the Chinese are doing, and that's my primary concern.
WSJ: What will these networks cost, and why is the path that you're advocating better for taxpayers and the economy as a whole?
MR. SPALTER: There are a number of assessments about what it would actually cost to deploy a national independent network or a public-private partnership model. Deloitte suggested it would be upwards of $130 billion. We believe that not only economic efficiencies but operational efficiencies will be driven through an FCC auction process for spectrum. Those monies would be conferred to the U.S. Treasury.
MR. SCHMIDT: If some form of RFP were given that raised private funds in the tens of billions of dollars, that money would be new to the industry, and the industry is today strapped with a great deal of debt because of previous auctions and suffering from a lack of capital investment. There's no question that the proposal that we are making would raise additional capital into a system that needs it, literally billions of dollars.
You have a default plan, which is spectrum inefficient and slow, and you have a new plan, which will work, which requires taking a little bit of risk. You would only take a risk if you thought that this was a national emergency and that waiting however many years it's going to take to auction, which is far more than two, is not OK. I'm of the opinion, from the standpoint of the national security of the United States, it's crucial that we accelerate our 5G deployment.
MR. SPALTER: There are numerous legal concerns about whether the Defense Department has the statutory authority to assign how its spectrum assets can be used. We've already seen through existing contractual efforts by the department the risk of additional slowdowns and roadblocks. Not to mention the enormous amount of know-how, financial resources and [capital spending] commitments that will be required to adequately advance a fully national independent network.
---
Drew FitzGerald contributed to this article.
---
Mr. Tracy is a Wall Street Journal reporter based in Washington, D.C. He can be reached at ryan.tracy@wsj.com.

Credit: By Ryan Tracy
