People have been worrying about computers taking over the world since they used tape reels and punchcards. But for at least some people, the threat now seems much more plausible.
As artificial intelligence advances into new -- and sometimes scary -- capabilities, there is a growing movement to sound the alarm about the technology. Pessimists argue that AI's creations could lead to catastrophe.
In the other camp are scientists who say such concerns are overblown, and that we should be focusing primarily on how AI is being implemented right now and how it could cause harm in our daily lives, such as tools that help produce potent misinformation.
For insight into the issue, The Wall Street Journal asked experts on each side of the divide to lay out their best argument. Dan Hendrycks, director of the Center for AI Safety, argues that AI is an existential threat that demands urgent action. Arvind Narayanan, a professor of computer science at Princeton University, and Sayash Kapoor, a doctoral candidate at the university, argue the doomsayers are exaggerating the risks, and that humanity has a significant edge over AI.
---
YES:
AI is capable
of mass
destruction
----
By Dan Hendrycks
The pace of AI development is accelerating, and so are the associated risks. We already have AI that can create realistic fake images of politicians to influence elections. As a statement issued by 28 of the world's leading economies at the recent U.K. AI Safety Summit put it, AI has the "potential for serious, even catastrophic, harm." In one scenario, AIs could allow nonexperts to bioengineer pathogens as deadly as Ebola and more contagious than Covid.
As these systems develop further, the risks could escalate beyond our control.
We are not prepared for these risks. For every paper published on AI safety, there are 50 on increasing capabilities. Regulations are nearly nonexistent, let alone international coordination. Rather, developers are pressured to proliferate powerful systems while disregarding risks, which stem from many diverse sources.
AI is providing groups and individuals with unprecedented abilities. Take bioengineering. A few decades ago, only a handful of scientists had the expertise and technology to synthesize new pathogens. Today, online services allow individuals to have synthetic DNA sequences shipped to their doorstep. And, thanks to AI, people will soon be able to obtain the expertise they need to assemble those ingredients into weapons.
Consider this: MIT researchers recently asked undergraduates to test whether chatbots "could be prompted to assist nonexperts in causing a pandemic." Within one hour, the chatbots came up with four potential pandemic-causing pathogens. Currently, chatbots sometimes hallucinate or generate erroneous plans, but future versions will likely address these issues. Soon, AIs could provide a guide to creating pathogens deadlier and more contagious than any Cold War-era germ-warfare program.
This deadly expertise is by no means limited to biological warfare. AIs will increase the speed, potency and accessibility of cyberwarfare as well, allowing hackers to easily destroy critical infrastructure.
Some might argue that AI will improve pandemic resilience and cybersecurity. However, attackers have an advantage. AI defenders would need to protect against every possible vulnerability -- while attackers only need to find and exploit one. And pathogens created by AIs could be so potent that defenses like vaccines would come too late to prevent a large loss of life.
Fundamental technical challenges hinder our ability to predict or control advanced AI. Their reasoning is often indecipherable and can result in unpredictable behavior. This opens up the possibility for "rogue AI systems" that we exercise little control over.
The unpredictable nature of advanced systems is well-documented in many high-profile incidents involving chatbots. Some have proven prone to providing unhinged, inappropriate or threatening responses after extended conversations with users, such as encouraging them to leave their spouses.
Meanwhile, AI developers are racing to integrate AI systems not only in our personal lives, but also in decision-making by corporations, governments and militaries. There is a significant risk they will acquire unintended goals and engage in harmful behaviors to pursue these.
Optimists often make the argument that teams of AIs and humans will always outperform AIs acting alone. There may be an interim period in which this is true, but this will not always be the case.
Machines, for example, surpassed the top human chess players decades ago. For a brief period after, there were "cyborg teams" of humans and AIs that were able to outperform machines alone. Today, however, humans only get in the way when pitted against modern systems alone. As AIs become more and more intelligent, we will likely see something similar take place across all domains.
The dangers of the technology are widely recognized by industry experts. My nonprofit, the Center for AI Safety, recently released a statement: "Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war." It was signed by hundreds of leading AI scientists.
AIs will be our most potent creation, a testament to human intelligence but not necessarily wisdom. Nuclear weapons, a product of intelligence, nearly caused catastrophe due to the absence of wisdom. AI development's recklessness and lack of global oversight show that this disparity remains. As Carl Sagan warned, "If we continue to accumulate only power and not wisdom, we will surely destroy ourselves."
---
Dan Hendrycks is director of the Center for AI Safety. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
---
NO:
The fears are
based on flawed
ideas
----
By Arvind Narayanan and Sayash Kapoor
Movies and books have enthralled us with the notion of a rogue AI -- a creation that turns on its creator. So, when an AI expert tells us killer robots are almost here, and it is an us-versus-it situation, we are inclined to believe.
But fears of AI's huge risk rest on a tower of fallacies. One is the idea of rogue AI itself, which is based on flawed concepts from science fiction that don't match how AI is actually being built. A second is incorrectly reframing existing civilizational risks, such as nuclear warfare, cyberattacks or bioweapons, solely as AI risks. And focusing on how future technology can cause harm ignores how the technology can help. We already have the tools and know-how to address AI's risks calmly and collectively.
Let's start with the idea of rogue AI. Even an AI with a banal purpose, the argument goes, may accidentally turn rogue. Consider the thought experiment about a so-called paper-clip maximizer: an AI whose goal is to make as many paper clips as possible. The worry is that it will realize that acquiring influence in the world and control over resources will help it achieve that goal. Once it is all-powerful, it might commandeer all of the world's resources, including those needed for humanity's survival, for paper-clip production.
Such arguments rest on a simplistic definition of intelligence. They presuppose a machine with unparalleled capabilities, yet completely devoid of common sense. An analogy is a chess-playing bot: It can crush the human world champion but lacks any judgment outside this domain.
Yet, to operate autonomously and usefully in the real world requires good judgment and the ability to question goals and subgoals. An AI without common sense, for instance, wouldn't last five minutes without doing something destructive. A human might ask it to get a lightbulb from the store "as quickly as possible," and it would do that by ignoring traffic, norms and laws -- and promptly get itself shut down.
In other words, a refusal to interpret commands literally is a prerequisite for even basic real-world functionality. And the AI would have to operate in the real world for a long time before it acquired anywhere near the level of capability that the paper-clip thought experiment presupposes. It can't be trained on text from the internet and then let loose. That would be like expecting to read a book about biking and then be able to ride a bike.
Apocalyptic AI scenarios also ignore one big fact. AI makes us ever more powerful, too. Superhuman chess AI is only possible because chess is an artificial environment where we deprive the human of access to AI or any other technology. The real world isn't like that.
There is no reason to think that AI acting alone -- or in defiance of its creators -- will in the future be more capable than people acting with the help of AI.
But what about malicious actors who get access to AI, and leverage its power? There are endless ways to misuse AI, so let's dive into one of them: cyberattacks. Could AI in the future be used to hack national-security infrastructure and, say, launch nuclear missiles?
We don't need to speculate. For well over a decade, AI has been superior to humans, even experts, at detecting many types of security vulnerabilities. Automated bug-finding tools give hackers a massive advantage compared with manually examining software code.
And the world hasn't ended. The reason is that defenders have access to the same tools. Researchers and developers extensively test critical software for vulnerabilities before it is deployed. In fact, bug-finding tools are primarily developed not by hackers but by a multibillion-dollar information-security industry, and are funded by governments. AI for finding flaws has improved security, not worsened it.
The same goes for other malicious behavior that poses risks. AI has some uses in almost any area, including warfare and bioterrorism. This has enabled a sleight of hand by those preaching AI doom: They reframe other massive risks as AI risks.
For example, it is true that in the future, AI might help with some of the steps involved in developing pandemic-causing viruses in the lab. But it is already feasible to engineer pathogens that could cause pandemics in the lab, and terrorists could look up instructions to make those pathogens on the internet. The problem isn't really about AI, but about bioengineering viruses in the first place.
If anything, apocalyptic thinking will worsen risk by misguiding policy makers about what interventions are actually needed. Putting AI back in a bottle will do nothing about the real problem.
As for the possibility of sheer accident? We will need to improve our early-warning systems and our ability to quickly shut down misbehaving AI. But the engineering community has already done this successfully with many other dangerous systems, and can do it with AI. As elsewhere, the defenders won't stand still.
---
Arvind Narayanan is a professor of computer science at Princeton University, and Sayash Kapoor is a doctoral candidate at the university. They can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
