It's the biggest puzzle in the economy today: We are surrounded by tech advances, from artificial intelligence to robotics, but you can find no sign of it in wages or productivity. Apocalyptic warnings of jobs destroyed by automation look increasingly ludicrous amid a record streak of employment growth.
In the past year I've dug into this in columns and articles and concluded there isn't a paradox: automation hasn't advanced nearly as far as evangelists claim, and where it has, it's often created more jobs than it's destroyed. But that's the past; what about the future? Forecasts about technology are seldom more than wild guesses, yet a case could be made that the economic payoff may now be coming.
History shows that tech breakthroughs commonly take decades to move the needle on economic growth. Blame it on false starts, costly implementation, human resistance, and simple math: It's years before a new industry is big enough to make a ripple in what is now an $80 trillion global economy.
In a recent paper Erik Brynjolfsson and Daniel Rock of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Chad Syverson of the University of Chicago note electric motors based on alternating current were introduced in the late 1800s but even by 1919 half of U.S. factories still weren't electrified. The integrated circuit was commercialized in the 1960s yet 25 years later computers still represented just 5% of the value of all business equipment. Indeed, since the introduction of computers labor productivity has behaved much as it did after the introduction of electric motors and the internal combustion engine.
The authors blame these lags on the cost and time it takes for businesses to adapt to new technologies, obstacles they see at work today. Online shopping came along in the 1990s but retailers struggled to adapt business processes to the internet. They needed to build complementary infrastructure such as fulfillment centers, and, the authors note, customers had to adapt their habits, as well.
What about AI? Banks first used machine learning -- a type of artificial intelligence that spots patterns in massive data sets -- to spot credit-card fraud in 1987. But to gain widespread acceptance first computing power had to get a lot cheaper, data sets a lot bigger, and lots of people had to spend lots of hours deciding what questions to ask and then training algorithms to answer them.
Hype always runs well ahead of reality, bringing failure and dashed expectations. Much of that hype is reflected in the stock-market valuations attached to early-stage companies, most of which eventually fail.
Yet when a company achieves the value that today's tech leaders have, it tells you something important. A third of the rise in the S&P 500 index this year is due to five tech firms. That may mean the advances these companies represent are becoming economically significant.
Internet sales, for example, now represent 9% of total retailing, putting discernible downward pressure on inflation.
True, U.S. growth has accelerated in 2017, but productivity, which J.P. Morgan estimates to have been 1.2%, is in line with the sluggish pace of the expansion, and one of the best performing industries, oil and gas, is responding mostly to the price of oil.
But perhaps the U.S. is at a point when technology and an economy growing solidly with low unemployment become mutually reinforcing. Entrepreneurs are more willing to take risks, including investments in new technologies, when the economy is running hotter, says Mr. Brynjolfsson. "This will speed up the adoption of the kinds of conventions needed to take full advantage of artificial intelligence and other new technologies," he said.
Consider the parallels between the present and 1998: The capital-gains tax rate was cut in 1997 and, with inflation quiescent, the Federal Reserve declined to jack up interest rates as unemployment dropped to new lows, creating the ideal environment for the dot-com boom. As stock wealth stoked spending,economic growth picked up sharply.
The party ended when the tech bubble burst in 2000 and the a recession followed in 2001. Similarly, Marc Sumerlin, who runs the research firm Evenflow Macro, predicts that the next two years could be the best of the expansion yet -- but they will be "the last hurrah."

Credit: By Greg Ip
