[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Nvidia's chief has warned about the risks of an escalating chip war with China. It looks like the company will get one anyway.
That could end up as a structural headwind for Nvidia, which recently became a member of the $1 trillion club thanks to the artificial-intelligence frenzy. China's chip-sector ambitions, and its own AI aspirants, also will suffer.
The Biden administration is considering steps to further curb exports of AI chips, like those made by Nvidia, to China. The U.S. already requires a license to sell the most high-end AI chips, like Nvidia's A100, to customers in China. But the new restrictions would include Nvidia's A800 chips, which were designed to defuse the impact of an earlier round of export controls instituted last August.
These latest restrictions may be meant in part to send a signal to U.S. companies to stop their cat-and-mouse game of trying to circumvent Washington's export curbs.
A800 chips have the same computing power as A100 chips, widely used for AI computations, but have a lower bandwidth for communicating with other chips. The new rules may restrict the provision of cloud services, too. Some Chinese AI companies may have leased high-end chips through such services to circumvent export controls.
But the Biden administration also needs to strike a fine balance: Such restrictions will slow China's AI effort, but may also hit revenue at U.S. chip companies.
Nvidia said last August that the restrictions could knock $400 million off its revenue for the October quarter. But the company managed to largely offset that by selling alternative products to China, the company said in its November earnings call.
Still, these tighter curbs could hurt Nvidia given that A800 chips have been very popular with Chinese companies, according to Jefferies. Chinese companies, like U.S. ones, have been ramping up their offerings of generative AI.
Chinese companies may also have been stockpiling chips in expectation of tighter restrictions. Citi estimates China may account for around 5% to 10% of Nvidia's data-center sales. How much Nvidia will be affected will depend on whether Chinese customers just buy new, slower chips developed by the company as replacements -- or whether the compromise in performance becomes a hindrance.
Chinese chip stocks, on the other hand, surged Wednesday. AI chip maker Cambricon Technologies rose 3.2%, while graphics-chip maker Changsha Jingjia Microelectronics gained 4.8%. They should benefit from China's drive to make chips domestically.
It will be challenging to catch up given how all-encompassing U.S. chip restrictions have become -- ranging from equipment to talent. But Beijing will keep trying given that it now clearly views "chip sovereignty" as a matter of national economic survival.
This probably won't be the last time investors in Nvidia, AMD and other U.S. chip darlings wake up to unpleasant news related to China.
Credit: By Jacky Wong
