As some of the metaverse's biggest proponents are scaling back or shutting down spending on their visions for virtual worlds, many marketers are standing firm.
Forty-six percent of consumer brand marketers say they will increase their metaverse budgets this year, and only 12% say they will spend less, according to a survey of 903 executives conducted by research firm Forrester in January and February.
Mastercard Inc., which last year helped host a virtual Grammy Awards red carpet on popular online game platform Roblox and created a plaza for Pride Month in the 3-D virtual world Decentraland, plans to fund more branded metaverse experiences, said Chief Marketing and Communications Officer Raja Rajamannar.
"Beyond the buzz, beyond the novelty value, there is a lot of possibility in this," Mr. Rajamannar said.
Marketers' continued interest in the metaverse contrasts with some recent developments. Microsoft Corp. recently shut down a social virtual-reality platform; Walt Disney Co. closed its division for metaverse strategy; and Mark Zuckerberg, who kicked off much of the interest in the sector when he renamed Facebook as Meta Platforms Inc., has shifted his focus at least in part to the industry's new obsession: artificial intelligence.
Marketers aren't immune to the enthusiasm over AI. Still, many big brands say they will continue making long-term investments in the immersive, three-dimensional digital experiences that define the metaverse.
Roblox, which lets players drop avatars into millions of 3-D virtual experiences, is on track to double the number of branded worlds it hosts this year after recording about 100 in 2022, a spokeswoman said. Recent examples include Roblox experiences backed by retail clothing brand PacSun and restaurant-and-entertainment chain Dave & Buster's.
Designer Samuel Jordan, who goes by Builder_Boy on Roblox and has worked with fashion brands such as Stella McCartney and Forever 21 and celebrities including Elton John, has begun receiving requests to collaborate with properties ranging from TV shows to Nascar, he said.
Metaverse campaigns' potential value can outweigh their modest price tags, even when they are less effective than envisaged, marketers said.
Tokyo-based cosmetics giant Shiseido Co. has found that consumers are more willing to engage with brands in such settings than on traditional social platforms, said Dina Fierro, senior vice president of the Web3 and metaverse group at Shiseido Americas.
"When you think about seven or eight precious minutes with a consumer and how lucky you are to get maybe six seconds of someone's attention on a platform like an Instagram or a TikTok, I think it's very easy to validate the theory that this is a qualitative engagement," Ms. Fierro said.
Credit: By Patrick Coffee
