Some say the smartphone has peaked -- suggesting that our co-dependent pocket pals have reached some pinnacle of evolution. Nonsense. There is a lot more to come, especially if you're hoping for improvements in design, interface and privacy. We're not talking about 5G and folding displays. At the CES conference in Las Vegas this year, some of the most potentially disruptive inventions were tiny components from companies you've never heard of.
1. Invisible Buttons
The arrival of 5G, the next-generation wireless networks, requires phones to have more antennas. Because metal in the phone's body can block antenna signals, phone makers are rethinking their designs, wrapping the whole phone in plastic or glass, and ditching mechanical buttons. However, some people panic when you take away their buttons -- we've heard from many people who are holding on to old iPhones because they still have a home button.
In lieu of making the back of a phone as touch-sensitive as the front, which would be expensive and a power drain, designers could add virtual buttons, such as ones developed by a startup called UltraSense Systems. These tiny little chips, which use ultrasound to detect your finger, lie just beneath the phone's surface. One placed on the back might be a camera button, with multiple functions: a quick tap for a selfie, a double tap to switch to video and maybe a long hold to open your photo library.
Gamers might want a phone with invisible buttons all around the edges, hidden controls that respond only when you launch a game.
The trouble with invisible buttons is you might forget where they are. Daniel Goehl, UltraSense's chief business officer, says a designer could add a little divot where your finger should go. Another option is haptic feedback -- a gentle vibration or click -- to signal to your finger that it has found the sweet spot.
2. Electric Feel
Phones already give us such feedback -- newer iPhones shake if Face ID fails, for instance -- but our fingers generally follow our eyes around a touch screen. With the right haptic responses, they can do more.
French startup Hap2U developed a prototype smartphone with a haptic display. It's meant to restore some of the physical sensations that were lost when we abandoned physical keyboards for sheer glass. (RIP BlackBerry. Hello, iPhone!) Instead of shaking the whole phone, electronics under the screen pinpoint spots to generate friction, so that your fingertip detects a physical change.
The assessment from Wall Street Journal reporter Katherine Bindley, who tried out the Hap2Phone at CES in a demo involving on-screen game controls and volume sliders: "It's as if the keys or sliders are elevated slightly from the rest of the display, like the thinnest button you could imagine," she says. It was sometimes too subtle. In one scenario, she tried to set an alarm without looking, using the hands of a clock. (She failed.)
Hap2U, which doesn't build phones but sells its technology to device makers, also sees adding tactile sensations as a way to bring touch interfaces to the visually impaired.
3. Better Biometrics
Since the iPhone X came out, Apple has led the way with facial recognition, unlocking the phone with only your face. But there are times when a fingerprint is preferable. Last year, Samsung embedded a fingerprint sensor inside the bottom half of the display on the Galaxy S10. You get the benefit of a fingerprint scanner without losing screen real estate, except sometimes you don't know where you're supposed to put your finger.
Isorg, another French startup at CES, has the solution: It turned an entire smartphone screen into a fingerprint reader. Rather than an ultrasonic sensor, like the one in Samsung's Galaxy S10, Isorg's is optical, and you can put your finger anywhere. Better yet, the device can read multiple fingerprints at once. This could equate to more security, because a set of fingerprints is presumably more difficult to spoof than just one. Isorg's sensor can be built on plastic and shaped as needed. In addition to lurking under a phone's screen, it could be built into the grip of a scooter or bicycle, for on-the-fly biometric verification.
4. Body Camouflage
OnePlus has made a name for itself designing cheaper but innovative handsets for the discerning Apple hater. This year at CES, it showed off a concept phone with a solution to an aesthetic problem: the three-eyed monster. As smartphones slimmed down, their cameras multiplied, while getting chunkier. OnePlus explored using electrochromic glass to hide the camera array. The glass, which you might have seen in fancy bathrooms and late-model airplanes, goes from clear to opaque on demand. OnePlus says a thin version for phones turns clear in 0.7 second. You wouldn't want to miss a great shot, just because your phone's camera has a cloaking device.
5. A Closer Voice Assistant
The amenities described above might never make it to your phone. But you will definitely experience some variant of this next innovation quite soon.
Ever notice that Siri and Alexa require an internet connection? Even doing something as simple as setting a timer requires your voice command to be sent up into the cloud for interpretation.
A new breed of chips is bringing artificial intelligence -- or particularly, deep learning -- down from the cloud. Not only does this save on both bandwidth and battery life, it also adds to a device's privacy protections. People want a relationship with their digital assistant, not necessarily with everyone at the company that built it.
Navigational directions or weather reports require an internet hit, but "there's no reason everything you say has to go to the cloud," says Kurt Busch, CEO of Syntiant, a chip maker focused on on-device voice processing.
While Syntiant gears its chips for everything from laptops to earbuds, Mr. Busch says his company's current goal is an always-listening voice assistant in your ear that can execute a small set of commands -- adjust volume, skip music tracks -- without a wake word or even a tap.
In a few years, Mr. Busch sees full natural-language processing coming to devices. These assistants would be trained in the cloud, and receive periodic updates to improve performance. Ideally, they would learn things about you -- your accent, for instance -- to perform better. They would go online only when you completely stump them.
If you're an iPhone user, you'll have to wait until the fall to see what's in store. Samsung devotees have a shorter wait: The next big Galaxy reveal is in February.

Credit: By Wilson Rothman
