THALES
Australia to Buy
Armored Vehicles
Australia will buy a fleet of Hawkei light-armored vehicles for its army from French aerospace and defense contractor Thales SA in a 1.3 billion Australian dollar (US$916.4 million) deal.
Thales on Monday said it had signed a supply deal with Australia's government for 1,100 vehicles and more than 1,000 trailers.
Australia is seeking to modernize its military to cope with potential threats in the Asia-Pacific region and Middle East. Talks over a binding deal have continued since late 2011, when Thales was named as the preferred bidder for a contract then estimated to be worth A$1.5 billion.
The selection of Thales over rival contractors, including from the U.S., for the light-armored vehicle contract is a boost for Australia's defense industry as the vehicles will be built at the company's factory in Bendigo, a former gold-mining city nearly 100 miles from state capital Melbourne.
Australia's center-right government has been under pressure to do more to secure local defense jobs, after some missteps by senior lawmakers added to unease about rising unemployment nationally following the end of a decadelong mining boom. A former defense minister, David Johnston, was dropped from the government late last year after he disparaged the ability of thousands of workers at naval shipyard ASC to compete for warship and submarine contracts.
-- Robb M. Stewart and Rob Taylor
---
RELATIVITY MEDIA
Founder Makes Deal
For Film Studio
Investors including Ryan Kavanaugh, Relativity Media LLC's embattled founder and chief executive, have reached a deal to retake his bankrupt Hollywood studio, leaving the troubled company's television unit in the hands of senior lenders, according to people familiar with the negotiations.
Mr. Kavanaugh' s investor group, which also includes supermarket mogul Ron Burkle, is getting Relativity's film and music units and its stakes in its sports and education divisions, according to the people. "The deal is signed," one of the people familiar with the matter said.
The company intends to reorganize around its remaining holdings and hopes to emerge from bankruptcy by Oct. 20, the person said. Mr. Kavanaugh will retain his position as chairman and chief executive.
A group of senior lenders has agreed to purchase Relativity Media LLC's television studio out of bankruptcy for $125 million in debt forgiveness.
-- Tom Corrigan
---
APPLE
AI Buyout Could Aid
Siri Interactions
Apple Inc. has purchased an artificial-intelligence startup that could help make iPhone users' interactions with the virtual assistant Siri more natural.
Apple bought VocalIQ Ltd., a U.K.-based software maker working on ways to improve computers' ability to understand human speech, and to "speak" more naturally. The terms of the deal weren't disclosed.
An Apple spokesman confirmed the deal with the company's standard statement after an acquisition, saying Apple "buys smaller technology companies from time to time, and we generally do not discuss our purpose or plans." VocalIQ didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.
The acquisition could help Apple's efforts to bolster Siri, which is controlled by voice commands and sometimes struggles to understand users.
-- Jack Nicas
