Chinese search-engine giant Baidu reported a drop in quarterly profit, but beat top- and bottom-line estimates, helped by stable online marketing revenue and rising sales from its AI Cloud business.
The Beijing-based company said Thursday that net profit for the first quarter fell 6.5% from a year earlier to 5.45 billion yuan, equivalent to about $754.9 million, topping the 4.11 billion yuan expected by analysts in a FactSet poll. Operating profit was higher, but the bottom line was hurt by a decline in fair-value gains from long-term investments.
Adjusted net profit rose 22% to 7.01 billion yuan, beating analysts' expectations for 5.64 billion yuan. The widely tracked metric excludes the effects of share-based compensation expenses, fair-value changes in long-term investments, and disposal gains and losses, among other things.
Revenue rose 1.2% to 31.51 billion yuan, just above analysts' estimate of 31.22 billion yuan.
Baidu said sales from online-marketing services, which make up more than half of overall revenue, rose 2.9%. Core non-online marketing revenue rose about 6%, mainly driven by the AI Cloud business, while revenue from the company's iQIYI video-streaming service fell about 5%.
Once considered one of China's shiniest technology giants alongside Alibaba and Tencent, Baidu has seen its core advertising revenue growth slow in recent years, leading it to search for new growth in fields such as self-driving cars, cloud computing and artificial intelligence.
The company in April said users of its Ernie Bot, China's most popular ChatGPT-style bot, had doubled in recent months to more than 200 million.
The chatbot, launched in March 2023, competes with many large-language models in China, including Alibaba's Tongyi Qianwen and Tencent's Hunyuan.
Baidu said it is working to make its Ernie family of models cheaper and more efficient, saying the launch of several lightweight LLMs in the first quarter had already made Ernie more affordable.
Alibaba and Tencent earlier this week reported single-digit revenue growth in the quarter ended March.
Alibaba's adjusted profit dropped 11%, while Tencent reported adjusted profit growth of 54%.
Generate image description

Credit: By Tracy Qu
