Artificial intelligence is poised to add some juice to electric vehicles -- by speeding up improvements in battery technology.
Researchers are moving closer to delivering batteries that are safer, recharge faster and are more sustainable than the generation of lithium ion batteries now in use. Within five years, experts say, electric vehicles, or EVs, will reach price parity with traditional combustion-engine cars, thanks in part to the role AI is playing.
The battery makes up 25% of an EV's total cost, and half of that battery cost is materials. Using AI, battery researchers can speed up the exploration and testing of a vast universe of new material formulations that could make up a battery. The result is that advances in research and development are happening at a pace previously unheard of. Discoveries that once would have taken years to achieve now are possible, in some cases, in a matter of weeks.
"Historically we have operated on human intuition and experience, making small changes in things that have worked in the past," says George Crabtree, director of the Joint Center for Energy Storage Research, established by the U.S. Department of Energy at the University of Chicago Argonne lab to accelerate battery research. "Machine learning speeds up this materials discovery process by orders of magnitude."
In particular, AI allows researchers to identify the sweet spot between faster charging times and a battery's expected life.
"The robust charging performance of our EVs that simultaneously extends the life of our batteries would not be achievable without AI," says Danielle Cory, General Motors engineering group manager -- next generation controls.
Lithium ion batteries have three basic components, but each is composed of multiple materials. This creates an almost limitless universe of possible replacement materials when scientists want to tinker to improve price, safety or performance. Before AI, a search for new materials was done with traditional statistical analysis, which was limited by computing capability and a researcher's ability to glean information from the data.
AI, or machine learning, changes all of that. Fast computers trained to recognize specific patterns are sifting through vast amounts of data stored in the cloud, tapping into materials databases, experiment results and years of scientific literature, in a high-powered search to identify which battery chemistries are likely to outperform and which are likely to fail.
At its research lab in Almaden, Calif., International Business Machines Corp. has scientists using AI to accelerate development of a lithium ion battery that is fast-charging and free of heavy metals. IBM says it has discovered a way to use an iodine-based material that can be sourced from brines found in saltwater, potentially making this battery much cheaper to produce than today's lithium ion formulations.
One recent set of possible materials for use in the electrolyte -- a substance inside a battery that assists with the generation of the electrical current -- had about 20,000 potential compounds. Using traditional computational methods to screen those candidates could have taken five years. Machine learning evaluated them in nine days.
---
Ms. Oliver is a writer in New York City. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Suzanne Oliver
