Six months ago, Facebook Inc. said it would open its Messenger service, making it possible for businesses to build virtual assistants that can chat with the one billion-plus real people who use the communications platform each month.
Since then, developers have created more than 33,000 such "chatbots," which have icons and nicknames that at first glance might not appear that different from a friend or relative in a user's contact list.
Last month, Mastercard Inc. launched Kai, a bot for banks that makes it possible for Facebook Messenger users to check activity on their credit, debit and loan accounts and set up financial-management tools. Another Mastercard bot for merchants lets customers make purchases by sending a Facebook message and paying with Mastercard's digital wallet.
Such capabilities may be just the beginning for bots. A range of companies are betting that the convergence of messaging platforms, chatbots and increasingly powerful artificial intelligence will lead to the creation of a more natural interface between machines and humans.
"We are thinking of an intelligence center that will help you get to the right bot at the right time so you don't have to have a sea of icons that are sitting there that you don't know how to use," says Stan Chudnovsky, vice president and head of product for Messenger at Facebook.
Facebook is using its power to accelerate the growth of messaging and bots. In 2014, it pushed users to employ Messenger for direct messages, and the platform now has more than one billion users. That same year, Facebook acquired for $19 billion messaging service WhatsApp, which also now has one billion users.
April's debut of development tools for building Messenger bots has appealed to startups and established brands alike. Some users have complained that initial Facebook Messenger bots are slow, with limited conversational capabilities.
Facebook is meeting with developers and recently updated its tools to, for example, further customize conversation threads. "It's very early days for bots," Mr. Chudnovsky said. He predicts that within perhaps two years, people and bots powered by artificial intelligence will conduct complex dialogs.
A Facebook user planning a vacation, for example, could send his criteria to Messenger, which would match the information to bots from travel-company partners. Partners would reply with offers.
The goal for many companies is to build intelligent software agents that understand natural language and field multifaceted requests such as, "Help me rent a car in Philadelphia two Saturdays from now." Some bots, learning the habits of their human masters, may anticipate work. "Your monthly golf date isn't yet scheduled. Would you like to call Kiawah Island?"
This is beyond today's simple bots that answer trivia questions or reorder laundry detergent based on data from prior purchases, says Roberto Masiero, senior vice president of innovation labs at Automatic Data Processing.
"It's a tectonic shift in how we interact with computers," Mr. Masiero said.
Mr. Masiero predicts that bots will become the new interface for corporate software. Rather than launching individual software programs to change health benefits, say, or start a retirement account, employees could consult with bots that have learned their habits and use algorithms and machine learning to make suggestions, he said.
ADP software engineers are working with social anthropologists and copywriters to tinker with bot behavior. Tests show that for bots to earn human acceptance, they must not act too much like people or too much like computers.
Bots that refer to themselves in the third person sound unnatural, Mr. Masiero said. "I" and "we" work better. Bots that fire replies in milliseconds are unnerving, he said. His team has programmed delays into response time so that a bot replies no sooner than two seconds after a question.
ADP aims to pilot bot interfaces on some of its human-resources software next year.
At American Airlines Group Inc., Chief Information Officer Maya Leibman said bots may improve customer service by providing faster access to information and a more consistent experience for fliers. Developers at the airline demonstrated how to use Amazon's Echo, a voice-activated bot device, to check in and retrieve other information.
Credit: By Kim S. Nash
