As cities and states roll out algorithms to help them provide services like policing and traffic management, they are also racing to come up with policies for using this new technology.
AI, at its worst, can disadvantage already marginalized groups, adding to human-driven bias in hiring, policing and other areas. And its decisions can often be opaque -- making it difficult to tell how to fix that bias, as well as other problems.
Cities are looking at a number of solutions to these problems. Some require disclosure when an AI model is used in decisions, while others mandate audits of algorithms, track where AI causes harm or seek public input before putting new AI systems in place.
Here are some ways cities are redefining how AI will work within their borders and beyond.
Explaining the algorithms: Amsterdam and Helsinki
One of the biggest complaints against AI is that it makes decisions that can't be explained, which can lead to complaints about arbitrary or even biased results.
To let their citizens know more about the technology already in use in their cities, Amsterdam and Helsinki collaborated on websites that document how each city government uses algorithms to deliver services. The registry includes information on the data sets used to train an algorithm, a description of how an algorithm is used, how public servants use the results, the human oversight involved and how the city checks the technology for problems like bias.
Amsterdam has six algorithms fully explained -- with a goal of 50 to 100 -- on the registry website, including how the city's automated parking-control and trash-complaint reports work. Helsinki, which is only focusing on the city's most advanced algorithms, also has six listed on its site, with another 10 to 20 left to put up.
"We needed to assess the risk ourselves," says Linda van de Fliert, an adviser at Amsterdam's Chief Technology Office. "And we wanted to show the world that it is possible to be transparent."
Auditing the AI: New York
Some cities are looking at ways to remove potential bias from algorithms. In January, the New York City Council passed a law -- to go into effect in 2023 -- covering companies that sell AI software that screens potential employees. The businesses must obtain audits to ensure they don't discriminate against job candidates on the basis of race, sex or national origin. The new rule also requires companies using AI for hiring or promotion decisions to disclose its use to job seekers and employees.
"Hiring is a really high-stakes domain," says Julia Stoyanovich, an associate professor of computer science and engineering at New York University and the director of the NYU Tandon Center for Responsible AI, who consulted on the regulation. "And we are using a lot of tools without any oversight."
The New York bill isn't exhaustive, says Dr. Stoyanovich -- for one thing, it doesn't detail what constitutes an audit. She suggests making the AI display something like nutritional labels on food, with the data points used in the hiring decision broken down like nutrients and ingredients. She says ensuring that the audits are helpful to the public will be the next challenge.
"We want to be careful about how these audits are done, who does them, and what they contain," she says. "Companies will want to do less rather than more."
Giving communities more power: Santa Clara County
Another effort to cut down on bias is giving communities a say in how law enforcement uses AI.
Working with the American Civil Liberties Union, California's Santa Clara County passed a law mandating community control over police surveillance (or CCOPS) in 2017. The law requires any agency within Santa Clara County's jurisdiction that wants to use surveillance technology to submit it for public input at an open Board of Supervisors meeting.
The agency must present a policy detailing how the technology would be used, including how any data collected would be stored or shared. If the Board of Supervisors approves the purchase, the agency is responsible for a yearly impact report to prove the technology meets agreed-upon specifications.
Since the Santa Clara law passed, the Board of Supervisors has approved the use of roughly 100 technologies. The one exception: a proposal on facial-recognition technology, because of concerns including the potential for false positives.
"I'm a tech enthusiast," says Joe Simitian, a member of the county's Board of Supervisors. "But there was significant potential for this to be abused without a robust set of policies."
Cooperating with other cities: Amsterdam, Barcelona and London
A group of cities are pushing an AI effort to help educate other cities on best practices on deploying AI systems more effectively and ethically. That is what Amsterdam, Barcelona and London hope to achieve with the Global Observatory of Urban AI.
The three cities agreed on five principles -- fairness and nondiscrimination, transparency and openness, safety and cybersecurity, privacy protection, and sustainability -- that lawmakers need to consider when procuring or building AI systems.
To show how those principles look in practice, the Observatory plans to put out research this year, including an atlas of best practices for AI already in place in cities around the world, which will include Amsterdam's guidelines on what cities should demand from private AI providers and Barcelona's system for creating recommendations systems for social services.
Other papers will explore how the technology was deployed and how cities have navigated the relationship between public and private.
---
Ms. Snow is a writer in Los Angeles. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Jackie Snow
