BERLIN -- Ford Motor Co. and Volkswagen AG are in talks to create a self-driving-car joint venture, people familiar with the matter said, aligning two of the world's largest auto makers in the race to reshape the future of transportation.
The two companies are considering various options for structuring the new business and a deal could be announced by mid-November, these people say.
One option could involve Volkswagen taking a stake of up to 50% in Ford's existing driverless-car unit, and another would have a new company combining both auto makers' self-driving units, the people said. Forming a new company would create a global technology brand, and could make it easier for the two sides to share ownership of new patents and intellectual property and open the venture to additional partners, the people said.
Earlier this year, Ford and Volkswagen said they were exploring a strategic alliance that would include codeveloping commercial vehicles, as well as other projects, but those talks have led to a broader discussion of ways Ford and Volkswagen can cooperate globally, these people said.
Volkswagen declined to comment.
Ford said in a statement that the discussions entail "conversations about potential collaborations across a number of areas."
The talks, reported by German business daily Handelsblatt, come as auto makers contend with Silicon Valley newcomers looking to upend the traditional car business.
Tesla Inc., which launched its first electric car in 2008, has pulled ahead of rivals Mercedes-Benz, Audi, and BMW AG in the U.S. market for luxury plug-in vehicles. Alphabet Inc.'s Waymo is ahead of many auto makers in its self-driving efforts and could end up in control of that car technology in the next decade, analysts say.
Faced with these challenges, conventional auto makers have on occasion shrugged off past rivalries to team up on the new technological front.
Ford is investing billions in its autonomous-driving operations with plans to bring a fully driverless car to market by 2021 for commercial use. Last year, the Dearborn, Mich., car maker committed $1 billion to Pittsburgh-based artificial-intelligence firm Argo AI, acquiring a majority stake in the startup. And this summer, Ford carved out a new stand-alone unit, Ford Autonomous Vehicle LLC, to attract outside investment.
Volkswagen has fallen behind rivals in developing self-driving cars. It has been bogged down by its diesel-emissions cheating scandal, which has cost it more than $30 billion in fines, penalties, and compensation for consumers so far. Nonetheless, the company has developed a standard electric-car technology platform and is ramping up to produce millions of battery-powered cars off it over the next five years.
---
Mike Colias contributed to this article.

Credit: By William Boston
