ALTOS HORNOS DE MEXICO
Steelmaker Seeks
To Protect Debt Plan
Mexican steelmaker Altos Hornos de Mexico S.A.B. de C.V. has asked for aid from a U.S. Bankruptcy Court to protect a debt workout plan that was 17 years in the making.
Altos Hornos is seeking an order that will bar creditors from seizing U.S. assets, including $20 million cash, while it implements a balance-sheet restructuring that was approved by a court in Mexico earlier this year, court papers say.
Low steel prices pushed Altos Hornos into insolvency proceedings in Mexico in 1999. It emerged in May, with a plan that permitted it to file for chapter 15 bankruptcy protection in the U.S.
Chapter 15 is a form of bankruptcy designed to shield U.S. assets of international companies that are working out financial troubles in their home countries.
An employer of more than 19,000 people in steel plants and coal and iron mines, Altos Hornos persuaded creditors to swap much of their debt for equity.
While the Mexico plan plays out, Altos Hornos wants a U.S. Bankruptcy Court to prevent creditors from upsetting the restructuring through collection action in the U.S., according to Francisco Xavier Gaxiola Fernandez, the court-appointed executive who has been overseeing the restructuring.
-- Peg Brickley
---
INTEL
New Chips Take Aim
At Hot AI Market
Intel Corp. signaled it wants a bigger role in artificial intelligence, revealing plans to modify a line of chips to target a fast-growing market that is turning into a battleground for technology suppliers.
The company told technology developers Wednesday that it plans next year to deliver a new version of the Xeon Phi processor -- a product line previously targeted at scientific applications -- with added features designed to accelerate tasks associated with what Silicon Valley calls artificial intelligence.
Intel said the technology will help accelerate a technique called deep learning, increasingly used for tasks such as interpreting speech, identifying objects in photos and piloting autonomous vehicles.
Intel's Xeon processors already are a fixture in data centers, and have a role in nearly all deep-learning tasks carried out there. But some users also install auxiliary processors for artificial-intelligence tasks, notably chips called GPUs that rival Nvidia Corp. has long sold for videogames.
Intel has said the Xeon Phi line, which has more processors than standard Xeon chips, is already being used for some deep-learning applications. Diane Bryant, executive vice president in charge of Intel's data center group, said Wednesday at an Intel event that the model coming out next year will handle additional instructions designed specifically for such computing jobs.
Intel says Xeon Phi can run most analytic software without tapping external processors that can slow analytical tasks, something it bills as a key advantage over other approaches.
-- Don Clark
