[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Selling the picks and shovels for artificial intelligence is a solid place to be at the moment. As long as they aren't sold as loss leaders.
Dell Technologies has seen its market value surge over the past 12 months, as booming sales of Nvidia's AI processors have sparked strong demand for the types of specialized servers that run on those chips. Dell's most recent financial results bore that out, as server and networking revenue surged 42% year over year to $5.5 billion in the fiscal first quarter ended in April.
That was the best growth that segment has recorded in at least eight years, according to financial statements going back to when Dell merged with EMC as a private company in 2016.
But the company's fiscal first-quarter report last month also contained some less flattering details of that booming AI-driven growth. Operating income for Dell's Infrastructure Solutions Group, or ISG, segment that includes servers slipped 1% year over year to $736 million, and came in 18% below Wall Street's targets. Operating margins for the segment came in at 8% -- more than four points below the average of the previous four quarters.
Given the sharp growth of Dell's AI server backlog over that time, the trend suggested the company was selling its hottest product at near break-even levels. Dell's shares lost nearly one-quarter of their value in the two weeks following the May 30 results.
Dell, which is helmed by Chief Executive Michael Dell, doesn't break out profit margins for specific product lines. On its earnings call following the report, the company noted that a variety of factors played into the disappointing ISG margins, including weakness in data storage revenue and deferral of a large amount of service and support revenue that typically goes with its server sales.
The latter should result in improved margins going forward. Wall Street currently expects Dell's ISG margins to come in around 11.5% for the full fiscal year ending in January, according to consensus estimates from Visible Alpha.
Still, booming demand for AI gear has made competition intense. Dell's longtime rival Hewlett Packard Enterprise announced several of its own AI initiatives at its Discover conference on Tuesday, which included an appearance by Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang.
And Super Micro Computer, a smaller company focused mainly on AI servers, is expected to see its revenue double in the fiscal year ending this month -- and surge another 58% the following year, according to FactSet estimates. Dell leads the overall server industry in market share, but Super Micro's share of AI servers in the first quarter was 30% compared with Dell's 23%, according to market research firm Dell'Oro Group.
In a report earlier this week, however, Morgan Stanley analyst Erik Woodring noted that Dell has the advantage of being able to deliver highly customized servers along with a full suite of other products and services necessary to build up AI networks. "Designing, building and innovating in AI servers is far more complex than we believe investors understand," Woodring wrote, adding that concerns about near-term AI server margins are misguided.
And while Dell's shares have clawed back some gains this week, the stock remains notably cheaper at nearly 18 times forward earnings compared with Super Micro's multiple of 29 times.
The possibility of getting added to the S&P 500 is another wild card that could turn in Dell's favor; Bernstein Research analysts noted Monday that Dell has the second-highest market capitalization of eligible companies not part of the index. If Dell can serve up better AI profit in the coming quarters, this blue chip should provide investors plenty of green.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
