Quantum computing's processing power could begin to improve artificial-intelligence systems within about five years, experts and business leaders said.
For example, a quantum computer could develop AI-based digital assistants with true contextual awareness and the ability to fully understand interactions with customers, said Peter Chapman, chief executive of quantum-computing startup IonQ Inc.
"Today, people are frustrated when a digital assistant says, 'Sorry, I couldn't understand that,'" said Mr. Chapman, who was named CEO of the venture-capital-backed startup this week after about five years as director of engineering for Amazon.com Inc.'s Amazon Prime. Quantum computers "could alleviate those problems," he said.
That's because quantum computers have the potential to sort through a vast number of possibilities within a fraction of a second to come up with a probable solution. A Rubik's Cube, in an analogy to illustrate the power of quantum computers, could be solved instantaneously because the technology can process different combinations at once. A classical computer, by contrast, would need to search through the possibilities sequentially, which could take days, months or even longer, IonQ executives said.
Quantum computing harnesses the power of quantum bits, which can represent and store information in 0s and 1s simultaneously, compared with binary digits, or bits, which can either be 0s or 1s and which have dominated the computing industry to date.
IonQ's method of commercializing quantum computing involves quantum bits based on trapped ions, which naturally exhibit quantum mechanical effects such as superposition, or 0s and 1s existing simultaneously. The company has said previously that trapped ions are more likely to scale, with better performance and increased predictability than other methods.
Mr. Chapman, who began his career as a software engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology working with artificial-intelligence pioneer Marvin Minsky, said that quantum-computing power could also help combine knowledge across multiple disciplines into one single AI system. A digital assistant with expertise in physics, chemistry and material science could help solve problems that humans with one area of expertise can't, he said.
Julie Love, director of quantum business development at Microsoft Corp., said quantum computing's potential impact on AI models is "a real selling point" for business customers. Theoretical research on the topic has shown that quantum-based machine-learning systems can be trained on data exponentially faster than on classical computers, she said. Machine learning, a type of artificial intelligence, is the science of getting computers to act intelligently without being explicitly programmed.
AI and quantum computing will work hand in hand in the future, said Arvind Krishna, senior vice president of cloud and cognitive software at International Business Machines Corp. Quantum computers can make AI even more powerful, he said in an interview Wednesday at The Wall Street Journal's Future of Everything conference.
Companies are already experimenting with how AI and quantum computing could work together to solve business problems and yield new discoveries. Volkswagen AG, for example, has used the two technologies to develop a quantum-computing-based traffic-management system. The system could be embedded in its vehicles or could be used by public-transportation or ride-sharing companies to predict revenues based on more accurate passenger demand.

Credit: By Sara Castellanos
