Major late-night shows including ABC's "Jimmy Kimmel Live" and CBS's "The Late Show With Stephen Colbert" went dark Tuesday after the union representing movie and television writers announced it would go on strike.
On Tuesday, members of the Writers Guild of America picketed outside the gates and entrances of entertainment companies in Los Angeles and New York. "We must now exert the maximum leverage possible to get a fair contract by withholding our labor," the WGA said.
The work stoppage comes after talks between the WGA and a coalition representing the major Hollywood studios, streamers and networks concluded without a new deal by Monday's deadline.
With a strike, late-night shows and variety shows, which also include NBC's "Saturday Night Live" as well as HBO's political talk show "Last Week Tonight with John Oliver," are also expected to go dark, people close to the shows said.
"The writer's demands are not unreasonable," Mr. Colbert said on his Monday night show. Mr. Colbert is also a member of the WGA.
The only late-night show that will keep running new episodes is Fox News's "Gutfeld!" parent Fox Corp. said on Tuesday. The show doesn't have WGA members among its writers. Fox Corp. and News Corp, the parent of The Wall Street Journal's publisher, share common ownership.
The WGA, which has a membership of 11,500, said offers from the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, the group that represents major studios, streamers and networks, have been "wholly insufficient" and that this negotiation has shown their commitment "to further devaluing the profession of writing."
The AMPTP said on Monday that it presented a package to the WGA that "included generous increases in compensation for writers as well as improvements in streaming residuals," two key issues for the writers.
The coalition of content purveyors went on to say it would be willing to improve on those proposals but wouldn't yet "because of the magnitude of other proposals still on the table."
Among those proposals cited by the AMPTP is WGA's demand that each TV show be required to carry a minimum number of writers for a specific length of time, "whether needed or not."
The WGA said the unwillingness to negotiate on those matters shows that entertainment-industry companies are trying to turn the writing profession into a gig economy in which writers are freelance workers with no job security or protection.
No future negotiations are currently scheduled, both sides said.
Many of the issues dividing the two sides are tied to the growth of streaming platforms, which have veered away from the traditional business model of producing television.
Historically, a television show is developed through a process in which a script is ordered and then a trial episode, or pilot, is made. If the show is ordered, the writers start mapping out a season, writing scripts and working on the show through all facets of production.
Nowadays, many shows are developed with multiple scripts or even a full season mapped out before they are ordered, a practice pioneered by Netflix.
When a show is ordered and goes into production, typically fewer writers are kept on board.
Writers and executive producers say having fewer writers during production and postproduction puts the onus on the remaining writers and is a detriment to the creative process.
Chris Keyser, co-chair of the WGA's negotiating team, said recently that this is an example of the industry "reducing our pay and pulling us out of the process of making our television shows."
The companies that comprise the AMPTP counter that the business of making content is changing rapidly and that their models must change, too.
Several including Walt Disney, Warner Bros. Discovery, Comcast's NBCUniversal and Paramount Global have been cutting staff and budgets for movies and television. Even Netflix has said it would become more aggressive in monitoring content costs.
There are also issues regarding moviemaking, including a demand from the WGA that writing compensation and residual terms for feature films be standardized, regardless of whether a movie is released theatrically or on a streaming service.
Artificial intelligence was also a part of the talks, with the WGA seeking to regulate the use of AI-generated material in television and movies.
With a strike, late-night and variety shows will be first to feel the effects. In a letter to Wall Street analysts and media investors, the WGA warned that shows such as "Jimmy Kimmel Live," "Saturday Night Live" and "Real Time With Bill Maher" would likely go dark without writers.
In the last strike in 2007-08, the late-night shows stood in solidarity with writers until eventually coming back and trying to make do without anyone to write their jokes and skits.
Should a strike drag on through the rest of spring and into summer, the fall television offerings for the broadcast networks could also be delayed. Netflix and other streaming and premium-cable channels typically make content far in advance, as do movie studios, so it might be a while before there is any impact there.
Writers aren't the only labor challenge facing Hollywood's content makers. Talks start next week between AMPTP and the union representing directors, and in June the actors guild will commence negotiations on a new deal.
Credit: By Joe Flint
