Samsung Gets Behind the Wheel
Samsung Electronics' latest billion-dollar deal books a seat on technology's next big thing smarter cars. It looks like a ride worth taking.
The Korean technology giant said Monday it will buy U.S. auto-parts supplier Harman International Industries for $8 billion in an all-cash deal. The transaction, the largest in Samsung's history, comes as the smartphone market is maturing.
It is a bet that automobiles, which have looked roughly similar for decades, will be the next place to fit in more chips and screens. Around 65% of Harman's revenue came from supplying chips, audio systems or other parts to vehicles in the fiscal year ended in September.
Samsung isn't the only one making the bet.
The biggest semiconductor merger ever came last month as Qualcomm, which supplies chips to Samsung's smartphones, agreed to buy
NXP Semiconductors for $39 billion. NXP's automotive-chip business could help Qualcomm buffer the pain of its stalling mobile-chip business. NXP itself merged with rival Freescale just last year to become the biggest auto-semiconductor maker. Japan's Renesas, the former market leader unseated by NXP, agreed to buy Intersil for $3.2 billion in September in an attempt to fight back.
While fully self-driving cars could still be years away due to legal or even moral ramifications, there is plenty of room to make human-driven cars smarter. Touch-screen panels are commonplace in high-end cars but haven't been more widely adopted. Features such as pedestrian detection and traffic prediction can help drivers even if they still have to put their hands on the wheel.
Samsung vice chairman and heir-apparent Lee Jae-yong, who took over the helm of the company after his father was incapacitated by a heart attack two years ago, is clearly eager to put the company's cash to good use. The company has done some smaller deals in the past few months, including buying a cloud-services company, a mobile-payment firm and an artificial-intelligence startup founded by the creators of Siri.
The deal values Harman at 15.8 times next year's adjusted earnings, according to S&P Global Market Intelligence. That is higher than 10 times for Delphi Automotive and 14.8 times for Panasonic, which supplies batteries to Tesla.
Since it is an all-cash deal, the transaction will be immediately accretive to Samsung, and the company can well afford it with its $64 billion of net cash. Given the continuing frenzy in this space, the question is whether Samsung's price will be enough.
If it can close the deal, Harman offers Samsung a good lift on the automotive tech highway.
-- Jacky Wong
India's Black-Money Experiment Shines Bright for Bonds
Draining cash from an economy, like drawing blood, is a delicate procedure. As India is finding out, it can be very painful.
India's government last week moved to demonetize high-denomination bills, or 86% of all currency in circulation, and replace them with new series. A week later, cashless crowds are gathering at banks, ATMs have run dry of cash, while the central bank is telling the population not to hoard cash. The Finance Ministry relaxed previously announced daily limits on withdrawal and is taking steps to ease the pain.
The shock reform is aimed at rubbing out India's pervasive black money, or unaccounted-for cash, some counterfeit, some legitimate but evading taxes. It is a bold move for Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who should get credit for bringing a larger part of the shadow economy into the formal economy.
But it is a dangerous move in the near term. The shadow economy accounts for more than 20% of gross domestic product and cash is equal to 12% of the GDP, triple the level in emerging markets in general, according to Nomura. The move has the potential to stifle commerce until the new notes are available. Local media reported the death of a child because doctors didn't accept a deposit in 500-rupee notes.
In theory, sucking cash out of the economy should push prices down, setting the stage for the central bank to cut interest rates. Except that the sectors most affected with the largest and most conspicuous tax-evading cash transaction volumes, like real estate and jewelry don't make up a significant part of the consumer-price index.
Even still, the big winner appears to be Indian bonds. To exchange the old notes over a certain amount, Indians must deposit them in a bank account. That is flooding banks with a fresh source of funding; Nomura figures it could be 2 trillion rupees (nearly $30 billion), equivalent to 3% of India's GDP over the next three months. If a smaller round of demonetization in 1978 is any guide, much of that money will flow into government bonds.
If the reforms work, in theory it could broaden the government's tax base. And any money that doesn't get redeemed, the government can reissue and spend as it pleases without increasing the money supply.
Indian government bonds, a favorite among emerging-market investors, have rallied since the announcement. That may be a bet the reforms will work. But it could also be a bet that India's economy is about to slow. It could take Mr. Modi's plan a while to come together.
-- Anjani Trivedi
This Chinese
Uptick May
Prove Brief
China's private sector is showing a tentative revival, but investors could be in for a rude awakening as Beijing shifts back to risk control.
After months of faltering, growth in private investment in China has now ticked up two months in a row, according to official data out Monday. The problem is that it is still low, growing 2.9% year to date, short of the economy's supposed 6.7% pace.
Sustained growth in private investment, which represents around two-thirds of total investment in the country, would be welcome. But with a recovery hardly begun, policy makers alarmed by overheated real-estate prices and a bubbly bond market are signaling they want to rein in leverage.
The new credit that has flowed since late 2015 has benefited the wrong parts of the economy. Cash flowing into property and infrastructure development has helped low-value-added, state-dominated sectors such as steel, while industry overall, mostly privately owned, has lagged behind. Building-material and metal-smelting profits were up 38% from a year earlier through the first nine months of 2016, while all other industrial profits in aggregate rose only 5%. Industrial growth stayed at 6.1% in October, marking six months without acceleration.
Although China has made progress in helping private businesses access finance, many remain dependent on small banks and the murky nonbank shadow-finance sector both of which now have targets painted on their backs by regulators.
Private companies coming up for air may find themselves struggling to breathe again.
-- Nathaniel Taplin
Overheard
Chief executive officers have been cautiously expressing their views about a Donald Trump presidency. PepsiCo's Indra Nooyi criticized Mr. Trump's statements about women. Companies such as New Balance supported his antitrade stance.
Grubhub CEO Matt Maloney was more blunt, criticizing his employees for supporting Mr. Trump.
"Please reply to this email with your resignation because you have no place here," he wrote the day after the vote.
The email quickly went viral. The hashtag #boycottgrubhub spread on Twitter. Some suggested Mr. Maloney should be fired.
He tried to apologize and said he didn't ask for anyone to resign if they supported Mr. Trump.
Grubhub shares are down by one-fifth since earnings late last month on concerns of slowing growth. Perhaps Mr. Maloney was trying to get his customers so angry that they worked up an appetite.
