Inflation eased in August to a new three-year low, teeing up the Federal Reserve to begin gradually reducing interest rates at a meeting next week.
The consumer-price index climbed 2.5% from a year earlier, according to the Labor Department, decreasing from 2.9% in July and extending its cooling streak to five months. Core inflation, a measure that excludes volatile food and energy costs, held about steady at 3.2%.
Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal had expected overall prices to have risen 2.6% from a year ago, as well as a 3.2% increase in core prices.
The report likely cemented a shift in focus by the Fed from inflation, which has receded from 40-year-highs, and toward a cooling labor market, where softer hiring has sparked concerns of broader deterioration in the economy.
Major stock indexes swung between gains and losses Wednesday, extending a run of volatile trading sessions linked to economic data. The S&P 500 veered as much as 1.6% lower before rebounding to a 1.1% gain by the closing bell. The yield on 10-year Treasurys inched upward, to 3.653%, but remained near its lowest level of the year.
Firmer shelter inflation that contributed to somewhat stronger-than-anticipated core price increases in August will likely make it harder for officials to push for a larger half-percentage-point rate cut at next week's Fed meeting, Wall Street analysts said on Wednesday.
Many of the central bankers have signaled they are prepared to cut rates, and Wednesday's consumer-price index reading won't change that outcome.
But some officials hadn't entirely ruled out the prospect of a larger cut, as opposed to a more traditional reduction of a quarter percentage point, or 25 basis points.
Traders on Wednesday ramped up their bets that the Fed would start lowering rates by 0.25 point next week, but they continue to expect the Fed will cut rates by more than 1 percentage point this year. That implies at least one cut of 0.5-point in either November or December.
Fed officials face a tricky calculus because, while recent data haven't highlighted signs of an imminent slowdown, they have pointed to lower risks of sticky inflation and greater risks of a more pronounced slowdown in the labor market.
The decision over how much to cut next week is up to Fed Chair Jerome Powell, and his call will be scrutinized for what it says about how he sees those risks.
Even if the Fed starts lowering rates by 0.25 point, a debate over whether to accelerate the pace of increases in November "should be and will be much more focused on the labor market than inflation data, particularly if we continue to see these kinds of readings," said Samuel Rines, a macro strategist at asset manager WisdomTree.
Cost increases for food slowed in August, while used vehicles and energy were cheaper than a month earlier. An intensifying selloff in oil markets suggests prices at the pump will continue to decline in the coming weeks, a key reversal in pressures that have colored consumers' views of the U.S. economy.
Many analysts believe that price increases for housing will gradually slow down, following the path of inflation in other goods and services, as more renters sign new leases. That would help weigh down annual increases in overall consumer prices toward the Fed's longstanding 2% target.
"We've gotten really close to that," said Laura Veldkamp, a professor of finance and economics at Columbia University. "This battle against inflation is more or less done."
The economy is a top issue for voters who haven't decided whether to back Vice President Kamala Harris, the Democratic presidential nominee, or former President Donald Trump, the GOP's nominee. Inflation of the past few years is a big vulnerability for Democrats, and voters consistently list higher prices for energy, food and housing among their top concerns.
The report comes as investors struggle to parse the health of the U.S. economy, which has slowed from the torrid growth it enjoyed immediately after the pandemic, when employers scrambled to reopen and hire new workers.
Easing inflation has given breathing room to cost-weary families. But the labor market has also cooled, with hiring and wage growth slowing and the average spell of unemployment rising as it takes longer to find jobs.
The cost of living also hasn't fallen. "Even a more customary pace of inflation doesn't erase the rapid run-up in prices that has stretched household budgets, a strain millions of Americans are still feeling," said Greg McBride, chief financial analyst at Bankrate.com.
With rates still high and people awaiting relief in the form of lower rates on mortgages, car loans and credit cards, major retailers are adjusting to more shoppers hunting for deals. Target slashed prices to help boost sales last quarter, while Amazon.com reported that customers are increasingly looking for discounts and lower-price essentials.
But even though consumers are searching for deals, they are still spending.
"We have not seen any incremental fraying of consumer health," John David Rainey, Walmart's chief financial officer, said on a recent earnings call.
Officials at the central bank usually telegraph their moves ahead of time to avoid surprising Wall Street. But the Fed is now in a self-imposed quiet period leading up to next week's meeting, turning investors' attention to Wednesday's inflation report for final clues about the outlook for interest rates.
The uncertainty has jolted a U.S. stock market that notched record after record this year due to excitement about the prospects for artificial intelligence. Projected demand for commodities has also wavered, pushing contracts for future deliveries of oil, gasoline and diesel on Tuesday to their cheapest prices since 2021.
Generate image description

Generate image description

Credit: By David Uberti and Nick Timiraos
