Palantir Technologies used its data-mining skills in Washington to help build a $36 billion company. Now, it is confronting the challenges of doing business with the U.S. government.
Revenue growth from U.S. government contracts has slowed in recent quarters, precipitating a reversal of the company's stock-market ascension. Analysts and investors point to Palantir's loss of momentum in corners of the federal government, as agencies such as the Defense Department are increasingly looking at competitors that are less expensive than Palantir and offer more-flexible tech solutions.
Meanwhile, the company's push to expand its business with overseas governments and commercial clients hasn't completely offset the slowdown. Palantir's total revenue is estimated to have grown about 16% in 2023, according to analysts surveyed by FactSet. That would be its slowest annual growth as a public company, hampered by cooling government growth.
"Government agencies are changing the way in which they work with Palantir," said Rishi Jaluria, a software analyst at RBC Capital Markets. "They don't want to put all their eggs in one basket because Palantir is expensive."
Palantir Chief Executive Officer Alex Karp said the U.S. government is a "cyclical and difficult" business that doesn't generate revenue in the same steady manner of a commercial business.
"You can't just look at an isolated snapshot and say U.S.G. is down," he said, referring to the U.S. government business, in an interview on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.
Chief Revenue Officer Ryan Taylor told analysts in August that Palantir's U.S. government business was disappointing, but that the numbers "belie the long-term strength of our business." In November, he said Palantir's U.S. government business would pick up pace beyond its current growth rate of 10%.
In 2022, Palantir said revenue growth from U.S. government customers was more than twice that.
The U.S. Army, a top Palantir customer, is using more tech companies for each project to avoid becoming too reliant on any single company or technology and to encourage competition to keep prices lower, said an Army official.
"We want to make sure we get the most participation from industry and the most diversity," the official said.
The Army also wants more control over its own data than its software vendors have given, Brian Raftery, project manager of the Army's data platform, said at a November presentation on the Army's plans.
"My contention is that all data that is generated by the Army is Army data," Raftery said, adding that this "might cause some discomfort" and "consternation" at the technology companies that sell to the Army. He didn't specifically mention Palantir.
Some U.S. government customers have grown frustrated with Palantir over limits to how they can access their own data. The company's practice of sometimes charging customers when they want to run a new analysis using existing data on Palantir software has driven the cost up for some agencies, said former Palantir employees.
The company has said that its customers have control and ownership over their data, and that it doesn't transfer, sell or otherwise attempt to profit from customer data.
Competitors including the longtime government contractors Deloitte and Booz Allen Hamilton Holding have been landing government contracts for data analytics, Palantir's sweet spot, sometimes replacing Palantir, according to contract award announcements.
Brent Thill, a Jefferies analyst, cautioned recently that Palantir stock had been hyped by euphoria regarding artificial intelligence and that its government business is decelerating, without assurances of when it would recover. Analysts at William Blair flagged last year that Palantir would suffer from increased "competitive pressures for new defense contracts."
The company's shares tripled in the first 11 months of 2023 but have since fallen.
Palantir has said its new artificial-intelligence platform will fuel company growth. "It is going to be nearly the complete value of our business" in the future, Karp said.
---
Jack Gillum and Sam Schechner contributed to this article.
Credit: By Heather Somerville
