Ford Motor Co. plans to release a fully driverless car without a steering wheel or pedals in the next five years, the latest salvo in a technological arms race engulfing the global auto industry.
The Dearborn, Mich., auto maker on Tuesday said it would initially target ride-sharing fleets and package-delivery services with the unnamed model, underscoring the still-incremental approach many car companies are taking before offering vehicles to consumers that don't require humans behind the wheel.
Ford expects the first of its driverless cars to be used by commercial-fleet operators looking to cut the costs of employing human drivers, company executives said. The vehicles largely will be confined to cities with pre-mapped zones designed for autonomous vehicles.
Separately, Ford said it had acquired Israeli machine learning firm SAIPS and invested $75 million in Morgan Hill, Calif.-based laser sensor maker Velodyne Inc. Both are aimed at boosting Ford's autonomous-vehicle know-how, with the latter working on sensors to help autonomous cars successfully recognize objects and navigate traffic. Chinese web-service provider Baidu Inc. invested in Velodyne alongside Ford.
Ford's forays mark the latest attempt to keep up as traditional car companies and Silicon Valley upstarts race to deliver automated-driving technologies. But those endeavors have come under increased scrutiny after the May fatal crash of a Tesla Motors Inc. car driving itself. Questions also remain over regulations and legal liabilities arising from the advancements.
General Motors Co. punched the accelerator earlier this year, taking a $500 million stake in ride-hailing startup Lyft Inc., with which it plans to soon start testing a fleet of driverless taxis. The Detroit car maker also has said it expects next year to roll out its SuperCruise feature that allows for hands-free driving on the highway.
Other global giants including Toyota Motor Corp., Nissan Motor Co. and Volkswagen AG have committed to putting self-driving cars on the road. Nissan pledged it would roll out 10 new models within the next five years with a range of self-driving features aimed at individual buyers, including a fully autonomous car.
Ford's driverless car won't be made available for sales to individual customers until later in the decade, Chief Executive Officer Mark Fields said in an interview.
"We've done a lot of work reducing the cost on the technical components, but at the outset, it is still going to be a relatively expensive vehicle," he said.
Credit: By Christina Rogers
