Chicago police have arrested a 14-year-old boy in connection with a sexual assault that was streamed live on Facebook, part of a grim trend of violent acts being broadcast live on the internet.
A 15-year-old girl was lured to a Chicago residence on March 19 and assaulted by multiple juveniles while people watched online, police said Sunday.
"It just disgusts me that people would look at those videos and not pick up the phone and call 911," said Chicago Police Superintendent Eddie Johnson.
Law enforcement said they learned of the assault when the girl's mother approached Superintendent Johnson after a press conference last month to report that her daughter was missing. She also showed him snapshots of the video.
"No woman should ever be treated the way this young girl was," he said.
The 14-year-old boy is facing charges of sexual assault and manufacture and distribution of child pornography, according to police. It was unclear Sunday if he had a lawyer.
Those tracking crime in major cities say it is increasingly common for violence to be streamed on services like Facebook and Twitter or provoked by social-media interactions.
According to a tally by The Wall Street Journal, people have used Facebook Live to broadcast at least 64 violent or criminal acts, including murder, suicides and the beating in January of a mentally impaired teenager, also in Chicago.
Facebook said videos glorifying violence are against its content guidelines but that it largely relies on users to flag objectionable content. The company said it is researching the use of artificial intelligence to detect violence in live videos.
In the Chicago sexual assault case, the city's police worked with Facebook to execute social-media search warrants and track down the suspects, said Commander Brendan Deenihan. A second arrest warrant has been issued for a 15-year-old, and police expect to make more arrests as well, he said.
The victim, who was located by police after her mother reported her missing, is "extremely traumatized from this event," said Cmdr. Deenihan. After the assault, people bullied her online, causing "a lot more trauma," he said. "She's having a very difficult time even talking about what occurred," he said.
---
Deepa Seetharaman contributed to this article.
Credit: By Zusha Elinson
