Google will show artificial-intelligence-powered answers to billions of people using its search engine by the end of the year, broadening its rollout of the technology as it tries to fend off growing competition in its core business.
The move, starting this week in the U.S., strengthens Google's embrace of generative AI, computer programs that can produce fluent text and other kinds of media.
Investors and competitors consider the rollout a barometer of the search giant's confidence in the technology -- and its willingness to reshape the way people interact with information online. The rollout will be watched closely for how it affects Google's hundreds of billions of dollars in advertising sales and its relationship with online publishers that rely on the search engine for valuable traffic.
Google over the next few days will begin automatically answering certain searches in the U.S. with a feature called AI overviews. People asking Google to explain the connection between lightning and thunder, for instance, will see a passage of text answering the question at the top of the results page before the traditional list of links.
"The tech enables you to solve user problems," said Liz Reid, a vice president overseeing Google search. "When it does that -- and when it does with high-enough quality -- users embrace it and they embrace it quickly."
Google will introduce the AI-powered summaries in scenarios in which people have found they provide clear value, such as when answering lengthy queries, Reid said. Otherwise, users will see Google's typical mix of links, ads and webpage snippets.
Google unveiled the changes Tuesday at its annual I/O conference, which has become a showcase for the company's AI capabilities since the late 2022 release of Open-AI's ChatGPT prodded it to move more quickly in releasing competing technology.
None of Google's AI efforts cut closer to the heart of its business than the new search features. Google unveiled the project a year ago after Microsoft, OpenAI's largest backer, unveiled a version of the Bing search engine that used AI to respond to questions in a conversational format.
Startups such as Perplexity, which has been valued by investors at more than $1 billion, have released similar tools that can synthesize information from around the web. OpenAI is working on a search product that would compete with those offerings, said people familiar with the matter. An OpenAI spokeswoman declined to comment. Hundreds of millions of people in the U.S. will begin seeing AI overviews in search this week, and more than a billion will see them by the end of the year after they are rolled out to other countries, Google said. It tested the features with users who signed up through a program called Search Labs.
Google on Tuesday introduced several updates to its Gemini chatbot, one day after OpenAI unveiled an AI voice assistant that could better digest images and video in addition to text. The Gemini chatbot for paying subscribers can now respond to prompts that are the equivalent of 1,500 pages of text in length, or about 100 emails, Google said. A version of the chatbot available in the coming months will be able to hold audio-based conversations with users.
In one demo, Google showed a woman wearing augmented-reality glasses and asking an AI program to answer questions about her environs, harking back to the Glass project it discontinued after negative public reception. It is calling the new initiative "Project Astra."
A Google spokeswoman said the glasses were a functional research prototype from the company's AR division. "We do not have any launch plans to share," she said.
Investors are sensitive to changes in Google search that could reduce the amount people click on ads. Most of parent Alphabet's $307 billion of revenue last year came from ads placed next to search results. Google offered few details about how ads would work with the AI overviews, which take up a significant portion of the typical search-results page. It is hosting an event next week during which it is expected to provide more details about ad formats in the summaries.
---
Deepa Seetharaman contributed to this article.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
