Chinese search-engine giant Baidu Inc. is facing more turmoil in its top ranks, with President Qi Lu planning to relinquish his operational roles after about 18 months on the job.
Baidu had been betting on Mr. Lu to help it move beyond its roots as a search engine into self-driving cars and other businesses driven by artificial intelligence. A former top executive with Microsoft Corp., Mr. Lu was hired with much fanfare in January 2017, taking over day-to-day leadership from Baidu Chairman Robin Li.
In a statement Friday, Baidu said Mr. Lu will no longer serve as president and chief operating officer come July, though he will retain his post as Baidu's vice chairman.
"Due to personal and family reasons, I am no longer able to work in China on a full-time basis," Mr. Lu said in the statement, adding that he plans to spend "more time with my family in the U.S."
Baidu's American depositary receipts fell as much as 7% in after-hours trading.
Mr. Lu's resignation is the latest in a series of executive changes at Baidu, which has lagged behind rivals Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Tencent Holdings Ltd. in launching new mobile initiatives.
Two months after Mr. Lu came aboard, Baidu lost its then-chief scientist, Andrew Ng, who was spearheading the company's artificial intelligence efforts.
Baidu was once considered on par with Alibaba and Tencent, but both now dwarf Baidu in market capitalization. In 2016, Baidu was rocked by controversies over online ads for medical services, which cut into revenue.
Mr. Lu was hired as part of a turnaround effort, which also included Mr. Li's wife, Melissa Ma, taking on a role as a special assistant to her husband.
Hong Bo, an independent tech analyst, credited Mr. Lu with helping improve Baidu's reputation.
During Mr. Lu's short tenure, Baidu has made progress with its autonomous-car software called Apollo, opening it up to the auto industry. In November, Baidu was named by the Chinese government as one of the leading companies to advance the country's artificial intelligence strategy.
Baidu didn't make an announcement on Mr. Lu's successor. In its statement, the company said it promoted Haifeng Wang, who currently heads of the company's AI group, to senior vice president.
---
Yang Jie contributed to this article.

Credit: By Yoko Kubota
