An AI model can be used to detect stress in office workers based on how they use their mouse and keyboard.
So suggests a new study, which found that a machine-learning model using those measurements was more accurate at detecting stress in people than a model that tracked their heart-rate data.
"We saw that the models that just used the mouse and keyboard data performed better than the models that had the cardiac data in it," says Mara Naegelin, a Ph.D. student at ETH Zurich, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, and one of the study's authors.
Naegelin and her fellow researchers used machine-learning models to analyze data on keyboard-typing activity, mouse movements, cardiac data and a combination of two or all three of these elements to determine which performed best in terms of measuring stress. They found thatthe model trained on mouse and keyboard data performed better than the model that used mouse, keyboard and heart rates. Of the single-modality models, the cardiac data performed the worst.
The test was conducted in an environment that simulated an office environment, so the results still need to be confirmed in real-life scenarios, Naegelin says.
In the experiment, 90 students performed work-related tasks, including typing numbers into a spreadsheet, making calculations and entering claims data into a database from scanned documents.
Participants were divided into three groups. A control group carried out assigned tasks, such as planning meetings and aggregating data, with no additional work; a second group at times answered questions from managers in person in a mock interview scenario while completing other assigned tasks; and members of a third group were, at certain points, interrupted with additional questions sent through an online chat on top of tasks assigned to other groups.
At regular intervals during the experiment, participants were asked to rate their stress levels through a computer questionnaire.
Researchers learned that workers made longer, less accurate movements with their mouse, as well as more typing errors, when they were stressed. Shorter, more direct movements with the mouse were tied to lower stress levels. The study didn't focus on why increased levels of stress are thought to affect motor skills.
The researchers say they believe a stress-detection system that logs keyboard and mouse movements might be beneficial as a self-help tool for employees alongside other initiatives to improve workplace mental health. But employee participation would need to be optional and based on informed consent, and companies would need to commit to protecting user privacy.
"You would have to ask every employee that uses it whether or not they want to share that information. You have to figure out the aggregation level," such that a specific employee or group of employees can't be identified, says Raphael Weibel, a Ph.D. student at ETH Zurich and one of the authors of the study.
---
Suman Bhattacharyya is a writer in Philadelphia. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com
Credit: By Suman Bhattacharyya
