Remember Christmas in the 20th century? In bungalows, split-levels, even mansions, the holiday looked much the same: fake snow sprayed onto windows, tiny china choristers on the mantel, strings of lights that stubbornly remained one color. On the tree? Basic glass globes and strips of tinsel that invariably turned up later all over the family dog.
In 2021 almost any conceivable color, material and style of Christmas decoration can be had. Holiday decor purveyor Balsam Hill offers 141 faux-greenery garlands, from the exuberantly fruited "Outdoor Berry Burst Foliage" to a poetically melancholy string of rumpled magnolia leaves. Far-flung locales yield crafty options: papier-mache cardinals from Ukraine, granny-square tree skirts from Portland, Ore. Said designer Lance Thomas, co-owner of Thomas Guy Interiors in Lake Charles, La., who began his career kitting out clients' holiday homes, "I think the Internet is 100% the largest driver of inspiration and access to buying." To help you customize your own Christmas look, we found great examples within eight categories of trimmings and four popular styles -- traditional, modern, maximalist and organic. Stick to one aesthetic, or mix and match.
---
HOSE FOR THE HOLIDAYS / HANG THEM WITH CARE
Traditional: Sock of Ages: Small-town scenes rendered as seasonal stitchings add a grace note of nostalgia to this embroidered loot bag. Christmas Needlepoint Stocking Cotton, $30, LLBean.com
Modern: Restocking: Made from leftover scraps of organic cotton, this patchwork swag sack brings atypical color blocking to your mantel. Shay Christmas Stocking, $45, FermLiving.us
Maximalist: Blues Power: These bold, one-of-a-kind Santa bags sewn from brightly colored vintage Peruvian bed covers buck the tyranny of green and red. Turquoise Otomi Stocking, $195, StFrank.com
Organic: Folksy Foot: Hand-sewn in Vermont and prewashed for a homey texture, this linen-and-cotton mantel tenant gets just-enough zip from subtle zigzag stripes. Scarlet Maine Weave Stocking, $65, Nordstrom.com
---
BIRD BAUBLES / BLOWN GLASS OR PAPIER-MACHE, FOUR SPECIES OF AVIAN CHARMER TO PERCH IN YOUR TANNENBAUM
Maximalist: Heavy Feather Ahead: Handblown in a Bavarian glass factory, this chick preens in 30 layers of painstakingly applied plumage, paint and sequins. Inge-Glas Manufaktur Lotta Ornament, $23, SaksFifthAvenue.com
Organic: Gentle Soul: Felted from locally sourced wool in Central Asia's Kyrgyzstan, this socially conscious feathered friend is child-safe and squeezably soft. Little Blue Bird Ornament, $22, CraftSpring.com
Traditional: Classic Red Breast: A study in scarlet, this puffy papier-mache songbird made in Eastern Europe has hand-gilded wings to catch the light. Ukrainian Bird Ornament, Cardinal, $15, AcornOnline.com
Modern: Brancusi on a Branch: This sculpted parrot made of high-fired porcelain with a chalky matte finish will from a distance mimic a snow drift on an evergreen backdrop. Parrot Ornament, $28, JonathanAdler.com
---
LIGHTS FANTASTIC / THEY SPARKLE, THEY BUBBLE -- ONE OF THESE SETS OF TWINKLERS IS BOUND TO SUIT YOUR STYLE (FROM TOP TO BOTTOM)
Organic: Poetic Wax: These reusable, retro sconces require no electricity; just clip them on and add candles -- to burn or not. Flower Shape Christmas Candle Clip, $14, Amazon.com
Traditional: Vintage Wonderland: A strand of 50 wavy glass bulbs in crayon colors will spark nostalgia while remaining cool to the touch. Heritage Teardrop LED String Lights, $26, Noma.com
Modern: Low Glow: Tiny, warm-white lights on a 120-foot length of featherweight, bendable silver wire will lend a restrained, fairy-tale aura to any space you desire, indoors or out. Electric LED String Lights, 10 feet, $22, WestElm.com
Maximalist: Body Bubble: These carnival-colored glass tapers burble hypnotically after they heat up, but if one breaks don't touch the methylene chloride liquid. Traditional Bubble Light Set 7 Lamps, $15, noveltylights.com
---
COSMIC CAPPERS / GAZE AT THESE POINTEDLY DIFFERENT STARS -- FINE FINISHES FOR TREETOPS IN WOOD, WIRE, SHELLS AND RATTAN
Traditional: Folk Star: A hand-carved reminder of a simpler era, this timeless barn-red beechwood beacon exudes universal appeal atop a Christmas tree. Hand-Painted Wood Tree Topper in Brick, $77, LuluAndGeorgia.com
Modern: High-Wire Act: Shaped from strands of medium-weight steel, artist Celina Mancurti's night-sky silhouette is both pared-down and overstated, with an expansive 10-inch diameter. Wire Star Tree Topper, $32, Food52.com
Maximalist: Luminous Lotus: This brass-edged crowner shines light through pond-flower petals fashioned from windowpane-oyster shells. Illuminated Capiz Star Tree Topper, $42, anthropologie.com
Organic: Natural Beauty: A textural twinkler in rattan on a black metal base provides you with a rough-hewn piece de resistance. Woven Tree Topper, Threshold Designed With Studio McGee, $20, Target.com
---
FRONT-DOOR DECOR / A HIP SQUARE, BLINGY RING, FAB FAKE AND MOSSY WHEEL
Traditional: Artificial Intelligence: A chic throwback to the postwar promise of plastics, this realistic ring of faux cedar, lamb's ear and berries will look fresh forever. DesignsByCandCRoom Woodland Christmas Wreath, $110, Etsy.com
Modern: Edgy Hedge: A fresh take on preserved boxwood, this close-clipped cube will stay verdant year-round if you make sure to mist it. Square Boxwood Wreath Large, $175, AnnieSelke.com
Maximalist: Grand Illusion: Flat as a stage set, this wooden board presents as 3-D with an artfully painted scene sealed beneath a coat of varnish. Trompe L'Oeil Christmas Wreath Small, $195, ScullyAndScully.com
Organic: Lichen It: Many-hued varieties of preserved moss will add an authentic botanical bent to your festive entrance. Would be at home in the forest at Hogwarts. Mixed Moss Wreath, $150, ShopTerrain.com
---
SKIRT SELECTION / FOUR FOR THE FLOOR AROUND THE BASE OF YOUR TREE
Modern: Drift to Get: Decked with a flurry of snowflakes, a cozy but austere wool tree cloak has buttons to adjust for any trunk or stand. 72" Handmade Christmas Tree Skirt in Felt-Tacked Snowflakes on Cream, $380, ArcadiaHomeInc.com
Maximalist: Floor Show: For a luxuriously layered look, home goods designer Kim Seybert bejeweled a scarlet tree robe with more than 2,000 glass and plastic baubles. Royal Beaded Velvet Tree Skirt, $698, NeimanMarcus.com
Traditional: Forest Frolic: Embroidered in Scandi-classic red-and-white style, a cotton garland of acorns and leaves sets the scene for antler banter beneath your tree. Nordic Reindeer Tree Skirt, $129, PotteryBarn.com
Organic: One-Knit Wonder: Festooned with folkloric patterns and created by a collective of Bosnian knitters, no two of these woolen tree undergarments are exactly alike. Heirloom Candy Cane Tree Skirt, $598, SundanceCatalog.com
---
COVER STORIES / FROM LEFT, FOUR GIFT WRAPS THAT TELL DIFFERENT HOLIDAY TALES, WHETHER CUTE AND CONSERVATIVE OR BOLDLY UNORTHODOX
Traditional: Scandi Sheet: A naive Nordic scheme of snowflakes, reindeer and town folk is screen printed in a classic palette of green, red and gold. Scandinavian Christmas Handmade Paper, $5 a sheet, PaperSource.com
Modern: Wrapped Attention: A pattern of clean, contemporary waves washes over sheets of luxe matte Holiday Wave Wrapping Paper, designed by Chicago duo Baumbirdy. $15 for 5 sheets, Minted.com
Maximalist: Arctic Blast: An exquisitely rendered floral celebrates such cold-hardy holiday heroes as red baneberries. Frozen Flora Wrapping Paper, $15 for 3 sheets, BySheShe.com
Organic: Gift Lift: A duo of mother-daughter designers created these multiuse drawstring cotton bags, including pompoms and yarn ties. Reusable Gift Wrap Bundle, $20, UncommonGoods.com
(See accompanying photos -- WSJ Dec. 11, 2021)
Credit: By Mark Golin and Michelle Slatalla
