SEOUL -- In the battle to defend humans from another humbling by computers, has mankind got the right representative?
The ancient Chinese boardgame of Go was the last professionally played game in which top pros were unchallenged by machines. Not any longer.
South Korean grandmaster Lee Se-dol was beaten in the first game of a best-of-five Go tournament against Google-developed artificial intelligence project AlphaGo on Wednesday in Seoul.
"I am in shock. I never thought I would lose," Mr. Lee said after the match.
Go is a simple looking but hugely complex game using black-and-white counters to win territory on a 19-by-19 grid of lines. It is played by around 40 million people, mostly in East Asia.
It represents a quantum leap for computers from when IBM's Deep Blue beat world chess champion Garry Kasparov in 1997, and when the Watson supercomputer triumphed over flesh-and-blood contestants in the TV quiz show "Jeopardy" in 2011.
Go is so complex that mathematicians have long studied it and players say no Go game has been played the same way twice. Some mathematicians have calculated the number of possible Go games to be 171 digits long. Within the first 40 moves, there are believed to be more possible positions than atoms in the observable universe, a number roughly 80 digits long. The number of possible games of chess is roughly 50 digits long, according to some calculations.
The babyfaced 33-year-old Mr. Lee has been on the front of almost every national newspaper as South Korea has become transfixed.
The downtown hotel where the match is being played has been turned into a Las Vegas strip hotel on prizefight night, with public figures coming and going to soak in the slow-moving action.
Mr. Lee is by far the most successful active Go professional, with 18 world titles since he turned pro in 1995. But he has had less success in recent years, winning only one tournament last year.
The rising star of Go is an 18-year-old Chinese player, Ke Jie, a younger player who has dominated in the past few years. Mr. Ke is undefeated against Mr. Lee, having beaten him twice this year. In 2015, he became the first player since Mr. Lee to win two world titles in one year.
Mr. Ke made his thoughts known about Mr. Lee's loss soon after play finished. "AlphaGoa may have defeated Lee Se-dol, but it can't beat me," he wrote on his Weibo account, a Twitter-like social-media service in China.
Demis Hassabis, founder of Google DeepMind, the developer of AlphaGo, said before the tournament that Mr. Lee was the ideal professional to test the program against because of his pedigree, but future matches might include Mr. Ke and other professionals from China and Japan, where Go is also popular.
Go experts generally agreed Mr. Lee failed to recover from a bad move early in the opening game. "Is he going to bring his A-game tomorrow? He'd better," said Andrew Jackson, vice president of operations at the American Go Association.
Credit: By Alastair Gale and Jonathan Cheng
