Goldman Sachs Group's asset management arm has completed fundraising for its debut fund dedicated to backing high-technology businesses in healthcare, a sector where many companies have lost significant value since 2021.
The GSAM unit of the New York investment bank has raised $650 million for West Street Life Sciences I, through which the firm backs early- and mid-stage businesses focused on areas such as precision medicine, cell therapy, immunotherapy, synthetic biology and artificial intelligence, Goldman said. The fund gives the firm a chance to capitalize on recently reduced company values in the sector.
GSAM has already invested around $90 million from the new fund in five businesses, including cancer-drug developer Nested Therapeutics in Cambridge, Mass., and Rapport Therapeutics in Boston, a precision-medicine company that develops treatments for neurological conditions, the firm said.
Goldman had aimed initially to raise as much as $500 million for the fund. The vehicle received commitments from a mix of institutional and individual investors, corporate investment arms as well as the firm itself and Goldman employees, the bank said.
Debut funds have proved especially difficult to raise over the past 18 months as a shortage of capital among many institutional investors has led to a higher proportion flowing to larger, more established firms and strategies. First-time funds accounted for $38.8 billion of private-equity capital raised last year to the end of the third quarter, equivalent to 5% of the total, the lowest proportion since at least 2001, according to data provider Preqin.
Amit Sinha, who leads GSAM's life-sciences investing team, said Goldman seeks to fill a "capital void" in the market left by an exodus of Main Street and generalist investors. The absence began emerging in 2021 as the world started to move beyond the Covid-19 pandemic and the gap widened in early 2022, when a sharp increase in interest rates drove up the cost of capital and dented the valuations of companies that need a lot of cash to develop their products, such as those focused on life sciences.
The Nasdaq Biotechnology Index fell 35% by the end of the 2022 second quarter from a third-quarter 2021 peak. Since September 2022, the index has climbed about 27%.
"The nature of innovation in this space is not linear and is often fraught with setbacks. You may think you only need 12 months of capital to get to that value-creating event, but 12 months can quickly become 18," Sinha said.
But the sector has been lucrative for investors who brave the risks. The average internal rate of return for life-sciences deals over the past 10 years has been 25%, with top-quartile performers achieving more than 50%, according to data from consulting firm Bain & Co. The inherent technological and regulatory risk, however, means life-sciences demonstrates a greater variance in returns than other types of healthcare investment.
Several multiplatform asset managers, such as Blackstone and KKR & Co., have thrown their weight behind life-sciences investment in recent years as they look to exploit their ability to raise and deploy large amounts of capital.
Such asset managers also benefit from their holdings of "life-sciences-adjacent" businesses, such as equipment manufacturers and research providers, which can work alongside newly acquired companies, Sinha said.
He added that in addition to the life-sciences investment team, Goldman has formed an advisory board whose members include Dr. Ross Levine, a leukemia specialist with the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, and Dr. Lloyd Minor, dean of Stanford University School of Medicine.
Credit: By Rod James
