What do you do when a sudden break from past trends profoundly reorders the way the world works? If you're a business, one thing you probably can't do is turn to existing artificial intelligence.
To carry out one of its primary applications, predictive analytics, today's AI requires vast quantities of relevant data. When things change this quickly, there's no time to gather enough. Many pre-pandemic models for many business functions are no longer useful; some might even point businesses in the wrong direction.
AI has seemed to many experts like some kind of magic sauce that could be poured over any business process to transform it into an unstoppable deliverer of self-driving cars and destroyer of white-collar work. As the date for those types of disruption continues to be pushed back, it's clear that AI isn't progressing as fast as we were once told, and that it won't be a cure-all.
It is hardly an AI winter, but a chill is definitely in the air. Businesses for which AI is more of an add-on are furloughing data scientists previously awarded stratospheric salaries, and complaining they can't find uses for AI.
The hype around AI is subsiding. The flip side of this trend is we're starting to see that, far from being magical, AI is most useful for accomplishing some pretty mundane stuff. We use AI daily, every time we talk to a voice-activated personal assistant or unlock our phones with our faces or fingerprints. Beyond that, for most businesses, academics, public-health researchers and actual rocket scientists, AI is mostly about assisting humans in making decisions, says Rachel Roumeliotis, a vice president at O'Reilly Media, a publishing and events company that, among other things, teaches coders how to use AI.
When SharpestMinds, a startup that sells mentoring services to data scientists, surveyed its alumni in April and again in May, it found that 6% of respondents had been affected by furloughs, pay cuts or layoffs.
Uber recently shut down its AI research lab, and Airbnb's layoffs included at least 29 full-time data scientists, according to its directory of those let go.
SharpestMinds founder Edouard Harris says hiring for such roles has slowed significantly, down by 50% since before the pandemic.
What's happening is not so much a reckoning as a "rationalization" of the application of AI in businesses, says Rajeev Sharma, head of enterprise AI at Pactera Edge, a technology-consulting firm. "[Companies] feel this is a time they can get rid of extra hires or lower performers who are not a good cultural fit," he adds.
By contrast, the deep-pocketed big tech companies clearly see AI as core to their businesses, and plan to keep hiring like crazy. Google Chief Executive Sundar Pichai has said that in the sweep of human history, AI is more important than electricity or fire, and all the Big Five have said they'll continue to add to their engineering ranks during the downturn, including data scientists and AI experts.
A just-released survey of nearly 1,400 AI professionals, conducted by O'Reilly Media, found the two biggest barriers to the use of AI in businesses are leaders who don't appreciate its value, and the difficulty of finding business problems for which AI might be useful.
Right now, AI's top-shelf approach to solving many problems, the so-called deep-learning algorithms, are good at doing things like identifying cats in pictures and beating humans at the strategy game Go. However, they require enormous quantities of data to train, and are left flat-footed when that data no longer represents the world we live in, says Gary Marcus, a New York University professor and former head of autonomous driving at Uber. That is, rather than resembling the mock-ups of the world that human brains construct, they're just big engines for finding statistical correlations.
The biggest tech companies have enough data to build AI systems that can identify things in images or recognize human voices, but other types of AI -- say, an algorithm to predict the best way to route goods through a supply chain or the buying habits of shoppers -- break down during events like the pandemic. Even in good times, small- and medium-size businesses simply don't have enough data to train useful AI systems, says Prof. Marcus.
A number of studies comparing new AI algorithms to "old-fashioned" ones have found they perform no better -- and sometimes worse -- than systems developed years before.
Researchers on the AI-development front lines are bullish about its long-term value and say any retrenchments are only temporary. At the Allen Institute for AI, founded by late Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen, researchers are applying AI to the discovery of treatments, vaccines, and clinical insights into the behavior of Covid-19, says Oren Etzioni, who heads the institute.
When AI is applied to well-defined tasks, the increasing availability of massive data sets, better deep-learning algorithms, and growing computational power are the very things that will make it "a transformative tool for scientists as we face pandemics, climate change, or any other of humanity's thorniest problems," he adds.
Researchers are working to fix the core problem in modern AI -- the demand for so much data -- but a solution is a long way off, says Chris Mattmann, deputy chief technology and innovation officer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. His own team had to employ a posse of Ph.D. students and postdocs to spend three years labeling images from the surface of Mars to train a system to automatically identify geographic and geological features of a Martian landscape. The system will make its debut on Mars Helicopter, a drone that's part of the Perseverance rover mission scheduled to launch this summer. Mercifully, the rocks of Mars don't change much from year to year.
Even firms that still want to make AI part of their business processes are discovering they might have less need for specialists than the kind of day-to-day software engineering that is required to suck up data, clean it, then send it off to some cloud AI service, says Mr. Sharma. Everyone I spoke with agreed that "data engineering" is the next evolution of data science.
Yes, AI is failing to deliver on some of its biggest promises. But we're entering a time when the things it does well are becoming more apparent.
"I think when people say 'AI' they still think robots and chatbots," says Ms. Roumeliotis. "Basically it's a thing that can help you analyze data and make choices."

Credit: By Christopher Mims
