Healthcare companies have been mesmerized by the possibilities of "synthetic data" -- data built out by applying artificial intelligence algorithms to real data sets. But ongoing technology challenges continue to limit widespread industry adoption, with many companies holding back on using it.
For years, drug and health researchers have been experimenting with the technology, which enables them to more freely analyze, for example, the impact of a drug on a given subpopulation, without the typical privacy and regulatory hurdles. A 2021 Gartner study estimated that by next year, 60% of the data used broadly for the development of AI and analytics projects would be synthetically generated.
Reality is nowhere near that, clarified Arun Chandrasekaran, an analyst at the IT research and consulting firm. In some areas, he said, the engendered data has made headway, for instance, as images for training self-driving cars. But in health and drug research, where synthetic data could be particularly useful in generating medical records, adoption remains low.
The technology's steep cost and the sparse number of vendors have been a drag on its uptake. But the far larger problem, healthcare companies say, is ensuring that synthetic data accurately represents the target population -- in other words, is more like real data.
"The complexity and the variability in healthcare and science makes it a really hard problem to solve," said Jim Swanson, chief information officer of Johnson & Johnson.
One area where Swanson sees promise is in analyzing the long-term impacts and effectiveness of medicines already on the market. Currently the company does this with de-identified patient data -- data from which identifiers have been removed or changed, but which could be linked back to the person by other details. Synthetic data could create much larger data sets, including in areas with stringent data curbs, the company said.
But creating a representative data set is hard, given the many relevant variables in patients: how many medications they are on, whether they smoke, whether they need a hip replacement, among many others, Swanson said. And those variables can change as new scientific discoveries emerge, he added. At the same time, it's critical that the mix and makeup of variables in the original data be fairly captured in the synthetic data order to run an accurate analysis.
"You can create synthetic data easily enough, but is it correlated enough to give you a specific and an accurate example?" Swanson said. "That's the problem you have to solve."
When creating synthetic data, there's a trade-off between accuracy and privacy, said Lalana Kagal, principal research scientist at the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab. Typically, synthetic data is created by running real data through an AI algorithm that re-creates it in a form that is similar, but not identical. The closer the synthetic data is to the original source data, the more accurate it is -- but it is also more likely to leak the original data. In addition, it's unclear exactly how similar synthetic data must be to the source data to be subject to HIPAA laws, she said. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act shields health records.
It's possible new techniques could be developed to ensure the original data stays private without sacrificing the accuracy of the synthetic data, Kagal said. Meanwhile, some companies are hanging back.
In 2021, genomics company Illumina published a promising case study on the use of synthetic data in genomics with technology vendor Gretel. More recently, however, Illumina said synthetic data isn't a priority in research and development at the company.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
