China's internet industry is dominated by a trio of giants, and one of the biggest weapons they use to maintain their dominance is their checkbook.
Search engine Baidu Inc., e-commerce company Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and gaming-and-social-media company Tencent Holdings Ltd. -- known collectively as BAT -- all have used a combination of minority-stake investments in startups and acquisitions to ensure they don't miss out on big trends and can build wide-reaching ecosystems that reinforce their core businesses.
Take online video. Alibaba spent some $4 billion last year to acquire Youku Tudou to compete with Tencent Video and Baidu's iQiyi -- meaning China's three biggest video sites are under the BAT troika. Similarly, Alibaba spent $1.5 billion in 2014 to acquire AutoNavi, one of the three big mapping companies along with Baidu Map and Tencent Map.
I have written before about how the big three act as kingmakers among China's startups. But the impact is farther-reaching. The net effect is that while the three of them compete aggressively with each other, they also pre-empt broader disruption by gobbling up share in developing sectors of the industry.
U.S. internet companies like Facebook Inc. and Google parent Alphabet Inc. also invest in and acquire startups as part of their strategies. But as much as those companies are dominant within specific slices of the internet business -- search, social -- the collective clout of China's big three is hard to compare.
"The monopoly power of BAT is much greater than the internet giants in the U.S.," says Xinlei Chen, professor of marketing at Shanghai Jiaotong University. Prof. Chen says part of the reason is laxer antitrust rules. He says the trio's dominance hurts innovation, and advocates more regulation of China's internet sector.
Alibaba, Tencent and Baidu declined to comment on their investment strategies.
Their investment activity this year has remained intense. Tencent is the fourth most-active investor in China so far this year, ahead of Sequoia Capital and SoftBank Group Corp., making altogether 25 venture investments and acquisitions in the country, according to Dealogic. Alibaba and Baidu rank lower, but Baidu is seeking to catch up, establishing two investment vehicles in the past two months: a $200 million venture fund to invest in startups that focus on artificial intelligence and other new technologies, and a 20 billion yuan ($3 billion) private-equity fund to invest in internet companies.
The big three not only dominate in their core businesses, they're also quickly expanding into new businesses. To see how active they are in targeting hot new areas, look at the shareholder structure of ride-sharing champion Didi Chuxing Technologies Co., one of the biggest new internet companies to arise in recent years.
Tencent was an early investor in Didi, while Alibaba was an early backer of another riding-sharing app, Kuaidi. Those rivals merged to form what became Didi Chuxing to take on UberChina, an affiliate of Uber Technologies Inc. in which Baidu was a strategic investor. So when Didi Chuxing acquired UberChina, it ended up with all three Chinese internet giants as shareholders. The three combined now own about 19% of Didi, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Ivy Li, founding partner at venture-capital firm Seven Seas Partners in Menlo Park, Calif., says the Chinese internet giants are more intent than U.S. counterparts on using startup investments to cultivate ecosystems for their businesses. "I don't hear the word 'ecosystem' here as much as in China," she says.
In his 1,569-word-long letter to shareholders this month, Alibaba Chief Executive Daniel Zhang used the word "ecosystem" 10 times. Tencent mentioned the word four times in its 2015 annual report.
Access to data is a big part of it. With the help of its wide-reaching ecosystem, Alibaba is transitioning from an e-commerce company to a data company, says its executive chairman, Jack Ma. "Alibaba collects massive amounts of data on its e-commerce marketplaces, through mobile wallet Alipay, and from digital entertainment sites and social media properties operating within its ecosystem," Alibaba says in a post on its website explaining Mr. Ma's vision.
Although Alibaba and others say that they want to use the data from their ecosystems to provide better services to their users and clients, the concentration of data within a few biggest companies make some people feel uneasy in China. Prof. Chen argues that the government should change how it regulates internet companies.
Instead of focusing on pricing power, which doesn't apply to internet companies very well since much is free online, he says that regulators should look more into new online resources such as data and web traffic. "If core resources such as data and traffic are controlled by only a handful of companies, it will be difficult to prevent them from manipulating the market," he wrote in an article last year.
Credit: By Li Yuan
