WASHINGTON -- Legislation with bipartisan support in Congress would expand the role of the National Science Foundation and provide up to $200 billion in tech and related research funding to meet what backers say is a growing threat from China.
The centerpiece of the package is a bill that would rename the federal government's science agency as the National Science and Technology Foundation, and authorize it to spend $100 billion over five years for research into artificial intelligence and machine learning, robotics, high-performance computing and other advanced technologies.
An additional $10 billion would be authorized for the Commerce Department to designate at least 10 regional technology hubs for research, development and manufacturing of key technologies.
Additional funding would likely be made available for domestic semiconductor manufacturing and other tech-related supply-chain proposals.
The Endless Frontier Act got a hearing before the Senate Commerce Committee on Wednesday, drawing support from Republicans and Democrats. Still, partisan and regional concerns are likely to emerge, including over the package's size.
Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.), who is pushing the effort, also wants to include additional measures to boost funding for semiconductor manufacturing as well as shoring up domestic supply chains for manufacturing and other initiatives, people familiar with the matter said.
Those initiatives could add tens of billions of dollars to the package's price tag, with some of that money potentially being funded as part of President Biden's $2.3 trillion infrastructure plan.
Lawmakers in both parties also expressed concern about veering too far from market-centered decision making and establishing industrial policy.
"We will not beat China by copying its strategy," said Sen. Roger Wicker (R., Miss.), the top Republican on the panel. Strategic government investments "are important, but we will not win by simply throwing money at the problem."
Credit: By John D. McKinnon
