Google stopped selling the latest version of Glass after the device sparked privacy concerns and didn't gain traction with consumers.
The company said on its website Wednesday it was no longer selling Glass Enterprise Edition, the most recent version of the product. It didn't say why.
Google, like other tech companies, has been cutting costs in recent months.
Google said in a statement Thursday that it was still working on other augmented-reality products.
"We'll continue to look at ways to bring new, innovative AR experiences across our product portfolio," the company said.
Google's Glass project had been troubled from the time the company sold its first prototypes in 2013. Both regulators and consumers raised concerns about how the device could secretly record people in public and collect sensitive data for Google. Google marketed Glass as a next-generation device that could take pictures or project holographic computer images for the person wearing it.
Google has redesigned Glass over the years, making the product look less like a sci-fi movie prop and more like traditional glasses. The company at one point worked with an Italian eyewear maker. But Glass sales were lackluster. People were hesitant to spend sometimes $1,000 or more on a device with few obvious uses.
The company paused individual sales of Glass in 2015. Google brought the product back two years later as Glass Enterprise Edition, targeted at corporate customers.
Google said on its website Wednesday that until September it would continue helping Glass users resolve app issues or problems with their devices.
Many tech companies, including Google, have been cutting costs over concerns about a slowing economy. Google's parent company, Alphabet Inc., said in January that it was laying off 6% of its workforce, or 12,000 jobs, in its biggest-ever round of job cuts.
"These are important moments to sharpen our focus, reengineer our cost base, and direct our talent and capital to our highest priorities," Alphabet Chief Executive Sundar Pichai wrote in a message to employees announcing the changes.
Google has focused considerable attention over the years on its consumer-electronics ventures like Glass. Now Google is also concentrating on the race to debut new artificial-intelligence products and keep up with competitors like Microsoft Corp. and OpenAI.
Other tech companies have experimented with wearable devices that use augmented reality. Snap Inc. released video-recording sunglasses in 2016 but has struggled to sell them and trademark the product name, Spectacles. The Wall Street Journal reported in 2021 that Apple Inc. could unveil a headset or smart glasses in 2022, but Apple hasn't released such a product.
Snap and Apple didn't return requests to comment on Thursday.
Credit: By Alyssa Lukpat
