In one scene in "Her," a love story set in the not-too-distant future, the main character, Theodore (Joaquin Phoenix), is meeting with his soon-to-be-ex-wife (Rooney Mara). She confronts him with a question that many people nowadays jokingly ask their spouses: "You're dating your computer?"
The answer: yes. Played by Scarlett Johansson, Theodore's operating-system paramour -- named Samantha -- isn't just able to organize his schedule and clean out his inbox in seconds. She ultimately teaches him how to love again following devastating heartbreak, and makes him a better person. And she does it just with her voice.
"Of course I am going to defend the character I play for being not just a product of artificial intelligence," says Ms. Johansson. She and Mr. Jonze "were trying to make sure that she didn't feel like something Theodore had purchased. It was important that she stood up for herself when she felt wronged, that she was a real, fully realized character."
Ms. Johansson has gotten accolades on the film-festival circuit for her nuanced role, winning the best actress award at the Rome Film Festival. Warner Bros. is campaigning for a best supporting actress Academy Awards nomination, which would be a first for a voice-only performance. Herewith, a sampling of other notable vocal feats in filmmaking:
Robot & Frank -- In this 2012 indie, Peter Sarsgaard plays the voice of a home health-aid robot who becomes a co-conspirator in a jewel heist organized by his owner (Frank Langella). "You're starting to grow on me," Frank says to the robot. The robot replies: "Thank you, Frank. It's time for your enema."
Star Wars -- Although the man wearing the black suit in the George Lucas space franchise was British actor named David Prowse, the booming voice of villain Darth Vader was that of James Earl Jones. Mr. Lucas originally wanted to cast Orson Welles, but feared his voice would be too recognizable to audiences. The role "didn't pay much, and it never will pay much," Mr. Jones told the BBC. Had he been a credited actor, "I would have gotten points and all that stuff, and been made a millionaire. I am happy to have been special effects. That's all I was."
The Exorcist -- In this 1973 horror film, Linda Blair plays Regan, a teenage girl who becomes possessed by the devil. Well-known radio actress Mercedes McCambridge lent her dubbed voice to Ms. Blair's post-possession character, named Pazuzu, uttering many unprintably profane lines.
Charlie's Angels -- "Charlie, how will we ever know you really truly exist unless you come down here and have a coconut with us?" asks a sunbathing Cameron Diaz in the 2000 film reboot of the TV series, in which John Forsythe played Charlie, the boss three crime-fighting bombshells. "Faith, angels. It's called faith," says a voice emerging from a small speaker.
Credit: By Rachel Dodes
