General Electric Co. said Tuesday it would buy a pair of tech startups and unveiled several new customers for its GE Digital business, as the conglomerate seeks to convince investors its future is as much about software as heavy machinery.
GE said it acquired Wise.io Inc., a machine-learning firm in Berkeley, Calif., and Bit Stew Systems Inc., which enables the "ingestion" of masses of data for industrial applications. Terms weren't disclosed.
The deals would add about 120 staff to help expand the product offerings of GE Digital, a software unit with headquarters in San Ramon, Calif. Company officials said the unit would generate orders of $7 billion this year.
The deals come a day after GE said it would spend $915 million to acquire ServiceMax, a Pleasanton, Calif., firm that makes apps for service functions such as inventory management and workforce scheduling. GE previously invested in ServiceMax, which had raised more than $200 million, through its venture capital arm.
The acquisitions are helping the company build up Predix, its software platform aimed at assisting industrial customers such as utilities and airlines gather and analyze data to better manage their equipment and wring out greater efficiencies, said Bill Ruh, the company's chief digital officer and head of GE Digital. "It really is about transforming the service business," he said in an interview.
GE already was an investor in Bit Stew after leading a $17.2 million financing round in the Burnaby, British Columbia, company last year.
Investors also included Cisco Systems Inc., another company that could benefit from Bit Stew's technology, which helps unify data from disparate operating systems.
Wise.io was founded in 2012 by a group of data scientists. Its technology helps route customer-service requests.
GE, like its industrial competitors, is trying to prove to customers that they can get more life out of heavy machinery -- while avoiding unplanned outages -- by using the company's software to analyze and predict how the machines will perform.
GE's top executives will be discussing the software business at the company's annual Minds + Machines conference in San Francisco this week.
GE Digital is on track to garner about $6 billion in revenue this year, up 20% from last year, Mr. Ruh said. GE expects to have 20,000 developers working on software designed for its Predix platform by the end of the year, up from 10,000 in June.
Among the new clients GE would discuss is Exelon Corp., which will use Predix software across its fleet of power plants to analyze the past performance of its assets and to manage maintenance and downtime.
GE wants to hit $15 billion in software sales by 2020. The company says about half of that revenue should come from selling Predix applications to the electricity industry, which is under constant pressure to improve efficiency across the electricity business -- in generation, transmission, and the equipment that operates the power grid.
Credit: By Ted Mann
