The U.S. Copyright Office supported a copyright registration for a comic book created with the help of an artificial intelligence program, but said that individual AI-generated images couldn't be granted protection, the latest development in a closely watched case that has become a barometer for how AI art might be treated in the eyes of the law.
New York-based author and software developer Kris Kashtanova initially obtained copyright protection for the 18-page graphic novel "Zarya of the Dawn" last year. Mx. Kashtanova, who uses a gender-neutral honorific and pronouns, used a series of written prompts to guide the AI software Midjourney to create the images in the book, which describes the voyage of a young person through several futuristic worlds and was the subject of an article in The Wall Street Journal last month.
After a monthslong review, the Copyright Office wrote to Mx. Kashtanova's lawyer Tuesday to say that the copyright would remain in place for the novel, but that it would be amended to exclude individual, AI-generated images. It said it didn't have further comment on the matter.
Mx. Kashtanova posted on Twitter that their legal team was considering what further steps to explain to the Copyright Office how AI-generated images merit copyright protection.
The Copyright Office's decision noted that Mx. Kashtanova wrote the text and arranged and edited the images into their final form. But it ruled that what it called the unpredictable output of Midjourney meant that Mx. Kashtanova didn't create the individual images in "Zarya of the Dawn."
"Because Midjourney starts with a randomly generated noise that evolves into a final image, there is no guarantee that a particular prompt will generate any particular visual output," the letter from the Copyright Office said.
Van Lindberg, an intellectual property lawyer at Taylor English Duma LLP in San Antonio who is representing Mx. Kashtanova along with legal group Open Advisory Services, said more focus should be paid to how Mx. Kashtanova used the AI tool, refining their written prompts to create specific images. The importance of such prompts have gained more attention as software such as OpenAI's ChatGPT, Midjourney and DALL-E become more capable.
Mx. Kashtanova, who works as head of AI product at Mini Studio Inc., a New York tech company, made a similar point. "It is fundamental to understand that the output of a Generative AI depends directly on the creative input of the artist and is not random," they posted. Mx. Kashtanova previously described how they entered a series of written prompts into Midjourney, using a selection of phrases such as "New York skyline forest punk" and "crepuscular rays" to create a specific atmosphere.
Opponents of AI-generated art, meanwhile, have criticized it for sifting through masses of copyrighted images online to create new ones. Several artists have begun legal action, saying their images were included in reference databases without their permission.
Mr. Lindberg said he was pleased the registration for "Zarya of the Dawn" continues to be valid. "AI-assisted images can be brought together and the arrangement is copyrightable," he said. "That covers a lot of uses for the people in the AI art community."
Credit: By James Hookway
