Activist investor Elliott Management Corp. has taken a big stake in Pinterest Inc., according to people familiar with the matter, as the once-hot social-media company grapples with a decline in users and other challenges.
Elliott has told the company that it is the biggest investor in Pinterest, having built a stake of more than 9% in recent months -- partly in common stock, one of the people said. The activist has been in discussions with Pinterest over the past several weeks. It couldn't be learned what they have been discussing.
It has been a time of turmoil for Pinterest, which operates a free online platform for sharing images that inspire projects such as planning weddings, completing home renovations and creating recipes.
In June, Ben Silbermann stepped down as chief executive, becoming executive chairman. The company named Bill Ready, who had been president of commerce at Alphabet Inc.'s Google since 2020, as his successor. r
The moves came after several Pinterest executives departed in recent months, including its head of global business operations and its investor-relations chief.
Mr. Silbermann, one of three Pinterest co-founders, has a roughly 37% voting stake in the company, according to its latest proxy filing from April, which could limit Elliott's ability to force changes.
Pinterest's business grew dramatically during the pandemic, and in February, the company reported its first full-year profit and more than $2 billion in annual revenue. But while revenue grew by 18% in the quarter that ended in March from a year earlier, global active monthly users fell 9% and the company posted a net loss of $5 million, as Covid restrictions eased and people began spending more time offline. Changes to Apple Inc.'s privacy rules and a slowdown in ad spending also weighed in on the company's results.
Shares in Pinterest, which has a market valuation of about $12 billion, are down around 50% year to date, worse than the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index, which has fallen about 30%. The company went public in 2019 at $19 a share. The stock surged above $80 last year but is now below the IPO price, closing at $17.56 Thursday. The stock rose about 25% after hours when The Wall Street Journal reported on the stake.
In recent years, Pinterest has been looking to boost revenue beyond its advertising-centric model by expanding into e-commerce. The company partnered with Shopify Inc. in 2020, giving its users the ability to purchase products they find on its platform by clicking on a link to a merchant's website. In June, Pinterest acquired The Yes, an artificial-intelligence platform that customizes the fashion-shopping experience for users.
Credit: By Jessica Toonkel and Sarah E. Needleman
