Fifty years ago, on April 19, 1965, chemist and reluctant entrepreneur Gordon E. Moore set out to graph the rapid rate of improvement in semiconductor-chip performance -- and ended up discovering the heartbeat of the modern world.
That discovery is what became known as "Moore's Law," which is the observation that performance (speed, price, size) of integrated circuits, aka microchips, regularly doubled every 18 months. The graph began as an illustration to an article in Electronics magazine, and it didn't acquire the name Moore's Law" for another decade. And for a decade after that it remained a topic of interest mostly inside the semiconductor industry.
When he plotted the graph Mr. Moore was director of research at Fairchild Semiconductor, and others such as Doug Engelbart of SRI International and Moore's own partner, Robert Noyce, had already spotted the same dynamic. But Mr. Moore would go on to co-found Intel, permanently imposing the law's competitive pace onto the entire semiconductor industry -- and from there onto the world.
Moore's Law became iconic not because of its novelty or through media promotion, but because it has proved to be the most effective predictive tool of new chip generations, technology innovation and even social and cultural changes of the last half-century. It achieved all this despite doubts about its durability even by Mr. Moore and the fact that it isn't really a scientific law.
Yet against all odds and regular predictions of its imminent demise, Moore's Law endures. The historic doubling of chip performance every 18 months may have slowed to half that pace today, but even pessimists now accept that we likely will live under its regime well into the next decade and beyond.
If some of the recent breakthroughs in atomic-level transistors, nanotechnology and biological computers prove fruitful, Moore's Law could again accelerate, or at least continue to rule, for decades to come. It now seems more likely than ever that a thousand years from now, what will be remembered most about our time will be its stunning efflorescence of innovation and entrepreneurship. By then Moore's Law will have become Moore's Era.
These predictions have enormous implications for the millennial generation now entering the workforce. They have never known a world not defined by Moore's Law. But unlike their generational predecessors, to this new cohort social networks and iPhone apps are old hat.
What obsesses them is hardware -- drones, robots, 3-D printing -- that is even more closely connected to the fortunes of Moore's Law. Their careers will rise and fall on how well they ride the curve of an equation devised during the Johnson administration by a now-octogenarian settled into a comfortable retirement in Hawaii.
And what a curve it will be. Moore's Law is creative destruction on steroids. It regularly fosters the next wave of entrepreneurial opportunities made possible by the latest jump in chip performance. It can be blamed for much of the 90% mortality rate of electronics startups.
But because the usual graphic presentation of the law is tamed by the format into a nice shallow line, we don't get to see the awesome power of the raw curve -- which, like all exponential lines stays shallow seemingly for a long time, then suddenly curves almost straight upward in a vertiginous climb. It is the curve of a rocket's acceleration, of a pandemic, of the cells born from a fertilized egg.
The great turning took place a decade ago, while we were all distracted by social networking, smartphones and the emerging banking crisis. Its breathtaking climb since tells us that everything of the previous 40 years -- that is, the multi-trillion-dollar revolution in semiconductors, computers, communications and the Internet -- was likely nothing but a prelude, a warm-up, for what is to come. It will be upon this wall that millennials will climb their careers against almost-unimaginably quick, complex and ever-changing competition.
Crowd-sharing, crowdfunding, bitcoin, micro-venture funding, cloud computing, Big Data -- all have been early attempts, of varying success, to cope with the next phase of Moore's Law. Expect many more to come. Meanwhile, as always, this new pace will become the metronome of the larger culture.
Moore's Law has always induced de-massification: giant mainframe computers become smartwatches, giant vertically-integrated organizations are defeated by what Instapundit's Glenn Reynolds has dubbed an "Army of Davids."
Rigid command-and-control structures in every walk of life, from corporations to governments to education, become vulnerable to competition by adaptive and short-lived alliances and confederacies. Now that process is going to attack every corner of society.
Venture capitalist Peter Thiel is already challenging the value of a traditional college education, and Khan Academy, among other online universities, is offering an alternative. Hospitals are losing their walls to a revolution in personal health monitoring. And after the progressive experiment of this decade, millions of Americans will go to the polls in 2016 asking if big government itself is an incompetent anachronism. Even the human brain will be challenged by artificial intelligence -- the latter enjoying the advantage of continuously improving at the pace of Moore's Law.
Everything is now in play. Millennials face one of the greatest opportunities any generation has ever known: to completely remake the world through boundless digital technology.
The good news is that this generation seems to be already, often unconsciously, preparing for this adventure -- through robotics competitions, gatherings of tech enthusiasts, engineers and tinkerers at Maker Faires and other do-it-yourself events, and playing with new applications for their drones and 3D printers. Having lived their entire lives at the pace of Moore's Law, they seem to sense that the time has come to hit the accelerator. If millennials don't entirely get it yet, they soon will.
---
Mr. Malone writes for the Journal about technology.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: We Will Keep Moore's Law Going or Someone Else Will" -- WSJ April 25, 2015)
Credit: By Michael S. Malone
