The decision of a top executive at Samsung Electronics Co. to resign highlighted a leadership vacuum at the South Korean company, while also casting a shadow over its growth prospects even as it racks up record profits.
Kwon Oh-hyun, who as head of Samsung's components business is one of three company CEOs, will relinquish his vice chairman post by March, the company said Friday. He will give up his CEO job after his successor is named with a decision likely by year-end, according to people familiar with the matter.
The surprise move comes as the company's de facto leader, Lee Jae-yong, sits in jail after he was convicted in August for bribing South Korea's former president. The appeal trial for Mr. Lee, who has denied wrongdoing, started in the past week.
After Mr. Lee's bribery conviction, Mr. Kwon wrote an internal memo, calling the current times an "unprecedented challenge" and encouraging employees to continue working hard as they wait for "the truth to come to light."
In a statement Friday, Mr. Kwon, who is 64 years old, said he believes the company "needs a new leader more than ever," including young leadership, and a fresh start "to better respond to challenges arising from the rapidly changing IT industry." And, he added: "We are hard pressed to find new growth areas right now from reading the future trends."
For now, Samsung, the world's largest maker of smartphones and memory chips, has delivered record earnings, allowing it to shake off Mr. Lee's legal battle and the fallout fromlast year's global recallof fire-prone Galaxy Note 7 devices.
On Friday, Samsung said it expected operating profit of 14.5 trillion South Korean won ($12.8 billion) for the three months ended Sept. 30, which would top the previous quarter's record of 14.1 trillion won.
The components unit, led by Mr. Kwon, is a big reason for the ballooning profits. Samsung has pumped tens of billions of dollars into memory chips and displays, making the firm a go-to supplier -- even to its fiercest rivals.
The critical question -- especially with Mr. Lee behind bars and Mr. Kwon's planned departure -- iswhether Samsung can identify what's next.
A key weakness, say industry analysts, is that the South Korean firm lags behind Silicon Valley in producing popular applications or software.Its new voice-activated digital assistant, called Bixby, was beset by numerous delays earlier this year. Tech rivals have also beat Samsung to market with home speakers and artificial-intelligence technology. Meanwhile, Samsung must fend off China's deep-pocketed push into memory chips.
Samsung's current advantage in flexible mobile displays, in which it holds a 97% market share, could be punctured once rivals gain the ability to mass produce the curved screens.
Mr. Kwon, who joined Samsung in 1985 long before it became a chips heavyweight, has been a steadying force and served as Samsung's public face while Mr. Lee has been away.
Samsung's leadership ranks are stocked with executives who have decades of experience, so the firm should be able to find his replacement internally, said Mark Newman, an analyst for Sanford C. Bernstein.
"They've got a deep bench," Mr. Newman said.

Credit: By Timothy W. Martin
