WASHINGTON -- Technology companies are racing to get ahead of regulators to shape the future of artificial intelligence as it moves deeper into daily life.
Companies are already working AI into their business models, but the technology remains controversial. So International Business Machines Corp., Intel Corp. and associations representing Apple Inc., Facebook Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google unit aim to set a code of conduct through alliances with futurists, civil-rights activists and social scientists.
Critics, however, see it as an effort to blunt outside regulation by cities, states or the federal government, and they question if tech companies are best suited to shape the rules of the road.
For the corporations, the algorithms will be proprietary tools to assess your loan-worthiness, your job application, and your risk of stroke. Many balk at the costs of developing systems that not only learn to make decisions, but also explain those decisions to outsiders.
When New York proposed a law in August requiring companies publish source code for algorithms used by city agencies, tech firms pushed back, saying they needed to protect proprietary information. The city passed a scaled-back version in December without the source-code requirement.
"They're hiding behind trade secrets so you can't even get a look at what people are doing," said Ryan Calo, a University of Washington law professor who has advised Congress members on AI issues.
AI, broadly speaking, refers to computers mimicking intelligent behavior, crunching big data to make judgments on anything from avoiding car accidents to where the next crime might happen.
Yet computer algorithms aren't always clear on their logic. If a computer consistently denies a loan to members of a certain sex or race, is that discrimination? Will regulators have the right to examine the algorithm that made the decision?
The Obama administration sought to address these issues, with the Office of Science and Technology Policy issuing white papers on the ethical implications on AI. For now, the Trump administration has signaled it wants business to take the lead. The administration is worried overarching regulation could constrain innovation and make the U.S. less competitive, Michael Kratsios, the deputy in charge of tech policy at the Office of Science and Technology Policy, said at a conference in February. He noted China's push into artificial intelligence, which it is doing without much ethical quibbling.
In the past six months, Intel, IBM, Workday Inc. and the Washington-based Information Technology Industry Council -- whose members include Facebook, Apple and Google -- all issued principles on the ethical use of artificial intelligence. In January, Microsoft Corp. put out an entire book on "Artificial Intelligence and its Role in Society."
In 2016, some of the biggest tech firms formed an ethics-setting group called the Partnership on Artificial Intelligence to Benefit People and Society.

Credit: By Heidi Vogt
