Robots are becoming more of a reality in everyday life, and movies have started to overhaul their depiction of them. They're gentler, friendlier, and often better-looking.
Yet the question remains: Could the smart machines we are inventing rise up against us and obliterate humanity? Or could they become loyal, loving companions and world-saving tools? Two new movies, "Chappie" (March 6) and "Ex Machina" (April 10) will explore artificial intelligence in the coming weeks, with more projects to follow.
A little bit "RoboCop," with a dash of "Short Circuit" and even "Pinocchio," "Chappie" is hopeful about the place that robots and advanced computers might take us. This is despite the history of its South African writer-director Neill Blomkamp, who highlighted society's darker impulses in his two prior films, "District 9" and "Elysium." His next project: a new movie in the "Alien" franchise.
"To me it's not a foregone conclusion that [supersmart technology] is going to be evil and it's going to immediately launch the nukes," Mr. Blomkamp says. "Why not have the robot be more humane than the humans?"
In "Ex Machina," a reclusive entrepreneur (Oscar Isaac) has built a female robot that he treats poorly. He summons a young employee (Domhnall Gleeson) to his lair to administer a "Turing test" to his creation and see if her consciousness is human. His fantasy doesn't work as he'd planned. Two big-franchise sequels due later this year, "Terminator Genisys" and "Avengers: Age of Ultron," feature super-intelligent computer systems with a mind to eradicate humans.
"There's an argument to be made that all of science fiction can be boiled down to a series of warnings about unintended consequences," says Chris Barsanti, author of the 2014 book The Sci-Fi Movie Guide, which catalogs nearly 1,000 films. "Because robots are anthropomorphized, we see them as either these saviors and friends -- or as villains here to kill us."
Scientists are paying attention to these questions. Physicist Stephen Hawking recently said uncontrolled artificial intelligence could "spell the end of the human race." This from a 73-year-old man who has survived amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), communicating with a robotic voice and a form of artificial-intelligence technology.
Dramatic fiction featuring helpful robots, scary androids, and ominous supercomputers has been out there for decades. In fact, the first use of the word robot came not from industry but a 1920 Czech play by Karel Capek about a factory that created artificial people who were used as slaves. They then rebelled to destroy humanity. Robots were dreamed up not as labor-saving devices but as literary devices to make a point about exploiting labor.
"Chappie" is set in a near-future version of Johannesburg, where law-enforcement robots patrol violent streets along with human cops. An earnest programmer at the company that makes the robots (Dev Patel from "Slumdog Millionaire") has written code that could give the robots consciousness, making them self-aware and able to learn. The CEO thinks the upgrade won't be good for business. (She's played by Sigourney Weaver, who dealt with a malevolent android crew member in "Alien"). But the programmer manages to borrow a robot, and with a few keystrokes he turns it into a conscious being with a blank brain, innocent as a baby and eager to understand our world. He encounters human influences, good and evil, and eventually, like Pinocchio, Chappie needs to make some moral choices.
We've grown accustomed to movies in which smart technology comes back to bite us. In "2001: A Space Odyssey" (1968), the passive-aggressive spacecraft control system HAL 9000 tries to kill the ship's human crew after they plan to shut him off. In "Westworld" (1973), cowboy robot Yul Brynner goes haywire and takes aim at James Brolin; HBO has remade it as a series to air this year with Anthony Hopkins, Evan Rachel Wood and Ed Harris. Over the first two "Terminator" movies (1984 and 1991), we learn that the self-aware Skynet network is going to eradicate humans with a nuclear-weapon "Judgment Day." In "The Matrix," it turns out that the world we think we live in is a computer simulation, while our brains and bodies actually are stored in gooey vats so our computer overlords can use our energy as battery power.
Where did moviemakers -- and concerned scientists -- get the idea that supersmart AI might be humanity's "biggest existential threat," as entrepreneur Elon Musk speculated last fall?
From human history, for starters. "In every era in history, the dominant culture comes in and wipes out the primitive culture," says Patrick Lussier, co-screenwriter of "Terminator Genisys," which opens in July. If machines are smarter than us, what's to stop them from hurting people?
Of course, in movies, it's not usually the technology that starts the fight, says "Genisys" co-writer Laeta Kalogridis. "It isn't usually the case that robots or machine intelligence automatically want to destroy us." In "2001," HAL only became destructive after he was lied to. In the first "Alien," Ash, the malevolent android, is getting conflicting orders from humans. In 'Terminator,' when Skynet becomes self-aware, humanity panics.
We tend to create things, then in fear try to kill or abandon them. That was the story in Mary Shelley's 1818 novel "Frankenstein," and in Ridley Scott's 1982 film "Blade Runner," from a short story by Philip K. Dick, "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?" Steven Spielberg took the 1969 Brian Aldiss short story "Super-Toys Last All Summer," about a synthetic boy abandoned by his mother, and melded it with the Pinocchio tale in his 2001 robot film "A.I."
Mr. Barsanti thinks cinematic fears of frightening new technologies do soften, gradually. Early movies about the Internet were scary, such as "The Net"' and "The Matrix." In "Her,' an operating system becomes a romantic interest. "It's all really about the inevitability of technology," he says. "In a way, science fiction is trying to prepare us for the future."
Robots also look different now. Early screen robots, from the "Danger, Will Robinson" one on TV's "Lost in Space" to C-3PO in "Star Wars," were actors in costume. Even R2-D2 had a guy inside, 3-foot-8 Kenny Baker. The three waist-high drones in the 1972 movie "Silent Running" were inhabited by legless actors. The 1986 comedy "Short Circuit," about a military robot suddenly given a personality, featured a screwed-together mechanical robot, operated like a motorized puppet. (Critic Roger Ebert said it was the best actor in the movie.)
Lately, movie robots have been computer-animated, sometimes with the input of human actors. Chappie is played by Sharlto Copley, who during filming wore a skintight gray outfit and acted his part normally in all the scenes. Digital-effects artists essentially painted the computer-animated character over his acting. Mr. Blomkamp calls it "just an extreme form of makeup. Instead of two hours in the morning for wardrobe and makeup, it's one year after the film is shot. What's the difference?"
Real robots lag behind the cinematic fantasies but are making strides. Japanese company SoftBank this month introduced a four-foot-tall household robot called Pepper that can read human emotions via face recognition and speak multiple languages. Elsewhere in Japan, robotics experts are building eerily lifelike female androids. Researchers are prototyping robots to help in the care of the elderly, to provide companionship or physical tests -- a scenario the 2012 film "Robot & Frank" explored. Boston Dynamics recently introduced a human-shaped robot named Atlas that walks on two legs. Boston Dynamics' BigDog is a four-legged robot made for carrying loads in military applications. But whatever shape technology takes, people will humanize it.
"We just project on everything. I name my GPS. Some people say 'my car loves me.' We kind of want to make things sentient," says Ken Salisbury, a Stanford University professor who specializes in robotics.
Plenty of the advanced technologies shown in artificial-intelligence movies do remain far-fetched. Last year in "Transcendence," Johnny Depp uploaded his "consciousness" to the Internet, then went power-mad and had to choose whether to dominate or save the planet. There's uploading human "consciousness" from human brains to robots in "Chappie" too, essentially the complete transfer of a person's memories, personality and soul. In real life, scientists don't even know what that would mean.
"We don't have any real idea about what consciousness is, how to create it, whether a machine would be conscious," says Stuart Russell, director of the Center for Intelligent Systems at the University of California, Berkeley. Prosthetic limbs can be controlled by brain signals, and it's imaginable that memory signals someday could be stored outside the brain. "But that still doesn't get you to consciousness," he says. "If you gave me a trillion dollars [to find a way], I'd have to give it back, because there's no plausible engineering path."
He admits, though, that the idea of transferring one's heart and soul into a machine has cinematic advantages. "The reason you want a machine to be conscious," he says, "is so you can have a romantic subplot."
Credit: By Don Steinberg
