Harvard scientist L. Mahadevan is a bona fide genius who has studied such things as the shape of an apple, how brains fold and why Cheerios clump in a bowl of milk.
Parents will be pleased to learn that Prof. Mahadevan and a team of researchers have also made headway finding a pain-free technique of brushing the tangled hair of children, as well as their own.
The task has the sheen of a personal quest. Two decades ago, while at Cambridge University's department of applied mathematics and theoretical physics, Prof. Mahadevan's domestic duties included brushing the unruly hair of his 5-year-old daughter.
At some point, she fired him. "It was very tangled," said the professor, who has little hair himself. "I was not doing a very good job of it because I wasn't very patient."
His failure tugged at him for 20 years. The professor finally assembled a team that employed mathematical models, conducted experiments and published a paper on their discoveries in the journal Soft Matter.
Hair brushing goes back a long way, maybe 50 million or so years. Mammals back then developed tiny grooming claws, a precursor to nails, to pick out lice and ticks embedded in their tangles, according to studies. Nearly 5,000 years ago, Egyptians considered hair grooming important enough to pack brushes into tombs of the dead.
"At least half of humanity combs their hair every day, and yet almost no one pauses to think deeply about it," said Prof. Mahadevan, winner of a MacArthur Fellowship, also known as a genius grant. His expertise spans applied mathematics, physics, and organismic and evolutionary biology.
Barbers are on the front lines of tangle troubles. "I see it all the time," said Francis Pena, owner of the Man Cave Hair & Beard Lounge in Marblehead, Mass. "Most men don't take care of their hair very well, they don't comb it enough or sometimes even wash it, so I end up doing a lot of detangling."
With three boys, Michael Conti, of Westminster, Mass., didn't think much about brushing long hair. Then he had a daughter, now 6, and things got hairy. At first, he would start at the top of her head, he said, and "just try to rake this thing down. And it was just like yanking her head back, and she's giving me the, 'Dad, what are you doing?'"
Mr. Conti, a mechanical engineer, tried working the brush slowly through knots, inch by inch. That worked, he said, "but it took forever." His wife, Sarah Conti, a website designer, wasn't much better at it. "She would just yell at me," Ms. Conti said.
In an interview, Gianna didn't try to spin her parents' hair-brushing performance. "Bad," she said. She finally asked for a haircut short enough to spare everyone grief. Now, she said, "I brush my own hair."
The knotty hair puzzle reached Prof. Mahadevan's lab three years ago, as he was thinking about how birds build nests. His research led to the question of tangles, which also occur at the microscopic level in DNA helixes and in magnetic flux lines crisscrossing the cosmos.
"A very natural question to ask is how do you describe a tangle?" Prof. Mahadevan said. "How does the tangle change dynamically and in this very specific context, how can you essentially detangle?"
To get their head around the physics of the problem, the team simplified the challenge to two strands of wavy hair that wound around each other like a DNA helix.
They ran the single tine of a comb through the strands. As the comb moved down and the tangles intensified, so did the stress on the scalp. The scientists calculated something called link density. The higher the link density, the worse the tangle -- and the more likely a child ends up crying during brushing.
His team's finding, as published, is directed at a much smaller audience. "The unlinking of the homochiral helixes during this process can be quantified in terms of the Calugareanu-Fuller-White (CFW) theorem which states that Lk=Tw+Wr, where Link (Lk) quantifies the oriented crossing number of the filaments averaged over all projection directions" and so on.
Down the street from Harvard, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Daniela Rus, another MacArthur fellow, took note of the computations. She is a professor of electrical engineering and computer science, as well as director of the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Her work leans more toward automation -- in effect, taking the job out of the hands of parents. Researchers are building a robot to brush hair.
The lab is cluttered with graduate students hunched over computers. Mechanical arms rest on tables. One of the robotic arms attaches to a brush and moves through five different wigs on a mannequin, working on hair both straight and curly.
The laboratory brush is outfitted with sensors that detect tension. That tension reads as pain and is used to determine whether to use long strokes or shorter ones. The machine does a great job, Prof. Rus said. "It's slower and more rhythmic then when you do it yourself."
Science has found what most parents have learned through trial and tearful error. "You start at the bottom of the hair with a short stroke," Dr. Rus said. "As you work your way up, the strokes become longer and longer."
A full unraveling of the tangles that form in DNA, the universe and human hair is still ahead. "We are not yet there," Prof. Mahadevan said. "I'm sure we, or someone else, will pick up that strand."
---
Jennifer Levitz contributed to this article.
Credit: By Douglas Belkin
