BEIJING -- Xiaomi is a Chinese company known for its rice cookers, robot vacuums, air purifiers and smartphones. Now, it has pulled off what Apple, its longtime rival, couldn't: Make an electric car and bring it to market.
And it did it in three years.
In its home market, Xiaomi is cranking out its SU7 sedan to a waiting list of buyers after its launch in late March. Since early April, the Beijing-based company said it had delivered more than 10,000 of the electric vehicles and received nearly 90,000 binding orders.
Priced between $30,000 and $42,000, the SU7 can go up to 500 miles on one charge, Xiaomi says, undercutting comparable versions of the Tesla Model 3 in China by around $4,000 and outrunning it by around 200 miles per charge.
Xiaomi's feat illuminates a new reality in the century-old automotive business: The barriers to entry for making a car have shrunk in recent years with the emergence of electric vehicles. And in this new reality, China is speeding way ahead.
As the hardware has become simpler, the focus for what makes an appealing product has shifted decisively to software and features. "New EVs are more like computers with batteries on wheels," said Paul Gong, head of China autos research at UBS. "Chinese carmakers are now ahead of almost everyone else along the entire EV supply chain."
To save on time and costs, the company adopted practices from Tesla and other automakers, mined its own product-development know-how and plugged into China's fast-moving car supply chain. Years of honing laptops, blenders and petcams helped it develop features tailored to a fickle consumer base. Consumer-product expertise also helped in integrating the car with smartphones and household devices.
Xiaomi is the world's third-largest smartphone maker, after Apple and South Korea's Samsung Electronics. But making cars required a whole new level of complexity, Xiaomi CEO Lei Jun told state broadcaster China Central Television in April -- even without having to make the internal combustion engine. Xiaomi hired 6,000 people to work on the car project, Lei said. Some were recruited from foreign carmakers; others were transferred from other departments, said Ma Yingbo, a member of Xiaomi's marketing team. Among the cars Xiaomi looked to for inspiration was Tesla's Model 3.
To simplify development and reduce costs, Xiaomi adopted Tesla's process of "gigacasting," which employs large-scale, high-pressure aluminum die-casting to create the car's frame. The process combines hundreds of manufacturing steps into one, saving on components, weight, cost and time.
Xiaomi also had to innovate. The liquid aluminum that gets injected into the die-casting machine has to be a certain variety that can withstand an extraordinary amount of pressure. Xiaomi had to come up with its own material, building an artificial-intelligence program that used a method known as deep learning to simulate how different materials would behave when placed inside the die-cast machine, Ma said.
Xiaomi joined with Beijing Automotive Group to begin its plant project using the state-owned company's car-making license. From there, it took Xiaomi half a year to design the plant and an additional 15 months to build it, with the remainder of the three-year road to launch spent dealing with approvals, quality control and standards.
The company only seriously started looking into entering the car sector after the U.S. government blacklisted it in January 2021 for what it said were ties to China's military, Lei told CCTV. (In May 2021, Washington agreed to remove the company from the blacklist.)
In March 2021, Xiaomi declared its intention to join the ranks of Chinese EV makers and pledged to invest $10 billion over the next decade.
Xiaomi's entry catapulted it into the top 10 EV newcomers in China and intensifies a price war in China's EV market. Lei said Xiaomi is currently selling at a loss. To turn a profit, Xiaomi would have to produce 300,000 to 400,000 of the SU7 each year, he told CCTV. Xiaomi needs to quickly increase production to meet demand. Customers who ordered the car in late April will have to wait 40 to 50 weeks for delivery.
Last week, the U.S. increased tariffs on Chinese EVs to roughly 100%. Xiaomi has said it would focus on the China market in the next three years. The company didn't make Lei available for an interview.
Earlier this year, Apple ended its yearslong push to create its own electric vehicle, daunted by the increasing difficulty the company faced as it spent billions trying to catch or exceed the capabilities of existing carmakers. Upon learning of Apple's exit, Lei said he instructed employees to ensure the SU7 would work with Apple's CarPlay software, which displays iPhone screens on car dashboards, he told CCTV.
Generate image description

Credit: By Sha Hua and Yoko Kubota
