I still hate meetings. Almost 10 years ago I wrote that "meetings are supposed to be about discovery and buy-in" but instead "end up being about preening and politicking, and devolve into productivity-robbing, mind-numbing monotony." Since then, a poll by University of North Carolina researchers found that nearly two-thirds of managers agreed that meetings kept them from getting real work done, 71% thought meetings were "unproductive and inefficient," and 64% said meetings blocked deep thinking. There has to be a better way.
Sadly, when lockdowns came along and the word "Zoom" joined the vernacular -- along with the phrase "you're on mute" -- meetings got way worse. Sure, no one knows if you are wearing pants, but Zoom meetings lack social clues and such real-time feedback as glaring or grunting. I'm good at both. Worse, meetings multiplied. Zoom meetings peaked at 300 million a day in mid-2020. Yikes.
This included lots of online classrooms, where hints of the future were revealed. Bored-to-tears grade-schoolers, who are smarter than we think, figured out they could fake paying attention by changing their background to a video loop, maybe with a couple of head nods -- a rudimentary avatar. All that was missing were class notes from the nerdy kid and, in case you're called on, a realistic Ferris Bueller-like recorded answer, similar to when the principal, Ed Rooney, checked on him at home.
In related news, earlier this month at South by Southwest, a company appropriately named Soul Machines introduced Digital Marilyn: a pretty realistic artificial-intelligence-driven talking Marilyn Monroe avatar. Suddenly, all the pieces are in place. Can someone please adapt this for meetings?
Help is on the way. I use an app called Otter.ai to record interviews, and it quickly generates a Word document with almost perfect transcription. Otter can join Zoom calls and produce not only transcripts but pretty good meeting summaries. I spoke with the company's CEO, Sam Liang, who told me, "I have eight to 10 meetings every day. So you see, this is a huge pain point."
Mr. Liang says when he's double-booked, he watches "live meeting notes for multiple meetings going on at the same time. So I can multitask." He notes that in technology "it really pushes your imagination to think what's possible. We're pushing the envelope every day."
What does he have in mind? "You could send your avatar to join meetings on your behalf, with all your knowledge and all your perspectives." Not a cartoon avatar but, like Digital Marilyn, one that looks and sounds exactly like you. Mr. Liang figures Otter has transcribed thousands of his own meetings. With all that information, it can train a model to have the avatar respond to many repeated common questions. "My avatar could answer probably 95% of those questions on its own. And with synthesized speech" -- technology that already exists -- "it sounds exactly like me." A watermark would help avoid deepfake fraud. Meetings will never be the same.
"For the 5% that my avatar doesn't know the answer, it will ping me -- send me a message and say, 'Hey, Andy asked this question. I don't know how to answer. Can you help me?' Hopefully I can answer in real-time." Mr. Liang thinks meetings are mostly about information exchange. "Maybe that 5% are the most difficult problems that still need humans to work on." But now meetings are 20 times as productive.
I want this, but it may take some getting used to. "I'm sure there will be some pushback," Mr. Liang admits. "At least it's better to see your avatar than not seeing you at all. It actually has an even better memory than yourself." The more you use it, the smarter it gets.
What about emotions? Can it flag hidden agendas at meetings? "AI can already detect sentiment relatively well. You know, whether you're excited, whether you're calm or you're angry. So the next step is to train it to respond properly based on how the other people are performing or what emotional state they're in." It would crush at poker.
Could I really have this avatar attend all my meetings? What happens when every other participant is an avatar? Who speaks first? Then the true question hit me: Could it implement a BS detector? Someone lies and maybe the screen flashes red and a loud buzzer goes off. That sure would make meetings interesting. Same for boring cocktail parties when you're stuck next to a know-it-all who's loose with the facts. "I'm not sure that AI can do that right now," Mr. Liang says, "but I do think it is quite doable." From pain comes opportunity.
Meetings are a great use case for AI. Mr. Liang hopes to have a demo later this year. He explains, "It's all about collecting enough data and trying, right?" That's the new Silicon Valley ethos. See you on Zoom -- or not.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
