Major League Baseball has decided it can live with ghosts.
Specifically, its "ghost runner," the runner automatically placed on second base at the start of each extra-inning frame until the game is finished. This daffy device was put in place during MLB's abbreviated Covid season in 2020, and it has stuck around since in an effort to generate quick runs, avoid deep extra-inning slogs and burned-out bullpens, and complete the average baseball game in less time than it takes to ride a tortoise from Chicago to San Diego.
(To be clear, it's not literally a "ghost." The team batting puts one of its own human players on second base. "Ghost runner" is an old term from sandlot and Wiffle Ball games in which "ghosts" and "imaginary runners" are deployed when there aren't enough actual bodies to occupy and run the bases. If you imagined Casper settling a Twins contest, I am sorry to disappoint you.)
It turns out these "ghosts" have worked, cutting down on lengthy extra-inning battles. Now MLB is making them a permanent feature. Before you start howling about the desecration of the fading national pastime: The ghost runners will only be a regular-season thing. They will go into an ectoplasm-containment storage unit during the playoffs, and extra-inning games can resume taking as long as medical school.
You should also know that the "ghost" is beloved by players, who, purity of the game aside, aren't that jazzed about the prospect of being trapped on a diamond playing the Mariners until 3 a.m. on a Wednesday.
Baseball players: exhausted at the idea of long baseball games, just like us!
MLB at least has the right idea, experimenting to accelerate its pace of play. The same can't be said of NBA basketball, which is heading in the opposite direction with video reviews and coaching "challenges" threatening to turn a joyous and fluid sport into an exasperating forensic probe.
(Baseball has video review, too, and whenever the practice expands, I want to ask: How much have our sports-watching lives been enhanced by replays? Are you the type of person who needs furious accuracy from sporting entertainment, or are you OK with the occasional human mistake or miss?)
I do think baseball is on to something with its ghosts. I think it's time we start making them socially acceptable in other workplaces. Think of being able to send a ghost worker in your stead to the 9 a.m. staff meeting. Think about deploying a ghost for the next office holiday party. You get to go out to a fun dinner with your family, and the ghost is trapped in a corner hearing a co-worker babble on about an upcoming ski trip.
Of course, families would also appreciate the occasional ghost. Who wouldn't want a ghost that could take your place at Thanksgiving, birthdays and destination weddings? What about a ghost that could respond to all group texts and emails?
I guess we're close to reaching this point with the advancement of artificial intelligence, which promises robots to solve all our moral and social dilemmas in exchange for giving them total control of the planet.
A fair bargain, but I sense a complication. If sophisticated AI is truly capable of understanding the human condition, and effectively becoming human, it's only a matter of time before it comes back from a family Thanksgiving and says never again.
That's why I say ghosts, not robots. If ghosts can handle extra innings of baseball, they can handle anything.
Credit: By Jason Gay
