Ultimate Frisbee is a sport that Sean Childers wants to game. Mr. Childers, a 25-year-old law clerk, learned in college how to play Ultimate Frisbee. He liked it so much that he stuck with it in law school and still makes time to play on weekends.
Now, to get even better, he's on a new team with a different aim: Mr. Childers is trying to put a statistical spin on Ultimate Frisbee.
It's a common goal in sports obsessed with numbers. Professional baseball and basketball teams, in fact, have been overrun by geeks since the 2003 publication of the Michael Lewis book "Moneyball."
As it turns out, some Ultimate Frisbee fanatics are taking a page from those playbooks, and they're giving statistical analysis a whirl. "Ultimate is not profoundly different from any other sport that's currently using stats," said Milo Snyder, a 25-year-old data analyst who is a co-captain of the Pride of New York club team.
Ultimate Frisbee does have similarities to more mainstream sports. Teams score by throwing a Frisbee across the field -- with the only catch being that players can't run with the disc until they pass to a teammate -- as long as it doesn't hit the ground or get picked off by the defense first. The result is action that looks like soccer but with hands and like football but without the hits.
Mr. Childers himself sees Ultimate Frisbee, a classic counterculture activity since the 1960s, as a strange sport for eggheads to crack.
"Historically," he said, "people in Ultimate haven't collected statistics at all."
Ultimate Frisbee players have a long record of not taking themselves too seriously. The sport's historians believe the first game ever was a matchup of natural adversaries: a New Jersey high school's student government and the staff of its student newspaper. Ultimate Frisbee lives today as a laid-back, recreational sport often seen on college campuses.
There hasn't been much incentive to win, either. Other sports prize statistics because there is so much at stake. Yet most of the 5.1 million Ultimate Frisbee players in the U.S. begin in their 20s, after giving up other competitive sports, and no one makes enough money chasing a Frisbee around a field to call it a career.
But the sport is growing in spurts. Two professional leagues, Major League Ultimate and the American Ultimate Disc League, have formed since 2012 and go head-to-head against each other in the summer. Meanwhile, the number of Ultimate Frisbee players in the U.S. is up 27% over the past five years, according to the Sports & Fitness Industry Association.
Two of those players, Mr. Childers and Jeremy Weiss, have distinguished themselves as Ultimate Frisbee's statistical gurus. Mr. Weiss, 29, is a medical student pursuing a Ph.D. in machine learning at the University of Wisconsin. In his spare time, he moonlights as a broadcaster for a professional Ultimate Frisbee team.
They met online and teamed up to study 17,883 plays from 3,099 possessions over 68 games from the 2013 club season. "It's not that big," Mr. Weiss said of the data set.
Their findings may be Ultimate Frisbee's first statistical breakthroughs. What they called a player's "expected contribution" already exists as a metric in baseball and basketball. It's an estimate of player value, they say, that identifies Ultimate Frisbee's most talented players and spots those who may have been overlooked -- a way of saying, empirically, that one Ultimate Frisbee player is better than another.
They're more geeked about discovering a team's chance of scoring based on the Frisbee's exact location. Mr. Childers and Mr. Weiss crunched the numbers and were able to prove, for example, that if a player has the Frisbee in a corner close to his own end zone, then the optimal pass is actually a backward pass to the middle of the field, even if doing that seems counterproductive.
That new knowledge, Ultimate Frisbee experts say, could have a profound influence on the future of Ultimate Frisbee strategy. "Teams that use these stats want to know how to adjust their offense or defense to help win more games," said Charlie Eisenhood, the editor and founder of Ultiworld, a website that covers Ultimate Frisbee news.
They haven't changed the game yet. But their wonky research has reached Ultimate Frisbee's top teams. Seattle Riot, a two-time U.S. women's club champion, has players map the location of every pass in their games with a smartphone app designed for that exact purpose, giving them more data to mine after the season.
"In baseball, there's been so much work on statistics for decades and decades, and at this point it's a science," said Gwen Ambler, a Riot co-captain. "It's really an untapped resource in Ultimate."
Mr. Childers also pitched the idea to his own team, Pride of New York, or PoNY. The team's captains, who double as coaches, realized that PoNY didn't score as much as it should around the end zone, the area of the field where scoring chances peak. They stressed end-zone sets in practice -- and PoNY ended up as one of the U.S.'s top-10 club teams last year. "It's still in its infancy, but it's starting to get interesting and useful," said Jack Marsh, a former PoNY captain, whose day job is artistic director of a St. Louis circus.
Mr. Snyder was in charge of beefing up PoNY's statistical efforts for this season. He decided to collect as much information as possible about his Ultimate Frisbee players.
He knew what he had to do: film every practice. That would let him review footage afterward and record individual statistics. But he needed an overhead shot, which was more expensive and complicated than setting up a camera on the sidelines, to see every player on the field at once. "The bird's-eye perspective is really telling," he said.
He came up with a solution -- on a shoestring budget. On a recent Sunday morning, before PoNY practiced on a field near the Brooklyn waterfront, Mr. Snyder unveiled his eye in the sky: an 8.5-meter-tall pole meant for window washing that he attached to a small GoPro camera.
To make sure it wouldn't fall down on the job, though, Mr. Snyder checked off one last task before practice: He tied the contraption to a nearby fence with hot-pink laces.
Credit: By Ben Cohen
