Companies looking to deploy generative artificial intelligence have some choices to make.
There are a number of large language models that power generative AI, and many of the AI companies that make them have forged partnerships with big cloud-computing vendors. As business technology leaders make their picks among them, they are weighing the risks and benefits of using one cloud provider's AI ecosystem.
They say it is an important decision that could have long-term consequences, including how much they spend and whether they are willing to sink deeper into one cloud provider's set of software, tools, and services.
So far, AI model makers like OpenAI, Anthropic, and Cohere have led the charge in developing proprietary large language models that companies are using to boost efficiency in areas like accounting and writing code, or adding to their own products with tools like custom chatbots.
Tie-ups between model makers and major cloud companies include OpenAI and Microsoft Azure, Anthropic and Cohere with Google Cloud, and the machine-learning startup Hugging Face with Amazon Web Services. Databricks, a data storage and management company, agreed to buy the generative AI startup MosaicML in June.
For many businesses, the primary choice isn't which AI model to use but whether they stay within the AI ecosystem offered by their cloud providers, said Adnan Masood, who has advised Microsoft and is chief AI architect at digital technology and information technology services firm UST. The Aliso Viejo, Calif.-based company began using AI models from OpenAI and its cloud partner Microsoft Azure, in part because the firm already runs on Microsoft's cloud platform, Masood said.
Still, if a company chooses a single AI ecosystem, it could risk "vendor lock-in" within that provider's platform and set of services, said Ram Chakravarti, chief technology officer of Houston-based BMC Software. This paradigm is a recurring one, where a business's IT system, software and data all sit within one digital platform, and it could become more pronounced as companies look for help in using generative AI.
Companies say the problem with vendor lock-in, especially among cloud providers, is that they have difficulty moving their data to other platforms, lose negotiating power with other vendors, and must rely on one provider to keep its services online and secure.
Cloud providers, partly in response to complaints of lock-in, now offer tools to help customers move data between their own and competitors' platforms. Businesses have increasingly signed up with more than one cloud provider to reduce their reliance on any single vendor.
That is the strategy companies could end up taking with generative AI, Chakravarti said, where by using a "multiple generative AI approach," they can avoid getting too entrenched in a particular platform. Many chief information officers have said they willingly accept such risks for the convenience, and potentially lower cost, of working with a single technology vendor or cloud provider.
A challenge in incorporating generative AI is that the technology is changing so quickly, analysts have said, forcing companies to not only keep up with the pace of innovation, but also sift through potential data privacy and cybersecurity risks.
A company using its cloud provider's premade tools and services can more quickly implement generative AI off-the-shelf, Masood said.
"It has privacy, it has security, it has all the compliance elements in there," he said. "At that point, people don't really have to worry so much about the logistics of things, but rather are focused on utilizing the model."
For other companies, it is a conservative approach to use generative AI with a large cloud platform they already trust to hold sensitive company data, said Jon Turow, a partner at Madrona Venture Group. "It's a very natural start to a conversation to say, 'Hey, would you also like to apply AI inside my four walls?'"
And while many companies say they would like to "fine-tune" or customize large language models with their own data, most find that they don't need to make that kind of investment, said Ori Goshen, co-founder of AI company AI21 Labs. Many customers are just looking for a way to ask questions of and write summaries based on their data, he said, and AI21 offers its own software to help customers deploy its models.
"You can think conceptually about these language models as engines, but basically companies want cars," he said. "We're getting you much closer to a car."
For the cloud providers, it is also an opportunity to use generative AI to boost demand for their core cloud services. Microsoft last week reported slower quarterly sales growth, even as excitement around AI bolstered its business. Google's cloud-computing unit, a central piece of its AI strategy, reported revenue up 28% from a year earlier.
Amazon, which is expected to report earnings on Thursday, announced updates to its Bedrock AI platform last week, making it easier for businesses to pull in their own data for use with large language models, and deploy the various AI models that AWS supports, said Swami Sivasubramanian, the company's vice president of data and machine learning.
Google Cloud, like AWS, has increasingly aimed to market itself as a neutral platform where developers can pick among an array of generative AI models from different companies. A company spokesperson said it supports its own models like PaLM, and other open-source, third-party, and custom models.
Sivasubramanian said customers want to have their pick of AI models, typically using more than one for a single function, and end up "building so much scaffolding" to make them work that they need the extra help.
Microsoft, which last month announced that Meta's open-source Llama 2 model would be free and available to developers using its cloud platform, said it also allows developers to build their own "co-pilot" AI-based work assistants, and that companies can pull in their own data to use with OpenAI models.
In theory, these partnerships have opened up the number of AI models that executives can use inside their companies. But some technology leaders still don't want to remain wedded to a single cloud or tech provider, and have decided to wait and see which AI models can offer the best performance, at the best price.
"We're going to leverage the standard tech stack and infrastructure that we currently have, which is Microsoft Azure with OpenAI," said Larry Pickett, chief information and digital officer of biopharmaceutical services company Syneos Health. "But we know this is a bit of a horse race between all these different competitors, and so we just want to remain flexible."
Credit: By Belle Lin
