JPMORGAN CHASE
JPM -6.5%
Interest rates are starting to weigh on Wall Street's biggest banks. JPMorgan Chase on Friday posted better-than-expected quarterly profit and revenue, but the banking giant projected muted growth for the rest of the year. Last year, higher interest rates helped JPMorgan rake in record profits as it charged more on loans. But now customers are shifting their deposits into products like certificates of deposit that yield higher interest, putting pressure on the bank's margins. Chief Executive Jamie Dimon recently warned that inflation and interest rates could rise higher than expected. JPMorgan, Wells Fargo and Citigroup are also seeing high rates affect their mortgage businesses, as their first-quarter originations were sharply below prepandemic levels. JPMorgan shares fell 6.5% Friday.
NORFOLK SOUTHERN
NSC +1.3%
Norfolk Southern reached a settlement in lawsuits related to its 2023 Ohio train derailment. The freight railroad agreed to a $600 million settlement with local individuals and businesses. If approved it would be the largest-ever for a railroad disaster in North America. Norfolk Southern said the settlement isn't an admission of liability or wrongdoing. The company has estimated that costs associated with the derailment would surpass $1 billion. Norfolk Southern shares rose 1.3% Tuesday.
AMAZON.COM
AMZN +1.7%
Fresh AI optimism pushed Amazon shares to a record high on Thursday. Chief Executive Andy Jassy said in his annual letter to shareholders that generative artificial intelligence could be one of the largest technological transformations in decades. He laid out a vision for how it could be a critical building block in establishing Amazon's next pillar of growth following its online retail marketplace, Amazon Prime and its cloud-computing unit Amazon Web Services. Amazon shares rose 1.7% Thursday.
BOEING
BA -2%
The Federal Aviation Administration is investigating a veteran Boeing engineer's allegations that the plane maker dismissed quality and safety concerns during production of its troubled 787 Dreamliner jet. Boeing said in a statement that the claims are inaccurate and that the company is confident in the safety of its jets, which it says are subject to rigorous FAA oversight. Boeing shares lost 2% Wednesday.
PARAMOUNT GLOBAL
PARA -4.3%
Four Paramount directors are leaving the board soon, as the Shari Redstone-controlled company discusses a merger with Skydance Media, The Wall Street Journal reported on Wednesday. The departing directors were on a special committee of independent directors tasked with pursuing the best possible deal for the company. At least one of the departing directors expressed concerns about the potential Skydance deal, the Journal reported. Paramount shares lost 4.3% Wednesday.
MORGAN STANLEY
MS -5.3%
Multiple federal regulators are investigating Morgan Stanley's wealth-management division. The investigation focuses on how the bank vets clients who are at risk of laundering money through its sprawling wealth arm, The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday. The Securities and Exchange Commission, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and other Treasury Department offices are involved. Morgan Stanley shares dropped 5.3% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
