Goldman Sachs Group Inc. launched five new exchange-traded funds that rely on indexes built with machine learning and artificial intelligence.
The New York investment bank is working with Motif Investing Inc. to identify companies that fit with broad themes that Goldman's money managers think will drive growth, like "finance reimagined" and "data-driven world."
Goldman's foray into computer-driven ETFs is the latest sign of Wall Street's increased reliance on sophisticated automation. Computers can read far faster than a legion of analysts, sifting company reports, news stories and regulatory filings for clues to a company's future. Two years ago, BlackRock Inc., the world's largest money manager by assets, announced that it would overhaul its actively managed equities business to rely more on robots than humans.
"With machine learning, you can get the benefits of hundreds of stock pickers in a low-cost quantitative way," said Todd Rosenbluth, senior director of ETF and mutual fund research at CFRA. "You can create indexes that evolve based on shifts in data."
Recent years have seen the proliferation of a new breed of indexes that veer even further from plain-vanilla benchmarks. ETF issuers have designed funds that try to pick companies that are less volatile, higher quality or more socially responsible.
Further blurring the line between active and passive investing, many of the smart index funds are really just attempts to codify trading strategies that active money managers have employed for decades. Indexes aren't all that different from robots. They follow their methodology -- essentially their programming -- to pick stocks and rebalance their portfolios at scheduled intervals.
The goal was to define themes that have mass appeal and staying power and avoid the downfall of being so narrowly defined that investors lose interest, said Michael Crinieri, global head of ETF strategy at Goldman.
Data mining and language processing help companies like index provider MSCI Inc. quantify how companies perform on environmental, social and governance criteria. Motif uses web crawlers to scan patent databases and academic journals as well as company financial filings.
"What AI allows you to do is to be more dynamic and data driven, and remove the human bias," said Art Amador, chief operations officer and co-founder of EquBot Inc., in San Francisco. "We think it will help you perform more consistently through different markets."
EquBot has two AI-driven stock ETFs with more than $150 million in assets and runs separately managed accounts for investors.

Credit: By Asjylyn Loder
