BLETCHLEY, U.K. -- Here in the English countryside, at an estate where World War II codebreakers cracked the Nazis' Enigma encryption machine, world leaders pledged to work together to lessen risks of a technology they said also poses a grave threat.
Artificial intelligence, they said, could in its most advanced forms create catastrophic risks in realms including cybersecurity and biotechnology -- or even escape human control.
"It is sometimes worthwhile to take science fiction seriously," said Michelle Donelan, U.K. secretary of state for science, innovation and technology, quoting a codebreaker who worked at the estate.
In a statement, issued at the opening of a two-day summit that kicked off Wednesday, the U.S., China and two dozen other countries pledged closer cooperation in evaluating the risks posed by coming AI systems -- called models -- that are more powerful than those available today, and to consider legal frameworks to govern their deployment.
"There is potential for serious, even catastrophic, harm, either deliberate or unintentional, stemming from the most significant capabilities of these AI models," the joint statement said, citing potential misuse of powerful AI systems by bad actors or even loss of control of systems that aren't fully understood and are hard to predict.
The pledge is the first major international statement that echoes warnings over a potential existential risk to humanity from powerful new AI models.
Debates about how seriously to take those warnings, and what to do about them, are the main agenda of the meeting, which includes a U.S. delegation led by Vice President Kamala Harris, as well as executives from leading AI companies, including Elon Musk and OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman.
Both of the tech executives have warned of what they say is the potentially destructive potential of AI, which they are separately trying to build.
Others, including Meta Platforms policy executive and former U.K. deputy prime minister Nick Clegg, said those speculative risks are a distraction from current problems -- such as protecting elections from AI-created false videos.
"If you spend that much time worrying about something out there, you spend less time worrying about stuff right in front of your nose," Clegg said Tuesday.
On Wednesday, the U.S. said it would create an AI Safety Center as part of its Commerce Department, pledging that it would work with a counterpart in the U.K. to set standards for benchmarking the capabilities of AI systems, and gathering reporting data from AI companies.
The U.K. also announced future plans for AI safety summits to be hosted in South Korea and France the next year.
China's involvement in the summit is seen as notable by Western officials and industry executives, as some have feared AI could be used as part of an arms race between the world's superpowers.
Wu Zhaohui, China's vice minister of science and technology, said at the summit that the country supported international work to establish testing and assessment systems for AI.
The threat of an AI apocalypse at the hand of godlike machines has long been an object of pop culture fascination. But since the release of OpenAI's ChatGPT, which showcased the new technology's uncanny ability to produce plausible and fluid answers to questions on nearly any topic, it has also become a subject of debate over what priorities policy makers should set.
In a speech Wednesday, Harris said experts should expand their definition of AI safety to look at a broader set of risks including the societal harms she said already exist -- such as bias, discrimination or its ability to spread misinformation. Several of those issues were targeted by a U.S. executive order signed earlier this week.
Those concerns also have been echoed by some digital-rights and labor groups, which issued an open letter criticizing the summit's priorities.
"This is about being fired from your job by algorithm, or unfairly profiled for a loan based on your identity or postcode," the letter read. "Small businesses and artists are being squeezed out, and innovation smothered."
Credit: By Sam Schechner
