TOKYO -- The 1980s movie "Back to the Future Part II" transports viewers to a 2015 where people pay for cab rides with the swipe of a finger.
In the real 2016, fingerprints have entered the mainstream as a way to log on to smart devices, but it's still difficult to pay for rides or at the cash register with just a finger.
To be successful, a payment system would have to match the print against a database that may contain thousands or millions of other prints, and -- to keep impatient customers happy -- do it within seconds.
That's the challenge Yasuhiro Kuda says his Tokyo-based startup, Liquid Inc., has addressed. Backed by the Japanese government and some of the nation's biggest names in finance and technology -- including the venture-capital arms of banking giant Mizuho Financial Group Inc. and cellphone provider NTT DoCoMo Inc. -- Liquid is rolling out a fingerprint-payment system at retailers in Japan and elsewhere in Asia.
Biometrics -- identification through fingerprints, veins, facial features or any other pattern unique to each individual -- has long been considered an ideal form of authentication.
Most biometric systems used by consumers today, including the fingerprint ID used to unlock an Apple Inc. iPhone or iPad, deliver "1:1" identification. The iPhone knows only one fingerprint -- the owner's -- and checks for a match with the one finger on the touch button.
Liquid's system is an example of more-difficult "1:N" identification, which requires finding a match between the fingerprint offered and a large database of prints.
Thanks to artificial-intelligence techniques including "deep learning" -- in which programs figure out on their own how to improve -- Liquid's system can deliver fast and accurate 1:N authentication, Mr. Kuda said.
One business testing Liquid's system is Huis Ten Bosch Co., the operator of a theme park in southern Japan. Season-pass holders who let the park take their fingerprints can pay for food and rides inside the park with just a touch. Though only a few have tried the system, implementation has been "very smooth," a spokeswoman said.
Credit: By Takashi Mochizuki
