BuzzFeed Inc. said it would rely on ChatGPT creator Open-AI to enhance its quizzes and personalize some content for its audiences, becoming the latest digital publisher to embrace artificial intelligence.
In a memo to staff sent Thursday morning, which was reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, Chief Executive Jonah Peretti said he intends for AI to play a larger role in the company's editorial and business operations this year.
In one instance, the company said new AI-powered quizzes would produce individual results. For example, a quiz to create a personal romantic comedy movie pitch might ask questions like, "Pick a trope for your rom-com," and "Tell us an endearing flaw you have." The quiz would produce a unique, shareable write-up based on the individual's responses, BuzzFeed said.
Mr. Peretti expects AI to assist the creative process and enhance the company's content, while humans play the role of providing ideas, "cultural currency," and "inspired prompts," he wrote in his memo. In 15 years, he wrote, he expects AI and data to help "create, personalize, and animate the content itself," rather than just curate existing content.
BuzzFeed, which went public in late 2021 through a merger with a special-purpose acquisition company, last year moved to shrink its news division as it sought to make the business profitable, and said it would be doubling its creator network. The company is getting paid millions of dollars by Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. to help generate creator content for Facebook and Instagram, The Wall Street Journal reported.
BuzzFeed shares more than doubled in value Thursday, closing at $2.09. The stock remains down by over 75% since the company went public.
BuzzFeed remains focused on human-generated journalism in its newsroom, a spokeswoman said Thursday.
After receiving Mr. Peretti's memo, a number of employees on Thursday expressed concerns and asked him questions about the implications. Some employees asked about whether the use of AI technology would lead to a reduction in workforce, and expressed concerns around fact-checking AI-generated content.
Mr. Peretti told staff that digital-media companies that choose to rely on AI solely to save costs and produce low-quality content were making a terrible use of the technology, according to the spokeswoman. That isn't BuzzFeed's approach, Mr. Peretti said.
Microsoft Corp., which has invested billions of dollars in OpenAI, plans to incorporate AI tools like ChatGPT into all products, Chief Executive Satya Nadella said last week.
Credit: By Alexandra Bruell
