Some American conservatives thought that Hungary's Prime Minister Viktor Orban had found a way to unopen the Pandora's box of wokeism. We got it wrong. We overlooked his government's conscious coupling with the Chinese Communist Party. China has been acquiring strategic infrastructure -- air- and seaports, green-energy and telecommunications facilities -- and establishing secret police stations in Europe. Most consequentially, it has cultivated an all-weather strategic partnership with Hungary, a veto-wielding member of the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Since joining Beijing's Belt and Road Initiative in 2013, Budapest has pursued large-scale manufacturing collaborations with Chinese electric-vehicle companies. Mr. Orban has also expanded Huawei's cyber footprint, even though the telecommunications giant has been linked to intellectual property theft, espionage and cyberattacks for the Communist Party. At a May meeting with Peter Sztaray, Hungary's secretary of state for security policy, I asked about the cybersecurity and supply-chain threats posed by developing Chinese artificial intelligence, 5G networks and EV technology in his country. He said the government conducts thorough risk assessments and acts according to national interests.
Underscoring Mr. Sztaray's position, a January 2024 report by the Danube Institute (where I am a research fellow) posits that the Communist Party is unlikely to target its key ally. Yet China views Hungary as an "access point" from which its forces could mount hostile action against Western Europe and the U.S. At Washington's urging, leaders from France, Italy, and Spain have called for stronger cyber and trade defense measures. Hungary, in contrast, opposes the EU's de-risking efforts. The Orban government courted China's BYD Auto to build its first European EV production facility in Hungary. That will allow the auto giant to circumvent Brussels' new tariffs by manufacturing within the EU.
An effective redress to the Communist Party's subversion requires an accurate understanding of what Hungary gains from siding with anti-Western China. Mr. Orban's motives are ascribed to either illiberal authoritarianism or ethnonational conservatism. In fact, his Fidesz Party-led government blends an opportunistic agenda with the unique resentment-laden politics of Hungarian national identity, which is little understood beyond niche academic circles.
After the Soviet Union collapsed, Hungary aspired to become a liberal democracy. But its transition from a command economy to a market system, punctuated by an oligarchic intermezzo, resulted in deep recession, mass unemployment, lower living standards and social discontent. Weakened by a decade of financial mismanagement, the country's export-led and foreign-investment-controlled economy couldn't survive the 2008 financial crisis. In 2010 Mr. Orban capitalized on growing disillusionment with the West to regain political power. He championed a new national identity for Hungary as a postliberal Christian democracy with historic roots in the Turkic world and economic partnerships with China, Turkey and Central Asia through the "Opening to the East" (Keleti Nyitas) policy.
Consequently, the Orban government adopted a two-pronged foreign policy, euphemistically called "connectivity," which comprises social creativity in its relations with the West and aggressive integration into the emerging Beijing-led non-Western bloc. The first strategy turns Hungary's handicaps -- such as its pugnacity (rebellische Ungarn) and linguistic isolation -- into positive distinctions. Mr. Orban casts Hungarians as the lone defenders of Christianity and sovereignty against the EU's decadent despotism, thereby asserting national confidence and exceptionalism on the world stage.
The astute politician's portrayal of the West as conceited and treacherous recalls the enduring national "trauma" of the 1920 Trianon Peace Diktat (as it is called in Hungarian). Imposed by the Entente Powers after World War I, the treaty gave two-thirds of vanquished Hungary's territory to its neighbors and new successor states. In a vengeful and desperate gambit to reverse its territorial losses, Hungary allied with Nazi Germany, only to lose another world war and fall under the boot of Soviet tyranny for more than 40 years.
This century of humiliation ingrained bitter alienation into the national memory. It gave rise to Hungarian Orientalism or Turanism, which emphasizes the Eurasian Steppe origins and alleged Turkic ancestry of Hungary's founding Magyar tribes. The popular mythologizing of Hungarians as a warrior people, in Europe but not of it, and revanchist nostalgia for a pre-1920 Greater Hungary, reveal that the ghosts of past defeat and perpetual inferiority still haunt the national imagination.
Advancing rhetoric that restores Hungary's lost glory and stokes anti-Westernism, through favorably redesigned media and electoral systems, has enabled the Fidesz Party to hold power with a two-thirds supermajority in Parliament since 2010. It also informs the regime's strategy to seek geopolitical power within Beijing's non-Western sphere of influence. Mr. Orban predicts that illegal immigration, identity politics and warmongering have doomed the hegemonic West, whereas a harmony-seeking China will win the 21st century.
His government wants to emulate how China caught up with the "300-year journey" of Western industrial and technological progress in 30 years -- derisking be damned. For its part, China rewarded the small nation with a record $9 billion in foreign direct investment last year, along with massive infrastructure and logistics projects.
A Faustian bargain can't but end in tragedy. Hungary has made its bed. The U.S-led West will have to lie in it too, unless it can thwart China from exploiting Europe's most vulnerable link.
---
Ms. Hansen is a senior fellow in the Budapest Fellowship Program and a visiting fellow at the Danube Institute.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: How to Think About Viktor Orban and Hungary" -- WSJ Aug. 27, 2024)
Credit: By Meg Hansen
