ATLANTA -- Andrew Levy used to describe himself as a filmmaker, producing marketing videos for Fortune 500 companies.
When the pandemic clobbered business in March 2020, he reinvented himself as an artificial-intelligence entrepreneur. In January 2022, he and a partner launched AdPipe, a software company that uses AI to search existing video footage and turn the results into wholly new films.
The software recently helped Ziegler CAT, a Minnesota- and Iowa-based Caterpillar equipment dealer, create a two-minute promotional film drawn from 25 terabytes of footage from Caterpillar archives, prompted solely by a marketing script.
"We were just trying to survive, and during Covid survival looked like helping customers repurpose their existing footage," said Levy. It was such a hit, "we doubled down on those efforts, and AdPipe was born."
Based out of Atlanta and Athens, Ga., with 25 employees, AdPipe is the sort of startup that typically made its home in Silicon Valley. It's part of a wave of entrepreneurs who launched businesses in the past four years, capitalizing on changes unleashed by the pandemic itself.
Some 1.6 million new businesses were formed in 2023, through November, 38% more than in the year before the pandemic and the most since records began in 2005.
It's too early to know for sure what's driving the wave. More flexible schedules early in the pandemic, the upheaval of whole industries, the disruption of child care and pursuit of cheaper housing and better work-life balance may have pushed many salaried workers to pursue startup ideas.
"That it's persisted for so long suggests that the pandemic catalyzed something real and economically significant -- and something that, hopefully, will last," said Kenan Fikri, director of research at the Economic Innovation Group.
Originally from Atlanta, Michael Davis spent most of his career working in business strategy and tech startups in New York and Seattle. But Seattle's pricey real estate made homeownership a reach. He and his wife, who works in biotech, in early 2021 moved to Atlanta, where housing costs are half that in Seattle.
In June, Davis co-founded Homegrown, which provides revenue-based financing and strategic support to local bricks-and-mortar businesses looking to expand. The companies Homegrown has funded include co-working spaces, restaurants, coffee shops and bars, and employ 500 people. Davis is working with firms in other industries, including healthcare, pet services, boutique hotels and fitness.
Some of this demand for expansion comes from how the city has boomed, with population growth accelerating.
Davis doubts he would have left his high-paying job at Microsoft to launch a startup in Seattle. "Simply put, it's just far easier to take a leap of faith with a very high-risk startup when you aren't paying crushing living costs," he said.
Entrepreneurs, including sole proprietors, in metro Atlanta filed 75% more new business applications from 2020 to 2022 than in the three years before the pandemic. Other emerging hot spots include metro Mobile, Ala., where applications were up 127%, and New Orleans and surrounding counties, up 59%.
Atlanta's increase has also been particularly large in Black neighborhoods, said Jorge Guzman, economics professor at Columbia University.
The city, which is 47% Black, is thriving economically. It boasts the Russell Innovation Center for Entrepreneurship, which supports Black startups, and many prominent Black founders and early-stage investors, including Tope Awotona, Paul Judge and Jewel Burks Solomon. Atlanta has three top historically Black colleges and universities, as well as Georgia Institute of Technology, a leader in Black engineering majors.
A few years ago, Kevin DeMarco was a research engineer at Georgia Tech Research Institute, the university's nonprofit applied-research organization, where he worked on robotics and taught graduate students. When the pandemic hit and his lab went remote, the lack of commute and interaction with students gave him time to reflect.
DeMarco joined a startup summer school run by Atlanta Tech Village, one of the country's largest entrepreneurship centers, where he learned the basics of starting a company, and met a mentor ready to invest in a solid idea.
One came from DeMarco's aunt, an operating-room nurse who complained that many trays arrived at surgery with contaminated or missing instruments, delaying surgery and increasing infection risk.
So in the fall of 2020, DeMarco left his Georgia Tech job and launched RIF Robotics to develop software that controls an intelligent robot arm that can identify hundreds of instruments and is learning to sort them. This past October, they landed a partnership with Wellstar, one of Georgia's largest healthcare systems, and are training a robot arm in one of its hospital's labs.
"It took me stepping away from work for a while to say, 'What do I really want to be doing?'" he said.
Another appealing aspect of Atlanta is that it's a more affordable place to raise a family than coastal enclaves such as Silicon Valley or Boston. This became especially relevant as Covid-19 triggered closures and staffing shortages at child-care facilities.
Shelly Scott had a high-octane job at a financial-software company in San Francisco when the pandemic left her scrambling to find care for her toddler twins.
After striking out repeatedly, Scott and her family moved to Atlanta, about 100 miles north of the Robins Air Force Base community where she had grown up, while continuing to work remotely. Child care was much easier to line up than in San Francisco, but still challenging. That made starting a company -- something she had always wanted -- compelling. She left her job in late 2022 to start researching a startup plan.
Scott's child-care struggle inspired her to start a business for people in a similar, or worse, predicament -- specifically, military families who move every few years and often lack a network of acquaintances to help in a pinch.
In May, she launched GetSidekicks, a marketplace for military communities that connects those in need of short-term child care and home services with individuals available to help. Most of these gig workers are female veterans, many looking to reconnect with the community and find flexible work.
"I feel that my struggle with finding child care was meant to happen so that I would start this company," she said.
Credit: By Gwynn Guilford
