As Elon Musk chases a robot future, the Tesla board is trying to pull off its own breakthrough: time travel.
Specifically, Chair Robyn Denholm is doing her best to put shareholders in a 2018 state of mind as she asks them to reapprove the record pay package given to Musk six years ago -- which was rescinded by a Delaware judge.
She is trying to persuade them, in public messages, that the package with its holding requirements motivates Musk to "drive the same growth that we've seen over the past five years for many years to come."
The challenge for Denholm and the board is that it is 2024. And the vote can be seen as a referendum on how much Tesla needs Musk going forward -- even when he isn't 100% focused on the automaker. Rejection at June's shareholder meeting would be a signal that investors are weary of a less-than-fully engaged CEO -- even as he accomplished incredible things and hit the milestones of the original pay package.
That deal -- approved by shareholders in 2018 -- was intended, according to board committee notes, to ensure Musk remained Tesla's "fully engaged CEO."
Yet, by some measures, Musk has more on his plate today than he did then -- six companies instead of four, with the addition in 2022 of X and last year's creation of artificial-intelligence startup xAI. Plus, Musk has become more active in social and political issues that are beginning to show signs of turning buyers off to Tesla's core business.
All of which comes as Tesla's growth story has become murky with competition in China and its product road map turning toward robotaxis and humanoid robots.
Musk defenders argue he devotes significant time and effort to the company that reached achievements impossible without his involvement. They say he juggles his companies in parallel and that allowing his extracurricular activities is how the board keeps him engaged at Tesla.
Still, the board is clearly vying to compete for the superstar CEO's attention, raising a question: Does he want to work at Tesla, or not?
Other CEOs juggled multiple businesses or conglomerates. But when it came to General Electric, there was one share price. In Musk's case, there are five companies outside of Tesla.
And the judge in the Delaware case suggested that Musk should have been motivated by his pre-existing equity stake in Tesla. "After all, he stood to benefit by over $10 billion for every $50 billion increase" in market value, she wrote. "His equity stake was also a powerful incentive to avoid allowing Tesla to fall in what Musk might consider to be incapable hands."
The company argues shareholders approved the plan, Musk delivered on it, and now it is only fair for him to get what he was promised.
As shareholders reconsider the matter, it is easy to understand why Denholm and the board would want to evoke 2018. The company was a fraction of its current size -- in valuation and sales volume -- and there was a real question of whether Tesla could pull off a bet-the-company gambit to bring out a mainstream EV sedan called the Model 3.
The comp plan -- including taking Tesla's market value to $650 billion from about $60 billion -- was seen as a long shot, especially as the company was months behind in boosting the car's production.
It was another era for Musk -- one before he had pulled off one of the most remarkable corporate turnarounds in a generation and become one of the world's richest men. There were echoes of an Elon we know today, one with a wandering sense of imagination, driven to start ambitious new things even if his hands were already full. Then, he had SpaceX; his brain-computer startup Neuralink and his tunneling company Boring.
Given all of that, it is easy to understand why the board might have felt they needed to make Tesla worth his while.
In January, before the judge's ruling, Musk roiled investors with tweets that suggested he might take his ideas for AI and robotics elsewhere if he wasn't given more control of Tesla. "I'm not looking for additional economics," Musk said. "I just want to be an effective steward of very powerful technology."
Some on the board, according to people familiar with the thinking, feel Musk's tweets were misunderstood. What Musk intended to say was he wants new safeguards around the company's AI.
Whatever the case, Musk created the perception that he has one foot out the door with Tesla's most exciting technologies if he doesn't get his way.
Musk needs a successful Tesla. He certainly has other things to do rather than run Tesla, but the core part of his empire is based on Tesla's valuation, which many on Wall Street think would take a big hit without him at the helm. Because of that, one can't help but think this is all a giant game of chicken.
During the Delaware compensation trial in late 2022, Musk reiterated that he intended to stay at Tesla for life and confirmed he never intended to leave the company had shareholders rejected the original pay package in 2018. "You viewed Tesla as part of your family, right?" a lawyer asked Musk.
Yes, Musk responded, he did.
Credit: By Tim Higgins
