NEW YORK -- Samsung Electronics Co. unveiled a new flagship smartphone on Wednesday, its first launch in the wake of product-safety issues that beset the South Korean technology giant last year.
The Samsung Galaxy S8 is longer and slimmer than prior premium models. Its screen now extends to the device's top and bottom edge, and it has no physical home button. Unlocking is now done through a touch-screen home button, full-face recognition or a fingerprint scanner on the back of the device. An earphone jack is included.
Samsung, the world's largest smartphone maker, needs a controversy-free rollout following last year's recall of Galaxy Note 7 devices, after faulty batteries caused some devices to catch fire. The incident caused a dip in customer loyalty and trust, bruising Samsung's chic brand and costing the company $5 billion.
The Galaxy S8 is the company's most closely watched product launch in years. "If the product is really good, it will help bring back the loyalty and trust in the Galaxy brand," said Samsung's mobile chief, D.J. Koh, in a meeting with The Wall Street Journal at the Galaxy S8 launch event.
The company plans to announce the smartphone's price soon. It will hit shelves on April 21.
Samsung will lean heavily on a new virtual assistant, similar to Apple Inc.'s Siri, called Bixby, that uses artificial intelligence to field complex tasks. The feature, which is turned on with a button on the side of the phone, can complete multiple tasks with a single voice command, such as locating a nearby steakhouse and hailing a taxi.
Samsung's monthslong investigation into the Galaxy Note 7 debacle concluded in January that the root cause of the overheating could be traced to battery manufacturing problems and design flaws.
To avoid a repeat mistake, Samsung adopted an eight-point quality plan and added other safety measures for the Galaxy S8. The device, in a break with previous launches, doesn't feature a more powerful battery. But Samsung employed cutting-edge 10-nanometer chips that take up less space and work the battery less strenuously.
"It could have happened to anybody," Mr. Koh said, referring to the Galaxy Note 7 episode. Samsung's investigation into the device's battery problems allowed the company to obtain "tremendous data that we believe will be important for all our products," he said.
Credit: By Timothy W. Martin
