It's early afternoon and your eyelids are drooping. What's the best pick-me-up? The world's largest air-conditioner maker thinks it has an answer.
Daikin Industries Ltd. says its research revealed that lowering room temperature by a few degrees for several minutes beat some other ideas like brighter lights or a rosemary aroma.
The Osaka, Japan-based company, which owns the Goodman brand in the U.S., is planning a service with partner NEC Corp. that would detect sleepiness in office workers through artificial intelligence and deliver a blast of cool air to an area around that person. The companies think it will be ready by 2020.
It's part of Daikin's move away from its traditional hardware business, where it is vulnerable to the same competition that already drove many Japanese electronics makers from the global market. Daikin figures that if people could be persuaded to spend a few dollars on a bottle of premium water, they might do the same with premium air.
At a lab with 700 engineers, researchers are testing other ideas. In one study, Daikin found that in winter, men on average tend to work better at 68 degrees and 30% humidity, while women do better at about 72 degrees and 50% humidity. It is working on services to tailor air for each worker.
Daikin thinks its ideas can help it build a subscription revenue stream, the same way other companies sell cloud computing, software and other services to businesses, or Netflix Inc. sells streaming video to consumers.
Others in the air business are trying different avenues to boost recurring revenue. Johnson Controls International PLC has an "infrastructure as a service" program that allows building owners to pay for a certain output -- like cool air -- rather than for the hardware that delivers it.
Still, Daikin may be treading in tricky territory. When Daikin and NEC disclosed their system for monitoring and reviving sleepy workers, some people on social media in Japan said the idea suggested it sounded like a Big-Brother-is-watching dystopia.
"That might be a good sign," said Daikin engineer Satoshi Hashimoto. "When an idea is truly innovative you'll get about 70% of people opposed to it."
Next on the Daikin agenda: better air for what you eat and drink.
"We are also developing air that makes food taste better," said Sanae Kagawa, another Daikin engineer. "Starting with wine."

Credit: By Takashi Mochizuki
