Alphabet unit Google's talks to acquire the cybersecurity startup Wiz for a proposed $23 billion have fallen apart, according to a person with knowledge of the discussions.
In an email to employees sent Monday and viewed by The Wall Street Journal, Wiz chief executive Assaf Rappaport told employees the company is now aiming for an initial public offering.
"Wizards, I know the last week has been intense, with the buzz about a potential acquisition," he wrote. "While we are flattered by offers we have received, we have chosen to continue on our path to building Wiz."
He also said the company intends to reach $1 billion in annual recurring revenue ahead of the IPO.
Wiz is aiming to achieve the $1 billion annual recurring revenue mark within the next year and expects an IPO within a few years, the knowledgeable person said.
The company currently generates $500 million in annual recurring revenue, The Wall Street Journal recently reported.
Deal talks -- especially involving tie-ups of this scale -- are notoriously unpredictable. It's possible the companies could return to the negotiating table.
A deal with Wiz could have drawn antitrust scrutiny. Google is currently awaiting a verdict in a Justice Department lawsuit claiming it used illegal means to retain its dominance in online search. The federal agency last year filed a second antitrust suit, which hasn't gone to trial, alleging unfair practices in Google's ad-tech business.
Wiz was founded in 2020 and rapidly became one of the hottest companies in the burgeoning field of security for cloud computing. It raised $1 billion earlier this year at a valuation of $12 billion, making it one of just a handful of startups outside the artificial-intelligence industry to raise money at a higher valuation in 2024.
It is backed by high profile Silicon Valley venture capitalists, including Sequoia Capital, Andreessen Horowitz, Index Ventures, and Lightspeed Venture Partners.
Acquiring Wiz would have helped boost Google's offering in cloud computing, a field where it lags behind competitors Amazon and Microsoft.
A $23 billion purchase of Wiz would also have been the largest acquisition by a wide margin for Google, whose parent Alphabet is scheduled to report earnings Tuesday. Its biggest deal to date was the $12.5 billion purchase of Motorola Mobility that closed in 2012.
Two years ago Google bought another cybersecurity company, Mandiant, for $5.4 billion.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
