Reid Hoffman, the billionaire co-founder of LinkedIn and Inflection AI, is part of a group of Silicon Valley investors who have taken an active role in this year's presidential election, rallying behind their favored candidates both vocally and financially.
A partner in the venture-capital firm Greylock since 2009, Hoffman sat down with Emily Glazer at the WSJ Tech Live conference to discuss artificial intelligence, investing and politics.
Here are edited excerpts of the conversation.
WSJ: You introduced your AI avatar earlier this year. Why did you create this and what insights did you get from it?
REID HOFFMAN: The typical discourse around AI is very fear- and uncertainty-motivated, and yet there are amazing things we can do. So I decided to take the area where I think there is the most real concern -- deepfakes -- and show what you can do positively with it. For example, I gave a speech in Perugia, Italy, and then had my avatar deliver this speech in Hindi, Chinese, Japanese, Italian, etc., because it's part of that human connection. The idea is to try to shift the dialogue to being more curious and inquisitive about what we can create in the future.
WSJ: My takeaway from your new book, "Superagency," is that AI can better individual lives and society. But what do you say to all of the AI doomers who are still out there?
HOFFMAN: They are indeed still out there.
Part of the book shows that in all of human history, starting with the written word, the printing press, etc., it always starts with human discourse that this is the collapse of society, this is the disempowerment of humanity. This is because it's a change to the way the social order works. And that's how we start in terms of how these things operate.
It's like maybe AI this time is different. It's agent technology, it's cognitive versus physical, it's moving fast. But it isn't going to be different. It is going to be, as we've seen in every technology in human history, an increase in human agency. What's more, we can steer toward that. That's what I'm trying to show people.
WSJ: To change gears, we have a presidential election in about two weeks. Are you nervous?
HOFFMAN: Very. Primarily because I think it will make a big difference to business outcomes.
I've written a couple of op-eds about why I think Harris is a better choice for business. Tariffs and trade wars are terrible ideas for businesses, terrible for Silicon Valley. I think stability and trying to actually have institutions and the rule of law are more important than a 2% cut in a tax rate.
WSJ: You have also given billions of dollars toward Harris's campaign and to Biden before that.
HOFFMAN: Yes. Harris has been portrayed as antibusiness, but, having grown up in California, a bunch of us in Silicon Valley have met her. She's the first presidential candidate in history who actually referred to [tech] founders in her acceptance speech. As an entrepreneur and investor, I like that.
WSJ: If Trump wins, what's your plan?
HOFFMAN: Bourbon? The good thing about the Silicon Valley tech industry is it's strong and robust. If Trump wins, it will be a pretty strong blow to the American system of governance that we set up after World War II. That will hurt basically every American business, even the ones that aren't international. But the tech industry is robust, given the quality of its products, so that is good.
WSJ: And what if Harris wins? There could be contested election results for weeks. What role would the tech industry have to play in something like that? And what about this idea of misinformation or disinformation spreading online, as it did with 2020, as people are awaiting the results?
HOFFMAN: Yeah, well, we already know of one platform where the owner of the platform is spreading deepfakes himself.
Obviously, there will be some challenges in that arena, and I think that's a serious problem. It will be important for social-media companies to try to not spread misinformation and chaos.
WSJ: You did point to regulation as part of why you're supporting Kamala Harris. That drives a lot of business leaders' votes. So I want to set the record straight: Did you talk to Kamala Harris about replacing Lina Khan as head of the Federal Trade Commission?
HOFFMAN: Never. I made a specific comment about how I think Lina Khan misunderstands her role relative to big business. She's done a number of great things. But I disagree intensely with some of the things around the application of antitrust law within the general tech industry.
WSJ: How are you trying to open up the conversation with Trump supporters in tech?
HOFFMAN: It may surprise people that there are people that I'm having deep and friendly conversations with on this topic
If someone articulates a good intellectual principle as to why they're holding a point of view -- say, application of the rule of law to the crypto industry and why that's important -- that's a totally good conversation.
If it's more about I just want to gain power, buy crony capitalist influence, lower the taxes for myself, all of that, I'm not willing to engage in that conversation.
---
Write to reports@wsj.com
Credit: By Emily Glazer
