Amazon.com Inc. is committed to investing in innovative technologies even as it has faced one of its "harder macroeconomic years in recent memory," Chief Executive Andy Jassy said in his second annual letter to shareholders.
Mr. Jassy, who led cost-cutting initiatives that included slashing about 27,000 jobs, noted earlier periods that were challenging, such as the 2001 dot-com crash and 2008 recession. He said that Amazon in those periods still continued to invest in what would become successful businesses such as Amazon Web Services, its cloud-computing unit.
"While there were an unusual number of simultaneous challenges this past year, the reality is that if you operate in large, dynamic, global market segments with many capable and well-funded competitors, conditions rarely stay stagnant for long," he wrote. "Change is always around the corner."
Amazon has been in a state of retrenchment after years of growth. The company is in the process of cutting 9,000 corporate jobs after having laid off more than 18,000 employees from November through the start of this year. It has targeted unprofitable divisions such as its devices business, but the cuts also have affected high-performing segments such as AWS.
Mr. Jassy said AWS faces "short-term headwinds right now," despite growing 29% year over year in 2022 on a $62 billion revenue base, as companies spend more cautiously in the face of challenging current macroeconomic conditions.
Employees have faced pay cuts, and the company has moved away from certain projects. In March, it confirmed it was pausing construction on a large corporate real-estate complex near Washington that it calls its second headquarters.
Mr. Jassy has tried to quell concerns about layoffs and further cuts by telling staff that the company is still investing in long-term projects that will be effective and that he remains optimistic about the future.
In his letter, Mr. Jassy listed several business lines that he said could spur further growth. Those included its international business, chip development, advertising, its grocery business, healthcare and its satellite-internet business Project Kuiper.
Amazon recently paused its rollout of Amazon Fresh stores after they struggled to gain significant traction, and Mr. Jassy earlier this year said the company is experimenting with Amazon Fresh store formats until it finds a model that resonates with customers. In February, Amazon closed a $3.9 billion deal to acquire an operator of primary-care clinics, its next bet on healthcare.
Whole Foods Market, which Amazon bought in 2017, "is on an encouraging path, but to have a larger impact on physical grocery, we must find a mass grocery format that we believe is worth expanding broadly," Mr. Jassy said.
He also said the company has been working with generative AI models, the technology behind ChatGPT. Amazon on Thursday announced new artificial-intelligence offerings which target corporate customers. AWS is selling access to multiple large language models, allowing companies to build generative features off more than one.
Mr. Jassy said Amazon has been using machine learning for decades and plans to invest substantially in those models to boost "consumer, seller, brand and creator experiences."
In his letter, Mr. Jassy also said the company has made changes to its package-delivery network. After years of scaling up rapidly, the company is now looking to optimize its expanded network and battle the rising cost of getting products to customers, the CEO said. As part of that push, Amazon is moving away from its national fulfillment network in the U.S. and toward a more regional model.
Mr. Jassy said he remains confident that continued innovation will pull Amazon forward through this period.
"I strongly believe that our best days are in front of us" Mr. Jassy wrote.
Credit: By Sebastian Herrera and Dean Seal
