Have you ever tried to isolate and lift your inner eyebrow?
It's a skill I didn't fully appreciate until a recent Tuesday afternoon, when an artificial-intelligence tool scanned my body, face and voice to create my digital double. That double -- an AI replica -- could only pass as me if it knew how every muscle in my face moved.
As I sat in an orb, being photographed from all angles by dozens of cameras, I tried desperately to arch the part of my eyebrows closest to my nose without performing a full brow lift, a stunt that required a superhuman degree of control.
Meryl Streep must be amazing at this, I thought.
The task at hand was to capture how my inner-eyebrow raise is different from Meryl Streep's, or anyone else's. It was one of dozens of commands I followed to re-create every look my facial muscles and deepest emotions can produce.
The scan took place at the CAA Vault, a warehouse-type facility in Los Angeles built by Creative Artists Agency, one of the entertainment industry's top talent agencies. The Vault gathers several scanning stations -- body, face, voice capture -- in one place, so visitors can in a single day leave with a replica of themselves that appears on screen as authentic as the genuine article.
From there, the AI replica can be used to put an actor's face on a stunt double's body. It can dub an actor's lines into any language -- with the actor's mouth moving as though he is speaking fluently. A star might ship a digital double in his stead. He -- or some version of himself -- can be in two places at once. Years after the star's death, the replica could be revived for performances that commemorate his immortality.
At this point, only select CAA clients have gone through the Vault. A team of friendly engineers and experts guided me through each scan, cracking jokes and taking musical requests to help pass the time. The Vault is designed to be a one-stop shop, and most visitors can complete their scans in a long afternoon.
I saw in one day what digital cloning requires. To capture how my body bends, I stretched as though I had been leading a workout video. To capture how my face contorts when I'm happy, I smiled broadly and feigned surprise. To capture how my mouth moves, I shouted nonsensical phrases like, "The woman's purse was full of trash!"
Portraitists and theologians have long pondered what constitutes the essence of a person. By the end of the day, it seemed we had captured mine, ironically, through a series of very out-of-character behaviors.
I visited the frontier of what has been a decadeslong evolution among mortals and stars alike -- one that began when our phones became an appendage, continued when our names turned into Facebook profile URLs and took on a new urgency as we waved to one another across Zoom tiles. AI replicas feel like the next step, and a quantum leap.
But if my first reaction was "how cool," the second was "how scary." The political implications are easy to imagine -- an AI replica of a world leader could declare war in any language. And when the tech becomes widespread enough, everyday users will be able to generate photos and videos that appear to place them in any situation. Why go for a hike in real life when your digital double can summit Everest?
Home to the most in-demand humans on planet Earth, Hollywood has become an early proving ground for this technology. Stars could use a spare version of themselves lying around.
CAA clients own the digital doubles created in the Vault, giving them, the agency hopes, more license to police replicas made without their permission.
That hasn't always been the case as some companies have made and manipulated the digital doubles of stars. Striking actors this summer secured in their new contracts some protections against the use of their likeness by AI tools.
CAA and others want Washington's oversight, envisioning a world in which control of one's replica joins other inherent rights. "We didn't have that luxury of waiting for the law to catch up," said Alexandra Shannon, CAA's head of strategic development and the architect behind the Vault.
Take entertainment today, when AI is already feeding the entertainment machine with characters and stories we know well. In London, virtual avatars of the ABBA quartet perform "Dancing Queen" in a concert. AI has become the gasoline that keeps the nostalgia engine running.
CAA Chief Executive Bryan Lourd helped usher in one of the earliest adoptions of this throwback technology when Carrie Fisher, the actress who first portrayed Princess Leia in 1977's "Star Wars," died halfway through reprising the role in the newest trilogy. Fisher was the mother of his daughter, Billie Lourd.
The filmmakers approached the Lourds for permission to re-create Fisher digitally in the last movie in the trilogy, "The Rise of Skywalker" -- and struck a deal to make it happen.
When he saw the movie, Lourd had an experience we all might share soon enough. "It's a strange experience," he said, "to be able to see someone you care about, and even people you don't really know or care about, in all the different stages of their life."
That might explain the thoughts I had driving home from the CAA Vault. If I died that night, could my partner and friends and family seek respite in my digital double, a version of me preserved in technological amber?
I didn't know whether to feel comforted or captured.
Credit: By Erich Schwartzel
