The U.S. will prohibit Americans from investing in some Chinese companies developing advanced semiconductors and quantum computers starting next year, escalating Washington's efforts to prevent Beijing from producing cutting-edge technology for its military.
President Biden on Wednesday issued an executive order creating the rules after months of deliberations. The move could unsettle fragile efforts to rekindle diplomatic relations with China. Officials in Beijing have railed against U.S. policies restricting access to advanced technology, as tensions between the two superpowers have contributed to slowing U.S. direct investment in China.
Beyond banning new private-equity, venture-capital and joint-venture investments in advanced semiconductors and quantum computers, the executive order will require Americans doing business in China to inform the U.S. government about direct investments in artificial intelligence and other types of semiconductors.
Washington is increasingly concerned that Beijing could use American technology and know-how to develop weapons that could be used against the U.S. in a military conflict. The Biden administration last year restricted exports of advanced semiconductors and chip-manufacturing equipment to China, and the U.S. has also heightened scrutiny of Chinese investment in American technology companies.
Even ahead of their release, the new capital controls have started to reshape U.S. investor behavior. Venture-capital fund Sequoia Capital split off its China business earlier this year after persistent scrutiny in Washington. Other firms have slowed or paused transactions in China as they await the new rules, according to people familiar with their thinking.
The new investment restrictions risk refreezing an attempted thaw in diplomacy between the two superpowers. Biden administration officials cast the rules as narrowly targeted attempts to protect national security. Still, officials in Beijing say they are aimed at kneecapping China's economic growth and development. Chinese leader Xi Jinping complained to Biden about the export controls on semiconductors last year. China banned its major companies from buying technology from Micron Technology, the largest memory-chip maker in the U.S., earlier this year.
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington said China was "very disappointed" that the U.S. moved forward with the investment restrictions. "China opposes the U.S.' overuse of national security to politicize and weaponize trade, scientific and technological issues and deliberately making obstacles to normal economic and trade exchanges and technological cooperation," he said.
Industry reaction Wednesday was muted. Some industry representatives described the action as relatively narrow compared with approaches that lawmakers have considered.
The Semiconductor Industry Association said it looked forward to providing input, adding that "we hope the final rules allow U.S. chip firms to compete on a level playing field and access key global markets, including China." The National Venture Capital Association said it was watching closely "to ensure there are no unintended consequences on investments in U.S. companies."
Rep. Michael McCaul (R., Texas), the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, applauded the step but said the administration should apply the rules sooner and to more technology sectors.
"The administration scaling back -- at a time where aggressive action is needed more than ever -- continues the trend of appeasing industry at the cost of national security," he said.
The rules technically apply to investments in "countries of concern," though the administration has identified only China, as well as Hong Kong and Macau, as meeting that standard. Before enforcing the new rules, the administration will accept feedback on the regulations implementing them.
---
John D. McKinnon contributed to this article.
Credit: By Andrew Duehren
