[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
It is a topsy-turvy world: Management consultants have gotten better at marketing themselves than ad executives.
Companies used to rely on ads to promote brands. Now they have more direct ways to engage with customers. Luxury groups like Gucci have rapidly shifted focus from Vogue to Instagram, while consumer giants like Unilever are investing heavily in e-commerce.
This accelerating shift is a headache for the old pillars of the ad industry: agency holding companies like WPP and Omnicom. Not only is it hard to manage culturally -- it is easier to get would-be Mad Men motivated by a new Super Bowl ad than a customer-relationship-management system -- but it has also brought them face to face with deep-pocketed new competitors, notably consultancies Accenture and Deloitte.
Some agency groups are bulking up for the fight; others are slimming down. WPP wants to merge Young & Rubicam, a struggling traditional ad agency, with digital peer VML, and may also sell ailing data business Kantar. Interpublic Group this year paid $2.3 billion for the marketing operation of Acxiom Corp, which has the kind of individualized consumer data Kantar struggles to match.
Consultants compete for large capital-spending projects rather than classic ad dollars. Accenture wouldn't be interested in pitching for a TV car ad, but it would be interested in helping a company reinvent the car-buying experience, says Brian Whipple, chief executive of the company's marketing business, Accenture Interactive.
This is where the growth is. It is also where the scale is, thanks to a bias toward big projects. Accenture comes top of ad-industry rankings of the largest digital networks.
As agency groups and consultancies rub shoulders, investors can expect plenty of debate about their relative strengths. Agency executives argue that consultancies don't have the creative flair that underpins good marketing. Consultancies say they are trusted advisers -- a dig at agency groups, whose media-buying arms have come under fire from advertisers for inappropriate ad placement and undisclosed fees.
Consultancies have the advantage of relationships with more senior people, typically chief executives and chief financial officers. Agency groups answer to chief marketing officers, who often have to work with cost-cutting chief procurement officers.
From artificial intelligence to Amazon's Alexa, digital technology has plenty more capacity to disrupt the way companies engage with consumers. It is hard to see the power of the consultants' tech-heavy pitch getting any weaker. Agency groups have little choice but to follow where consultants lead.

Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
