BEIJING -- Xiaomi Corp. expects sales and smartphone shipments to each rise by more than 30% this year, its chief executive said, as the Chinese smartphone maker looks to overseas markets to keep up its growth.
The company expects sales to exceed 100 billion yuan ($16 billion) this year, Xiaomi Chief Executive Lei Jun said on the sidelines of China's National People's Congress in Beijing on Thursday. Xiaomi sales more than doubled in 2014 to 74.3 billion yuan.
"Our core products are all continuing to grow," Mr. Lei said.
Xiaomi has become one of the world's fastest-growing tech companies since it began selling high-spec smartphones at bargain prices in 2011. It became the world's most valuable startup last year, with a valuation of around $46 billion. But the company is battling slowing domestic smartphone growth this year, as rivals in China increasingly imitate its online sales business model.
Xiaomi expects to sell 80 million to 100 million smartphones this year, up from 61.1 million last year, Mr. Lei said. The company was the world's fifth-largest smartphone maker in the fourth quarter, with a 4.4% share of the market, according to market-research firm IDC.
Mr. Lei reiterated on Thursday his goal of making Xiaomi the world's biggest smartphone maker in the next decade.
Xiaomi's biggest focus in global expansion this year will remain India, Mr. Lei said. The company sells its phones in India and some other emerging markets outside of China, and plans to expand to countries such as Russia and Brazil. Xiaomi said in February it will begin to sell accessories online in the U.S., although it has no immediate plans to begin selling its phones in the U.S. and other developed markets.
Mr. Lei and several other Chinese tech leaders are members of the country's parliament, the National People's Congress, and attended its annual meeting on Thursday. Xiaomi's CEO said he has suggested revisions to Chinese law to improve the business environment for innovative companies.
Other industry executives have made proposals this week as well. Robin Li, chairman and chief executive of Internet giant Baidu Inc. and a delegate of the political advisory body called the Chinese People's Political Consultative Committee, proposed that the government develop a national plan for advancing artificial-intelligence technologies.
Credit: By Eva Dou
