Google is doubling down on its bet on artificial intelligence with new features and availability for its virtual assistant and smart speaker, part of a scramble with other tech giants to dominate the next wave of consumer technology.
The new uses, unveiled Wednesday at the company's annual software-developers conference, touch on such popular Google functions as photos, email and mobile payments. They build on two products -- Google Assistant and Google Home -- announced at last year's conference. But there was also a nod to a new computing platform: virtual reality.
Tech is in the middle of "this important shift from a mobile-first to an AI-first world and we are driving it forward across all of our products and platforms," Google Chief Executive Sundar Pichai said at the conference in Google's hometown of Mountain View, Calif.
Google, a unit of Alphabet Inc., is trying to make its services even more ubiquitous by plugging the Google Assistant -- its competitor to Apple Inc.'s Siri and Amazon.com Inc.'s Alexa virtual assistants -- into far more devices. Following a similar move by Amazon, Google said the Assistant will soon be available via an app on iPhones, as well as a variety of other devices, including refrigerators, washing machines and toys.
Google also said it would soon add phone-call capabilities to its Google Home smart speakers. Users can call any phone number in the U.S. or Canada with the service, an advantage over a new Amazon smart speaker called the Echo Show, which lets users video chat only with other Echo Show devices or phones that have the associated app.
Still, the Google Home trails Amazon's Echo by a wide margin. Market-research firm eMarketer estimated this month that Echo controls 70% of the smart-speaker market versus 24% for Google Home.
The pie is growing, though. EMarketer forecasts 35.6 million people in the U.S. will use a smart speaker this year, up 129% from 2016.
The use of virtual assistants, predominantly on smartphones, is far higher. EMarketer forecasts a 23% increase this year in the number of U.S. virtual-assistant users to 60.5 million, or nearly 28% of U.S. smartphone users. The market share of the various virtual assistants -- the Google Assistant, Amazon's Alexa, Apple's Siri and Microsoft Corp.'s Cortana -- is unclear.
Google showed its enormous reach with some new statistics Wednesday; for example, there are now 2 billion active devices running its Android software, up from 1.4 billion in late 2015.
Google also suggested its Google Drive online-storage service and Google Photos app are on course to join its current list of products that have more than 1 billion monthly users.
Separately, Google announced a new standalone virtual-reality headset that doesn't require a computer or phone to function -- an entirely new product category in the emerging virtual-reality industry -- with the hope it can become a new hit.
Credit: By Jack Nicas
