HONG KONG -- Tencent Holdings Ltd. of China has struck a deal to provide WebMD's health-care content to the more than one billion users on its WeChat social network, according to the companies.
The content-licensing deal includes WebMD articles, videos and slide shows covering medical and health topics, such as the side effects of chemotherapy or the symptoms of appendicitis. Financial terms weren't disclosed.
WebMD, which is owned by private-equity firm KKR & Co. and based in New York, said the deal will raise the quality of health-care information available to Chinese consumers. The content, slated to be rolled out by year's end, will also be available on Tencent's QQ messaging app.
"There are tens of millions of people on WeChat today that are forming groups for specific disease information, whether it's cancer or diabetes," said Jeremy Schneider, senior vice president of corporate development and global strategy for WebMD. "There is a lot of talking amongst themselves, but there is not a lot of credible information."
Tencent will translate and adapt the content for Chinese audiences, Meng Zhang, general manager of Tencent Healthcare Information Center, wrote in an email.
"There are quite some differences between Chinese and Western demographics, medical practices and cultures," Mr. Zhang wrote. "It is very important that we take into account these differences during the localization process."
Health care is a big -- and growing -- business in China, which is forecast to spend $1 trillion on health care by 2020, according to a report from McKinsey & Co. Its aging population is increasingly dealing with chronic conditions such as diabetes, but the health-care system doesn't have enough general family doctors who can direct patients to the right treatments and specialists, said Philip Leung, head of the Greater China Healthcare practice for consulting firm Bain & Co.
That leaves many people turning up at the hospital for care. Wait times can be so extreme that ticket scalpers book hospital appointments and then try to sell them for a big markup, a practice Beijing has started cracking down on, said Mark Natkin, managing director of research firm Marbridge Consulting.
In recent years, China has expanded insurance coverage, encouraged the growth of private hospitals and pushed for digitizing medical records. To further improve care, China last year tapped Tencent to be a "national champion" to develop uses of artificial intelligence technology in medicine.
Tencent has backed dozens of health-care companies, both in China and around the world. Mr. Natkin said his firm has tracked at least 30 health-care-related investments since April 2012. Tencent declined to comment.
The new WebMD services will compete against a growing number of companies providing not only medical information, but also online tools that help Chinese consumers navigate the system.
---
Fanfan Wang in Beijing contributed to this article.

Credit: By Shan Li
