NEW YORK -- Samsung Electronics Co. unveiled a new flagship smartphone on Wednesday, its first launch in the wake of product-safety issues that beset the South Korean technology giant last year.
The Samsung Galaxy S8 is longer and slimmer than prior premium models. Its screen now extends to the device's top and bottom edge, and it has no physical home button. Unlocking is now done through a touch-screen home button, full-face recognition or a fingerprint scanner on the back of the device.
Samsung, the world's largest smartphone maker, needs a controversy-free rollout following last year's recall of Galaxy Note 7 devices, after faulty batteries caused some devices to catch fire. The episode bruised Samsung's chic brand and ended up costing the company $5 billion.
The Galaxy S8 is the company's most closely watched product launch in years. "If the product is really good, it will help bring back the loyalty and trust in the Galaxy brand," said Samsung's mobile chief, D.J. Koh, in a meeting at the Galaxy S8 launch event here.
AT&T Inc. and T-Mobile US Inc. plan to offer the phone at a starting price of $750 for the Galaxy S8 with a smaller-sized screen; a bigger model would go for $850. It will hit shelves on April 21. A Samsung spokeswoman said preorders would begin Thursday.
The Galaxy Note 7 fiasco allowed rival Apple Inc.'s iPhone to vault past Samsung in global smartphone shipments during the final three months of 2016, the first time the South Korean firm slipped to No. 2 in five years, according to Strategy Analytics, a market researcher. But for the full year, Samsung remained the leader, shipping 309.4 million devices versus Apple's 215.4 million.
A smartphone recovery isn't Samsung's only challenge of the moment. The conglomerate's de facto leader, Lee Jae-yong, has been jailed for his alleged role in a bribery scandal that has rocked the nation's business and political elite. Mr. Lee has denied wrongdoing and his trial remains in the early stages, with a verdict expected by May.
Samsung's tangled web of ownership has drawn heightened criticism by South Korean politicians, regulators and foreign investors. Those critics are urging a shake-up for family-run conglomerates like Samsung. If those efforts prove successful, they could loosen the grip Mr. Lee -- the grandson of the company's founder -- has over the total empire.
Despite those battles, shares of Samsung Electronics, the conglomerate's crown jewel, are trading near all-time highs. The Suwon, South Korea-based firm in January posted its best quarter of operating profit in three years, driven by booming sales at its components business.
Its Galaxy S8 release will give Samsung at least five months of sales before Apple's expected release of the much-anticipated 10th-anniversary iPhone this September. The speculative frenzy around the iPhone has been heightened by analysts' predictions that it will be one of the company's most revolutionary devices, with some suggesting it will come in a new size, feature an upgraded display and offer functions such as wireless charging and facial recognition.
To counter Apple, plus lower-cost rivals gobbling up market share in China and India, Samsung will lean heavily on a new virtual assistant, Similar to Apple Inc.'s Siri, Samsung's Bixby, which is turned on and off with a button on the phone's side, uses artificial intelligence to field more-complex tasks than do rivals' offerings.
Samsung's monthslong investigation into the Galaxy Note 7 debacle concluded in January that the overheating could be traced to battery manufacturing problems and design flaws.
To avoid a repeat, Samsung adopted an eight-point quality plan and added other safety measures for the Galaxy S8. The device, in a break with previous launches, doesn't feature a more powerful battery.
---
Tripp Mickle contributed to this article.
Credit: By Timothy W. Martin
