Technology companies are hurriedly snapping up startups in the field of artificial intelligence, and Intel Corp. is the latest to join a buying spree fueled by one of the hottest trends in the tech sector.
The chip maker on Tuesday announced plans to pay an undisclosed amount for Nervana Systems, a 48-employee company working on semiconductors, software and services to exploit a popular AI technique called deep learning.
Intel's move follows an earlier deal by Apple Inc. to purchase Turi Inc., a Seattle-based specialist in the field. The two acquisitions add to a string of 31 purchases since 2011 of AI startups by large companies, according to venture-capital researcher CB Insights. The firm lists buyers that include Alphabet Inc.'s Google, Twitter Inc., Yahoo Inc., International Business Machines Corp. and Salesforce.com Inc.
Factoring in smaller acquirers, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP counts 29 related acquisitions so far this year, suggesting the total deal count for 2016 will top the 37 deals announced last year.
"We are on a very swift and increasing pace," said Todson Page, the consulting and accounting firm's U.S. technology industry deals leader.
Industry executives link the deal activity to the rapidly widening applications of AI, a broad term referring to ways to make computers emulate attributes of the human brain. An initial cycle of excitement about the technology arose in the 1980s and later fizzled, but interest has boomed in recent years due to breakthroughs in the field known as machine learning, especially in the specific area of deep learning.
Instead of programming machines explicitly to, say, recognize a human face, deep learning allows computers to learn to perform the task by analyzing vast troves of images of faces. Apple, for instance, uses deep learning to analyze speech commands issued to Siri, the software used for a variety of tasks on iPhones. Other applications include detecting credit-card fraud, interpreting medical images, studying crop growth, and enabling drones and self-driving cars to navigate.
"AI is about to transform industry after industry," said Andrew Ng, a deep-learning pioneer who is chief scientist at Baidu Inc. and an associate professor at Stanford University.
Dollar figures for the AI acquisition binge are hard to come by -- as are figures for individual AI transactions -- because the big-tech companies are swooping in on startups before they have built market valuations of a size that buyers would be compelled to disclose.
The buyers need talent more than technology, Mr. Ng said, since today's AI products quickly will need to be updated. Google, which led its peers with nine purchases, according to CB Insights, mined the AI research community in 2013 by buying DNNresearch, a company helmed by the influential University of Toronto AI researcher Geoffrey Hinton.
Intel has special motivations. While its Xeon chips handle most computing tasks in data centers, rival Nvidia Corp. has popularized chips known as graphics processing units, or GPUs, to more quickly handle specialized chores associated with deep learning.
The following year, Google bought DeepMind Technologies Ltd., a London-based startup founded by Cambridge University graduates that some publications pegged at a price tag of more than $400 million.
Credit: By Don Clark
