To understand one of the biggest challenges American manufacturers face, walk halfway down the assembly line at the Alene Candles factory in New Albany, Ohio.
That is where workers stand on either side of a slow-moving conveyor belt pulling at wicks with bent needle-nose pliers, straightening them out and centering them before the candles move on to be lidded, labeled and packed up for shipment.
Straightening the wicks is physically taxing and boring, and finding enough people willing to do it is getting harder.
What is proving even more difficult is building a robot that can do the job.
It isn't that machines are cheaper or do the work faster or better. In fact, people are better than robots at tasks such as straightening wicks and placing lids on candles.
But Alene is already struggling to find workers for some of its most basic entry-level jobs, and it expects the problem to be compounded as trends like wellness and aromatherapy fuel demand for candles.
"We looked at how many people would be needed in the factory if we scaled the way we were operating," said Rodney Harl, Alene's president and chief executive. "We said, how in the world are we going to get, not 600 to 800 people, but 1,200 or 1,500 in our busiest time of the year? We could see a day where you can't get folks to put on the line."
North American companies purchased robots at a record pace in 2022, according to data from the Association for Advancing Automation, a trade group. But unlike past automation bursts, when companies were focused on lowering their labor costs and competing with overseas rivals, the current surge of robot development is driven as much by labor shortages and a belief that a shrinking labor force could stymie growth.
Alene's pursuit of a wick-straightening machine, now in its fourth year, keeps hitting obstacles. In 2020, Alene asked a few dozen engineering firms to propose automation solutions, then paid three of the firms to build prototypes, and invested well over $1 million in one of those. It has set up the new machine on one line and is trying to work out the kinks. But the machine isn't performing as well as expected and has already cost far more than Alene ever imagined it would, Harl said.
Among the challenges: The simple movements of the workers in what Alene calls Zone 2 of its assembly line are incredibly precise. Visual judgment is required to determine whether a wick is off-center to the left or the right. Some candles have thin wicks that can get submerged in hot wax, and those need to be fished out as the wax cools. And unlike robots, humans can quickly wipe wax buildup off their tools.
The fear that automation spells the end of jobs hasn't been borne out, said Julie Shah, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and head of the school's interactive robotics group.
One reason is that adoption has been slow and uneven, with only 11.1% of U.S. manufacturing plants reporting that they used robots in 2019, according to data from the U.S. Census Bureau. When companies adopt automation successfully, they end up adding workers as they become more productive and fill more orders, Shah said. And machines' lack of flexibility has often resulted in what Shah calls "zero-sum automation," in which gains in productivity are canceled out by the need for people to fix or reprogram robots and compensate for their drawbacks.
Early evidence suggests that like robots, generative artificial intelligence is more likely to change some of the tasks that people do rather than fully replace those human workers.
The U.S. may have 2.1 million unfilled manufacturing jobs by 2030, including entry-level and skilled workers, according to a 2021 report by Deloitte and the Manufacturing Institute. Nearly 15% of Ohio's labor force worked in manufacturing businesses in 2022.
"I don't think it'll affect our jobs," Carolyn Hart, 62 years old, said of the company's automation push. Hart has been working on Alene's assembly line for almost 10 years, and currently straightens wicks. Machines make mistakes, she said, "and you still need people to step in."
Around 250 year-round employees make candles at Alene's New Albany plant. That figure more than doubles during the peak season, supplemented with temporary workers. From August to November, Alene turns out more than 500,000 candles a day in its factories in New Albany and in Milford, N.H.
Alene has increased pay for wick straighteners faster than for other positions. The job pays a starting wage of $16 to $17 an hour, around $1.50 more than other candle-making roles, with additional bumps for second and third shifts.
That has helped, but it won't solve the problem for the long term, especially when other local businesses also are boosting pay rates.
"If we make 50% more candles, we need 50% more straighteners," Harl said. "We could pay people $100 an hour and you can fill the job. In a candle factory, that's not feasible."
At the same time, regional demand for workers is rising. Facebook, Amazon.com and Google have warehouses and data centers nearby. Job boards advertise dozens of logistics and production jobs in the area, paying anywhere from $13 to $25 an hour. And with Intel and Honda set to soon open factories in the area, competition for skilled labor -- the people who, at Alene, mix ingredients, operate machines or test batches of products -- will get more intense.
Alene's workers say they look forward to the day when the wick-straightening job and others like it are done by machines. T'Yanca Dozier was already automated out of one job. When Dozier, age 34, started at Alene nearly 12 years ago, she stood at the front of the assembly line gluing wicks into the glass jars. She was relieved when machines took that over, she said.
When that process was automated, Dozier moved down the line to straighten the wicks. Today, she is a line lead overseeing assembly lines. More automation "will be awesome," she said. "We'll be able to produce more candles, and it'll give us the opportunity to do more things."
Credit: By Lauren Weber
