When it comes to consumer chatbots, there seems to be a pretty clear disconnect: Companies generally like them, and consumers generally don't.
Last year, 71% of more than 4,500 employees across industries surveyed by Forrester Research said their companies were either experimenting with or implementing conversational AI and chatbots on their websites. The benefits are obvious: Brands are looking to cut costs, and chatbots are cheaper than people. What's more, they believe, chatbots have the potential to improve customer experiences.
At the same time, a Forrester survey conducted last year found that just 16% of consumers said they often used chatbots, and over a third said they never use them.
Why the disconnect? Chatbot adoption "has been significantly hampered by bad design," says Max Ball, principal analyst at Forrester. "People just look at the cost savings and they don't look at the customer experience."
The problems, he and others say, run the gamut. Chatbots are slow and don't understand the question. When they do answer, the responses are too often wrong. They make it hard to be transferred to a human. And they are either too human, or not human enough.
Companies believe that technology can address many of these issues. But for now, chatbots continue to frustrate many consumers who dare to start a conversation with them. Here's a look at some of the biggest annoyances.
Overpromising and underdelivering
Since the rollout of commercial chatbots, companies have made ambitious claims about what they can do. They raised expectations that they couldn't hope to meet.
Banks, for example, boasted about the growing number of tasks their chatbots could perform, says Andrew Way, senior director of research at Corporate Insight, a market-research firm. "Saying 'Hey, we can handle 100 tasks' might make people think it can help with fee reversals or conduct transactions . . . when in fact it can't," says Way. Instead, he says, a lot of the tasks that chatbots could help with were answering simple, frequently asked questions that could just as easily be found on the website.
They don't understand common language
Consumers often ask questions in a casual, conversational way, or include questions that have typos or spelling errors -- confounding the chatbot.
For example, a retailing chatbot might not recognize a question from a consumer that asks for a product recommendation about sports-team "swag," or respond to acronyms or emojis commonly used in instant-message conversations between people (think SMH for "shaking my head").
To address this, some companies are training their chatbots on common phrases. To help people who wanted to transfer money into their individual savings accounts, U.K.-based bank NatWest had taught its chatbot, Cora, to understand phrases including, "I want to put some money in my ISA," and "Let me transfer money into my ISA," says Wendy Redshaw, chief digital information officer at NatWest. But as more people started using the phrase "top up my ISA," Cora was unable to complete the transaction. So the company added that phrase to Cora's vocabulary.
They send you somewhere else
Many chatbots function like a "link tool" that take the user to a topical section of a webpage or app, instead of addressing the customer's question. Ask a chatbot about policies and procedures, for instance, and it may simply offer a link to the relevant page on the company's website.
This leaves the customer having to figure out what to do on their own, which can be frustrating, says Grant Easterbrook, a financial-technology consultant in the Netherlands.
Signet Jewelers has tried to resolve this issue for questions about its returns policy by putting the most relevant information in the chatbot window and offering a link to the webpage for more details and to initiate the returns process, says Madhura Deshpande, Signet's vice president of digital product.
A previous version of Chipotle Mexican Grill's chatbot, Pepper, would respond to order-status questions to the restaurant chain with instructions on how to look up the information online, outside of the chatbot interface. "It was just adding a little friction to the experience unnecessarily," says Nicole West, vice president of digital experiences at Chipotle. The company's chatbot now offers a real-time order status inside the chat conversation, she says.
They don't let you multitask
Some digital assistants don't let you navigate to other pages or apps while you are waiting for a response to a question. If you move away from the chatbot and then try to reopen the conversation, you often have to start all over again.
"It's one thing on a desktop computer," says Way, "but it's a much bigger issue on a phone when you don't have the ability to have multiple screens."
They're too nosy too fast
Asking too much personal information in the beginning -- even if it isn't required for the particular task -- might give the customer the impression it's a data-collection tool and turn off the customer, says Nirali Amin, senior vice president of solutions at artificial-intelligence technology firm LivePerson.
"They'll start asking for things that you don't need to ask right away . . . making you go through a validation process," says Ball at Forrester. "And it turns out the only thing you want to know is what the hours are."
They aren't human enough -- or they're too human
Cammy Crolic, associate professor of marketing at the University of Oxford, says research shows that humanizing a chatbot can increase consumer trust and customer loyalty. But her research also suggests that a humanized chatbot -- one that might have a name, an avatar or a humanlike way of communicating in the first person -- increases consumer expectations, and in turn, can cause consumers to lash out when it can't solve their problem. "By raising the expectation that the chatbot will behave in a humanlike manner, they sort of infer that this chatbot will understand them better and act on their behalf," she says.
To minimize the negative effects of humanlike chatbots, companies that are able to detect customer sentiment might want to dial back the humanlike behavior when the customer is angry or upset, she says. At the same time, by making the chatbot more humanlike when customers are happy, companies can reap the positive benefits of their feeling more connected.
Similarly, companies have to strike a balance between being chatty and robotic.
"It's like a balancing act of striking the right professional tone while also trying to be empathetic and sound somewhat human," says Way.
No more than one question
Chatbots sometimes can't handle multiple questions in one interaction. A customer asking about a missed delivery may have another question about product quality that could go unanswered in the initial conversation, forcing the customer to go back to the beginning in a new conversation.
Chipotle, for one, says its chatbot currently lets customers enter multiple issues, but that the chatbot sometimes closes the conversation after the first issue is addressed.
For example, says West, a customer may say an order arrived late and was missing the chips and guacamole. The chatbot, she says, "will send the customer down a particular journey based on the fact that it was a late delivery," but in doing so will leave behind the issue about the missing item. This is "where we have the most room to improve that experience and where we've had the most hiccups from a customer perspective," West says.
Signet Jewelers says its initial chatbot design would force customers with two questions back to the main menu, requiring them to start over, says Deshpande. Now, she says, the company has incorporated natural language processing algorithms that can detect the intent, and answer the follow-up question right after the first one.
It can take too long to connect to a human
One of the biggest challenges companies face is getting the transfer between chatbot and human right when the chatbot can't help the customer. Sometimes customers have to wait, and information can get lost during the handoff from chatbot to human.
Chipotle's West says its chatbot can recognize triggers in the conversation that will prompt a connection to a live agent, who will have all the information from the chat.
Companies can improve the process by ensuring transcripts and summaries of chat history are provided to human agents, says Evgeny Kagan, assistant professor of operations management and business analytics at Johns Hopkins University.
You don't know you're talking to a chatbot
As companies build chatbots that mimic humans, some consumers may not be aware they aren't talking to humans. If customers believe they're talking to a human agent, they may have unrealistic expectations around its capabilities, says Way.
"A lot of people have the perception that a human will be able to take action . . . whereas a robot virtual assistant might not be able to," he says. "If they have a specific customer service need and then discover that it is a virtual assistant, it can be quite jarring."
They can serve up inaccurate answers
As companies introduce generative-AI chatbots into their customer-service workflows, it will be a challenge to minimize inaccurate or hallucinated answers.
Of course, humans make mistakes, too. But consumers might be more tolerant of human error than machine error.
When an airline client of LivePerson was testing a generative AI chatbot with its own employees, it gave an inaccurate answer when asked about baggage fees.
The chatbot, says LivePerson's Amin, said customers would incur no additional cost if the baggage fee was paid at the airport ticket counter, which was incorrect. Paying the fee at the airport would cost more. The problem was that the bot was trained on outdated information.
"They fed the bot overlapping instructions," says Amin. One of the instructions had expired, she says, and "should have been deleted from the system but it wasn't."
---
Suman Bhattacharyya is a writer in Philadelphia. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Suman Bhattacharyya
