The bedside manner of doctors, nurses and other caregivers is getting a boost from an unexpected source: artificial intelligence.
Virtual simulations that incorporate AI are making their way into medical training programs across the country, placing caregivers in the role of patients or having them interact in their real-life roles with virtual patients. The simulations aim to help train health-care workers to be more empathetic and improve difficult conversations with patients suffering from a wide range of conditions including Alzheimer's, cancer and substance addictions.
"If health-care workers can virtually stand in the shoes of patients as they interact with doctors, nurses and their families, they have a tremendous opportunity to improve the care they deliver," says Daryl Cady, chief executive of the Hospice of Southern Maine, which has used a virtual-reality training module with nearly a hundred employees, as well as dozens of health-care workers at nearby hospitals and physicians' offices.
With virtual patients, students and practitioners can practice with many more patients in many more medical situations than the traditional training methods -- which typically use lectures and role playing. They get real-time feedback, and they can repeat challenging situations and see how the encounter with the patient changes depending on their choices.
Embodied Labs, for instance, has created simulations that deal with terminal disease, Alzheimer's, and hearing and vision loss.
To create the virtual-reality hospice module used at the Hospice of Southern Maine and at similar facilities, Embodied Labs co-founder Erin Washington and another employee spent two days immersed in the hospice's Gosnell Memorial Hospice House. In the simulation, participants wear a virtual-reality headset and embody a 66-year-old veteran named Clay Crowder as he receives the news that he has terminal lung cancer. Participants can move Clay's hands as if they are their own, pick up objects and look around 360 degrees, as Clay, his wife and two daughters navigate his final days and death. The simulation gives participants a sense of how family and caregivers typically act in this situation and how it all feels to the patient.
"The goal is to help medical students, clinicians and the community better understand the role of hospice care in the end of life," says Ms. Cady. "I was surprised at the emotions I experienced doing the module." Some participants have had such a strong response to the end-of-life simulation that a social worker or chaplain is now present to provide emotional support.
The gamelike style of the simulations has been a draw for many, says Marilyn Gugliucci, director of geriatrics research at the University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine, where students have used Embodied Labs modules to learn about common aging conditions.
"This generation is used to gaming and is wowed by the format. It grabs their attention and helps them understand hearing loss and macular degeneration, for instance" says Ms. Gugliucci. "They actually experience the frustration of not being able to see and not being able to hear well."
Now all first-year and second-year medical students as well as students in the nursing, social-work, physician-assistant and occupational-therapy programs at the college are required to do Embodied Labs virtual-reality simulations. The VR kits, which include both the hardware and software, cost approximately $2,500 each.
Meredith Kursmark, a pediatrician at Children's Community Pediatrics in Pittsburgh, has been using a digital training simulation from Kognito that she can access on her laptop. The simulation involves screening teenagers for substance abuse, one of several simulations Kognito provides. In this case, the user is the caregiver in the simulation, not the patient.
In one Kognito simulation, users meet a virtual patient named Lori, a 32-year-old attorney who has been taking oxycodone after a car accident for back pain and has become addicted to painkillers. Users first receive guidelines about effective tactics to build rapport and trust with Lori and learn more about her opioid use.
As the conversation begins, a button that says "talk" appears on the screen and gives a menu of tactics to use and questions to ask. If the user introduces a judgmental question, such as saying "I can't help you unless you help yourself," Lori stops responding and looks withdrawn. A virtual coach on the bottom of the screen offers personalized feedback and suggests different tactics.
Through trial and error, participants practice screening for opioid-use disorder and building a patient's motivation to reduce drug use and collaborate on a treatment plan. Lori adapts her behavior based on the decisions of the participant throughout the conversation.
At the end of the simulation, users get a report identifying what they did well and where they could improve. Kognito's simulations cost $40 to $150 per user.
Early results show that Kognito's simulations are effective training tools. In a 2017 study published in the Journal of the American Psychiatric Nurses Association, 277 physicians and nurses used a Kognito simulation to practice screening for substance use and mental-health disorders. Self-reported data collected three months after taking the simulation showed a 38% increase in at-risk patients identified and a 60% increase in patients screened. There was also a 50% increase in patients with whom treatment options were discussed and a 44% increase in patients collaborating with health-care workers to decide on treatment plans.
The more people who use the Kognito simulations -- which now have had over a million users, according to Kognito co-founder and CEO Ron Goldman -- the more realistically the virtual patients behave, because there is more data to train the algorithm.
"Instead of having to pre-script all the possible questions and answers, AI allows the virtual human to dynamically generate a response as users speak with them," says Mr. Goldman.
---
Ms. McConnon is a writer in New York. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Aili McConnon

ERIC Subject: Physicians; Patients; Nurses; Caregivers; Medical Students; Training Methods; Feedback (Response); Drug Use; Artificial Intelligence; Role Playing; Geriatrics; Algorithms; Hospices (Terminal Care)
