Nokia said it plans to cut up to 14,000 jobs as the telecommunications-equipment maker wrestles with a sharp downturn in spending by telecom operators.
The Finnish company said Thursday it would shrink its workforce to between 72,000 and 77,000 by 2026, from 86,000, depending on how market demand evolves. The cuts are part of an effort to generate annual cost savings of up to 1.2 billion euros, equivalent to $1.26 billion.
The move comes as Nokia contends with weakening demand in its network-infrastructure and mobile-networks businesses, with customers facing a tough macroeconomic environment beset by high inflation and rising interest rates. Telecom operators are also working through stockpiles of inventory that were ordered during previous periods of tight supply.
Nokia's comments mirror those made by Swedish rival Ericsson earlier this week, with the two Nordic telecom-gear giants also grappling with a shift in business mix from higher-margin 5G work in early-mover markets such as North America to lower-margin developing markets such as India.
After a period of frantic 5G rollouts in India, work there is starting to level off.
"We saw some moderation in the pace of 5G deployment in India, which meant the growth there was no longer enough to offset the slowdown in North America," Nokia Chief Executive Pekka Lundmark said.
Nokia reported a 45% fall in third-quarter comparable net profit to 304 million euros, while sales fell 20% to 4.98 billion euros. Both those figures came in below analyst forecasts, prompting the company's shares to fall more than 4%.
The company said sales at its network infrastructure business fell 14% in the quarter amid weaker customer spending, while mobile networks sales fell 19% because of a slowdown in 5G deployments in India.
While Nokia said its total addressable markets this year would be smaller than previously expected, it said it continues to believe in the medium- to long-term attractiveness of the markets. For instance, it said the continued development of cloud computing and artificial intelligence require investment in networks that offer greater capabilities.
Credit: By Dominic Chopping
