Tech stocks ticked higher and Treasury yields declined following a tentative deal over the weekend to raise the U.S. debt ceiling.
Investors are waiting to see if the agreement reached by President Biden and House Speaker Kevin McCarthy (R., Calif.) can be implemented by June 5, after which Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said the U.S. would be unable to pay all of its bills on time. The next step is for the legislation to be passed by Congress, which could run into procedural hurdles and opposition from lawmakers.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note reversed course after climbing into the weekend. It ended at 3.697%, down from 3.820% at the previous close. The yield on one-month Treasury bills dropped to 5.224% from 5.496% before the debt deal.
Stocks were mostly higher. Enthusiasm for companies involved with artificial-intelligence and the flight to the market's biggest tech stocks lifted the Nasdaq Composite, which rose 0.3%. The S&P 500 inched up less than 0.1%. The blue-chip Dow Jones Industrial Average gave up about 51 points, or 0.1%.
Nvidia, the chip maker at the heart of the artificial-intelligence boom, was among the day's big gainers, rising 3%. At one point, Nvidia's shares traded high enough to give the firm a $1 trillion market capitalization, the first semiconductor company to achieve that rare valuation.
Rival chip makers Intel and Qualcomm increased 3.4% and 5.1%, respectively. Netflix and Tesla, two of the other big technology stocks that have dominated the market in recent years, each added more than 3%.
"Tech is trading like safety stocks because you had a bank crisis," said Alex Atanasiu, portfolio manager for Glenmede Investment Management.
Besides being reliable winners the past several years, taking a bet on the future profits of big tech firms like Microsoft and Apple becomes more attractive when interest rates are lower. Bank failures prompted investors to position for the Federal Reserve to pause or even reverse interest rate increases. That has made the market uncomfortably top heavy, said Atanasiu, who is telling his clients to diversify.
"If you go back 100 years, there were really only three periods the market was this concentrated: the Internet bubble, the 1920s and today," he said.
Phil Blancato, chief executive of Ladenburg Thalmann Asset Management, said he too is leery of 2023's stock rebound, given how few stocks have been responsible for it.
"Cash is your friend right now, and dividend stocks," he said. "Be paid to wait around; there's too much uncertainty."
Energy shares, the worst-performing group in the S&P 500 this year, were the weakest group again Tuesday as fuel prices fell.
U.S. oil futures for July delivery dropped 4.4% to settle at $69.46 a barrel. The benchmark domestic crude price is down 39% from a year ago due to ample supplies and a murky growth outlook. Natural-gas futures closed 3.7% lower to end at $2.327 per million British thermal units, down 71% from a year ago thanks mostly to mild weather.
Shares of EQT, the largest U.S. gas driller, dropped 2.8% while oil producers APA and Devon each declined 3.5%.
Laggards also included Target and Bud Light brewer Anheuser-Busch InBev, which shed 3.7% and 4.7%, respectively. Both stocks have tumbled since imbroglios with combative customers over LGBT marketing campaigns.
Economic data released Tuesday showed consumer confidence waning and U.S. home prices weakening.
The Conference Board's gauge of public confidence in the U.S. economy declined from April to May but topped analysts' expectations.
The S&P CoreLogic Case-Shiller National Home Price Index rose a seasonally adjusted 0.4% in March, compared with February and 0.7% from a year earlier. It was the smallest year-over-year increase in more than a decade. Prices declined in some Western markets, such as San Francisco, Seattle and Phoenix.
Overseas, Europe's Stoxx 600 fell 0.9%. Early Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei was down 1.1%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 2.1% and the Shanghai Composite was down 0.7%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.2%.
Credit: By Ryan Dezember
