Twitter Inc. Chief Executive Jack Dorsey appeared to back off plans to spend part of this year in Africa and defended his time leading the social-media company as he tries to fend off a push by activist hedge fund Elliott Management Corp. to possibly replace him.
Mr. Dorsey on Thursday said the spreading coronavirus was, in part, causing him to rethink his plans.
Speaking at a Morgan Stanley event, Mr. Dorsey said given "everything happening in the world, particularly with coronavirus, I have to reconsider what's going on and what that means for me and for our company."
The CEO first disclosed his Africa plans last year via Twitter, surprising some company insiders.
He said on Thursday he didn't make his plans to work there remotely sufficiently clear at the time.
"I do believe fully in this concept of figuring out how to work in a distributed model. So my intention is not to go over and just hang out or take a sabbatical, but actually everything I'm doing in San Francisco, doing on another continent." he said.
Mr. Dorsey defended his plans to spend time in Africa. "The tech innovation is incredible," he said, and represented a growth opportunity for Twitter.
Elliott has taken a roughly $1 billion stake in Twitter and nominated four directors to the social-media company's board.
It is also seeking a full-time CEO. Mr. Dorsey runs payments firm Square Inc. as well as Twitter.
Mr. Dorsey co-founded Twitter and was its first chief executive, before he was pushed out in 2008 with the company struggling from technical glitches.
He returned to the company in 2011, first as executive chairman before being reappointed as CEO in 2015 when he relinquished the chairmanship. He retained the Square CEO job.
"I have enough flexibility in my schedule to focus on the most important things and I have a good sense of what is critical on both companies," Mr. Dorsey said at the investor event.
Mr. Dorsey has received public backing for retaining his CEO role at Twitter from some within and outside the company. Tesla Inc. Chief Executive Elon Musk, who also runs rocket firm Space Exploration Technologies Corp., or SpaceX, and is a heavy user of Twitter, tweeted "Just want to say that I support @Jack as Twitter CEO," using Mr. Dorsey's name on Twitter. A "#WeBackJack" campaign supporting Mr. Dorsey launched on Twitter, joined by several employees of the social-media company.
Opening the door to Elliott's campaign is the fact that Twitter doesn't have the super-voting-share structure that insulates some other Silicon Valley companies from outside pressure.
The fund's interest in Twitter comes after several years during which the social-media company has struggled to generate the kind of user growth that rivals, such as Facebook Inc., have generated. Twitter also has drawn criticism for the nature of the discourse on its platform frequently criticized as hostile.
Amid those issues, the company's share price, and user base, has lagged behind rivals. Twitter has 152 million daily average users, according to its latest quarterly figures, compared with Facebook's user base that tops 1.6 billion.
Twitter shares are down 3.4% since Mr. Dorsey took over as interim CEO in July 2015 before regaining the post on a permanent basis later that year. Facebook's stock has more than doubled over that time.
Mr. Dorsey aimed to deflect some of the criticism, saying he had focused the company when he returned and had driven technical improvements.
Many of the initiatives have materialized in the last year, he said.
Among the initiatives he has pushed is greater use of machine-learning systems to help provide more relevant content to users.
The new tools also are being used to identify for removal content that violates Twitter policies, he said. "We've removed a lot of the burden of reporting abuse and harassment."
Twitter last year also surprised investors when it said that technical glitches hampered its ability to sell ads in the third quarter, causing the stock to tumble. Fixing the software problem would still weigh on earnings this year, it said.
The company has been rebuilding its advertising services, Mr. Dorsey said, and expected to complete the effort this year, "which is a huge milestone for us and long overdue."
Despite some investor concern that the spreading coronavirus could dent advertising revenue broadly, Mr. Dorsey said it was too early to detect any impact for Twitter.
He said that the outbreak was driving more people to seek out Twitter to determine what is happening.
Twitter is among several companies to have adjusted its operations to deal with concerns about the virus.
Mr. Dorsey withdrew from a planned appearance at the annual South by Southwest gathering in Austin, Texas, scheduled for this month.
The company also said it was asking employees to work from home to stem the spread of the virus. Twitter also has taken steps to try to curb misinformation on its platform about the epidemic.

Credit: By Betsy Morris
