Investors are dealing with pain this year, but Jim Simons and Renaissance Technologies LLC are racking up such huge gains that 2020 could be one of the hedge-fund firm's best years ever.
The Long Island-based firm's flagship Medallion hedge fund has risen 24% this year through April 14, according to investors. The performance is thanks in part to a 9.9% gain in March, a brutal month for global stock markets. Medallion's gains come even after its hefty investor fees, which include a cut of 36% or more of all trading gains and 5% of all money invested in the fund.
Medallion is open only to employees, former employees and a handful of people close to the firm. Because employees are the firm's owners, most of the fees end up going back to them in some form. Before those investor fees, Medallion, which manages nearly $10 billion, was up about 39% for the year on April 14.
Funds that Renaissance makes available to outside investors haven't done nearly as well as well, however, though they have rebounded lately. The Renaissance Institutional Equities Fund (RIEF), for example, was down 10.4% through April 10, investors say. RIEF has a longer holding period than Medallion. The fund focuses on U.S. shares and aims for returns that more closely track the overall market.
By comparison, the S&P 500 index has fallen 11.4% this year, through April 14, while Vanguard's 60/40 index fell 5.9%, in line with the performance of the average hedge fund, according to industry tracker HFR. Hedge funds aim to protect investors in times of crisis but few have performed like Medallion. Medallion has had its rough moments lately. At one point in March, it faced slight losses for the year before surging in the month's second half. Some people close to the firm say the unusual volatility raises questions whether the recent gains will continue apace.
Renaissance, which manages about $75 billion, began in a drab strip mall. It relies on mathematical models rather than intuition and judgment, an approach that can pay off in rough markets. Since 1988, Medallion has averaged annual gains of 39% after fees, and its best years include 2000 and 2008, difficult years for most investors.
Mr. Simons, who turns 83 this month and is worth over $23 billion, is working from his Long Island home amid the coronavirus pandemic, friends say. Though he remains Renaissance's chairman, he mostly focuses on philanthropy. He leaves the firm in the hands of Chief Executive Peter Brown, a computer scientist who has said he generally sleeps four hours or less each night. Robert Mercer, a major supporter of President Trump, stepped down as Renaissance's co-CEO in 2017 but remains a researcher at the firm.
Behind Medallion's recent gains is a distinct approach to investing. Rather than predict the direction of individual stocks or markets, Medallion makes the bulk of its profits betting on the relationships between equities. This strategy can be seen as a more complex version of so-called statistical arbitrage investing that others on Wall Street attempt.
The Medallion fund holds thousands of stocks at any one time, while betting against thousands of other shares and trading currencies, commodities and bond futures, according to people close to the firm.
During market collapses, most investments tend to plummet in unison, which can make it hard for Medallion to profit. That phenomenon may help explain why the fund treaded water in early March. In the aftermath of these difficult periods, opportunities often arise. Each day, Renaissance's 35,000 computer processors comb 30 trillion bytes of data searching for mispricings. For example, if a company fell harder than it should have relative to another stock, based on historic patterns and other factors, it could create a buying opportunity.
Renaissance's predictive models, developed by the firm's 320 or so string theorists, astronomers and other scientists and mathematicians, are built on more than 10 million lines of computer code and rely on historic prices and other data. Preset algorithms generate all of its trades, eliminating human emotion from the decisions.
Because the system employs elements of machine learning and is so complicated, it can be challenging for the firm's own executives to immediately understand why the firm is doing well or poorly. Some of them believe their gains, at least in part, could result from mistakes rival investors make.
"The computer runs itself and we hardly ever interfere, the machine tells us what we should do," says someone close to the firm. "Every experience we've had shows that humans mess up worse than machines."

Credit: By Gregory Zuckerman
