The scene looked like any after-work gathering of young professionals. The 30-odd guests squeezed into the host's East Side brownstone apartment sipped red wine from plastic cups and crammed around the dining room table munching pizza.
It wasn't until they quieted for the evening's presentation that things got a little strange. The topic? Growing meat in a lab.
If you want to reduce animal suffering, why not cut animals out of the food chain entirely, suggested Erin Kim, communications director with New Harvest, a nonprofit that funds research on cellular agriculture.
Makes sense to me. And to others at the gathering as well. This was, after all, a meetup of Effective Altruism NYC -- the local incarnation of a global movement embraced by people committed to benefiting others in the most efficient way possible.
"We are totally a bunch of nerds," says member Rachel Atcheson, who works in Mayor Bill de Blasio's office as an animal-welfare liaison. "We try to keep things pretty rational."
Not sure what cause to support? There's an online calculator for that. Sample question: "How many chickens are morally equivalent to one human?"
Can't figure which nonprofits provide the biggest payoff? Many rely on GiveWell, a charity evaluator started by former hedge fund types who try to quantify exactly how much good a given program accomplishes per dollar spent.
You won't find effective altruists giving to panhandlers -- that's not efficient. Combating global poverty is a focus, as is reducing existential risk, such as the threat posed by artificial intelligence. Future generations matter!
Others focus on animal welfare.
"It's less expensive to help animals than to help people," says Avi Norowitz, a lead data engineer who helps organize Effective Altruism gatherings.
He realizes how cold that might sound. "There's a lot of debate about who deserves moral consideration, and how much," he notes.
Effective Altruism's New York contingent is growing fast. Its 800 or so members -- often science and engineering types -- meet twice a month for dancing, kayaking or just a good, old-fashioned debate about the marginal utility of funding a global deworming program.
Not surprisingly, many Effective Altruists work at nonprofits. Others adopt an "earn-to-give" approach. Why become a teacher when you can earn enough in finance to fund five teaching positions?
Chris Jenkins was earning his Ph.D. in evolutionary psychology when he decided his goal was to, "Give as much money as I can to the best causes."
He added programming and probability to his studies. Now, he has a data-science job with a tech company, allowing him to make a generous monthly contribution to the Against Malaria Foundation, a nonprofit recommended by GiveWell. Estimated cost per life saved: $7,500.
The group doesn't keep a running tally of its philanthropic impact. But at the individual level, some take an online pledge at GivingWhatWeCan.org, committing at least 10% of their earnings "to whichever organizations can most effectively use it to improve the lives of others, now and in the years to come."
Chris Corliss, a 34-year-old software salesman, who hosts many of the gatherings, gradually boosted his giving to 40% of his solid, six-figure income by maintaining a relatively frugal lifestyle -- including living with a roommate -- as his career progressed.
Studies show that beyond a certain point, more money doesn't make you happier, he notes. Giving, meanwhile, provides a sense of existential security.
"It's a moral safety net," he says. "This is where I've chosen to direct my old Catholic guilt."
There is a risk, of course, of taking things too far and burning out. You could spend your whole day fretting over the marginal utility of a latte versus a $5 donation to a favorite charity.
A hot topic, then, is sustainability -- adopting a lifestyle for the long haul. Mr. Norowitz says he could give more if he put less into savings, or got rid of his car, but he isn't trying to be perfect.
"Humans are not altruistic machines," he says. "As much good as you're doing, you can feel good about that. And strive to do more."
---
anne.kadet@wsj.com

Credit: By Anne Kadet
