[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
There was a time -- and not very long ago -- that Salesforce would have scoffed at 11% growth.
That was then. The cloud software giant's fiscal third-quarter ended October was the third consecutive period showing revenue growing at that pace year over year.
The company used Wednesday's report to affirm Wall Street's projection for 10% growth in the current quarter ending in January -- 9.8% if not rounding.
Single-digit growth territory is generally where Silicon Valley software companies go to die -- or, at least, start paying dividends. But not Salesforce. The results and forecast counted as good news against some rather downbeat expectations on Wall Street.
Several analysts cited discussions with industry sources indicating weakening demand for Salesforce's offerings. Salesforce shares rose 74% this year but by 7% in the past six months, lagging behind the Nasdaq's 10% gain over that time.
But its shares jumped 9.4% on Thursday following the results. Sentiment was helped by a surprising acceleration in growth for quarterly billings and current remaining performance obligations, two important measures of deal activity for the company that sells software as a subscription service.
"Overall, results reflect strong execution, particularly on multiyear contracts," analyst Tyler Radke of Citigroup wrote in a note to clients.
Salesforce certainly doesn't talk like a slow-growth company. Chief Executive Marc Benioff used the word "incredible" 20 times during his opening of Wednesday's earnings call to describe the quarter. But a big part of Salesforce's appeal these days is how it has offset its slowing top line with a rapidly expanding bottom line.
Adjusted operating margins came in above 31% for the second straight quarter; they were under 23% a year ago. That is no small feat for a company long accustomed to spending its way to growth; sales and marketing expenses once averaged close to half of revenue but remained at 36% of revenue for the past two quarters.
Austerity goes only so far in tech -- especially in an age when generative artificial intelligence is remaking the industry and firing up new growth prospects.
Microsoft, Salesforce's largest rival in cloud-based enterprise software, seized early momentum after the launch of the ChatGPT chatbot a year ago. It embedded generative AI technology widely across its Office suite of software products as well as Dynamics, its customer-relationship management software that competes directly against Salesforce's core business.
Wall Street expects Microsoft's total Cloud revenue, which is three times as large as Salesforce's entire business, to grow 20% annually over the next two years, according to estimates from Visible Alpha.
Salesforce isn't shrinking from AI; the company has launched several of its own generative AI products and tools. Benioff noted that it is one of the few areas in which the recently downsizing company has been hiring.
But Wall Street remains skeptical; analysts currently see Salesforce's revenue averaging only 11% growth over the next two years. Beating those targets while keeping spending in check will show whether the new Salesforce really can have it all.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
