A U.S.-born approach to defining how computer processors work presents a potential steppingstone to chip independence for Chinese tech companies that face growing limits from Washington on buying American semiconductors.
The so-called RISC-V technology offers an openly accessible approach to running the brains that power personal computers, smartphones and servers. It is an emerging rival to two, long-dominant proprietary models from Intel Corp. and Arm Holdings Ltd., a British company that U.S. graphics-chip maker Nvidia Inc. agreed in September to acquire for $40 billion.
The standard is winning global interest, and early users include Chinese online retail and tech giant Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., which developed what some industry insiders consider the highest-performance RISC-V chip in production. Alibaba has said it is using that chip in its data centers to perform artificial intelligence calculations, and is selling versions of it.
Widespread adoption of RISC-V, pronounced "risk five," could open the door for China to accelerate efforts to end its dependence on Western chip technology, threaten licensing revenues for Arm and could aid the rise of new rivals to incumbent chip makers, industry executives and analysts said.
"China wants to have its own architecture, but also an architecture where license fees won't have to be paid. So we see a strong buildup of RISC-V in China," said Handel Jones, chief executive of International Business Strategies Inc., an industry consulting firm.
Work on RISC-V, which originated at the University of California, Berkeley, dates back about a decade, but Nvidia's landmark acquisition this year and the technological face-off between China and the U.S. are fueling new interest.
For China, the technology offers a framework that could help insulate the country from U.S. export limits. Washington added Chinese telecom giant Huawei Technologies Co. to an export blacklist in 2019, and has sought to limit other big Chinese chip companies including manufacturing giant Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corp., which was added to the export blacklist in December. Arm's temporary suspension of its work with Huawei after the Chinese company's blacklisting by the U.S. further raised the alarm there.
---
Open-Source Tech
Could Shift Power
Chip architectures like RISC-V provide a sort of language for translating software commands into instructions for processors to perform the computations needed to send email, play games or perform other tasks.
Those base-level instructions have been largely defined by Intel Corp., whose x86-based chips dominate personal computers and servers, and Arm Holdings Ltd., which dominates smartphones by licensing its architecture to companies such as Apple Inc. that add their own modifications.
RISC-V is open-sourced, meaning its technical details are public and changes are openly debated.
The technology remains far behind in performance to what Intel and Arm currently offer.
However, the standard's backers -- which include prominent researchers and major companies in the U.S. -- hope it will do for hardware what the open-source movement did for software, shifting power from big incumbents and democratizing the plumbing of modern computing.
-- Asa Fitch

Credit: By Asa Fitch
