The U.S. government is divided and so are the people. But perhaps we can all agree that the economic growth of the 20th century, driven by robust markets and technological innovation, was good for everyone. The government can do more than most policy makers realize to sustain this long-term, broadly shared growth through investment in science.
I have three recommendations for the 116th Congress to support the sciences and foster innovation:
First, government needs to take a more active role in creating scientific infrastructure. The U.S. has done it in the past, showing that investments in science today can result in critical economic infrastructure tomorrow. For example, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency laid the foundation for the internet, which now powers the modern economy. Now this infrastructure needs to be maintained and improved to facilitate new innovations.
Congress can help without any additional spending by letting recipients of research grants use those funds to support open-source projects, which make their blueprints publicly available. Recipients can already use grant funds to buy commercial software; freeing them up to help open-source initiatives would even the playing field.
Take Python, the open-source programming language that has become the language of choice for software developers in the fields of artificial intelligence and data science. Programmers have used Python to power innovation in everything from the detection of gravity waves (resulting in last year's Nobel Prize in Physics) to reducing the cost of developing new drugs. Letting researchers allocate even a fraction of their federal grant funding to support open-source projects like Python would encourage the development and maintenance of scientific infrastructure open to everyone.
Second, Congress should look for opportunities to extend scientific transparency to the private sector. It could draw on the principles that guided the design of our patent system; the law protects a private right to charge for the use of a discovery, but mandates public disclosure of its details so others can learn from it.
To see how this could work, consider hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, for oil and gas. Regulators in North Dakota forced firms to disclose how much water and sand they used to frack each well and how much oil it produced. This let a different firm drilling a well nearby select a better mixture for its well. Over time, the entire industry optimized the mix used in various geological conditions and substantially reduced costs.
Congress could apply this insight to industries accumulating vast quantities of data about daily life. At an artificial-intelligence conference in September, an Uber representative suggested that anyone looking to do cutting-edge research on autonomous-vehicles would have to come work for the ride-sharing company in order to access Uber's massive -- and proprietary -- dataset of vehicle trips. Opening access to that data would speed up innovation and spur growth.
Third, Congress can protect the independence of the federal government's scientific advisers, who must be uncompromising in their pursuit of the facts. The key is to set them apart from regulators, who rely on facts but must compromise to balance competing interests when they write regulations.
The National Transportation Safety Board is a model for this. After a transportation accident, the NTSB's only job is to establish what happened. It can make recommendations, but has no power to implement them. Flight-safety regulations are the Federal Aviation Administration's responsibility. This layer of separation protects both scientists and regulators.
The same model should be applied to other areas, such as diagnosing the cause of a financial crisis. After the last crisis, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission was not able to reach consensus about the facts of what happened because some members jumped ahead to possible regulatory changes. Keep the two separate: Congress should create fact-finding authorities that are independent from all regulatory agencies. This would give regulators and firms the facts they need to evaluate any changes to existing regulations.
By focusing on science, the 116th Congress can help create growth and prosperity. As a citizen, I remain optimistic. As a scientist, I'm convinced that the U.S. can repeat what it did so well in the last century: foster innovation that benefits all Americans.
---
Mr. Romer, a co-recipient of the 2018 Nobel Prize in Economics, is a University Professor at New York University.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Government Helps Science, the World Wins" -- WSJ Dec. 1, 2018)

Credit: By Paul Romer
