Nvidia Corp. has been a force among videogame fans for more than a decade. Now the rest of the world is catching on, as the premier maker of chips that paint scenes of on-screen adventure and mayhem emerges as the kingpin in hardware for artificial intelligence.
Sales of Nvidia chips to internet giants like Microsoft Corp. and Facebook Inc. -- which rely on AI to do things like automatic image labeling and language translation -- have grown by triple digits, year over year, for six quarters straight. Investors have responded by driving up Nvidia's stock roughly sevenfold in the past two years, lately trading at about 45 times earnings, compared with an industry average around 17.
The market is rewarding not only the company's dominance in graphics and AI but also its extraordinarily well-balanced operations. In the Drucker Institute's Management Top 250 ranking of the most effectively managed U.S. companies, Nvidia's overall score of 76.8, which puts it in the top 10, is based on strong scores in all five categories that contribute to the overall ranking -- customer satisfaction, employee engagement and development, innovation, social responsibility and financial strength. The financial metric, in particular, sets the chip maker apart. Nvidia ranks 13th in that category, tied with Accenture, thanks in part to its per-share earnings nearly tripling over the past couple of years.
Nvidia's secret is an unconventional chip design. General-purpose processors from Intel and others are built to handle a wide range of unpredictable tasks, from web surfing to financial modeling, while performing up to dozens of complex calculations at once. In contrast, Nvidia's chips originally were built solely to put splashy animations on a screen. In the late 1990s, the company introduced a chip architecture designed to execute thousands of relatively simple tasks, such as computing the color of each pixel on a computer's screen, simultaneously.
By the mid-2000s, Chief Executive Jensen Huang realized that the same technology likely would be useful for other tasks, and he invested in enabling the chips to respond to a wider variety of instructions. That makes the chips much faster for any number of repetitive jobs.
The newly programmable chips turned out to be well suited to the emerging field of deep learning, an artificial-intelligence technique that gives computers the ability to recognize, say, a photo of a cat by examining, pixel by pixel, enormous numbers of pictures of cats.
An Nvidia server packed with eight of the company's latest processors can do the same deep-learning work as roughly 160 conventional dual-chip servers, at roughly 15% of the cost, according to Linley Gwennap, principal analyst with the Linley Group, a technology research firm.
Nvidia is selling its chips to a range of companies. Its deep-learning prowess has led to relationships with companies working on autonomous vehicles, robots, industrial systems and other devices that would benefit from the ability to sense and respond to their surroundings.
Still, Nvidia's business isn't without risk. The fast-growing AI market is so new that forecasting its growth is iffy. And while Nvidia's graphics chips have proved faster than conventional processors for deep learning, rising ranks of competitors are betting that chips built for AI from the ground up will be even better. Such products are expected to reach the market in due course, led by Intel Corp., which aims to ship specialized AI chips in the coming year.
---
Mr. Greenwald is a Wall Street Journal reporter in San Francisco. He can be reached at ted.greenwald@wsj.com.

Credit: By Ted Greenwald
