SoftBank Group Corp. is putting its massive $93 billion tech-investment fund to work in construction.
The Japanese conglomerate's Vision Fund is leading a group of investors with an $865 million bet on Katerra Inc., a three-year-old Silicon Valley startup that aims to change how housing and commercial buildings are constructed by using an assembly-line-like system to control every aspect of design and production.
Founded by the former chief executive of electronics manufacturer Flextronics, Katerra handles everything from design to construction, while building prefabricated walls and fixtures in factories.
The Menlo Park, Calif., startup calls itself a "technology company," emphasizing software aimed at making the process more efficient. A main innovation appears to be a business model that puts architects and construction workers on the same payroll.
The deal, which values Katerra above $3 billion, marks the latest investment by the Vision Fund in ground rarely tread upon by tech investors.
The fund, anchored by a $45 billion commitment from Saudi Arabia, was initially described by SoftBank as a vehicle to invest in technologies of the future such as robotics and artificial intelligence. But since its launch last year, the fund has also invested in companies trying to upend old-line industries, such as WeWork Cos., a co-working office manager, and Plenty Inc., an indoor-farming company.
SoftBank executives have said they want to be at the forefront of technology shifts in myriad industries, and they have shown a willingness to invest at lofty tech valuations for promising startups.
Katerra, with over $1 billion in funding raised since its founding in 2015, is among the fastest startups to command a multibillion-dollar valuation.
The company is growing rapidly. It has 1,300 employees and plans to have 3,000 by year-end, said Michael Marks, its chairman and co-founder, and the CEO of Flextronics. The company didn't discuss exact revenue but said it has had $1.3 billion in bookings since it started.
Katerra's initial projects almost all involved Wolff Co., a real-estate developer led by another Katerra co-founder. But it now has 15 new clients, Mr. Marks said. He said Katerra's biggest appeal is saving developers time, which can yield better financial returns on projects that typically involve high-interest loans.
By year-end, "we think we can build from foundation to the keys in 30 days," he said. "That's typically a year today."
Still, Katerra and others trying to shake up the construction industry face challenges. Construction codes vary not just between states, but between towns. Construction unions have been apprehensive about such startups. Buildings above five or six stories require more complex engineering that has stymied some modular developers.
Other investors in Katerra include Khosla Ventures, iPhone manufacturer Foxconn Technology Group and the Canadian Pension Plan Investment Board.

Credit: By Eliot Brown
