[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Micron Technology is no stranger to forces beyond its control. But life as a political pawn brings a host of complications.
The 44-year-old maker of memory chips is long accustomed to the brutal cycles of that market. And the current one has been no less so. Micron's fiscal third-quarter results Wednesday showed revenue plunging 57% year over year -- its worst drop in more than two decades and the fourth consecutive quarter of double-digit revenue declines.
Yet such are the oddities of the memory market that the results and accompanying forecast qualified as good news, at least initially. The decline in the recent quarter was in line with the company's forecast, and its projection for $3.9 billion in revenue for the current period was in line with analysts' expectations. That target would reflect a less-severe year-over-year sales decline than the prior two periods, leading Micron Chief Executive Sanjay Mehrotra to proclaim the industry "has passed the bottom" on the earnings call. Micron shares rose 3% in after-hours trading after the results Wednesday.
But the stock slipped 4.1% on Thursday, as it has become more apparent that Micron's road back is a long one. The company garnered more than $4 billion in operating losses over the past two quarters -- more than it has lost on an annual basis in at least 16 years, according to FactSet. And Mehrotra said Wednesday that "more normalized levels of pricing" aren't expected to return until sometime in calendar 2025.
Then there is China. The government banned major Chinese companies from buying Micron's memory, citing national-security concerns. Companies in China account for about a quarter of Micron's revenue, and Mehrotra said Wednesday the company estimates about half that amount is at risk from the ban. Micron is working to mitigate that impact; it announced plans earlier this month to invest $600 million in its production facilities in China, which could improve the company's standing there.
But the ban shows Micron's vulnerability in the geopolitical conflict that engulfed the chip industry, and that conflict has proven to be anything but predictable. With another U.S. presidential election next year, tensions seem more likely to increase than to abate.
As such, Micron's recovery out of the memory industry's current trough will follow a less predictable path. The company is wisely cutting production to help pricing and says it intends to maintain global market share even with the China ban, which implies that it plans to take some sales from Samsung Electronics and SK Hynix as they fill Micron's hole with Chinese customers.
And then there is the new race among tech giants over generative artificial intelligence, which Tim Arcuri of UBS predicts will "ultimately drive disproportionate growth in memory," since such capabilities rely on powerful computing chips that require large amounts of memory. That should prove good for Micron, especially as its core PC and smartphone markets start to stabilize later this year and next. But global politics is even more volatile than the memory business these days, and Micron's playbook for that is much less established.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
