[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
A $27 billion bid sounds big in Japan. But there is sense behind Foxconn Technology's generous offer for embattled tech giant Toshiba's lucrative computer-chip business, which, if completed, would be the biggest foreign acquisition of a Japanese company in recent years -- even if it represents a striking 50% premium to analysts' estimates of the unit's fair value.
So what gives? After all, Toshiba is desperate for a sale, following the bankruptcy of its nuclear business Westinghouse. On Tuesday, Toshiba announced long-delayed results, without the customary auditor's sign-off. The company also expressed doubt about whether it could stay in business.
Despite Toshiba's distress, Foxconn will know that to secure a deal, it will have to assuage Japanese concerns about one of its high-tech crown jewels -- a big employer to boot -- falling into foreign hands.So the Taiwanese company, famed for assembling Apple products, is pitching its high bid to Japanese officials and to Toshiba as too good to refuse. Moreover, Foxconn is no stranger to laborious negotiations in Japan: When it bought loss-making electronics maker Sharp last year, it managed to push the price down by 40% over several months. A similar result this time would help justify its eye-watering opening bid.
Ambition is also fueling the premium. Foxconn doesn't yet have a big business producing NAND flash drives, a profitable area where demand is growing thanks to the rise of artificial intelligence and cloud computing. Buying Toshiba's business, which has a 20% market share in this technology according to Nomura, would help Foxconn catch up with leaders like Samsung. Making a large bid now might help to deter other potential suitors for the business.
Big premiums aren't unusual in tech deals. Western Digital's $19 billion acquisition of SanDisk last year came at a 63% premium to its pre-deal closing share price. Foxconn may still face a tricky time convincing Japanese regulators to green light the sale. But its bid will certainly get their attention.
Credit: By Anjani Trivedi
