Sweden's H&M Hennes & Mauritz posted better-than-expected third-quarter earnings as its focus on profitability and inventory efficiency saw strong cash flow and profit development, but it cautioned that the start to the autumn season has been delayed by unusually warm weather in Europe.
The fashion retailer on Wednesday posted a net profit of 3.33 billion Swedish kronor, or about $302.9 million, for the quarter to Aug. 31 compared with 531 million kronor a year earlier. Analysts polled by FactSet had expected 3.23 billion kronor.
Sales rose 6% to 60.9 billion kronor, as previously announced, but sales in September are seen falling 10% in local currencies as hot weather made customers delay purchases of autumn clothes while the company is also missing out on Russian sales this year after exiting the country.
H&M is working through a cost and efficiency program to save 2 billion kronor a year and it said Wednesday that the program is proceeding at full speed and will continue to have an effect in the coming quarters.
At the end of last year it outlined plans to cut around 1,500 jobs from its global workforce as part of the broader efficiency program aimed at reducing administrative and overhead costs and boosting its profit margin that was under pressure from higher raw-material and freight costs.
Its recent focus on profitability and inventory over sales is moving the company in the right direction as it aims to meet its long-held 10% operating margin in 2024, it said.
"With a strong customer focus, improved cash flow and increased inventory efficiency our goal of an operating margin of 10% during 2024 remains," Chief Executive Helena Helmersson said.
H&M reported a third-quarter operating margin of 7.8% versus 1.6% last year.
After several years of rebalancing its physical store presence in light of the market shift toward online shopping, H&M said Wednesday that its store portfolio has reached a level at which it sees fewer closures going forward.
The company was a relative latecomer to digital sales and has been investing heavily to boost its online store footprint and logistical infrastructure while optimizing the number of its stores.
The company still sees stores as an important part of building its brand, though, so it plans to open new stores while increasing investments in areas such as technology, artificial intelligence and supply chain.
At the end of August, H&M had 4,375 stores, down from 4,664 at the same time last year, with 175 of the closed stores relating to Russia and Belarus.
During the current financial year it has opened 66 new stores and closed 156.
The retailer added that it would proceed with a 3 billion kronor buyback starting Wednesday.
Credit: By Dominic Chopping
