The U.S. said it would add China's most-advanced memory-chip manufacturer to an export blacklist on Thursday, ratcheting up restrictions aimed at holding back the development of the country's semiconductor industry.
The addition of Yangtze Memory Technologies Co. to the Commerce Department's so-called entity list could further disrupt the company's business following an earlier round of restrictions in October that led chip-manufacturing equipment companies to pull out staff based at its facilities and pause their activities there. The blacklisting is due to take effect Friday, the Commerce Department said in a statement.
Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.), who is leading an effort to bar the U.S. government from buying chips from YMTC and other Chinese chip makers as part of the coming year's defense budget, called YMTC a threat to national security. "The Biden administration needed to act swiftly to prevent YMTC from gaining even an inch of a military or economic advantage," he said in remarks on the Senate floor Thursday.
YMTC makes so-called flash memory and has become increasingly competitive with non-Chinese manufacturers including Idaho-based Micron Technology Inc. and South Korea's Samsung Electronics Co.
"Today we are building on the actions we took in October to protect U.S. national security by severely restricting [China's] ability to leverage artificial intelligence, advanced computing, and other powerful, commercially available technologies for military modernization and human rights abuses," said Alan Estevez, the Commerce Department undersecretary for industry and security, pledging that work would continue. The Chinese embassy in Washington didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.
The export blacklist requires companies to obtain a license from the Commerce Department before selling any goods or services to companies on the list.
YMTC and 30 other Chinese companies were added to the Commerce Department's so-called unverified list in October. The department said it could move them to the export blacklist if it couldn't verify that end uses of those companies' products weren't problematic for the U.S.
On Thursday, the department said it was removing about two dozen Chinese companies from the unverified list after completing checks on them in cooperation with China's government. But YMTC and about three dozen other companies were moved to the export blacklist, signaling that verification wasn't successful.
Aside from YMTC, the companies added Thursday included Shanghai-listed artificial-intelligence chip maker Cambricon Technologies Corp., information-technology giant China Electronics Technology Group Corp. and several research institutes that the Commerce Department said tried to acquire U.S. technology to support China's military.
Another addition was Pengxinwei IC Manufacturing Co. Ltd., a Shenzhen government-owned chip maker run by a former executive at Chinese telecom Huawei Technologies Co., which the Commerce Department said was involved in activities against U.S. interests. Huawei was placed on the blacklist in 2019.
---
Aruna Viswanatha contributed to this article.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
