America is still adding jobs, but no longer at a red-hot pace. That sent markets into a tailspin Friday, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average sliding more than 600 points.
Job growth slowed sharply in July and the unemployment rate rose to its highest level since 2021, the Labor Department reported. The data adds to evidence that a labor market whose strength was already fading could actually be on its way to weakness.
Hiring slowed to 114,000 jobs last month, the government said, missing expectations. The unemployment rate rose to 4.3% -- its highest level in nearly three years, when the economy was still clawing its way back from the pandemic.
Stocks fell sharply after the data came out, reflecting investors' renewed worries about an economic slowdown. Everything from banking stocks to small companies took big hits, Treasury yields mostly fell below 4% and the CBOE Volatility Index, Wall Street's "fear gauge," closed at its highest level of the year.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite closed in correction territory, or down at least 10% from its recent high. Disappointing earnings from big technology companies have led some investors to question whether the mania around artificial intelligence, which has fueled tech stocks this year, has gone too far.
The jobs report is sure to give another spark to debates about whether the Federal Reserve is behind the curve in its handling of the economy. Fed policymakers on Wednesday kept rates where they are, but strongly implied that they would cut in September.
Some investors have started to question whether the Fed has already waited too long to trim interest rates. And while that debate may be a moot point -- a cut in September looks all but guaranteed -- many investors will want the Fed to cut by a half point instead of the quarter point they were expecting. Interest-rate futures on Friday went from implying a quarter-point cut in September to a half-point cut.
At the Fed's news conference Wednesday, Chair Jerome Powell said a larger half-point cut wasn't "something we're thinking about right now" but then, after appearing to have concluded his answer, he added that officials hadn't made "any decisions at all."
While the labor market was bound to cool down from its postpandemic hiring spree, the question now is whether it will keep softening right into a recession.
Friday's jobs report wasn't the only data released this week that pointed to a weakening economy. Thursday, the Institute for Supply Management reported that its measure of manufacturing employment deteriorated in July, helping spark a selloff in stocks.
The Labor Department said average hourly earnings were up 3.6% in July from a year earlier -- above the recent pace of inflation, but the smallest gain since May 2021. The jobs count for May and June was revised down by a combined 29,000.
The jump in the unemployment rate was from more people looking for jobs, rather than people losing their jobs. The labor-force participation rate, the share of working-age people who were employed or seeking work, rose to 62.7% from 62.6% in June. Absent the increase in participation, the unemployment rate would have stayed at 4.1%.
July's job gains were concentrated in the healthcare sector, which added 55,000 jobs, construction, which added 25,000, and leisure and hospitality, which added 23,000. On the other side of the ledger, the information sector shed 20,000 jobs.
To a degree, the slowdown in job creation last month might reflect the effects of Hurricane Beryl. The hurricane made landfall in Texas on July 8, near the start of the week the Labor Department uses for its employment readings. The Labor Department said there was "no discernible effect on the national employment and unemployment data for July," but many economists questioned that.
Jefferies economist Thomas Simons noted that over a million customers in the Houston area were without power during the jobs-report survey week, and in the storm's wake, there was also a notable move up in weekly readings on initial claims for unemployment insurance filed in Texas. The Labor Department on Friday said that 461,000 people with jobs were unable to work because of weather in July. The average number of people missing work because of weather over the previous 10 Julys was 37,000. The August jobs figures could see a rebound as those storm effects reverse.
But other labor market measures are flashing warning signs.
The Sahm rule, an indicator popularized by economist Claudia Sahm, says that if the average of the unemployment rate over three months rises a half-percentage point or more above the lowest the three-month average went over the previous year, the economy is in a recession. Over the past three months, the unemployment rate has averaged 4.13% -- 0.53 percentage point above the three-month average low of 3.6% over the past year.
Powell characterized the Sahm rule as a "statistical regularity" on Wednesday. "It's not like an economic rule, where it's telling you something must happen," he said.
Sahm says she doesn't think the economy is on the immediate cusp of a recession. She reckons that changes in the supply of labor since the pandemic, including the recent jump in immigration, have led the Sahm rule to overstate how weak the job market is. But she worries about the direction things are heading: The unemployment rate is historically low, but it has been trending higher; the number of jobs the economy has been adding each month is still historically strong, but it has been trending down.
"We are still in a good place, but until we see signs of stabilizing, of leveling out, I'm worried," said Sahm, a former Fed economist who is now the chief economist at New Century Advisors.
---
Nick Timiraos, Gunjan Banerji and Chelsey Dulaney contributed to this article.
Generate image description

Generate image description

Credit: By Justin Lahart
