[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
There's no telling how much recent trouble in the banking sector will weigh on the U.S. economy. Inflation data from the Commerce Department on Friday made it a tad easier for the Federal Reserve to wait and see, though, rather than to keep raising rates and finding out later that it had made a mistake.
In its February report on personal income and spending, the Commerce Department reported that its measure of consumer prices -- the Fed's favored inflation gauge -- rose 0.3% in February from January, putting it 5% above its year-earlier level.
More important, the so-called core measure, which excludes food and energy prices, rose 0.3% from a month earlier -- a shade less than economists polled by The Wall Street Journal had expected. January's gain was also revised lower. Versus a year earlier, core prices were up 4.6%. That is still much more than the Fed would like, but was the smallest gain since October 2021.
Friday's inflation reading was welcome news to investors, economists and policy makers who have been struggling to tease out how badly banking woes will weigh on the economy. The general thinking is that more restrictive lending conditions will be to some degree equivalent to further Fed rate increases. But how many?
Reports that have typically received only cursory glances from investors are suddenly top of mind. The Fed's weekly report on lending to banks that comes out Thursdays, its weekly report on the banking system's assets and liabilities that comes out on Fridays and the Investment Company Institute's reading on money-market fund assets that comes out Thursdays are all getting pored over. Pundits who only recently became experts on the inner workings of artificial-intelligence tool ChatGPT are now experts in these.
The difficulty is that although measuring the amount of cash flowing into money-market funds, for example, can help provide information on whether stresses in the banking system are building up or dissipating, it cannot tell you how those stresses are playing out in the economy.
What is happening is unfamiliar, and what loose historical precedents there are, such as the savings-and-loan crisis that began in the 1980s, occurred before money could be moved with a tap on a phone.
So the only real way to tell the effects of any tightening in lending will be to see, and seeing takes time. Friday's report was for February, after all, and the world has changed since then.
Credit: By Justin Lahart
