A big decline in Salesforce shares helped drag stock indexes lower Thursday, masking a broad rally outside of the tech sector.
Despite gains in nine out of its 11 sectors, the S&P 500 fell 0.6%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 0.9%, or around 330 points, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite lost 1.1%.
Salesforce alone subtracted 352 points from the Dow. The business-software provider fell 20% after it cut its outlook for subscription and support revenue, citing cooling demand from its customers. That set the tone for other tech stocks, such as Microsoft, which fell 3.4%, and Adobe, which slid 6.6%.
Salesforce's results showed a downside of the recent surge in artificial-intelligence investment. The AI boom has lifted indexes and powered outsize gains in the stocks of several companies, most notably the chip maker Nvidia. But it also means that businesses have less money left over to spend on other expenses, such as enterprise software, analysts said.
"There's a little bit of a give and take," said Yung-Yu Ma, chief investment officer at BMO Wealth Management.
Thursday's tech-led decline added to a rough few sessions for the Dow, which fell 411 points Wednesday and is down 2.5% for the week.
There were, though, encouraging signs beyond the tech sector. The retailer Best Buy was among the top performers in the S&P 500, advancing 13% after it reported better-than-expected earnings. Real estate led all sectors, climbing 1.5%. Overall, the S&P 500 remains up 9.8% for the year.
Stocks broadly benefited from a decline in Treasury yields, which had surged and weighed on indexes in recent days.
Yields had drifted lower overnight and dropped further after data showed the U.S. economy grew at a slower pace in the first quarter than the government had originally estimated.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note settled at 4.553%, according to Tradeweb, down from 4.623% Tuesday. Treasury yields fell earlier this month after data showed a slowdown in U.S. job growth and modest cooling in inflation. That move lost momentum and then reversed sharply this week -- surprising many analysts given the lack of new information on the economy.
Some investors said that yields had fallen too much in the first place given uncertainty about when the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates this year, if at all.
Fed officials have said that they will lower rates when they gain more confidence that inflation is on a clear path to their 2% target.
Bond yields, which fall when prices rise, are heavily influenced by investors' expectations for short-term rates set by the Fed. They in turn help dictate borrowing costs across the economy, including 30-year mortgage rates.
Investors and officials will gain more clarity about the pace of price increases on Friday, when the Commerce Department releases its latest report on the personal-consumption expenditures price index, the central bank's preferred measure of inflation.
As usual, investors already have a good sense for what the PCE index will show based on other inflation gauges, such as the consumer-price index, that have already been released. The core PCE price index, which excludes volatile food and energy categories, is expected to have climbed 2.7% in April from a year earlier, an easing from the 2.8% gain in March.
There is, however, still room for a surprise that would have an impact on markets, analysts said.
U.S. crude oil lost $1.32, or 1.7%, to $77.91 a barrel.
The Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.6%. At midday Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.2% but Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 1.5%. S&P 500 futures were down 0.2%.
Credit: By Sam Goldfarb
