BEIJING -- Chinese Internet giant Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. is investing in an Israeli technology company that aims to improve product searches on e-commerce websites.
Tel Aviv-based Twiggle announced Tuesday that Alibaba has joined its latest investment round, which is being led by South African conglomerate Naspers. The round will bring total funding for Twiggle to about $20 million, according to sources familiar with the deal. Before Alibaba's investment, the firm had raised a total of $14.7 million in equity funding.
Alibaba, which runs China's massive Taobao online marketplace, declined to specify the amount or the reason for the investment.
Twiggle is the second Israeli company Alibaba has backed, following its small investment last year in a QR-code startup.
That both Alibaba and Naspers are involved is unusual in that Johannesburg-listed Naspers holds a 34% stake in Alibaba rival Tencent Holdings Ltd. The involvement of rival strategic investors indicates the interest in advancing e-commerce search, analysts say.
"We were looking for investors who could help us understand the industry better and who are interested in the next generation of solutions for e-commerce," said Amir Konigsberg, CEO and co-founder of Twiggle. "With nine million different sellers, Taobao is one of the biggest and most challenging sites out there."
Twiggle's biggest appeal for Alibaba is its query language tool, which uses behavioral data and artificial intelligence to narrow search results for online shoppers. "What our system is able to do is adapt itself to specific retailer data and structuring patterns," Mr. Konigsberg said.
Online shoppers have to pick through more than one billion products for sale on Alibaba's Taobao and Tmall marketplaces. An enhanced query tool could refine results so that a search for, say, "camera" won't return results for camera cases or lenses.
"An investment into Twiggle makes perfect sense when you look at Alibaba's core revenue stream," said Rushabh Doshi, an analyst at research firm Canalys. "It will help ensure that product search results are relevant to the user."
Twiggle also is mapping out how products are related to each other and their attributions, to help cut the error rate in product results.
Better-targeted search results are growing in importance as mobile becomes a bigger source of Alibaba's revenue.
Twiggle could also help Alibaba sell its growing cloud-computing service to other e-commerce sites, analysts say.
Mr. Konigsberg said Twiggle, which was founded three years ago by former Google employees, will use the funding to expand its Israeli engineering team and establish offices in the U.S.
He said his business will start working with two large companies later this year to deploy the new query language, though he declined to elaborate.
Credit: By Alyssa Abkowitz
