PORTO ALEGRE, Brazil -- In a country with a history of corruption and government inefficiency, Councilman Ramiro Rosario has come up with what he believes is a winning strategy to improve the work of politicians: replace them with computers.
The 37-year-old legislator in Brazil's southern city of Porto Alegre passed the country's first law in November that was written entirely by ChatGPT, the artificial-intelligence chatbot developed by the San Francisco startup OpenAI.
The law itself was purposefully boring -- a proposal to stop the local water company from charging residents for new water meters when they were stolen from their front yards. It would easily pass, calculated Rosario.
One recent day, donning jeans and sneakers, Rosario described how the city usually runs (or crawls) under Porto Alegre's 36 councilors, from a warren of cubicles here in a vast modernist building overlooking the Guaiba River.
Under normal circumstances, it would have taken his six-person team several days to draft the bill. There would have been lengthy discussions over the legalese, interjected with dozens of coffee breaks and some heated discussions over the performance of Gremio, one of the city's local soccer teams.
His assistant would have had to figure out the inner workings of DMAE, Porto Alegre's water and sewage authority. (Rosario said he had asked DMAE for help but they never replied to his message.) DMAE didn't reply to a reporter's request for comment about not replying to Rosario's request.
Then some poor soul would have had to check if the bill was even constitutional, Rosario said -- no small feat given that Brazil's constitution is 64,488 words-long, outdone only by India and Nigeria.
Add to that several typically protracted Brazilian working lunches -- followed by more coffee -- and perhaps one of the country's many public holidays, which if on a Thursday would have been unofficially extended to Monday.
But, in fact, none of that was necessary. ChatGPT got the job done in 15 seconds.
Rosario sat down in front of his computer back in June and described the bill he wanted in a sentence. A perfectly-crafted law with eight articles came back, including a clause Rosario had never thought of: if the water authority didn't replace the stolen meter within 30 days the property owner would be exempt from paying their bill.
"Who knows where she got the 30-day thing from! She went above and beyond!" said Rosario, an AI enthusiast who said he likes to talk to "her" daily. After the release of ChatGPT's latest vocal version in Brazil, the chatbot has taken on a friendly woman's voice with a slight country twang -- a peculiarity ChatGPT itself suggests may be because the bulk of its input data comes from Sao Paulo, Brazil's agricultural powerhouse.
"There was one day I asked for help in the kitchen. I told her: 'Listen, all I have in the fridge is a mango, a lime, an apple, and an open bottle of wine,'" Rosario digressed. She came up with a recipe for pasta with a mango sauce and told him to drink the rest of the wine. "It was delicious!"
Rosario put the drafted legislation up for vote exactly as ChatGPT had written it. It was unanimously approved by the city's other councilors and signed into law by Porto Alegre's mayor at the end of November. Chat GPT even whipped up the press release.
It was only then Rosario revealed to the rest of councilors that he hadn't written it. "They would never have signed it if they'd known."
Rosario said he believes his law was the first in the world to be written entirely by ChatGPT. (As he talked, he picked up his phone and checked with the chatbot for confirmation, glowing with pleasure as she praised him.)
Brazil spends more than 13% of its gross domestic product on the salaries and pensions of public servants. He wanted to demonstrate how much more efficient and cost-effective the government could be if it employed AI instead of so many people.
He cited, for example, the city hall's public-relations assistants down the hall who write news releases like the one ChatGPT just churned out. "There must be 20 or 30 of them -- they probably won't be needed in the future, well, to be honest, they're already no longer needed."
Voters were delighted. "I'd choose artificial intelligence over the intelligence of politicians any day," said Adriano Soares, a 21-year-old student in the city. Politicians frequently rank as society's most hated group in Brazil.
The reaction to Rosario's big revelation wasn't so great here in City Hall. Firstly, some councilors assumed Rosario had been caught cheating, like a lazy student using ChatGPT on schoolwork. "They didn't get it," he said. When they did get it, they felt duped, accusing him of being unethical by lying to them, Rosario added.
"It's a dangerous precedent! It's just not something you do! He should have talked to the other councilors first," said Joao Bosco Vaz, 68, a councilor for the Democratic Labour Party, calling for the law to be revoked.
To be sure, the biggest pushback came from the council's most elderly members. A week after the law was sanctioned, a group of graying public servants organized a lecture on the perils of AI.
Rosario didn't get an invite.
Credit: By Samantha Pearson and Luciana Magalhaes
