Companies seeking to attract a gender-diverse group of applicants are sometimes advised to choose the words they use in job postings carefully. Using stereotypically masculine or feminine adjectives to describe the qualities needed for a position can affect who applies.
Or so the thinking goes. A recent study, however, finds little evidence to support that notion.
In one part of the study, researchers analyzed almost 300,000 job posts on an actual recruitment website over a two-year period. They looked for words that social psychologists in previous studies have defined either as stereotypically masculine, such as active, aggressive, assertive and self-reliant, or stereotypically feminine, such as empathetic, committed, dependable and warm.
The authors then looked at 487,379 applicants who contacted recruiters through the site to inquire about the job postings.
They found that as the number of feminine words in a job advertisement increases, women are slightly more likely and men slightly less likely to inquire about the position, but the difference is so small that it wouldn't have much effect in practice in terms of attracting more female applicants. And when a job description is gender neutral, meaning it doesn't include stereotypically masculine or feminine adjectives, there is no significant difference in terms of who is more likely to apply.
More feminine wording had a "negligible effect on whether women or men inquired about a position," says Emilio J. Castilla, a professor at the MIT Sloan School of Management and one of the paper's authors, adding that the researchers controlled for demographic variables, occupation, flexible hours and other factors that could influence the results. The authors also used a natural-language-processing machine-learning algorithm to determine whether the language in the job postings was masculine, feminine or gender neutral, rather than a list generated by scholars, and found similarly negligible effects when it came to who inquired about the position.
In another part of the research, the authors asked about 2,500 participants to fill out a questionnaire electronically. Once participants were finished and ready to get paid for their time, they were shown an advertisement for a part-time university research-assistant job and were asked to click on a link if they were interested in the position.
About 1,240 participants clicked on the link to learn more about the job. All participants then saw the same job description, but with one of three variations: One had stereotypical masculine adjectives, like assertive or outspoken, inserted into the text. Another had stereotypical female adjectives, like compassionate and supportive, inserted into the text. A third option omitted all adjectives. The job listings also indicated if the recruiter was either female or male, or it omitted the recruiter's gender entirely. Participants were divided into nine groups to test all permutations of these conditions.
Once again, the authors found that while women were more likely to apply to postings that had stereotypical female adjectives than men, the effect was almost statistically insignificant. If the posting had no adjectives or stereotypically male adjectives, there was no statistically significant effect on the female participants' decision to apply when compared with male participants. The recruiter's gender or lack of information about their gender also usually madeno statistically significant difference in terms of who applied.
Castilla says that omitting words thought to be stereotypically masculine or feminine could actually be counterproductive in some cases because words such as persistence, tenacity or collaboration and empathy could be fair descriptions of the skills needed for certain positions. "It's a superficial intervention with little tangible effect," he says.
---
Lisa Ward is a writer in Vermont. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Lisa Ward
