Elliott's Nudge Good for Samsung
When it rains, it pours. Samsung Electronics suddenly finds itself juggling multiple problems at once, yet the latest drizzle from an old-time adversary could be refreshing.
Elliott Management, Paul Singer's New York-based hedge fund, is agitating for changes at the Korean tech giant that include a one-off $27 billion dividend, a split of the company and a Nasdaq listing.
The proposal, in an open letter Wednesday, comes as the smartphone maker already is embroiled in a massive recall of its latest phone due to defective batteries. Vice Chairman Lee Jae-yong, who has been running the company since his father was incapacitated by a heart attack in 2014, was appointed to the board last month, indicating a power transition.
Mr. Singer isn't a new face to Samsung. Elliott attempted, and failed, to block a merger between two companies in the group, Samsung C&T and Cheil Industries, last year. The merger was purportedly to help the Lee family consolidate control of Samsung Electronics, the crown jewel of the corporate empire, at the expense of Samsung C&T's shareholders.
One problem for the Lee family is that it owns only about 4.8% of Samsung Electronics. Throwing in stakes owned by other companies in the group, the Lees control a mere 18%. Analysts have worried that the Lees would push for mergers within the group to cement control while destroying value for minority shareholders such as with the Samsung C&T-Cheil deal. But this would be harder to pull off with Samsung Electronics directly, since slightly more than half of the company's shares are owned by foreigners, including institutional investors who could mass against such moves.
Anyway, what Elliott has proposed is largely consistent with what Samsung said it would do, though it is doing so at a slothful pace. The company has launched a buyback plan, but compared with the $58 billion in net cash sitting on its balance sheet, more can be done. The cash that the family would receive from a special dividend could help pay the huge inheritance tax bill in case the elder Mr. Lee dies.
And a split into a holding company and an operating company, as Elliott suggested, is also where Samsung is moving, especially since Korean regulators have been pushing for the company to simplify its circular shareholding structure.
A sorting out of the Lee family's holdings and a simplified Samsung conglomerate should help erase the substantial discount at which Samsung Electronics trades to peers. Samsung may have dragged its feet in moving toward a more shareholder-friendly structure. A nudge by Elliott should hasten the process.
-- Jacky Wong
Salesforce Should Definitely Leave This Bird in the Bush
Always hungry for growth, Salesforce.com now seems poised to bite off more than it can chew.
The cloud software company's name emerged two weeks ago as a potential suitor for Twitter. While hardly an exclusive list, Salesforce's appearance was surprising given the lack of obvious synergies and the cost it might bear to make the deal happen.
The potential cost got even higher considering Salesforce shareholders took 6% off the stock's value after the initial report.
That was only a tease. A Wall Street Journal report late Tuesday makes clear that Salesforce is still very interested. Chief Executive Marc Benioff has reportedly been talking up Twitter behind closed doors going so far as to describe the troubled microblogging service an "unpolished gem" at one gathering. Salesforce shares fell another 5% as a result.
In all, the prospect of buying Twitter has erased nearly $5 billion in Salesforce's market value.
Considering that Twitter probably wouldn't sell for anything less than $18 billion, that is worrying. Salesforce has zero net cash and would need to fund such a deal with a mix of debt and stock. That assumes Twitter shareholders would accept volatile Salesforce shares for nearly half their consideration in the deal. It should be noted that LinkedIn chose an all-cash bid from Microsoft despite the fact that Salesforce offered a higher price as the latter included plenty of stock.
Whatever Salesforce offers, it is worth asking what exactly the company would get in return. Salesforce provides businesses with subscription-based software to run sales, marketing and other functions. It is working to expand those capabilities with artificial intelligence, which requires reams of data to work. Mr. Benioff described data as "the currency in software's new world order" in an interview with the Journal over the weekend a good indication of why he is drawn to Twitter's 313 million monthly active users.
But Salesforce is already one of the few companies to have "Firehose" access to Twitter's real-time feed, so it isn't at all clear why it needs to buy Twitter outright. And Twitter isn't without its own significant issues, including stagnating user growth. Salesforce must demonstrate it can find solutions that have eluded Twitter's current management.
The prospect of losing out on another big deal may have Mr. Benioff convinced that he simply can't let this bird fly away. Investors clearly wish he would.
-- Dan Gallagher
Airline Price
War Proves
Cynics Right
EasyJet faces a hard winter. While U.S. airlines show signs of holding on to at least some of the benefits of cheaper oil, their European peers are proving cynical investors right by ceding them to consumers in a continuing battle for scale.
Europe's second-largest budget airline followed its June profit warning with another on Thursday. The shares nose-dived in anticipation of another raft of forecast cuts.
The problem is oversupply combined with creeping costs. EasyJet will fly roughly 8% more seats this year than last as a result of planes it agreed to buy in sunnier times and its strategy of taking market share from national flag carriers. But demand has been weak, so the airline has had to discount. Revenues per seat were 8.7% lower year over year in the quarter through September, and easyJet expects a similar performance in the current quarter.
The company didn't cite Brexit in its shopping list of excuses, beyond its currency impact. Instead it noted terrorist attacks and disruption at various airports.
One question concerns the willingness of Chief Executive Carolyn McCall to tough out the trough. But an executive thought to be her successor quit last month, suggesting she will stay.
The top five airlines account for roughly 55% of European capacity, compared with some 90% in the U.S., calculates Gerald Khoo at Liberum Capital. Everyone wants consolidation, but only through their own ongoing expansion. Time to buy a European holiday, not European airline shares.
-- Stephen Wilmot
Overheard
Surprises can sometimes sneak up on you.
Developed-market inflation still is undershooting economists' expectations, according to Citigroup's inflation-surprise indexes, which track the gap between forecasts and outcomes on a variety of price measures.
Either economists are getting more intelligent or, more likely, inflation is picking up because the undershoot has become the smallest since late 2012.
In fact, inflation is starting to be higher than expected in some surprising places: the eurozone and Japan. The former recorded the highest positive inflation-surprise reading in September since 2013. Even in the post-Brexit U.K., inflation is picking up, just not as sharply as thought.
Oddly enough, the country that is lagging behind is looking to actually raise rates. Inflation has been more buoyant in the U.S. than elsewhere -- but it still is proving lower than forecast.
