[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Give Microsoft credit for this much -- it doesn't think in the short term.
In the 19 months that the software giant has been trying to complete its proposed acquisition of Activision Blizzard, Microsoft has made a few moves that seem counter to the running logic of how the videogame industry operates. One of those was the many deals it signed early on with makers of rival game platforms to keep Activision games such as the mega-popular "Call of Duty" franchise available to them instead of keeping them exclusive to its own Xbox console.
The latest move came Tuesday, in the form of a restructured deal that essentially cedes rights to stream Activision games over cloud-gaming services. The concession is aimed at securing the approval of U.K. regulators, who represent the final roadblock to closing the deal after Microsoft won a court victory over the Federal Trade Commission last month. Under the new agreement, videogame publisher Ubisoft would control cloud-streaming rights for Activision games for the next 15 years worldwide, save for the countries in the European Economic Area, where Microsoft would retain cloud-streaming rights because of deals the company struck with other game-platform operators.
At first glance, giving up cloud rights might seem like a concession too far. Spending $75 billion on Activision was never about giving the Xbox an advantage: Videogame hardware is a low-margin business in which Microsoft is running a distant third behind Sony's PlayStation and Nintendo's Switch. But while game streaming is a nascent business, it is a natural fit for Microsoft, which is a titan in cloud-computing services. The Microsoft Cloud segment generated nearly $112 billion in revenue in the company's most recent fiscal year ended in June -- more than the total revenue of Sony and Nintendo combined for the same period.
But that sort of scale allows Microsoft to play a very long game. It is unlikely Microsoft's strength in the overall cloud business will vanish over the next 15 years, especially with the company's bold moves to implement generative artificial intelligence into those services. And the company will retain the rights to put Activision games onto subscription-based services such as Xbox Game Pass.
That is an important steppingstone to establishing any game-streaming industry, as much of the industry's current business models remain centered on selling full games as digital downloads or disks at retail. Microsoft's Game Pass is the leader in game-subscription services: Analyst Michael Pachter of Wedbush compared Microsoft's new deal to Netflix's losing access to "The Office" and "Friends" in 2020, which didn't derail the streamer's growth momentum.
Adding Ubisoft to the mix complicates the picture somewhat as there is no guarantee the French game publisher will choose to offer cloud rights to games such as "Call of Duty" on attractive terms. But Ubisoft has been more willing to experiment with new business models than some of its larger publishing rivals. It was an early backer of Google's Stadia cloud gaming service, even putting its popular "Assassin's Creed" and "Far Cry" franchises on the platform before Google shut down the service earlier this year. Ubisoft's Paris-listed shares jumped 8.5% on Tuesday after news of the deal.
Microsoft's shares also edged higher by the market close. The new deal is seen as raising the odds of the merger's finally getting closed as the U.K.'s Competition and Markets Authority called the new arrangement "substantially different from what was put on the table previously." In a note to clients, analyst Andrew Marok of Raymond James said the deal should address the CMA's concerns, noting "it is hard to argue that providing rights to a rival firm restricts competition in the market, especially when that rival firm is then given permission to act in their economic interest with the rights they have received."
For Microsoft, buying Activision is becoming more like a game that never seems to end.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
