Salesforce.com has set a goal of doubling its annual revenue.
But the business-software company faces a significant obstacle in making the leap from $10 billion, which it expects to hit in its next fiscal year, to $20 billion: intensifying competition.
The San Francisco company holds the biggest slice of the market for software that helps salespeople track their interactions with customers and prospects. But companies such as Microsoft Corp., SAP SE and Oracle Corp. are encroaching on its turf.
Adding to the pressure is some analysts' skepticism that the company can maintain its rapid growth even as the overall market expands at a steady clip. Investors might press Salesforce, which has posted losses for the past five years, to start turning a profit if revenue growth slows, analysts say.
That doesn't appear to faze Salesforce Chief Executive Marc Benioff, who disclosed the $20 billion goal in a November conference call without putting a time frame on it.
As companies interact more with their customers online, the global market for sales, marketing and customer-service software and related tools is expected to grow at a compound annual rate of 14% from 2015 to 2020, reaching $51.55 billion, according to Gartner estimates.
Salesforce aims to post annual revenue growth of between 20% and 30%, Chief Financial Officer Mark Hawkins told investors in October. At that rate, its revenue would reach $20 billion -- from the projected $10 billion in fiscal 2018 -- in 2021 or 2022.
Maintaining that kind of growth will be difficult, said Andrew Bartels, a research analyst at Forrester Research Inc. "Twenty percent is reasonable. Thirty percent is a stretch."
Salesforce's revenue growth slowed to 24% in fiscal 2016, which ended Jan. 31, from 37% in 2012. Expansion in its core market -- software that helps salespeople track their interactions with customers and prospects -- was 13% in the most recent quarter.
After its consecutive annual losses, Salesforce is moving toward profitability.
The company significantly narrowed its loss in fiscal 2016 to $47.43 million from $262.69 million a year earlier.It expects in 2017 to turn a per-share profit of 24 cents to 25 cents, making for a net-profit margin of about 2%.
Sizable sales and marketing expenses, which for Salesforce have helped drive revenue, are a challenge. Those expenses amounted to nearly 47% of revenue in the most recent quarter, down slightly from 48% of revenue in the year-earlier period.
So far, investors have been willing to forgo profits in exchange for growth. But their patience could have its limits, especially if growth continues to decelerate.
"At some point, you'd expect investors to say, 'Where's the money?' " Mr. Bartels said.
Salesforce executives say they are pursuing rapid revenue growth to fund expansion efforts in areas such as analytics, artificial intelligence and the so-called Internet of Things, in which myriad devices are connected to the internet. The cash flow and share-price increases that often accompany revenue growth can help pay for acquisitions and top engineering talent.
Salesforce holds the greatest share of the market for so-called customer-relationship-management software, nearly 20% last year, according to Gartner. But it must fend off challenges from SAP, which held around 10%, and Oracle, which had nearly 8%. Oracle is pushing into Salesforce's traditional stronghold of applications delivered via the web.
Microsoft, in particular, has set its sights on sales software, where it held a 4.3% share last year. The software giant recently revamped its Dynamics software for web delivery. Dynamics 365 carries a lower price tag than the comparable Salesforce offering and is gaining traction in the price-sensitive midmarket, which includes companies with between 100 and 1,000 employees, according to field surveys conducted by Jefferies Group, said John DiFucci, managing director at the investment bank.
Salesforce's shares have lagged behind many of its competitors because of concerns about slowing sales growth and the battle for market share. The stock is down 13% in the past 52 weeks, closing at $69.09 on Wednesday. In the same period, Oracle shares are up 4.8% and Microsoft stock has risen 12%.
Microsoft in December closed its $26.2 billion acquisition of LinkedIn, giving Microsoft access to data that Salesforce itself has said would confer unique advantages. Salesforce fought the acquisition by complaining to regulators that Microsoft would use LinkedIn data in anticompetitive ways. Microsoft agreed to minor concessions in return for approval of the merger in Europe.
"We will continue to compete with and partner with Salesforce," a Microsoft spokeswoman said.
Salesforce aims to further pump up sales growth by boosting its presence in its core market. Its strategy includes focusing on industry-specific markets, such as financial services, as well as expanding internationally. Seventy percent of its revenue came from the U.S. in fiscal 2016.
Mr. Benioff has pointed to the company's software-development platform that allows third parties to build apps that take advantage of the company's range of software features. Revenue in the reporting segment that includes third-party apps grew 39% in fiscal 2016, faster than any other segment.
"We see competition everywhere, and that's good," Salesforce Chief Operating Officer Keith Block said in October in an interview. "At the end of the day, it keeps us on our toes."
Credit: By Rachael King
