Sure you've got the right address?" the cabdriver asked dubiously as we pulled up to a gloomy building on a back street in Brooklyn's Williamsburg neighborhood. I shared his skepticism. It was indeed my destination-Kingsland Ward at St. John, a century-old hospital -- but it looked entirely abandoned. When the unmarked door creaked open, however, a woman dressed as a nurse checked my name off her list and ushered me inside. For the next two hours, 14 fellow "inmates" and I were led through 22 decorated rooms, the sprawling stage of "Then She Fell," a dreamlike theatrical piece inspired by "Alice in Wonderland." We jumped between seats at a Mad Hatter's tea party and watched acrobatic couples climb the walls together. At one point, I lay on a cot alongside the White Queen as she told me a bedtime story, while I tried not to look painfully self-conscious.
Call it the "Sleep No More" effect. Since 2011, when the creative reworking of "Macbeth" opened in the McKittrick Hotel in Chelsea to huge acclaim and financial success, New York has thrown itself into immersive theater with gusto. The city now offers an ever-changing roster of live events that abandon traditional theater settings and grab audiences by engaging all the senses. Some ladle out gourmet food or craft cocktails, others waft fragrances or host interactive magic shows or poetry readings. All cater to an untraditional desire to become part of the action.
"Audiences today would rather have their own experience than sit and watch one passively from a seat," said Arthur Karpati, a producer of "Sleep No More."
These site-specific events offer travelers a bonus benefit -- an opportunity to visit restricted or forgotten corners of New York, from Gilded Age mansions to historic graveyards or (as with "Then She Fell") ghostly hospital wards that leave cabdrivers concerned for your safety. I've lived in Manhattan for over 20 years, but I recently decided to see what other secret portals the latest immersive shows might open. I would have to be discerning: The bewildering variety of options ranges from the genuinely moving to the comic and downright hokey. "Whenever I hear the word 'immersive,' I roll my eyes," said DeeDee Luxe, an actress and producer at Manhattan venues including the McKittrick Hotel. People bandy the buzzword about so freely in the theater world now, she said, that it risks losing its meaning.
Some venues are hidden in plain sight. One night, to experience the less-than-reverent "Drunk Shakespeare," I climbed an anonymous stairwell in Times Square and stumbled into a large room furnished like an antique library, save for the bar set up in a corner. Each performance features a different play. The night I was there both the audience and the performers imbibed liberally, an actress knocking back shots while channeling Lady Macbeth and presenting a hilarious, fractured and -- by the end of the night -- slurred slice of "the Scottish play."
A few nights later, I was transported to 1950s Cuba, reimagined at the Public Hotel on the Lower East Side for the musical drama "Carmen: To Havana and Back." The hotel's very new basement had been converted into the Tropicana nightclub, where I ended up dancing with actors on the bar.
Often, the experience relied on its New York location. Last fall, I ventured to Brooklyn's 478-acre Green-Wood Cemetery for "Nightfall," an annual event. It was uniquely spooky to wander the candlelit grounds after dark, slipping at will between the tombstones to encounter circus acts, storytellers and even a classical concert in the catacombs.
Other immersive experiences distinguish themselves with a decidedly high-tech edge. At the hands-on museum Spyscape, in Times Square, for example, visitors can dodge green lasers "Mission: Impossible"-style, break spy codes and practice their lying skills. Clearly, technology is the way of things to come. Recent advances in VR (Virtual Reality), AR (Augmented Reality) and AI (Artificial Intelligence) offer new possibilities in immersive theater. To get a sense of it, I hopped a ferry at Battery Park one crystalline morning to visit the Future of StoryTelling Summit (FoST), an annual, experimental-theater festival that incorporates the latest gadgetry into its performances, many happening simultaneously. It was held at a New York attraction I'd never heard of, the Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Gardens in Staten Island, a complex that began life as a 19th-century home for retired sailors and is now run by the National Park Service. As I wandered through it, I stopped to take a VR tour of an Amazon tributary, then later, exploring the site's gardens, I found myself sipping a cocktail with an actress in Edwardian dress who was channeling Mrs. Dalloway, the heroine of the eponymous Virginia Woolf novel.
The most memorable moments blended the traditional and futuristic. I wandered into a tent for "Annabellee," a multidimensional exhibit inspired by Edgar Allan Poe's last poem about a doomed young woman, to find a mysterious, elfin grotto of babbling fountains, ancient herbs and dangling crystals. Creator Ava Lee Scott put me through a "cleansing ritual," with incense and melodies wafting around me; I then put on a headset to meet an avatar for a virtual tarot reading. "Nothing will ever replace live theater," Ms. Scott said later, when she had stepped out of character. "But technology is providing the tools to go further into the intimate experience."
Charles Melcher, FoST's director, sums up the appeal of immersive theater another way: "To explore beautiful sets and see stories unfold and choose how to navigate them -- it brings all your senses alive. And that doesn't get old."

Credit: By Tony Perrottet
