Smartwatches could detect a common heart-rhythm disorder with relatively high accuracy when people were at rest, but less so when participants were physically active, a new study found.
The study, led by researchers at the University of California, San Francisco, tested the use of the heart-rate sensor and step counter built into Apple Inc.'s Apple Watch, to try to detect atrial fibrillation, a type of irregular heartbeat that can cause blood clots and strokes if left untreated.
Researchers used a mobile application from Cardiogram Inc. -- which provided funding for the study -- to access the watch data, and a machine-learning network trained to analyze the data.
About 2.7 million Americans and 34 million people world-wide are estimated to have atrial fibrillation. Many patients don't experience symptoms, and it can go undetected until a complication occurs.
The study is part of research testing mobile devices such as watches as tools to monitor users' health. But the approach has limitations, including patient demographics that don't always represent the broader population -- partly because of the high cost of some devices.
The Apple Watch costs between $249 and $399.
The new UCSF study is part of a broader project the school started in 2013 called Health eHeart, which is trying to harness mobile technologies to develop strategies for preventing and managing heart disease.
For the new analysis, researchers developed a type of machine learning known as a "deep neural network" to analyze the heart-rate and step-count data collected from about 6,680 of the study participants who had Apple Watches. The researchers used step-count data to assess whether increases in heart rates were irregular or normal because of physical activity.
Researchers provided Apple Watches to about 50 patients with atrial fibrillation while undergoing procedures at UCSF known as cardioversions to restore normal heart rhythms. Patients were flat on their backs and the watches collected heart-rate data while they were still experiencing irregular heartbeats, and then when normal heart rhythm was restored.
The algorithm was able to distinguish between atrial fibrillation and normal heartbeats with about 97% accuracy when compared with gold-standard electrocardiograms, according to results published online Wednesday by JAMA Cardiology.
But the results were less impressive in a test of the algorithm in about 1,620 people using Apple Watch outside of the hospital in their everyday lives. The watch distinguished between atrial fibrillation and normal heart rhythm with about 72% accuracy, compared with participants' reports to the researchers of whether they had atrial fibrillation.
---
Tripp Mickle contributed to this article.

Credit: By Peter Loftus
