As a legal dispute ensnares Uber Technologies Inc.'s robot-trucking division, several startups are showing off their own moves toward self-driving delivery vehicles that would reinvent the freight business.
Much of the autonomous-vehicle attention has centered on the race to embed the technology in everyday cars -- involving auto makers such as General Motors Co. and BMW AG and tech giants such as Uber and Alphabet Inc.'s Waymo. But another school of thought is that trucking -- whether long-haul or across-town -- is ripe for quicker change.
The trucking industry is struggling to find drivers, and regulations governing working hours are squeezing profits. Also, some artificial-intelligence experts believe computer brains can more easily master highways than complicated city streets.
"It's an industry that has clear need, where there is a substantial driver shortage, particularly of drivers that are experienced, who are safe and talented," Alex Rodrigues said last week. The 21-year-old robotics expert was sitting in the back of a royal blue Peterbilt truck, retrofitted by his company, San Francisco-based Embark, with two laser sensors and cameras to test self-driving software on public roads in Nevada and on a closed course in California.
Embark and fellow startups Starsky Robotics and Drive.ai all emerged in the past week with details about their plans. Their engineers, bearing top artificial-intelligence pedigrees, are seeking a way to replace drivers in commercial fleets.
The idea seemed novel a year ago when Anthony Levandowski quit as a founder of Google's self-driving-car project -- now known as Waymo at Alphabet -- to found Otto, a company focused on self-driving semi-trucks. Major manufacturers such as Daimler AG and Volvo AB had been working on the technology, but Mr. Levandowski brought a Silicon Valley swagger. One of his early stunts was transporting a trailer of Budweiser in Colorado.
Uber quickly acquired Otto in a deal valued at as much as $680 million. Last week, Waymo filed a lawsuit accusing Uber of using trade secrets allegedly taken by Mr. Levandowski and other former Waymo employees to design a laser sensor used for navigation. Uber said it would review the matter carefully.
"This is a crazy, competitive space and there's a lot of money on the line," Starsky co-founder Stefan Seltz-Axmacher said. "One of our investors said it as, 'We have the opportunity to build intergenerational wealth.'"
San Francisco-based Starsky, which has raised $3.75 million, aims to hook up with freight companies by year-end to test trucks without human occupants on highways in states such as Michigan, Nevada or Florida. In the coming months, the company plans to conduct self-driving tests with humans on board, similar to the way Waymo has conducted more than 2.5 million miles of testing on public streets. But Starsky wants to start hauling real loads so it can collect revenue.
Drive.ai's founders believe around-town delivery vehicles -- limited to specific areas -- and other commercial fleets could be an easier way to introduce the technology. The Mountain View, Calif., company first drew attention about a year ago when it received a permit to test in California. It expects to announce pilot projects later this year.
"The question we want to figure out is which routes are the most valuable to start automating," said co-founder Carol Reiley.
Drive.ai has a crowded office in a garage near Waymo where it has equipped four cars with sensors and cameras to test its software. The team, which emerged from Stanford University's Artificial Intelligence Lab, aims to reduce the amount of computing power required to run its software in a car to that of a smartphone.
Embark isn't disclosing how much it has raised, but backers include venture firm Maven Ventures, one of the early investors in San Francisco-based Cruise Automation -- acquired by GM last year in a deal valued at up to $1 billion.
Embark's Mr. Rodrigues arrived in Silicon Valley about a year ago, having helped build the first autonomous vehicle to drive on Canadian roads while a student at the University of Waterloo. It was while stuck on a California highway after his car broke down that he was struck by the idea of applying the technology to trucking. "There was a truck every six seconds," he said. "Most of these trucks had 'drivers wanted' signs."
Credit: By Tim Higgins
