Reports of artificial intelligence's impending death are greatly exaggerated. We needn't brace for the bubble to pop or fear an uptick in popular disillusionment with the technology. Its capabilities are merely beginning.
AI has only recently exploded into public view. When OpenAI launched ChatGPT in November 2022, few people outside industry had heard of large language models, let alone used one. Two months later the product was estimated to have reached 100 million monthly active users. "In 20 years following the internet space," wrote a UBS analyst, "we cannot recall a faster ramp in a consumer internet app." Venture capitalists poured more than $40 billion into AI enterprises. Chipmaker Nvidia saw a huge spike in its share price, briefly taking it to a trillion-dollar market capitalization, and Meta announced its plan to spend $33 billion on its "build-out of AI capacity."
It's easy, in this context, to get carried away and make extravagant claims about what AI will accomplish. Many businesses and consumers are asking reasonable questions: Where are the predicted job losses and the boom in productivity? What are the definitive use cases, and why can't we see them? It's one thing to be intrigued by a product demo but quite another to integrate a new tool effectively into one's workflow.
Let's maintain some perspective. AI is useful. It is inventing and generating knowledge: the defining feature of our species, the engine of civilization and the basis of the economy. Intelligence will soon become a cheap and ubiquitous commodity.
Consider the technology's development in recent decades. For much of my career, industry considered natural language processing -- technology's use of the human lexicon -- to be a pipe dream. Language was considered too nuanced and complex for machines to handle. Even three years ago large language models produced incoherent babble. Today, they can produce novel passages on par with professional human writing. Even cheap open-source systems can do so proficiently. That development is real and profound, not superficial hype.
The lesson is clear: AI can't and shouldn't be judged on what is publicly available today. We should instead evaluate it with objective indicators -- verifiable data, computation, proven techniques -- to measure its development. Research has shown that AI systems' capabilities, such as language generation and image recognition, have sharply improved in recent years.
The full suite of the technology's benefits will doubtless take time to materialize. It took decades for factories to rebuild around electric motors after steam-era flywheels and pulleys. There was no light-bulb moment when it came to using electricity, and there won't be for AI either. The technology can augment almost any job today, but reimagining and reconstructing entire industries won't happen overnight.
As we consider that future, we should be careful not to overstate things. Too much hype can be damaging -- especially to businesses -- as the economy lurches back and forth between bouts of enthusiasm and disillusionment. I believe AI will be one of the most significant transformations we'll witness this century; in the blink of a civilizational eye we're already seeing it replicate such fundamental things as human creativity and reasoning. I also know, however, that we must properly describe its future without rhetorical flourishes. A hype cycle only undermines long-term consumer and business confidence. Serious AI researchers and companies neither want nor need it.
Keep this in mind, and the picture with AI becomes clear. Zoom in and some of the details are overblown. Zoom out, and you'll find that we're on the brink of significant change.
---
Mr. Suleyman is CEO of Inflection, an AI company, and author of "The Coming Wave: Technology, Power and the 21st Century's Greatest Dilemma."
Credit: By Mustafa Suleyman
