TOYOTA MOTOR
AI Research Extends
To Third University
Toyota Motor Corp. is expanding its artificial intelligence research to University of Michigan, its third university collaboration in the U.S. to try to advance its efforts in autonomous driving.
Last year Toyota announced a $1 billion effort to expand its research in autonomous driving and has hired professors from Stanford University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology. It also brought on the entire staff of Jaybridge Robotics in Cambridge.
The latest partnership includes the hiring of UM researchers Ed Olson and Ryan Eustice, autonomous vehicle experts at the Ann Arbor-based school.
With the recruitment of Messrs. Olson and Eustice, Toyota has taken a new approach to getting the people it needs in this emerging area of the tech economy. It has offered the researchers a chance to split their time between the university and the auto maker throughout the year. This hybrid hiring approach allows the company to obtain scarce talent without savaging the universities that are doing basic research.
-- Mike Ramsey
---
MARKS & SPENCER GROUP
Food Business Helps
Bolster Sales 1.9%
British retailer Marks & Spencer Group PLC reported a 1.9% rise in sales for its fiscal fourth quarter as food sales helped outweigh a continuing slump in its clothing and home division.
The sales update is a first under Chief Executive Steve Rowe, who took the reins on Saturday.
London-based M&S warned that it continues to expect currency pressures and challenging trading conditions to heavily impact its full-year profitability.
On Thursday, the retailer reported a 4% increase in food sales for the 13 weeks ended March 26, although sales were flat on a comparable basis as M&S said it chose to improve its margins in this business. Sales fell 1.9% in the clothing and home business while comparable sales declined 2.7%.
"Turning around our clothing and home business by improving our customer offer is our number one priority," said Mr. Rowe.
The results underscore the pressure on Mr. Rowe to set out a clear strategy at M&S's full-year earnings update next month on how he plans to revive nonfood sales.
"The outcome of his plans will ultimately determine the success or otherwise of M&S' share price performance for the immediate future," said Shore Capital analyst Clive Black.
-- Saabira Chaudhuri
