Twitter sent a letter to Microsoft saying the company "appears to have used the Twitter API for unauthorized uses and purposes," a move that follows public criticism of the software giant by Elon Musk in recent months.
The letter, addressed to Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella and dated Thursday, focuses on Microsoft's use of Twitter's application programming interface, or API, in several products including some related to Xbox, the search engine Bing and advertising and other tools.
The API lets developers analyze some Twitter data and build tools with it.
"Microsoft may have been in violation of multiple provisions of the agreement for an extended period of time," Alex Spiro, a lawyer at Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan who has represented Musk, said in the letter, referring to an agreement between the two companies over how Microsoft would use Twitter's API.
For years, Microsoft used Twitter's standard developer APIs free of charge in some of its products, according to the letter. Spiro said Microsoft declined to pay for continued access to Twitter's APIs last month.
Twitter is asking Microsoft to hand over information about its use of Twitter's API for the past two years, including identifying Twitter content currently in Microsoft's possession and records describing how Microsoft used Twitter's API, according to the letter.
A representative for Microsoft confirmed the company had received the letter with some questions about its previous use of the free Twitter API. Microsoft will review the questions and respond appropriately, the person said, adding, "We look forward to continuing our long term partnership with the company."
Twitter recently said it is raising prices for access to its API, prompting complaints from some developers and users. Musk has sought to increase Twitter's revenue, which has included changes like switching from a free to paid verification system. Musk, who acquired Twitter late last year and quickly faced challenges to Twitter's business due to concerns from advertisers, recently said the company is coming close to breaking even.
Musk has publicly criticized Microsoft in recent months, including over Microsoft's investment in ChatGPT maker OpenAI.
In April, Microsoft said it would drop Twitter from a Microsoft advertising product, meaning users could no longer access their Twitter accounts through the social-media management tool, according to a notice from Microsoft at the time. In response to a user who tweeted about it, Musk alleged in a tweet that Microsoft "trained illegally using Twitter data," adding "lawsuit time." He didn't provide more detail.
---
Tom Dotan contributed to this article.
Credit: By Alexa Corse
