Online clothes shopping keeps promising more: flash sales, up-to-the-minute styles, inside peeks at the runway and exclusive designer interviews. What every shopper wants and no one delivers, though, is the guarantee of a perfect fit.
A group of Boston mathematicians think they can help. They have developed a computer program that relies partly on the clothes already in your closet to predict how the next garment will fit.
The technology, called True Fit, is being rolled out on Thursday on the websites of retailers including Macy's and Nordstrom. True Fit will predict customers' size in some 350 fashion brands, from Jean Paul Gaultier to Joe's Jeans, and the number of brands is expected to double by year end.
Achieving a great first-time fit is a holy grail in online retailing. Many retailers say between 20% and 40% of their online sales are returned (the percent varies widely among retailers and spikes during promotions), and fit is the No. 1 reason. Returns of garments that don't fit are "the biggest problem we all have with the Internet," says Stephen Budd, group president at BCBG Max Azria Group, one of the participating brands. "My wife is a victim," he adds. "She buys two of these, two of those, and she returns one."
When it comes to fitting online shoppers, "we've got to learn and we've got to move fast," says Colin Johnson, spokesman for Nordstrom, which now sees Nordstrom.com as one of its most important stores.
However, many fit technologies have been tried and flopped. Retailers have created virtual mannequins for customers to dress and set up full-body scans in stores. But shoppers are reluctant to participate in systems that require much work and time from them.
For women's clothing in particular, sizing is difficult. One brand's 4 is another's 8, primarily because fashion labels shape their clothes so differently, using their own closely guarded specifications to create patterns. Online retailers often ask shoppers to consult "fit charts" or type in body measurements, which can be time-consuming.
"The tape measure is inaccurate," says Bill Adler, chief executive of True Fit. People often measure wrong. When researchers started developing True Fit five years ago, they found some early test subjects used metal tape measures. And True Fit discovered a naughty consumer secret: Even when shopping for themselves, people lie about their measurements.
Macy's has tried, among other methods, a system that created customer avatars, which didn't function well, says Macy's.com president Kent Anderson. The retailer is looking at futuristic technology that could use cellphone cameras to measure the dimensions of a consumer's body, comparing that to apparel measurements.
But tests of True Fit with Macy's denim have proved to increase sales and reduce returns, and the company is working on rolling it out to other womenswear, accessories, and ultimately menswear. "I'm encouraged with the results," Mr. Anderson says.
Unlike most other fit technologies, True Fit avoids the tape measure, relying instead on crunching large amounts of data. It has access to a large number of fashion labels' garment specifications for both men and women, though Macy's and Nordstrom are starting with women's styles.
Marc Crossman, president and chief executive of Joe's Jeans, says he agreed to give True Fit access to Joe's patterns and product specs out of excitement about the project. "Our biggest concern was giving away our secret sauce, which is our fit," he says.
True Fit's algorithms calculate a customer's size and shape based on information he or she has given and compare that to the specs of garments the customer is shopping for. It can then recommend a size in each garment, describing how it expects it to fit in tricky areas like the bust and hips. It also suggests other garments that would fit well.
Consumers start creating a profile by giving their age, height, and weight and answering questions about their body shape. (For instance, it asks where your tummy sits on your belly -- high, medium or low.) Then the shopper selects items that fit well from her own closet and identifies the brands, styles and sizes.
"The best predictor of future behavior is past behavior. So we would weigh what's in your closet much more highly than what you tell us" about your size, says John Stauffer, True Fit's chief technology officer.
True Fit says it doesn't collect "personally identifiable information," and the buying data resides with the retailers. A shopper's size profile will travel with him or her to most of the participating retailers. So one could register for True Fit at Macys.com and then get True Fit sizing recommendations at JoesJeans.com.
Over time, the system keeps track of what the consumer buys -- and what is returned -- building a profile. Because the algorithms are a form of machine learning -- much like those that predict music preferences for Pandora, reading choices for Amazon or entertainment options for Netflix -- the more a consumer shops using True Fit, the better its predictions should become.
In tests with 400,000 users on a website selling denim, True Fit reduced the return rate for premium denim to 20% from 50%, Mr. Adler says.
At the system's core is the information it gleans from the favorites in a shopper's closet. That can be a strength or a weakness, as I discovered when I tested it out last week on Nordstrom.com.
Two of my favorite dresses, a Marni and a Jason Wu, weren't listed on Nordstrom's version of the system. Though Marni and Jason Wu are participating in True Fit, Nordstrom has opted to list only brands it sells online, according to the store and True Fit. Nordstrom has customized the system in other ways: For instance, it is initially using True Fit only for dresses, though it plans to add more items.
It took me 10 to 15 minutes to put in the information True Fit requires. (Mr. Adler says the process should take "a few minutes.")
Since few of the listed labels were in my closet, I had to use a Diane von Furstenberg dress that is too tight across the chest and a St. John tank dress whose size -- a four -- is a testament only to the aggressive vanity sizing the brand uses. So I was afraid to trust my True Fit size.
While the system suggested several dresses that fit in with the styles in my closet and would fit me, including a twist-front Boss dress, I preferred a swingy Elizabeth & James number that would add something new and different to my wardrobe. True Fit recommended a medium, but I thought it might feel tight. I ordered the large, which it said would fit me more loosely -- and crossed my fingers.
I was right: The dress fit me in large. True Fit seems to require better data than I was able to provide from my closet. Mr. Adler says the system will note that and improve the next time I make a purchase.
Credit: By Christina Binkley
