Cloudflare Inc.'s shares surged 20% in its first day of trading Friday, following a streak of technology upstarts making initial public offerings to meet investors' growing appetite for enterprise information-technology companies.
The stock of the provider of cloud-based networking and cybersecurity services closed Friday at $18 a share on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol NET. It was priced at $15 the day before.
On Thursday, Cloudflare said it sold 35 million of Class A shares to the public at the $15 price, raising about $525 million, or about $603.8 million if underwriters exercise their option to buy an additional 5.25 million shares. According to FactSet, the company's market valuation is roughly $1.5 billion.
The San Francisco company said it had revenue of $192.7 million in 2018, and $134.9 million in 2017. Like many of its competitors, it has also entered the public sphere with some losses, part of a growing trend by tech companies to increase spending and marketing to fuel growth and fend off competition. Cloudflare's net losses were $87.2 million in 2018 and $10.7 million in 2017.
This year has seen many IPOs in the information-technology space, fueled by more corporate spending on cloud computing and strong stock-market debuts.
For instance, videoconferencing company Zoom Video Communications Inc.'s shares soared 81% above its IPO price on its first trading day in April.
Shares of Health Catalyst Inc., which develops software using artificial intelligence to analyze data for hospitals and health-care companies, also traded well above its projected price in its first day of trading in July.
Yet not every technology company has fared so well in their debuts. SmileDirectClub Inc.'s shares slid 28% on its first day of trading Thursday, and the highly anticipated public market debuts of Uber Technologies Inc. and Lyft Inc. were lackluster.
We Co., parent of co-working-space company WeWork, is expected to make its trading debut the week of Sept. 23. The company is weighing a projected valuation that could slip below $20 billion, far lower than the $47 billion set in a funding round earlier this year.

Credit: By Kimberly Chin
