Sundar Pichai, chief executive of Google and parent company Alphabet Inc., said the U.S. government should take a more active role in policing cyberattacks and encouraging innovation with policies and investments.
In the wake of recent cybersecurity breaches attributed to Chinese and Russian hackers, Mr. Pichai said the time had come to draft the equivalent of a Geneva Convention for technology to outline international legal standards for an increasingly connected world.
"Governments on a multilateral basis . . . need to put it up higher on the agenda," Mr. Pichai said in a recorded interview for The Wall Street Journal's Tech Live conference on Monday. "If not, you're going to see more of it because countries would resort to those things."
Mr. Pichai appealed to the U.S. government to take an active role in fostering innovation amid rising competition from China. Under Chinese President Xi Jinping, the Communist Party has outlined a plan to advance the country's artificial-intelligence capabilities and develop its own semiconductor sector. The ambitions have coincided with a Balkanization of the internet as China, Russia and others censor content and require tech companies to store data inside their borders.
Google, whose search engine doesn't operate in China, is investing in quantum computing and artificial intelligence to stay ahead of Chinese internet companies that compete with it to provide services in markets around the world, Mr. Pichai said.
"We can take a long-term view and do [that], particularly at a time when governments have slightly pulled back on basic [research and development] funding," he said.
He said the government could support Google's efforts to stay ahead by adopting policies such as providing work visas to engineers and scientists from overseas. It could provide incentives to give the U.S. more control over the semiconductor supply chain, which is largely dependent on factories managed by Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. The Biden administration has pressed Congress to address that issue by funding bipartisan legislation known as the Chips for America Act, designed to encourage domestic semiconductor investment.
"Public-private partnerships here can be a good template," Mr. Pichai said. "This is an area [where], you know, there's bipartisan interest in making sure that we are thinking about it for the long term."
The call for government action is part of a shifting ethos in Silicon Valley. In the past, the region championed libertarian ideals and favored government's staying out of the way of its innovations. But tech leaders have begun to encourage Washington to get more involved as competition with China escalates, cyberattacks intensify and lawmakers express concerns about social-media platforms.
Credit: By Tripp Mickle
