A year after scrapping plans to develop a nationwide network of food trucks, a former Walmart executive's startup wants to open nearly 100 delivery-focused restaurants around the New York City area with new investor funding.
Wonder last week raised $700 million from investors under a structure that promises equity at a potential discount once particular milestones are met, such as a sale or initial public offering, said Chief Executive Officer Marc Lore. The startup, which also owns meal-kit provider Blue Apron, has raised $1.5 billion overall.
In 2022, when Wonder last raised significant funding, The Wall Street Journal reported it was valued at $3.5 billion. Investors in the recent round, including New Enterprise Associates, GV and Dragoneer Investment Group, provided capital through a simple agreement for future equity, known as a SAFE note, said Lore.
Traditional startup funding has dried up in many sectors aside from artificial intelligence amid high interest rates.
"In this kind of market there is a disconnect between where investors would value the company and where I would value it," said Lore. "This is basically an elegant solution."
Lore founded Wonder in 2018 before he finished a stint as head of e-commerce at Walmart. Lore has personally invested around $300 million in debt and equity, including $100 million this round.
Wonder's 11 locations in New York's Manhattan and Brooklyn boroughs and New Jersey primarily offer takeout and delivery from several restaurants cooked in a single kitchen. Its plans call for adding nearly 100 more locations over the next two years, Lore said.
The startup initially set out to build a network of truck-based restaurants preparing hot curbside meals from popular chef-inspired menus. In the early years, around 500 Wonder trucks blanketed some suburban New Jersey and New York communities.
Wonder later shifted to a less-expensive operating model focused on physical kitchens. That shift temporarily erased much of Wonder's revenue.
Last fall, Wonder bought Blue Apron for $103 million. Blue Apron lost money in 2022, during its last full year as a public company, but reported $459 million in sales. Wonder declined to share its revenue excluding Blue Apron. Lore said investors are focused on Wonder's core model, not Blue Apron's revenue.
Lore has had success selling off several startups to larger firms, but hopes Wonder can be a company that sticks. "That's always the dream," said Lore, adding that the company envisions an IPO in three to five years.
Lore sold Quidsi, an e-commerce site for diapers and other household goods, to Amazon.com in 2010 for $500 million. Amazon eventually shut down the unit. He sold Jet.com to Walmart for $3.3 billion in 2016.
Walmart eventually wound down Jet, folding the operation into its broader e-commerce business. Lore left Walmart in early 2021 and took over as CEO of Wonder later that year. Lore also is part of the incoming, new ownership group for the Minnesota Timberwolves basketball team.
Credit: By Sarah Nassauer
