Technology companies have embraced the efficiencies that artificial intelligence has brought to the hiring process. Now they are dealing with the downside of candidates who leverage it themselves.
Candidates are using generative AI tools to build resumes that are customized to each job for which they are applying. They can fire off resumes in rapid succession or have bots do so. They are also relying on AI to prepare for interviews.
As a result, tech firms and recruiters are reinserting some human review and adding screening steps.
While candidates have long inflated their experience during job searches, recruiters said there has been a rise in so-called fake candidates -- people who misrepresent their experience and identities. These candidates are applying for remote roles with experience on their resumes that is found to be made up. Recruiters suspect fake candidates are getting through Zoom interviews by using software or having a third party feed them answers.
For years companies have relied on software that automates aspects of hiring. The process has frustrated applicants who can be removed from consideration without their resumes ever being viewed by a human. The cooler labor market and the ubiquity of remote interviews is only exacerbating the onslaught of AI-related issues.
"Nearly all of our customers, particularly the larger tech companies, are struggling mightily with the amount of applicants they're getting," said Ben Sesser, chief executive of the interview-software platform BrightHire. "Our clients are noticing the use of AI a lot throughout the hiring process."
At Lattice, a human-resources software platform, the talent team is leaving job postings up for only 24 to 48 hours because of the volume of resumes. Mendy Slaton, director of people operations at Lattice, attributed the influx of applicants to the tight labor market and the ways AI is expediting the application process for candidates. What used to take hours or weeks can now be done in minutes, Slaton said.
Lattice is considering additional steps in the application process. There are optional questions asking candidates to list three reasons they are interested in the role, before submitting resumes. The company is thinking about making that step mandatory. "I want to use AI to help me speed up that process, but I don't want it to replace the human judgment pieces," Slaton said.
BrightHire's software records interviews. Several clients told Sesser that in reviewing footage they noticed interviewees looking away from the camera before answering a question, a sign they might be using ChatGPT and a prompt for further vetting.
Some companies are requiring job seekers to record a video of themselves or answer preliminary questions before their submission is considered complete to mitigate the volume of applications and weed out those who might not be that interested in the role.
Many tech jobs require applicants to take tests that require them to showcase their coding skills. While the use of ChatGPT for coding tests isn't prohibited by many companies, some executives started requiring candidates to show their work during a live interview and explain what tools they used and why. News Corp, owner of Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal, has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI, the creator of ChatGPT.
Matt Somero, a recruiter who works on a contract basis in-house with two seed-stage startups, said when he posts jobs for those companies, he receives several hundred resumes for each role within the first 48 hours and has to close out the posting. On average he follows up with 10 to 15 people. Somero keeps coming across candidates who seem to be throwing spaghetti at the wall, applying to a senior role with only two years of experience.
Automation tools "appear to be enabling mass and fairly indiscriminate applying," he said. "There are really good folks that are just not getting seen because of the volume."
Somero encountered applicants who he determines through online sleuthing aren't who they claim to be. He has been on video calls in which candidates have blurry backgrounds and sound as though they are in a call center. Somero started checking university alumni directories to verify whether applicants went to the school listed on resumes and checking out profile pictures for what he considers to be red flags, such as a photo taken from afar.
Chris Abbass, CEO of the recruiting firm Talentful, said he knows of companies that hired "fake candidates" for remote roles. It became clear, he said, that the employees lied about their experience when they weren't able to do various aspects of their jobs or when someone showed up on a video call who didn't match the appearance of the person who was interviewed.
"There is software that people can use on a phone screen where they're playing the software in the background, and it's feeding the candidate the answer," he said. "There are household names that have hired people and then realized a couple weeks in that this person isn't the same person."
Arun Saigal, CEO of the mobile-app development platform Thunkable, said he is finding lately that some job hunters are listing generative AI experience on a timeline that doesn't make sense unless they worked for just a few companies. "You may be smart, but you just don't have that experience because that's not really possible," he said.
Saigal requires a coding test for some roles and doesn't mind if candidates use ChatGPT. They are allowed to use any tech that is helpful, but they are expected to disclose it.
"We ask you directly, 'What tools did you use?' " he said.
Credit: By Katherine Bindley
