Apple said its chief financial officer is stepping down next year, one of a number of top long-serving executives that are approaching 65.
Luca Maestri will be succeeded by Kevan Parekh, 52 years old, Apple's current vice president of financial planning and analysis.
Maestri, Chief Executive Tim Cook and Chief Operating Officer Jeff Williams have entered their early 60s and investors have watched closely for signs about who emerge as the next generation of top leaders.
A number of internal candidates are widely respected but Apple has yet to detail its plans. Apple doesn't have a mandatory retirement age.
Starting next year, Maestri, 60, will transition out of the role to lead its corporate-services team, which consists of its internal data center infrastructure and real estate.
Apple has been using its own internal servers for its recent AI capabilities, rather than using external cloud services.
Since taking over as finance chief in 2014, Maestri developed a reputation for keeping Apple running lean.
The company's expenses and corporate research grew relatively slowly, while many in the technology industry splurged on splashy projects.
During the pandemic, while many technology companies hired extensively in response to booming demand for their products, Apple stayed lean. Once the pandemic boom waned, many of these technology companies initiated large-scale layoffs, which Apple avoided.
Still, the company has been cutting back recently and refocusing in some areas.
Earlier this year, Apple canceled its decadelong foray into building its own electrical vehicle.
The company is now expanding its investments in artificial intelligence, where it has found itself behind the rest of the industry.
Throughout Cook's tenure, the company has had a relatively stable group of top executives and has tried to hold on to them in some cases even when they leave top positions. In 2020, long-time company leader Phil Schiller stepped down as chief marketing officer to become an "Apple Fellow," leading many to speculate about his eventual retirement.
Instead, he has played a leading role in the company's efforts to maintain its closed software ecosystem through the App Store.
Credit: By Aaron Tilley
