Salesforce is pushing for more environmental regulation of artificial intelligence, highlighting concerns about energy use and a lack of emissions disclosure within the technology sector.
The software developer said Monday that it will be advocating for lawmakers and regulators to start building legislation to require companies to disclose their AI emissions, with standardized metrics for measuring and reporting the environmental impact of AI systems.
"We really see in this exciting inflection point -- AI has the potential to exacerbate and or alleviate environmental challenges," said Megan Lorenzen, director of climate and energy at the San Francisco-based company.
In particular, Salesforce is calling on all companies employing general-purpose AI models to publicly disclose the energy efficiency and carbon footprint associated with AI development and operations using standard metrics. Doing so, it says, should help drive efficiencies over time as well as allow users to make more informed choices when it comes to using AI and energy use.
It marks one of the first instances that a technology company has looked to add regulation on AI emissions as concerns about sustainability and AI grow.
"If there's visibility there's awareness and pressure on it and that can drive change," Lorenzen said. "We see this as a critical part of our journey to a net zero future -- transparent disclosure."
Salesforce said it would be pressing for the environmental impact of AI systems to be considered as a risk factor when lawmakers classify high-risk models.
"If we as a company don't speak up and work with governments to paint a picture of what a sustainable future looks like we are going to fall short [on climate change goals]," Lorenzen said.
In Washington, Sen. Ed Markey (D., Mass), has been one of the leading voices on the subject of regulation over AI, highlighting concerns about the technology and its impact on the environment. Markey and three other Democratic lawmakers introduced a bill in February titled the Artificial Intelligence Environmental Impacts Act of 2024, aimed at developing standards to measure and report the full range of AI's effects on the environment, as well as creating a voluntary framework for AI developers to report the impacts.
"The development of the next generation of AI tools cannot come at the expense of the health of our planet," Markey said at the introduction of the bill.
Emissions from AI have been of increasing concern, largely because of how fast the sector is growing. Energy consumption from data centers represents roughly 1.5% of power generation, according to Lorenzen, but she said this could move to 4.5% in the coming years.
Chip maker Arm's chief executive, Rene Haas, echoed that point earlier this month, saying in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that AI's thirst for energy is going to be unsustainable. "The more information they gather, the smarter they are, but the more information they gather to get smarter, the more power it takes," he said.
Water usage also is a worry, with research from the University of California, Riverside, showing that for every 10 to 50 prompts to OpenAI's ChatGPT-3, the equivalent of a half liter bottle of water is needed to cool the system. OpenAI's founder Sam Altman, among other investors, said this week that they are putting $20 million toward Exowatt, a company that uses solar power to help meet the needs of data centers.
Greg Jackson, CEO of renewable energy provider Octopus Energy, said that demand for energy and in particular green energy is likely to surge as AI use expands, putting pressure on governments to build out grid infrastructure and ramp up renewable power generation.
"Most of the companies building data centers have huge clean-energy commitments so they are going to be driving the change for delivering green electricity at scale," Jackson said. "Data centers can be part of the green-energy solution but through the intelligent use of electricity."
Salesforce echoed this, saying that AI could be a force for good when it comes to climate change. Lorenzen said AI's ability to analyze large sources of data, spot patterns and predict the future based on models can help with climate change mitigation. A recent report from Boston Consulting Group said AI-enabled use cases could reduce carbon emissions by 5% to 10% by 2030.
Jackson's Octopus Energy uses AI to help predict where more energy is going to be needed at a given time, relying on weather data and usage patterns to inform how much power a particular area will need. "You can forecast where you can shift demand and that becomes hyper complex," he said.
Salesforce also is looking to help fund some of the technologies they say are needed to help drive change. "We want to make sure AI benefits everyone, everywhere and that really includes our planet," said Naomi Morenzoni, senior vice president of philanthropy at Salesforce.
The company is putting $2 million toward five companies looking to use AI to accelerate decarbonization. This includes WattTime, a nonprofit focused on getting companies, people and countries to choose cleaner energy, and Good360, a nonprofit which helps provide communities in need with aid and supplies in the wake of climate disasters.
Credit: By Yusuf Khan
