Artificial intelligence is having a big moment right now.
Tech giants and tiny startups alike are experimenting with generative AI, which creates text and images based on patterns in training data. It promises to make our lives easier. These tools also blur the line between what came from a human and what didn't: Type a few words -- the all-important "prompt" -- and watch text, graphics, even music materialize as if from nowhere.
While a majority of U.S. adults have heard of OpenAI's ChatGPT, only 14% have tried it, according to a report by the Pew Research Center. Many free AI-powered tools have appeared since ChatGPT's debut, and there are many more on the way.
Generative-AI tools aren't a fad. They will only become more present in our daily lives, as money pours into the sector, tech companies continue to innovate and more services become available. Deciding which AI tools to take for a spin can be overwhelming, so we've compiled a list of easy-to-try apps and websites to get you started.
Search & chatbots
AI-enabled chatbots are an enhanced way to search for information in a conversational form, brainstorm work ideas and even write poetry.
ChatGPT by OpenAI
ChatGPT, the most famous generative-AI tool right now, lets users type text-only prompts in exchange for text-only responses. It was trained on huge amounts of data found on the internet, so it's great for complex questions and drafting letters. To access the bot, create an account with OpenAI, or log in via Google, Microsoft or Apple. The free version is open to everyone, but it's slow and can refuse requests if too many people are using it. The faster, $20-a-month ChatGPT Plus doesn't have congestion outages, and gets under-the-hood updates sooner. chat.openai.com
Microsoft's Bing
The new Bing incorporates OpenAI's tech with Microsoft's search engine for up-to-date responses. It lets you write prompts to deliver text, image and video search results. That's helpful if a suggested recipe isn't what you're looking for, and you'd rather have a video walk you through the process step-by-step. The bot cites its sources, though that doesn't mean it's immune to AI "hallucinations." It's free to use, but to access all its features, you'll have to download the Edge browser and log in with a Microsoft account. bing.com/new
Google's Bard
Bard is great if you want to get straight to the point. You can use it to draft a blog post or an email to a boss, and even search the web. The company is working on an update that would let users prompt Bard with images, and in the coming months, Bard will be able to generate images using Adobe Firefly, a generative-AI image tool. You must be 18 years old or older with a Google account to use the free software, which works on a variety of browsers. bard.google.com
Image generators
AI images can be based on text or visual prompts, such as "King Kong roller skating down the Empire State Building."
OpenAI's DALL-E 2
OpenAI's DALL-E was one of the earliest image generators, and it's still a fun, if clunky, tool. It generates four images based on a text description -- "a chair shaped like an avocado" -- or even a photo. If you signed up after April 6, you'll have to buy credits to try it. labs.openai.com
Bing Image Creator
Bing Image Creator is powered by the latest version of OpenAI's DALL-E, but improves on it with a slick interface and a way to get free fast results. You need to log in with a Microsoft account but can use any browser. When you sign up, you get "boosts," tokens to generate images quickly. Boosts are replenished over time, but if you run out, image creation can take longer. bing.com/create
Adobe Firefly
Adobe Firefly does a lot free of charge. You can generate images from a text description, apply styles or textures to text and edit images based on text descriptions. You can also change the background, remove objects or zoom out the image beyond what was captured. Adobe said Firefly is trained using Adobe Stock images and other data sets to respect artists' ownership. firefly.adobe.com
Career & productivity
Companies are looking to AI to boost productivity in the workplace. These tools help cut back on the time you spend writing emails, taking notes or even attending meetings. If you want to use these tools at work, you might need your company's approval.
GrammarlyGo
GrammarlyGo, powered by its own tech and OpenAI's GPT-3.5, can help you draft emails in a pinch by scanning your email and summarizing a reply. You can also use the tool to rephrase your wording or adjust your tone, and it learns your preferences over time. Users get 100 prompts a month free. Grammarly Premium gives users 1,000 prompts for $30 monthly, or $144 annually. grammarly.com/a/grammarlygo
OtterPilot
Otter.ai's smart meeting assistant automatically handles live note-taking and action-item tracking. To use it, log into your Otter account and connect your Google or Microsoft calendars. OtterPilot then automatically joins your meetings and takes notes -- even if you're not in the meeting yourself. (Your workplace administrator might prohibit this tool.) The free version includes 300 monthly minutes of note-taking, up to 30 minutes per conversation. The $16.99-a-month Pro version is better for longer meetings. otter.ai
Khan Academy's Khanmigo
The OpenAI-powered chatbot is for students in need of personalized homework assistance. Its "Tutor me" mode and quiz module help with subjects including math, reading, science and history. It is most accurate for questions about major K-12 subjects but can still make mistakes. To get on the wait list, you need a Khan Academy account. You must be 18 to sign up, but you can give access to your kids. Once selected, you will be asked to donate $20 a month. khanacademy.org/khan-labs
Expedia's trip planning
Expedia's AI assistant, also powered by ChatGPT, offers travel recommendations to book directly in the app. When a user asks the bot for lodging suggestions, it organizes them in the app's Trips section. Just be aware: The tool is still in beta, it is only available in English, and it doesn't have access to real-time pricing information. expedia.com/app
Credit: By Cordilia James
