Does anyone remember the Hagstrom New York City 5-Borough Atlas? As an urban explorer in the 1990s, I counted it among my most treasured possessions: The entire city, spiral-bound, mapped and laminated. Then came Google Maps, the great leap forward. And now?
I recently explored several neighborhoods with Live.XYZ, a free map app launching this week that aims to change the way pedestrians experience the urban environment. While existing map apps focus on directions, Live focuses on locations and events, says co-founder and Chairman Robert Levitan. It maps what's happening now.
In what sounds like an expensive endeavor, Live dispatched a team that has so far spent four years walking nearly every block of New York City, mapping more than 120,000 locations including coffee carts, water fountains, murals and farmers markets, according to Mr. Levitan. The owners declined to discuss company funding.
In Vancouver, an app called Go Downtown offers similar features, but Live appears to be unique in New York City.
Live, which hopes to make money from advertising, content licensing and sales of aggregated user data, also uses machine learning to extract and map information from social-media feeds about events ranging from lunch specials and performances to classes and church services. You can zero in on a neighborhood to see what's happening nearby, or use the search functions to find what you want.
"We are indexing the real world by time and space," says Mr. Levitan, who is prone to grand pronouncements. "We are unlocking the now."
My first Live-assisted adventure was a trip to Manhattan's Lower East Side to get a culture fix. According to Live, the neighborhood hosts more than 190 galleries. Alas, the galleries were closed on a Monday afternoon. Could Live suggest an alternative? It displayed a cluster of yellow dots on nearby Orchard Street, signifying fashion retailers.
The strip, it turns out, is a dizzy mix of old school wholesalers and trendy boutiques. I sampled "Strange Paradise" unisex perfume. I admired the $5 belt rack at Ben Freedman and a top hat festooned with bullets.
Live also offers location lists submitted by fellow users. On one recommendation, I tried the nearby Punjabi Deli & Grocery -- a friendly hole-in-the-wall offering golden turmeric lattes. My $4.50 lunch combo was delicious.
Live says users often make discoveries in their own backyard. Indeed, I learned the bland-looking gift shop near my Brooklyn Heights home actually is an artists' collective featuring handcrafted skin-care products and terrariums, while the bar down the block doubles as a jazz club.
I stopped short when I saw a glowing dot over the nearby Brooklyn Historical Society. There was a $5 lecture on the Abraham & Strauss department store starting in 10 minutes. I booked out the door. The fun talk featured an eccentric historian sporting a big department store logo tattooed on the back of his calf.
While the day left me feeling enthusiastic about Live, Olivier Toubia, faculty director of the Eugene Lang Entrepreneurship Center at Columbia Business School, says unless you're a committed urban explorer, Live is likely just an incremental improvement over existing map apps and few will make the switch. "It probably won't be the next big thing," he says.
It's also a bit rough around the edges. On several occasions, Live flubbed a venue's hours and I found myself locked out of my destination. A search for a "low-carb" lunch spot returned irrelevant results like the Longevity Adult Day Care Center.
Live co-founder and CEO Jason Greenwald says the app's accuracy will improve through user-submitted corrections and machine learning.
The next day, I played train-stop roulette, dropping a pin on the subway map and using Live to explore whatever neighborhood fate dictated, which turned out to be the west end of Soho. Who knew this corner of the city still had so many galleries? Or the New York City Fire Museum, featuring 19th-century hose trucks and Chief, a taxidermy-stuffed Brooklyn firehouse dog from the 1930s?
Mr. Greenwald says Live is no niche app for urban adventurers. Rather, it will convert the masses to adventuring. "The new hobby, he says, "is just cruising. Just walking around."
---
anne.kadet@wsj.com

Credit: By Anne Kadet
