The northeastern Arkansas town of Walnut Ridge is celebrating its sesquicentennial. To commemorate 150 years of civic life, local leaders wanted to showcase how much the town has changed throughout the generations.
How to do so? There were high-tech options -- virtual reality, artificial-intelligence-powered displays, interactive screens -- but those can get expensive. Walnut Ridge, with a population of around 5,800, didn't have unlimited funds. "But we wanted to give our celebration a little extra punch," Mayor Charles Snapp said in an interview.
Thus, if you passed through Walnut Ridge on a recent weekend, you might have been puzzled by the sight of a tour group on Main Street standing in front of buildings and peering through devices that resembled squared-off binoculars.
"View-Masters," said Jon Walter, president of the local historical society. They once were staples of American childhood, introduced in the 1930s: handheld machines containing photos in seven-image circular reels, clicked through by using a thumb-operated lever.
"We thought that if we could get our own View-Master reels, with photos from our history, and let tour groups see Main Street as it is now, and also as it used to be, that would be ideal," Mr. Walter said. "The idea was for people to look at our current buildings, and then the tour guide would say to raise the View-Master to their eyes and press the lever, and they'd be seeing what was on that same spot a century or more ago."
View-Masters, however, traditionally offered reels showing internationally famous sights -- the Seven Wonders of the World, Disney characters -- not small-town business districts.
Yet Walnut Ridge's civic leaders were determined to find a way. They asked an Oregon-based company called Image3D to custom-manufacture a reel containing seven historical photos of the town. Officials ordered 10 reels and 10 viewing devices -- licensed by Mattel's View-Master but called RetroViewer by Image3D. Total cost to Walnut Ridge: $300.
"Purposely low-tech," Mr. Walter said. "We didn't want to build an app, or worry about internet connectivity. I put the 10 View-Masters in a tote bag, greeted the first tour group and handed each person one. Their eyes lit up."
Mr. Walter led the group to a gym and an insurance agency on Main Street. He directed them to lift their preloaded View-Masters -- and suddenly they were seeing Bloom's Department Store, the town's long-gone retail palace.
Main Street today, and with a click, old Main Street, resplendent with streetcars and black Model Ts. The modern courthouse, and then the first one, with its Gothic clock tower. "The tour groups are like kids again, holding plastic time machines," Mr. Walter said.
An idea sublime in its simplicity: three blocks, seven stops, yesterday brought to life -- the Seven Wonders of Walnut Ridge.
---
Mr. Greene's books include "Once Upon a Town: The Miracle of the North Platte Canteen."
Credit: By Bob Greene
