NFL teams are normally judged on their draft picks by the simplest metric possible. Roger Goodell walks to the lectern and announces the selection. Then the throngs of fans in attendance immediately grade the pick one of two ways: They cheer. Or they boo.
But this Thursday's NFL draft is highly abnormal. It's taking place remotely and not in Las Vegas as planned because of the coronavirus. Goodell is announcing the picks from his basement. The only people who will hear New York Jets fans boo are the poor souls who decided to shelter in place with a Jets fan.
Caio Brighenti, a student at Colgate University, came up with a way to make sure the people's verdict is heard as usual. Instead of finishing his senior thesis, he has been devising a way to calculate if people are cheering or booing even if he won't be able hear them cheering or booing. "I was bored and didn't want to do my homework," he says.
Brighenti realized there's one place strangers like to voice irrational opinions more than at a giant party of drunk football fans. It's called the internet. So he wrote a program that instantly quantifies how every team's fan base is reacting online to every pick in real time.
It works by rapidly compiling and analyzing their reactions on the website Reddit. As thousands upon thousands of comments pour in, he can live track just how angry or happy the fans for every team are. During the draft on Thursday night, he plans to live-stream the results to provide the 2020 equivalent of cheers and boos.
Reddit, in particular, is perfect for parsing through the psychoses of NFL fans on draft day. The site's setup makes it possible for him to scrape their comments immediately. There are also nearly two million members of the NFL's sub-Reddit, plus the ones on individual team pages, giving him an even larger sample size than the tens of thousands of people who show up to the draft in a given year. And there's a tool on Reddit for all of those fans to identify their favorite team, so Brighenti knows if every post is coming from someone who loves the Bengals or the Cowboys.
The program pulls every new post and places it in a spreadsheet that's the digitized version of a sports bar where everyone is arguing. Then each comment is evaluated by an analysis tool that rates the text on a scale from -1 to 1; lower figures are angrier and more negative and higher ones are happier and more positive.
"It basically keeps a rolling average of the sentiment of the fan base," Brighenti says.
It isn't a coincidence that a 21-year-old Brazilian college student can unlock the answer to a complicated question about football. Brighenti is part of a generation that has access to monumentally more data than ever before. He also has the curiosity and technical know-how to exploit it.
Brighenti was born in Sao Paulo, and two important things happened when he was younger. He lived in Michigan from ages 7 to 10 and learned to love being a miserable Detroit Lions fan. Then, when he was 12, he had his dad borrow a book on programming for him. He loved to code, he loved sports and the only thing he loved more was coding about sports.
"Sports is such a rich source of data," he says.
Sports is an especially rich source of data for someone with Brighenti's particular set of skills. He decided to try his hand at the NFL's Big Data Bowl, an analytics competition, last season when he couldn't find anyone else to work with him. By himself, going up against other teams of students, he submitted an entry anyway. It turned out fairly well for this one-man army. He wound up a finalist and presented his work at an annual trade show in Indianapolis in front of slack-jawed spectators who happened to be NFL executives because the event is also known as the NFL combine.
It was right around then when he got to work on his next project: measuring the online cheers and jeers of NFL fans. The draft hadn't been torpedoed yet, but Brighenti believed there could be a better way than turning up the volume on his television to judge everyone's reactions. He thought it would be telling to definitively document them because he understood those reactions are as visceral as they are unfounded. Fans boo picks who they later cheer on as superstars. They cheer picks who they later boo as busts.
In the time since, Brighenti has had even more time than the typical college senior. He's a double major in computer science and peace and conflict studies -- as bizarre of a combination as you could think of, he admits -- and working on a thesis that uses machine learning and natural language processing to detect "fake news." But his classes have gone online because of the virus, and that means he has only one class he actually has to digitally show up for every week, giving him plenty of bandwidth to study just how angry NFL fans are.
On draft day, when Brighenti streams the live results on Twitch, there will be 33 meters. There's one for all 32 teams to display just how positively or negatively their fans are reacting at any given moment. The other is rather self-explanatory and captures the net sentiment of every NFL fan. It's called the "Goodell Boo-Meter."
In the weeks building up to the draft, Brighenti has taken the program for test spins to gauge the psyche of the average football fan. The data left him with one conclusion. "Every fan base is always negative," he says.

Credit: By Andrew Beaton
