Stock indexes posted steep weekly losses after weaker-than-expected data reignited fears about the health of the U.S. economy.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite tumbled 5.8% on the week, its worst performance since January 2022. For the week, the S&P 500 fell 4.2% and the Dow Jones Industrial Average 2.9%, both the worst since March 2023. All three major indexes extended their losses Friday.
The turbulence began when traders returned from the Labor Day holiday to data suggesting continuing gloom in the manufacturing sector. Stocks and bond yields fell sharply Tuesday, echoing a sharp selloff that rattled markets in early August.
All eyes turned to Friday's jobs report for clues as to how the Federal Reserve will adjust rates at its next policy meeting, set to conclude Sept. 18.
The data was inconclusive: The U.S. added fewer than expected jobs in August, but the unemployment rate edged down, as forecast, and job growth was stronger than the previous month. The government revised down estimates for June and July job growth.
The Fed has signaled that it plans to cut rates for the first time in years later this month, but whether that will be by a quarter-percentage point or a larger half-point cut isn't clear. Interest-rate futures showed that traders think there is a 31% chance of a half-point cut in September, down from 40% on Thursday, according to CME Group.
Short-dated and long-dated Treasury yields fell after the report, with the benchmark 10-year Treasury yield closing at 3.710%, its lowest level of the year.
"We're at a place in time where it's easy to get nervous," said Art Hogan, chief market strategist at B Riley Wealth Management. "The critical question is whether we're seeing an economy that's just normalizing from an overheated second-half last year, or something worse. And we're getting a lot of mixed data."
Many of the highflying artificial-intelligence related stocks that have powered stock indexes higher this year were among the hardest hit.
Nvidia dropped 14%, erasing a staggering $406 billion of market capitalization. It was the largest weekly market value loss from a single company ever, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
Competitor Broadcom offered a worse-than-expected revenue forecast when it reported earnings Friday morning, sending both its and Nvidia's shares down. Broadcom was the S&P 500's worst performer, closing down 10%.
"We're seeing the megacap tech stocks becoming a victim of their own success," said Steve Sosnick, chief strategist at Interactive Brokers. "Expectations have become so high that any disappointment is very problematic."
Investors and analysts cautioned that the selloff comes in the context of a very strong year for stocks, which still appear historically expensive. The S&P 500 remains up 13% for the year.
Rick Rieder, BlackRock's chief investment officer for fixed-income, wrote to clients Friday that there are no clear signs of recession yet.
"While the data is clearly softer than what we, and the Fed, have been used to witnessing, it is very far from a disastrous indicator of recession, hard-landing, or some pernicious foreshadowing of future consumer weakness," he wrote.
Credit: By Jack Pitcher
