Before chewing over the more predictable parts of Ridley Scott's "Alien: Covenant," let's salute a really smart thing that Mr. Scott and his writers, John Logan and Dante Harper, have done with the latest edition of the "Alien" saga.
Seizing on the only source of sustained vitality in the director's 2012 film "Prometheus," they've made the most of it this time around. "Prometheus," a sci-fi adventure set in the "Alien" universe, was concerned with such cosmic questions as the origin of life. But the answers it came up with were awfully lame, and all but one of its characters were cut from space-age cardboard. The exception was an intricately appealing android. His name was David, he was played by Michael Fassbender, and he stole the show with supra-human aplomb. The good news is that David is back, in a way that doubles down, or more properly up, on his potential and gives Mr. Fassbender lots to do. (The cast includes Danny McBride, Billy Crudup, Demian Bichir and Carmen Ejogo.) And the bad news? This new "Alien" prequel is mostly a gore fest, which may be great news for gluttons of the genre.
The Covenant of the title is a spaceship carrying 2,000 colonists, along with unspecified numbers of frozen embryos, from Earth to a supposedly habitable planet on the far side of the galaxy. The colonists are sleeping deeply, since the trip is scheduled to take seven years, but the crew is rudely awakened by incipient calamity in the form of a neutrino burst. Extensive damage is sustained, followed by extensive repairs that are at least as interesting as watching the road being paved in "Cars."
Still, the repairs have their own logic, which is more than can be said of a detour to a nearby planet on the strength of a rogue transmission that features John Denver singing "Take Me Home, Country Roads." The stop is opposed by Daniels (Katherine Waterston), the ship's second-in-command, who is clearly not a John Denver fan. (Ms. Waterston gives a strong performance, even if Daniels can't touch Sigourney Weaver's powerful presence as Ripley in the four chapters of the main series.) Yet the detour is taken all the same, an impulsive exploration of an uncharted planet that looks like paradise, though any fan of horror stories -- or anyone who's read Ray Bradbury -- will know instantly that it's anything but.
A case could be made that "Alien: Covenant," being very much a horror story, has shrewdly forgone logic and plausibility in favor of letting the audience get ahead of, and savor in advance, the plot's most lurid developments. (Not those involving Mr. Fassbender, I hasten to say.) Thus the explorers dispense with sensible precautions. They don't bother to wear space helmets. They stray heedlessly from their ship, leaving its cargo door wide open. Venturing deep into caves, they touch gloppy stuff that shouldn't be touched, especially because it moves. Once the worst happens -- and this is a franchise in which the worst happens over and over again -- basic quarantine procedures are thrown to the solar winds. The results can be funny, as well as scary, but not "Spaceballs" funny, not "The Bad News Bears" funny. The cumulative impact of this silly stuff is a sense of laziness or fatigue, a breaking of faith with those in the audience who may have come expecting something new.
By the same token, many "Alien" fans will come looking for something old, and that's in bloodily abundant supply. It may well be sufficient, considering the excitement that an "Alien" logo can still elicit, almost four decades after the original hit the screen. The key word, of course, is "original." No one knew what was coming the first time around, any more than they knew, nearly two decades before that, what would happen to Janet Leigh when she stepped into the shower. In today's movie business originality is often seen as a risk, and carbon copies can be perfectly acceptable, despite the disappearance of carbon paper. In that context, the action sequences of "Alien: Covenant" give satisfaction, while the android element -- to use a bland, spoiler-free term -- provides ample food for thought and cause for worry, machine-learning being what it is and soon will be.
Credit: By Joe Morgenstern
