Silicon Valley investors have poured $2 billion into companies based on the data-collection software known as Hadoop. But a newer big-data program is stealing Hadoop's thunder. The software, known as Spark, has attracted the attention of startups and established companies alike. This week's Spark Summit in San Francisco is likely to draw 2,000 coders and entrepreneurs -- or 82% more than last year -- to explore its potential.
International Business Machines Corp. said it expected to spend $300 million over the next few years to put 3,500 coders on Spark-related projects in analytics, commerce and machine learning. Silicon Valley venture-capital firms Andreessen Horowitz and New Enterprise Associates have put $47 million into Databricks Inc., a startup that on Monday made widely available an online service built on the software.
Spark helps visual bookmarking site Pinterest Inc. offer up relevant images and Airbnb Inc. price rooms for rent. Startups based on Hadoop, including big-data software companies Hortonworks Inc. and Cloudera Inc., have rolled it into their product lines. It is part of a growing collection of free software that is chipping away at businesses long dominated by Oracle Corp., Teradata Corp., and other traditional database and data-warehouse competitors.
"Anyone that's going to be using data in the future is going to be leveraging Spark," said Rob Thomas, vice president of product development for IBM analytics.
Like Hadoop, Spark is used to analyze massive amounts of data. However, it is significantly faster than a core Hadoop component called MapReduce. That makes it handy for analyzing data as soon as it is generated, rather than needing to wait for data to accumulate and then processing it in a batch.
Technologists such as Mr. Thomas don't expect Spark to replace Hadoop, which is a grab bag of big-data tools that often includes and works together with Spark. But they do expect it to dramatically accelerate the extraction of insights from the flood of information generated by Twitter feeds, fitness trackers, online ad auctions, weather sensors, electric turbines and other consumer and industrial systems.
"Spark replacing MapReduce is like a car replacing a bicycle," said Christopher Nguyen, chief executive of Adatao Inc., which offers a software platform for data-driven decision making that includes both programs. That is, each has its uses, but one is many times faster than the other in many situations.
Like Hadoop, Spark is freely available under an open-source license, creating a challenge for businesses that aim to commercialize it. Databricks on Monday expects to offer widely a Web-based service that enables companies to take advantage of Spark's number-crunching power without having to install or maintain the software in their own facilities. The company has made a point of trying to corner Spark engineering expertise in hope of making it a natural choice for the software's growing user base, a common strategy for companies based on open-source software. It says it has 150 trial customers and 60 paying customers.
Other startups relying on Spark include Qubole Inc., founded by former members of Facebook Inc.'s data team, and ClearStory Data Inc. Qubole and ClearStory Data each provide big-data software and services.
Even as it promises to deliver big-data insights more quickly, Spark threatens to complicate an already thorny landscape, said Stefan Groschupf, CEO of Datameer Inc., which makes software based on Hadoop. Code written to work with MapReduce might not work with Spark. And Spark, which Mr. Groschupf said isn't yet reliable enough for corporate use, could someday be replaced by other emerging software. The complexity is bound to confuse corporate managers, he said.
"You have different vendors hurting the overall market, trying to get people locked into their products," he said.
Spark is the brainchild of Matei Zaharia, who conceived it to overcome Hadoop's limitations in 2010, when he was a Ph.D. candidate at the University of California, Berkeley. In early 2013, Mr. Zaharia's adviser, Scott Shenker, told venture capitalist Ben Horowitz about the software. Mr. Zaharia, he said, was the best computer-science systems researcher to come out of Berkeley in a decade.
The last time Mr. Shenker had tipped off Mr. Horowitz, the result was Nicira Networks, a company whose founders included virtual-network visionary Martin Casado. Nicira Networks eventually sold for $1.26 billion in 2012.
"He said, 'This guy is the Martin Casado of big data,'" Mr. Horowitz recalled.
The Spark tip prompted Mr. Horowitz and his colleagues to set about building Databricks.
Although Spark makes some programming jobs much faster and easier than they used to be, it will take some time before the bulk of Oracle database customers become convinced that they need it to run their businesses, said Nick Heudecker, an analyst with the research firm Gartner Inc. "Hadoop was not the first data platform," he said. "Spark will not be the last."
---
Deborah Gage contributed to this article.
Credit: By Robert McMillan and Elizabeth Dwoskin
