21 Lessons for the 21st Century
By Yuval Noah Harari
(Spiegel & Grau, 372 pages, $28)
Advertisements for investment vehicles are obliged to remind prospective customers that past performance is no guide to the future. Yet we seem to have no qualms about taking a historian seriously as a cultural forecaster. Yuval Noah Harari was a medieval military historian until the breakout success of his widescreen history of humanity, "Sapiens" (2014). Now he has become a guru whose opinions about the future of technology and politics are widely sought. But are the "lessons" of his new book, "21 Lessons for the 21st Century" -- the rhetoric of the title rather recalls Jordan B. Peterson's "12 Rules for Life" -- actually worth learning?
Mr. Harari begins by telling us that the public is disillusioned because of "the global elite" or "the global elites" or "liberal elites" (he seems unconcerned whether they are one or many, and what exactly their ideology is), and so we have been ushered into the "nihilistic" world of Donald Trump and Brexit. Technology is going to change everything over the coming decades, he argues, and no one has any idea how things will work out, so it is time for some modesty. We should, he recommends, "switch from panic mode to bewilderment." Try telling yourself, he encourages the reader, "I just don't understand what's going on in the world."
The author, by contrast, writes as if he understands absolutely everything about what's going on in the world but needn't stoop to details. Many of the book's chapters have their genesis in occasional pieces of journalism, and much of the text is windy punditry. There are many generalizing statements next to which this skeptical reader penciled, in the jargon of Wikipedia, "citation needed." "Liberals don't understand how history deviated from its preordained course," Mr. Harari writes, "and they lack an alternative prism through which to interpret reality. Disorientation causes them to think in apocalyptic terms." The idea that all "liberals" think in the same way is as unenlightening as the claim that all conservatives do.
Mr. Harari's idea of technology is similarly more concerned with broad sweep than fact and plausibility. He asserts that the alleged "increasing pace of change" today makes predictions impossible and proceeds to make predictions. He refers to fashionable concepts such as "the blockchain revolution" without explaining them and declares that robots will affect every job going, including the teaching of yoga. You may doubt that anyone will want to study with a yogabot, but never mind, because Mr. Harari is now enthusing about a future in which a poor person living in the jungle may consult "a hundred different AI doctors" on her smartphone and machines will be able to compose personalized pop songs to console you after a breakup. Mr. Harari is a great believer in the magical power of "algorithms," even as he doesn't seem to understand their limitations and dependencies. Google's chess-playing software AlphaZero, he says, "learned nothing from any human," which is untrue: It had to be given the rules of the game in the first place.
Thinkers in the predicting-the-future game generally choose one particular sci-fi scenario to lay their bets on: AI's becoming self-aware and choosing to destroy humans, say, or everyone uploading their consciousness into computers and enjoying an eternal digital-hallucinogenic trip. Mr. Harari, for his part, guesses that widespread genetic engineering, allied to the rise of artificial intelligence, will split our species into "a small class of superhumans and a massive underclass of useless Homo sapiens."
Much of this discussion will be familiar to readers of his previous book, "Homo Deus" (2017), and Mr. Harari repeats, too, his central ideas from "Sapiens." Religion is generally bad, and so is nationalism; terrorism is not much of a problem, but climate change and the possibility of nuclear war definitely are. "Fake news," meanwhile, is nothing new; in fact, the author argues, it is just the latest perverse efflorescence of exactly what has enabled the astonishing success of our species: our ability to make things up and invent stories that enable human cooperation. We are, indeed, a "post-truth species."
The problem with this thesis is that it rather conveniently ignores the existence of science, which rigorously constrains the kinds of stories we ought to believe in. The author has, however, embraced the dubious nostrums of popular evolutionary psychology: He repeatedly asserts that "we are still Stone Age animals" and so poorly adapted for modern life. But to say that is to ignore the enormous role of culture and tradition -- indeed, stories -- in the making of a modern human mind.
Near the end, Mr. Harari claims, bizarrely, that rationality "is a myth," having misinterpreted the findings of behavioral economics, which show only that humans don't always behave in ways that fit the highly restrictive economic definition of rationality. If rationality is a myth, it's hard to understand why he should recommend to his readers that "if you want reliable information, pay good money for it," excellent though that idea is. How can there be any such thing as reliable information if there is no such thing as rationality?
This book is marketed as history and promises to guide us through the present and near future, and yet by the conclusion its overriding tone is rather mystically navel-gazing. To find meaning in your life, Mr. Harari suggests, you should not identify with "the inner story of the self" but "observe the actual flow of body and mind." We should all invest in "advancing human consciousness" by deepening our capacity for compassion, and one way to do this, the author explains in the final essay, is through ancient meditation practices. This might well be fine advice, but Nostradamus it ain't.
---
Mr. Poole is the author of "Rethink: The Surprising History of New Ideas."

Credit: By Steven Poole
