RIYADH, Saudi Arabia -- The titans of Wall Street chatted under crystal chandeliers. With the Israel-Hamas war intensifying 900 miles away, the gathering made for an awkward split screen.
The world's business elite had come together for the Future Investment Initiative -- nicknamed "Davos in the Desert" -- where discussions included artificial intelligence, futuristic planned cities and the growing perils of higher interest rates and rising debt loads.
With the Middle East on the precipice of perhaps its worst conflict since the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003, the fighting in Gaza and Israel loomed over, but hardly disrupted, the Saudi-sponsored event. The forum opened Tuesday with a choreographed dance performance in front of screens flashing words like sustainability, data and technologies.
The war in Gaza scrambled the Middle East geopolitical landscape and upended momentum toward normalization of relations between Saudi Arabia and Israel. Attendees hoped carrying on with the event might help salvage those efforts and prevent an even more destructive, economically disruptive, conflict.
"Please, in spite of what happened in Israel, I urge you all to keep up that effort," said Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase. "It is the only way to get there -- with some leadership from Saudi Arabia -- for all the folks in the Middle East."
The CEOs of Goldman Sachs, Citigroup and Blackstone were there, as was Ray Dalio, founder of hedge fund Bridgewater Associates. Their presence was a sign of the pull that Saudi Arabia and its de facto leader, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, have on the finance world.
The high-caliber attendance marked a reversal from five years ago, when Western CEOs pulled out en masse after Saudi operatives killed journalist Jamal Khashoggi inside the kingdom's Istanbul consulate.
The crown prince appeared briefly Tuesday at the forum.
The conference charged a $15,000-per-person fee this year. It previously gave away tickets. Deals worth several billion dollars are expected to be signed during the next three days, following Saudi officials' announcement Sunday of plans to build a car factory with Hyundai in the kingdom.
Saudi Arabia, as well as its Gulf neighbors, are working to diversify their economies away from fossil fuels and integrate more broadly into global commerce. Much of the FII event is meant to showcase the appeal of investing in the Saudi startup scene and Neom, a planned sci-fi-like city dreamed up by the crown prince. Neom was seen as a likely venue for early business collaboration between Israel and Saudi Arabia, nestled in the kingdom's northwest corner less than 150 miles from the Gaza Strip.
After speaking about investment opportunities, Khalid al-Falih, the Saudi minister responsible for attracting foreign capital, called the war in Israel "the elephant" in the room. "That overshadows everything else, but for their good and for the good of humanity we have to keep the compass focused on the prosperity of our people."
In part, Gaza isn't squarely in focus because events there have far less of a clear effect on the business world than they do on geopolitics. Dimon focused much of his comments on the risks of higher-for-longer interest rates and the possibility that the Federal Reserve isn't tightening policy.
The main economic risk from the Israel-Gaza conflict is that it spreads, and energy supplies from the Middle East would be interrupted, or suspended for political purposes, as they were in 1973.
Oil prices have already jumped to reflect the risk, and likely would move higher if signs emerged that major energy producers were becoming more active participants in the conflict.
BlackRock Chief Executive Larry Fink warned the war could spark global economic contraction, depending on the conflict's duration.
"If these things are not resolved, it probably means more global terrorism, which means more insecurity, which means more society is going to be fearful, less hope and when there's less hope, we see contraction in our economies," Fink said.
Citigroup CEO Jane Fraser acknowledged that the forum was unfolding against the backdrop of Hamas's attack and Israel's strikes against Gaza. "It's desperately sad, so it's hard not to be a little pessimistic," she said.
Moments later, she praised the potential of AI for "the enrichment of human lives."
---
Paul Hannon contributed to this article.
Credit: By Stephen Kalin and Eliot Brown
