Venture capitalists put their money where their mouths were this election cycle.
Contributions by venture-industry employees to federal campaigns totaled more than $242 million through mid-October, dwarfing prior totals, according to OpenSecrets, a nonpartisan group that tracks money in politics.
That is more than double the level four years ago, for example, when the industry sent about $95 million to federal campaigns, per OpenSecrets. This election cycle's full federal political contribution data will be available in December.
Donations were much more highly concentrated this time around, with donors affiliated with four venture firms -- Andreessen Horowitz, Greylock Partners, Sequoia Capital and Pivotal Ventures -- accounting for more than half of the contributions, per the data. In 2020, 13 firms donated half of the industry's total.
The data is based on self-reported information by donors who list their employers at the time of the contribution. As such, it might include people who have now left those firms.
The venture industry continued to lean Democratic and liberal, sending just over half of its contributions to such groups and candidates, down from 82% in 2020. Republican candidates and conservative political groups increased their share of venture industry contributions, accounting for 22% of donations. Party-neutral groups, especially in favor of friendlier crypto policies, received about a quarter of VC contributions in this election cycle. Such groups weren't a significant player in 2020.
Outside political committees, which can receive unlimited contributions, got almost three-quarters of VC donations this time, a jump from 2020, according to OpenSecrets. One of the largest recipients in this category was the crypto super PAC Fairshake, which backed candidates of both parties that supported pro-crypto policies.
Venture investors' political activity surged this presidential election, with public and sometimes bitter debates between supporters of President-elect Donald Trump and Vice President Kamala Harris. Many venture capitalists felt their industry's future was riding on this election given Washington's influence over issues such as antitrust, crypto and artificial intelligence regulation. Some said they supported candidates for reasons broader than niche industry interests.
The staff of Andreessen Horowitz led the way in terms of monetary contributions, donating almost $65 million, more than a quarter of the total from the venture industry. Founders Marc Andreessen and Ben Horowitz were especially prolific with donations, registering among the top individual donors this cycle across all giving, not just in venture capital, according to Brendan Glavin, deputy research director for OpenSecrets.
Andreessen Horowitz staff gave more than $44 million to Fairshake and affiliated groups, per OpenSecrets, with the rest of the money going to a range of parties and political groups.
Venture-capital firms took a range of approaches this election cycle.
Among top contributors, the staff of Greylock Partners made $34.1 million in contributions, with a greater portion of that to Democrats and liberal groups. Greylock's Reid Hoffman was an outspoken supporter of Harris's presidential campaign.
Sequoia Capital employees donated $16.5 million, with liberal and Democratic recipients accounting for more than half of their contributions.
Pivotal Ventures, a Melinda French Gates company, as well as its staff, contributed $12.9 million, the bulk of which went to liberal-leaning groups, per OpenSecrets. The personal contributions of Melinda French Gates, who endorsed Harris, were part of that total.
Pivotal Ventures itself is bipartisan, a representative said, and gave to organizations including political-action committees that advance caregiving and other issues.
"Pivotal Ventures does not endorse or campaign for individual candidates. We are bipartisan and believe strongly that if we want to produce sustainable policies that last, we need to support elected officials who are willing to work across the aisle to solve our nation's biggest challenges," the representative said.
Pivotal was different from other venture investors on the OpenSecrets list because the organization itself made most of the contributions. Pivotal makes startup investments, but most of its work is in advocacy and philanthropy.
For crypto enthusiasts, the election has already proven a boon. Crypto prices soared after the results.
"We're optimistic that the U.S. will now be a better place for crypto builders, and that startups here won't have to be so focused on merely surviving a hostile regulatory environment," read a blog post written by three Andreessen Horowitz policy and regulatory staff after the election.
Joe Lonsdale, managing partner of 8VC, who supported Trump, said he is bullish on this administration and what it means for everyone in our country."
Credit: By Yuliya Chernova
