Last month, I read Mary Renault's "The Praise Singer," a novel about the ancient Greek poet Simonides. Like Socrates, Simonides lived when literature was moving from oral traditions to written words. Both men resisted the change and, fittingly, neither left a written legacy. Renault has her fictional version of Simonides call writing "an offense to the Muse," and Plato tells us that Socrates dismissed writing as words that "cannot teach the truth effectually."
Simonides and Socrates had a point: Reliance on written records devalues the perfection of memory, which requires performers to master their material. Earned mastery is why classical music soloists memorize their pieces, as Simonides would have wanted. Still, as we all know, writing has obvious, overwhelming advantages in precision and reproducibility, and these generally outweigh the ancient objections.
Whether or not to offload memory is no longer a live debate. In case the mere written word feels relatively impoverished -- confirming Socrates' intuition -- we can now also turn to higher bandwidth in audio, video or ultimately telepresence. Instead of memorizing facts, we learn how to retrieve them.
Today, we are offloading other cognitive functions besides memory. We are experiencing several revolutions at once, at least three of them, to my mind.
The most advanced case is calculation. I am old enough (barely) to have used slide rules and even "adding machines." The first generation of electronic calculators were expensive status symbols that science students lusted after. Today, you can get more computing power for $10 at any toy store.
This revolution in calculation has taught us, among other things, that chess is not a game of ineffable genius. Computer systems, making rapid, error-free calculations, crush even the best human players.
In physics, the jocular advice to "shut up and calculate" now has an entirely new meaning. It was once necessary, through clever tricks and approximations, to boil down problems to a point where the human mind could handle them. Today, the goal is to turn problems into forms that computers can digest and run with.
My own early stomping ground -- quantum chromodynamics, or QCD -- provides striking examples. Despite decades of effort, QCD's equations haven't yielded to traditional "analytic" methods. But computer-intensive "numerical" methods have been very successful, letting us see how quarks and gluons combine into protons and predict (most of) what happens after high-energy proton collisions.
Translation is another task ripe for offloading. Language barriers cause much of the alienation among nations plaguing humanity today. We already have crude systems for automatic translation, and progress here would be a powerful force for good.
A related problem is translating between human-ese and computer-ese -- also known as programming. High-level computer languages make that job easier, but it remains an arcane specialty. Siri and Alexa offer us a glimpse of the future, when we will program computers by telling them what we want, in clear English -- or Spanish, or Chinese.
Recognition is the latest, and least mature, frontier of offloading. Identifying the objects we see is a key human ability. Made automatic and translated into computer-ese, it could empower robot servants and self-driving cars (that is, robot chauffeurs). Neural networks have recently made dramatic progress on these tasks, using a strategy inspired by the brain, with artificial "neurons" exchanging signals to influence one another.
In a neural network, information is encoded in the relative strengths of different connections. Neural nets aren't programmed, as such, but are honed by experience. The workings of a successful neural network can be hard to understand -- as are the neural networks inside human skulls. Offloading to a neural network, from this perspective, looks a lot like training an assistant.
Some people -- the heirs to Simonides and Socrates -- fear that these new forms of offloading will erode human skills. No doubt they will, just as writing eroded human memory. But overall, they are liberating tools that will lead us to operate on a higher plane.
Credit: By Frank Wilczek
