Yale University professor David Gelernter is not a typical computer scientist. Most days, he sits at an easel near a wide window in his Woodbridge, Conn., house and paints. Two parrots fly around the house, which is filled with stacks of books and papers. The birds screech sporadically and one pops up from behind the couch to say "Peekaboo." There are no gadgets in sight, aside from a desktop computer barely visible in an adjacent office.
"I hate computers, and I refuse to play with them," he says. "Any success I've had in computing is because I fit so badly in the field." He thinks that using computers should be more logical. "I want software to work in 30 seconds," he says.
It is this desire that led Mr. Gelernter to start Lifestreams, a new company that aims to make desktops more user-friendly and the stream of information more intuitive. Years ago, a first try at commercializing his ideas ended in failure, but Mr. Gelernter is used to recovering from setbacks. In 1993, he was the target of a mail bomb from the Unabomber. The explosion disfigured his right hand and blinded his right eye.
Lifestreams, which is based on software originally developed by Mr. Gelernter and his colleagues at Yale, is set to launch in late January. It will organize computer documents, emails and other information as a narrative stream, with a look similar, for example, to the flow of CD covers in Apple's iTunes. Here the contents will be photos, videos, real-time chats and word documents shared within a certain group, such as a bridal party or a youth soccer league. Mr. Gelernter's personal slogan for the company is "by humans for humans."
His own approach to technology, he says, is a long way from that of his father, who was one of the inventors of artificial intelligence and loved to solve difficult computing problems. The younger Gelernter just wanted technology to work. At Yale, he got a bachelor's degree and a master's in classical Hebrew.
What finally inspired him to get a Ph.D. in the field his father loved was a passage in the Talmud saying it's an obligation to do something practical in addition to studying Torah. He chose computer science, a "silly decision I made in a bout of ideological fervor," he says.
But he doesn't regret it. He went on to become a computer science professor at his alma mater in 1982 and has made major contributions to the development of parallel computation, which allows one program to run on many separate computers at the same time.
By the late 1980s, Mr. Gelernter had become an early adopter of email and the Internet. In 1991, he published a book called "Mirror Worlds," predicting the Web. In it he said that software would "put the universe in a shoebox."
Two years later, the Unabomber's attack nearly killed him. He wrote the book "Drawing Life" in 1997 about surviving the trauma. Today, Mr. Gelernter is still physically uncomfortable. He moves around his living room slowly, but his wife and two adult sons say that he rarely complains.
In "Drawing Life," Mr. Gelernter turned his own pain, disfigurement and subsequent recovery into a metaphor for the state of the country. He criticized the U.S. for losing the resources that helped him to mend -- religion, family, art -- and argued that American culture has focused on sensationalizing crime rather than on teaching courage and character.
He was troubled that people would describe the Unabomber as "sick" or a disturbed "genius" but hesitated to call him "evil." It prompted Mr. Gelernter to ask, "What does it mean when a culture no longer believes in evil?" and "What happens to a society that has lost its ability to react morally in a crisis?"
His ruminations on those questions helped make Mr. Gelernter a leading conservative intellectual. He has written books on Judaism, religion in America and (in his eyes) the destructive influence of a liberal intellectual elite, as well as a novel. He also has found time to write about the aesthetics of computation. Many have credited him with coining the term the "cloud" to refer to the capacity to store information from computers "afloat in a virtual space."
He is also an avid painter. Mr. Gelernter calls his works "word art" -- mostly abstract, high medieval style paintings in vibrant, bright colors that incorporate Hebrew words. His work has been exhibited in New Haven, Conn., where Yale is based, and in Manhattan.
In the mid-1990s, Mr. Gelernter started his first company, Mirror Worlds, with the software he helped to develop at Yale (the same idea now behind Lifestreams). It created a desktop format that allowed users to look up a thread through their entire history. Before an appointment with a colleague, for example, the user could hit a button that would pull up every interaction, information exchange and document that related to that person and then list them in narrative order.
Mr. Gelernter launched his software among his 30-some employees, who could each see each other's stories. When one employee posted a picture of her engagement ring, he realized he was onto something -- it was essentially an early social network.
Soon after came photographs of birds and scanned takeout menus and business cards, much like Facebook and Twitter streams today. "We had Twitter essentially in 1999-2000," he laments.
Mirror Worlds never got off the ground commercially and ran out of money in 2004. Then, in 2005, Mr. Gelernter thought he was seeing something similar in Apple products. He believed that three of Apple's features -- Cover Flow, Time Machine and Spotlight, for flipping through CD covers, backing up files and performing searches -- looked like the software he had invented. Then, Mr. Gelernter said, a lawyer discovered an email that had been sent by the late Apple founder and CEO Steve Jobs to a handful of his lieutenants about Mirror Worlds, saying, "It may be something for our future, and we may want to secure a license ASAP." (Apple never did get a license.)
Those lines became the basis of a lawsuit filed by Mirror World's patent holders. (Mr. Gelernter and his co-inventor Eric Freeman had sold their patent as a condition of the company's funding in the 1990s, though Mr. Gelernter retains a 2% stake, minus costs, in any award from the lawsuit.) In 2010 a jury voted in favor of Mirror Worlds and gave its patent holders $625 million in damages, one of the top five patent awards in U.S. history. Six months later, a judge overruled the verdict. An appeal was unsuccessful, and last June, the Supreme Court declined to hear the case.
A new lawsuit is under way: Earlier this year, the patent holder filed an amended complaint against a number of technology companies.
Two and a half years ago, Mr. Gelernter's son, Daniel, decided to revive his father's idea. Daniel, 26, is now chief executive of Lifestreams, which has licensed the old Mirror Worlds software.
So far, Lifestreams has raised $3 million. It will launch first within groups such as families, Little League teams and college classes. For example, family members who are spread out across the country can share websites, photographs, documents and videos with each other by uploading them to the stream.
"The danger in Lifestreams has always been that it's such a fantastically broad idea," David Gelernter says -- and that makes it harder to sell.
Still, a decade ago, he says, "the technology was not ready, the graphics weren't ready and people's state of mind was not ready." Now he thinks the world may be able to see his vision. "It was F. Scott Fitzgerald who said there are no second acts in American lives," he says. "But this is a second act."
Credit: By Alexandra Wolfe
