[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Buying Informatica may turn out to be the truest test yet of Marc Benioff's sales prowess.
The co-founder and CEO of Salesforce had seemingly sworn off major acquisitions for his once acquisitive company.
But the consummate dealmaker apparently couldn't stay away.
The Wall Street Journal reported late Friday that the company is in "advanced talks" to acquire Informatica, which specializes in data management software.
Price is already an issue. The Journal reports that the companies are discussing a market value below the $11 billion at which Informatica closed trading on Friday.
That would make it Salesforce's third-largest deal ever, behind the acquisitions of Slack and Tableau Software.
Informatica's shares surged 85% over the six months prior to the report, as the company has been transitioning to a cloud-based business model while also talking up the potential for generative artificial intelligence to boost demand for its data management tools. The stock slid 6.5% on Monday.
Salesforce shares fell more than 7%. In reports issued Monday, several analysts noted that Informatica could be a good move for Salesforce -- helping the company plug a hole in its data offerings. The company also has a little over $14 billion in cash and marketable securities on hand, making a potential deal look affordable.
But Salesforce also has a history of paying up for acquisitions -- Slack landed a 54% premium to its unaffected share price -- and not always integrating them well.
Citigroup analyst Tyler Radke compared the latest deal report with Salesforce's 2018 acquisition of MuleSoft where, he wrote, the company ran into problems "as it folded the selling/customer-support motion into the core business."
"With Informatica's significant complexity, we believe a deal could raise the risk of execution challenges which may offset potential synergies," he added.
John DiFucci of Guggenheim noted that "recent transactions haven't worked out well" for Salesforce. He called the notion of paying a discounted price for Informatica "the biggest headscratcher" to the current deal rumor.
Wall Street has maintained a median price target of $39 on Informatica's shares since February, which was slightly above the stock's closing price on Friday. Salesforce has a lot of people to convince that the company is actually worth less.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
