California Gov. Gavin Newsom vetoed a controversial artificial-intelligence safety bill that pitted some of the biggest tech companies against prominent scientists who developed the technology.
The Democrat decided to reject the measure because it applies only to the biggest and most expensive AI models and doesn't take into account whether they are deployed in high-risk situations, he said in his veto message.
Smaller models sometimes handle critical decision-making involving sensitive data, like electrical grids and medical records, while bigger models at times handle low-risk activities like customer service.
Had Newsom signed the bill into law, it would have laid the groundwork for how AI is regulated across the U.S., as California is home to the top companies in the industry. Proposals to regulate AI nationally have made little progress in Washington.
The governor said he is working with leading AI researchers including Fei-Fei Lee, a Stanford University professor who has worked at Google and recently launched a startup called World Labs, to develop new legislation he is willing to support.
Newsom signed other AI-related bills into law this year. They include one requiring AI developers to label content created by their technology and others regulating election-related deepfakes and giving performers more control over digital replicas of themselves.
The bill he vetoed, SB 1047, would have required developers of large AI models to take "reasonable care" to ensure that their technology didn't pose an "unreasonable risk of causing or materially enabling a critical harm." It defined that harm as cyberattacks that cause at least $500 million in damages or mass casualties. Developers also would have needed to ensure their AI could be shut down by a human if it started behaving dangerously.
The bill applied to AI models that met a certain computing-power threshold and cost at least $100 million to train -- the estimated cost of OpenAI's biggest model, GPT-4. Any company doing business in California, regardless of where it is headquartered, was covered.
Google, Meta, Microsoft and OpenAI raised concerns about the bill, saying it imposed vague standards in the name of safety. Many smaller companies joined them, arguing the bill would chill innovation by discouraging large developers from making their models available to the public, fracturing a startup ecosystem that relies on such openness to innovate.
The bill would have prohibited developers from releasing large AI models "if there is an unreasonable risk" that the technology "will cause or materially enable a critical harm." Tech companies said the language opened a legal minefield.
"Nobody knows what that means. So you're basically leaving it to a court that's nontechnical," said Martin Casado, a partner overseeing AI investments at venture-capital firm Andreessen Horowitz.
Computer scientists Geoffrey Hinton and Yoshua Bengio, who developed much of the technology on which the current generative-AI wave is based, were outspoken supporters. In addition, 119 current and former employees at the biggest AI companies signed a letter urging its passage.
Credit: By Ben Fritz and Preetika Rana
