Filmmakers who redo movies with cult followings face a cruel challenge. The zealots who ought to form the core audience are often the most fickle critics. Some loyal fans of the darkly comic 1987 "RoboCop" dreaded the newly released remake, referring to it as "Fauxbocop."
In 2012, when the Dallas International Film Festival celebrated the 25th anniversary of the original with a full-house screening and panel discussion, the audience groaned when the remake was mentioned, and none other than Peter Weller, who first played RoboCop, announced to the crowd that it would stink.
Jose Padilha, who directed and conceived the new "RoboCop," appreciates their concerns.
"The fan base usually is right. Most remakes that have been happening have not been so good," he says. "I thought the fans would appreciate it if I didn't try to make the same movie again, because it's so good as it is. It would be silly."
The original "RoboCop" was a low-budget sci-fi movie with a cartoonish name, but it pushed boundaries, mixing political commentary, dark humor and over-the-top violence, which was part of the satire. The premise: In a dystopian near-future Detroit, cops are being slaughtered by cackling drug gangsters. The police department is turned over to Omni Consumer Products Corp., which is developing robots to replace officers. But a prototype "enforcement droid" malfunctions in a boardroom demonstration, riddling an employee with bullets. The CEO says he's "very disappointed," and an opportunistic executive proposes Plan B. After good-guy cop Alex Murphy is executed by a gang, Omni revives what's left of his body as a cyborg crime-fighter.
The movie parodied ambitious yuppie executives of the mid-1980s, a time when managers were reading the Chinese military treatise "The Art of War" as a business text. It flicked at government outsourcing of public security, our rising reliance on machines, and the decline of American manufacturing (though set in a failing Detroit, it was filmed in Dallas). Darkly funny, the original had fake TV newscasts about satellite-defense-system mishaps and phony TV commercials (one was for a Battleship-like family board game called NUKEM where every player had a big red button). Dutch director Paul Verhoeven wanted the parody of American culture to be grotesquely violent, and the film initially received an X rating.
"RoboCop" did well enough for Orion Pictures (later sold to MGM) to release sequels in 1990 and 1993. In 2008, the studio signed Darren Aronofsky to direct one reboot of the original, but the project fizzled. The fans remained. In 2011, a Detroit arts group used Kickstarter to raise $67,436 from around the world to erect a statue of RoboCop (it is scheduled to go up by this fall).
A poster for the original was hanging in the office of new MGM film division President Jonathan Glickman in 2011 when he met with Mr. Padilha, a Brazilian who had made politically tinged action films and documentaries, to talk about directing an American film.
"We discussed a lot of movies that I didn't want to make," Mr. Padilha recalls. "All the time behind the desk was a 'RoboCop' poster, and I was thinking 'I want to make that.' At the end of the meeting I couldn't help myself." He pitched his vision. "Lo and behold, two days later my agent called me and he said 'I don't know what you did at that meeting, but they're offering you 'RoboCop.' "
Mr. Padilha and screenwriter Joshua Zetumer keep the action in a devastated near-future Detroit (though they filmed in Toronto and Vancouver) and keep the Alex Murphy character, played by Joel Kinnaman. Omni's enforcement droids, deployed globally, still can't tell right from wrong. The film opens with one accidentally killing a child during "Operation Freedom" in Tehran.
"We already have drones fighting wars," Mr. Padilha says. "We'll soon have drones capable of flying themselves, and then we'll have robots capable of replacing soldiers and policemen. What Verhoeven saw as a fantasy is becoming real."
Rather than being managed by back-stabbing murderers, Omni now is run by a celebrity CEO named Raymond Sellars, played by Michael Keaton, who believes his technology brings good things. In a congressional hearing, he argues that law-enforcement robots dispatch justice without prejudice, anger or fatigue. But to assuage lawmakers, he builds a human conscience into a machine (in a factory in China) after Murphy is killed by the bad guys.
Samuel L. Jackson brings the film's comic relief as a militaristic TV commentator. Beyond the politics, Mr. Padilha explores what it means to be human in an age when technology is increasingly augmenting human functions. "Consciousness is no more than the processing of information," declares scientist Dennett Norton (Gary Oldman), who patches Murphy's head and lungs into the robobody. Mr. Padilha borrowed character names Sellars, Dennett, and Dreyfus from philosophers who have examined consciousness and artificial intelligence.
"I tried to smuggle ideas into the film," he says.
Still, the package is an action movie, even if the violence is dialed down to PG-13. MGM's Mr. Glickman says: "The surprise and the thrill of that extreme violence [from the original] would be lost on today's world, because it's already been done."
"A lot of people asked me, 'How can you do "RoboCop" without being R-rated?,' " Mr. Padilha says. "To me it's about the internal logic of the story. The points we were trying to raise, I didn't need brains to be blown to pieces and arms to be falling off. I needed to do other things. I needed to see the interior of the body [in a medical context]. The brain, the lungs. Frankly, nobody knew what MPAA would say to that."
Credit: By Don Steinberg
