"Geek" is a name some wine lovers proudly claim, just as sommeliers often aspire to create a "geeky" wine list. But what does the term really mean in the world of wine?
The question occurred to me while I was reading a "geeky" wine list created by ChatGPT, the artificial intelligence chatbot, and posted on the Wine Berserkers forum. Forum member Mariano Chiaramonte had asked the bot to create a list that "should mainly include producers, regions and grape varieties that are appealing to wine geeks." This prompted much discussion among forum members about their own actual geekiness (and surprisingly little concern about a chatbot taking a sommelier's job). As one who has never identified as a geek -- but who may have actually been one in school -- I decided to investigate the "geekiness" of wine a bit more.
The bot made some interesting choices. A number of wines were expensive but not obscure -- obscurity is big in geekdom. These included Champagne Billecart-Salmon Brut Rose, Tenuta San Guido Sassicaia and Dominus, the pricey red Napa blend. Others were famous and not that hard to find if you have (very) deep pockets. See: Domaine Coche-Dury Meursault and Domaine Leroy Chambertin. Still others were less pricey but much more obscure -- Battenfeld Spanier Frauenberg Riesling from Germany's Rheinhessen region and Tatomer Meeresboden Gruner Veltliner from Santa Barbara County -- which I guess makes them geeky or at least niche.
The bot-generated list seemed like it could almost be the work of an actual sommelier with good taste and an unlimited budget -- but a lack of attention to certain details. (One wine was listed simply as Sancerre Rose.) But was the list truly geeky? Who could say? A wine drinker would have to be both knowledgeable and wealthy to order a bottle of Coche-Dury Meursault, which costs around $1,500 a bottle retail and much more on a restaurant list. (The bot did not price the wine list.) I came to the same conclusion as most forum members: The bot-made list was more about expensive wine than pure geekiness.
Chiaramonte told me the idea to ask for such a list came to him while reading an earlier Wine Berserkers post, about a real wine list that had been labeled geeky by another forum member, Dan Kravitz. Indeed, according to Kravitz, Leeward restaurant in Portland, Maine, has an "aggressively geeky" wine list because -- at the time of Kravitz's post on Wine Berserkers -- few wines from familiar grapes like Cabernet, Chardonnay or Pinot Noir were listed. "[They] refuse to put anything well-known or popular on the list," Kravitz said in an email.
Leeward is a high-profile, Italian-focused restaurant, and I was curious to see its wine list. I found wines that were definitely uncommon, including bottles from small producers, many of whom were working with lesser-known varieties -- hybrid American grapes (Marquette, Vidal Blanc) as well as European ones (Grolleau, Jacquere, Erbaluce). I found some wines I knew and many I did not but was curious about, including a red blend, Mimeomia, from the Kalche Wine Cooperative in Fletcher, Vt., featuring Marquette, Frontenac Noir and Petite Pearl. The last was a grape I'd never heard of; that wine, said Leeward's general manager and wine director Paige Buehrer, was probably the geekiest one on her list.
When I told Buehrer that her list had been described as "aggressively geeky," she laughed. "I would hope that it's not 'aggressive'," she said. But she conceded, "I think it is a little bit geeky." She explained that the list was designed to provoke a conversation and "to open people up to new things."
Buehrer emphasized that she takes pains to describe lesser-known wines in terms non-geeky drinkers recognize. For example, she described Erbaluce, a white grape from the Piemonte region of Italy, as "like Pinot Grigio but with more going on and a tea-like bitterness." As a drinker fond of Erbaluce, I thought that was a good description.
If a geeky wine list could be defined as one that showcases obscure wines that may or may not be expensive, what, then, is the definition of a wine geek? Is there a difference between a wine geek and a wine lover or oenophile? I put the question to my friend Brad, who calls himself a wine geek, as do the members of his tasting group.
"Maybe calling yourself a geek says it might not be considered normal, but you're okay with that," Brad said. Other terms -- "connoisseur," "oenophile" -- don't capture the "nonjudgmental" aspect of being a geek, he explained. His group of geeks does, however, "toss around a fair amount of judgment in a nonjudgmental way," Brad conceded.
Ivan Ruiz so thoroughly identifies as a wine geek, he's adopted the term as his Instagram handle (@wine.geek). The Summit, N.J.-based sommelier and wine retailer said calling himself a geek is a way to express his enthusiasm for wine and to connect with others equally inspired. While "geek" once described someone "highly intelligent but introverted," Ruiz said, "the world has evolved, and in today's world being a geek is fashionable."
I'm definitely not fashionable in my wine tastes, so I suppose that disqualifies me as a geek. More important, as a columnist, if I adopted a geeky outlook I might lose sight of how most people think about wine. For most drinkers, wine is an adjunct to their lives, not front and center. It's an enjoyable component of a meal, a pleasurable time with friends. There is, however, one aspect of geekiness I do possess: an abiding desire to discover and taste wines I've never had.
That's why I decided I had to track down that wine I'd never heard of before on the bot-made geeky list: the 2020 Tatomer Meeresboden Gruner Veltliner from Santa Barbara. Only 600 cases of the wine were made; it's sold in just a few restaurants and stores. I found a bottle for $25. And as "geeky" wines often do, this one came with a good story.
Graham Tatomer founded his winery in 2008, after working in wine since 1995. In the mid-2000s he worked off and on in Austria, where he learned more about Riesling and Gruner while working at the legendary Weingut Knoll. Back home in Santa Barbara, Tatomer currently makes 3-4 Gruners a year (as well as Pinot Noir and Riesling) and considers himself a "white wine specialist." His Tatomer Meeresboden Gruner Veltliner Santa Barbara County proved excellent. Crisp, bright and pure, it put me more in mind of Austria than California.
Was my desire to find and taste this wine proof of geekiness, or something else? I believe simple curiosity fueled my quest -- not the pride in knowing that can be part of geekiness. I would call one possessed of unquenchable curiosity a wine lover. (And if you know where I can track down that Vermont blend from Leeward's list in New Jersey, where I live, let me know.)
---
Email Lettie at wine@wsj.com.
Credit: By Lettie Teague
