NAIROBI, Kenya -- Musa Abubakar spent years moderating Facebook content, scrolling through videos and images of what he said were often rapes, beheadings and suicides.
After enduring hours of "people having their hands chopped off, hanging themselves, set on fire alive," Abubakar says he has lost any sense of empathy. "I don't really feel anything."
He and 183 other content moderators here are now part of a lawsuit against a contractor for Facebook owner Meta Platforms, and the social-media giant itself. The moderators accuse the company, California-based Sama, and Meta of worker exploitation and unfair termination.
In legal filings, they say that reviewing graphic content like the videos Abubakar says he was regularly asked to watch has led to depression, PTSD and anxiety. It is one of three lawsuits in Kenya that are casting a fresh spotlight on the tech industry's far-flung, outsourced workforce.
Sama denies the allegations and says it supported workers like Abubakar with benefits such as health insurance and counselors. Meta declined to comment on the litigation. It is appealing decisions that allowed plaintiffs to name it as a co-defendant in two of the cases, including the one Abubakar is part of.
Meta has said that Nairobi's labor court, which is hearing two of the three cases, doesn't have jurisdiction because the company doesn't have employees or offices in Kenya. If Meta fails in its appeal, the suits could significantly broaden legal risks for the entire industry, lawyers and industry watchers say.
Global tech giants such as Meta and TikTok owner ByteDance rely on third-party contractors to outsource armies of workers in low-cost labor markets like Kenya. These workers are increasingly tasked with time-consuming jobs such as content moderation and data annotation, which is used to train artificial-intelligence systems. The two labor suits, if successful, could bolster efforts elsewhere to legally challenge big tech companies who contract out a large chunk of their workforce.
"It's not just Meta that's going to be worried about this," said Katie Harbath, founder and chief executive at consulting firm Anchor Change and former public policy director at Facebook. She added: "It could very much impact how they contract those [outsourcing] firms."
A third suit, filed against Meta only, in Kenya's High Court in December, alleges that Meta's Kenya-based content moderation wasn't adequate enough to stop ethnic hate speech amid the recent civil war in neighboring Ethiopia and that its algorithm gave such content more prominence.
"We have strict rules which outline what is and isn't allowed on Facebook and Instagram. Hate speech and incitement to violence are against these rules and we invest heavily in teams and technology to help us find and remove this content," a Facebook spokesman said in a statement about the company's work in Ethiopia.
The two other suits making their way through Kenya's labor court are further along.
Kenya has tried to turn itself into an outsourcing hub for global technology companies, including for content moderation and data annotation. Kenya boasts fast fiber internet in many places.
In 2019, Meta hired Sama to handle Facebook's content moderation for sub-Saharan Africa from Nairobi. Sama already employed thousands of workers here working on data annotation for AI applications for Facebook and other clients. That is the time-consuming work of correctly labeling videos, photos and recordings to help teach AI applications to recognize that content.
A few months after Sama began doing content moderation for Facebook, one of Sama's employees working on Meta content moderation, South African citizen Daniel Motaung, says he began organizing around 150 colleagues to protest their working conditions and demand better pay. Motaung says he was in the process of formally filing trade-union papers when he was fired.
In May 2022, he filed a lawsuit against Sama and Meta in the Nairobi Employment and Labour Relations Court, alleging worker abuse, exploitation, union-busting and unlawful termination.
Sama says that Motaung was fired for causes unrelated to his attempts to unionize and that the company would have worked with a union, had one formed. It accused him of coercing fellow employees and excluding others based on nationality. Motaung's lawyers deny those allegations. Meta declined to comment on ongoing litigation.
In January, Sama told all of its content moderators that they were being let go at the end of March, saying it had decided to exit that business altogether. Meta moved its Facebook content-moderation business to Luxembourg-based Majorel, which also has a Kenyan presence.
Then, in March, workers filed a separate suit at the same labor court alleging they were unlawfully terminated and were effectively blacklisted from being hired by Majorel. Majorel declined to comment.
Credit: By Alexandra Wexler
