A year ago, when the annual bitcoin conference opened in Miami, the city was arguably the country's biggest booster of digital currencies. MiamiCoin traded on a global crypto exchange. The Miami Heat basketball team played at FTX Arena, and cryptocurrency exchange Blockchain.com was preparing to move its headquarters to a splashy office in the city's Wynwood neighborhood.
As Miami prepares to host Bitcoin 2023 on May 18, none of those things is true anymore. Skepticism toward digital currencies has been rising ever since FTX filed for bankruptcy last year and its co-founder, Sam Bankman-Fried, was arrested on fraud and other charges.
While the two biggest cryptocurrencies -- bitcoin and ether -- rallied this year, the global market cap for cryptocurrencies is down 60% from its peak in November 2021, according to data provider CoinGecko.
Probably nowhere has the country's about-face on crypto been more pronounced than in Miami, where Mayor Francis X. Suarez once referred to his city as the world's crypto capital.
The Heat are playing their postseason home games at Kaseya Center, after Miami-Dade County severed ties with FTX. The exchange that hosted MiamiCoin halted trading in March after its value fell more than 99%. Blockchain.com won't be occupying the Wynwood office space, triggering a lawsuit for unpaid fees between the building's owner and the broker.
Even though he continues to receive his salary in bitcoin, the mayor no longer takes every chance to promote Miami as a crypto haven. "We thought it was a great opportunity, as a fintech marker, for us to jump in and be able to differentiate ourselves," Mr. Suarez said about digital currencies. "I don't regret us being innovative."
Many other Miami officials and business leaders soured on crypto, no longer counting on it as a main driver in the city's quest to become a world-class business and financial center. Even some locals who are part of the city's digital-currency economy are openly critical.
"Most of crypto was a pyramid scheme," said Ryan Kirkley, a local businessman who runs and advises early-stage blockchain and artificial-intelligence companies and helps connect them with venture capital.
At Miami's NFT conference earlier this spring, attendance was down by about 1,500 from last year, a spokesman for the conference said. The spokesman said the turnout exceeded expectations based on the market.
Now, some of the city's most prominent crypto proponents are backing away from the business. E11even Hotel and Residences, named for the popular nightclub where much of the crypto crowd spent their free time and money, accepted crypto for condos in a building where some units were priced as high as $20 million. After the collapse of FTX, which facilitated its crypto transactions, it stopped accepting payments in digital currencies.
Other crypto-related firms are ensnared in legal actions. Yuga Labs last year was valued at $4 billion and its flagship NFT collection -- known as the Bored Ape Yacht Club -- was plastered on T-shirts worn throughout Miami crypto circles. In December, the company was hit with a class-action lawsuit. The complaint alleges that the firm artificially inflated the price of its digital offerings by using celebrity insiders, who promoted the NFTs without disclosing their financial relationships to the firm.
MoonPay, a Miami firm that allegedly facilitated the NFT transactions between the firm and the promoters, has been named in the suit along with several celebrities including Gwyneth Paltrow, Madonna, Justin Bieber and Jimmy Fallon.
"We strongly believe that these opportunistic claims are without merit and we look forward to proving as much," a Yuga Labs spokesman said. The other defendants have either declined to comment or denied the allegations.
Credit: By Deborah Acosta
