Q: Finding specific messages in my Gmail app seems harder than it should be. Am I doing something wrong?
A: You'd think that Google, with its near-complete monopoly on helping us find things online, would produce an easily searchable inbox. Alas, I'm all too familiar with this issue, and I've received the same query from fed-up people who use Outlook and Apple's Mail app, so the problem isn't limited to Gmail. One factor: The apps tend to prioritize email search results based on the recency of messages, rather than their relevance. This isn't helpful.
As much as it pains me to say it, artificial intelligence tools can help a lot. When necessary, I use Google's free Bard AI chatbot to search smarter. It's often easier to type a question like "When's my flight to Houston" into Bard than trying to recall the correct airport code for a targeted search.
For those who reasonably don't want to rely on AI -- or are forced to use Outlook for work, or favor Mail because they love Apple -- some best practices come in handy when searching. You likely know that putting a specific phrase in quotation marks limits search results to messages that contain it exactly. For instance: "party foul" might zero in on gossip about a poorly behaved bachelorette guest from a few years ago rather than every invitation or sports newsletter you've ever received.
You might not know that you can use "from:" and "to:" to narrow your search to messages you've either received from or sent to specific people. For example, a query like this -- from:bossname@companyname.com "annual review" -- will help you find your last performance review with haste.
These tools, called "Operators," exist in all three major email apps, though they work in slightly different ways. For example, in Apple Mail, you can type in "12/3/2023-12/6/2023" to restrict your search to emails you've received or sent between Dec. 3 and Dec. 6. But in Gmail, you have to use "After:12/3/2023" and "Before:12/6/2023." In Gmail, you need to use "in:" to find emails in certain categories (e.g., "in:trash" or "in:archive"), but in Outlook you use "category:".
With these tips, you can sift and search a little less hopelessly.
Credit: By Daniel Varghese
