After SoftBank Group Corp. bought control of Sprint Corp. in 2013, the business went further downhill, losing ground to Verizon Communications Inc. and AT&T Inc. and running dangerously low on cash.
Within SoftBank, executive Rajeev Misra was working to limit the damage. The former derivatives trader helped design a series of deals, pledging Sprint's handset leases, network equipment and eventually some of its airwaves to raise billions of dollars in fresh debt and blunt fears the struggling wireless carrier was headed toward bankruptcy.
Now, Mr. Misra is a top lieutenant to SoftBank chief Masayoshi Son for the entrepreneur's next big thing: a $100 billion fund to invest in futuristic technologies like artificial intelligence, robotics and other "Jetsons"-like inventions.
Mr. Misra, who built Deutsche Bank AG's large credit-derivatives business in the last decade, is leading a crew of ex-bond traders and Wall Street salespeople helping Mr. Son raise and manage the SoftBank Vision Fund. Others include a trio of Deutsche and Goldman Sachs Group Inc. alums well-connected among Middle Eastern royals.
Their knack for financial structuring and ties to ultrarich investors are key as the 59-year-old Mr. Son reinvents SoftBank as an incubator of next-generation technologies.
The fund is set to launch in coming weeks with money from SoftBank itself, several Middle East sovereign-wealth funds, and Silicon Valley luminaries including Apple Inc., Qualcomm Inc. and Oracle Corp.'s Larry Ellison, The Wall Street Journal has reported.
Of course, the fund is Mr. Son's show. He is its sole "key man" -- a formal designation for a fund's top decision maker -- and has tapped some of his longstanding relationships in the technology world to fill its coffers.
Mr. Son also has a record as a technology investor, albeit owing more to gut than careful study. He famously decided to invest in Chinese entrepreneur Jack Ma
five minutes after meeting him. That $20 million investment was valued at $58 billion when Mr. Ma's company, Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., went public in 2014.
But his empire building has hit its limits. SoftBank carries more than $100 billion in debt and "can't leverage too much anymore," Mr. Son told VentureBeat in October.
The Vision Fund gives him billions of dollars to expand further using other people's money. Not that there aren't practical challenges.
One is finding bargains as startup valuations have climbed.
The fund, because of its large size, also will likely need to pursue large, mature companies in which returns are often harder to achieve.
Another issue is structuring deals without taxing SoftBank's balance sheet, in which the fund's holdings will be consolidated.
Solving those problems will fall to a team of financial whizzes in London. About 15 analysts recently set up shop in the city's posh Mayfair district, a neighborhood thick with hedge funds.
Mr. Misra, SoftBank's 54-year-old head of strategic finance, is an Indian-born, U.S.-educated cricket fan who was once Mr. Son's banker, structuring debt for his early telecom takeovers.
The son of middle-class parents in New Delhi, Mr. Misra earned engineering degrees from the University of Pennsylvania. He worked in the 1980s designing satellites at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, then was at a technology startup before going to Wall Street to join Merrill Lynch's trading desk.
He jumped to Deutsche Bank in 1996 among a wave of Merrill Lynch defectors, including the German lender's future chief executive office, Anshu Jain.
Mr. Misra spent the next decade building Deutsche Bank's credit-trading desk into one of the most profitable on Wall Street.
He was "a creative genius," said Martin Belvisi, a former Deutsche Bank trader. "We were ahead of the curve in product design."
Mr. Misra, who declined to be interviewed, struck colleagues as tireless and cool under pressure.
He oversaw dozens of traders including Greg Lippmann, whose big bet in 2007 against the U.S. housing market was a defining trade of the era. It made Deutsche Bank about $1.5 billion in profit, offsetting mortgage-related losses elsewhere at the bank, a Senate subcommittee later found.
As the crisis hit, Mr. Misra left Deutsche Bank and later joined UBS Group AG to run its fixed-income business, then Fortress Investment Group LLC. In 2014, he reconnected with Mr. Son at the lavish Italian wedding of SoftBank former executive Nikesh Arora, according to attendees. Mr. Son wooed his old banker to SoftBank.
Credit: By Liz Hoffman, Jenny Strasburg and Ryan Knutson
