SEOUL -- As the U.S. and China tussle over trade and technology, American companies maintain a major advantage over their Chinese rivals in a critical area: spending on research and development.
U.S. firms, led by Amazon.com Inc. and Google parent Alphabet Inc., invested more than $5 in R&D for every $1 spent by Chinese companies, according to a new report from PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, which logged the top 1,000 spenders among publicly traded companies for the year ended June 30.
Chinese tech giants Baidu Inc., Tencent Holdings Ltd. and Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. each spent less than at least 44 other companies, including Panasonic Corp., the Japanese industrial and consumer-electronics conglomerate.
The disparity reflects an approach to innovation by Chinese firms over the past decade in which they excel at "applications of existing technology, rather than original research," said Edward Tse, chief executive of Gao Feng Advisory Co., which advises Chinese and foreign firms. He cited mobile payments and messaging apps as examples.
PwC's figures don't include private companies, however, which leaves out China's state-owned monoliths and closely held Huawei Technologies Co., the world's largest maker of telecommunications equipment. Huawei said it spent more than $13 billion on R&D last year.
U.S.-based companies accounted for $329 billion of a record $781.8 billion in R&D spending tallied by PwC for the 12 months through June 30. While Chinese R&D investment came in at $61 billion, in 2010 that figure was just $7 billion, PwC said. In the latest tally, 145 Chinese companies were among the top 1,000 R&D spenders, up from 14 a decade ago.
The uptick in spending reflects efforts by Chinese firms to generate homegrown innovations, particularly in artificial intelligence, 5G and self-driving vehicles, Mr. Tse said.
"The gap between the U.S. and China is closing and continues to close," said Barry Jaruzelski, who leads PwC's U.S. industrial product practice and who was lead author of the report. "It wouldn't be a shock if the lines cross in the next 10 years."
Among China's biggest R&D spenders, Alibaba spent $3.6 billion and internet giant Tencent invested $2.7 billion. By comparison, Amazon, which spent the most of any publicly traded company, invested $22.6 billion in R&D, up 40% from a year earlier. Google parent Alphabet spent $16.2 billion.
The Silicon Valley giants have higher revenue than their Chinese counterparts, so the R&D spending gap is narrower when such investments are measured as a percentage of sales.
Amazon's vast array of businesses requires hefty R&D investments, including for robots working in warehouses and delivery drones. Alphabet, meantime, has been spending to build up its engineering talent, particularly in AI. Finance chief Ruth Porat said on an earnings call last week that R&D was the company's largest driver of an increase in operating expenses.
Amazon and Alphabet declined to comment, as did Baidu and Alibaba. Tencent said it couldn't comment before its earnings report on Nov. 14.
PwC researchers say they haven't found a correlation between investment and innovation. The findings show that the tech industry is a central driver of R&D spending, accounting for nearly $2 of every $5 spent world-wide.
---
Laura Stevens, Douglas MacMillan and Shan Li contributed to this article.
---
Chinese Companies
Often Spend Less,
But for Good Reason
Some large Chinese tech firms, in comparison with U.S. rivals, have sought to innovate more through acquisition than with in-house research, said Sabrina Howell, an assistant finance professor at New York University's Stern School of Business who researches American and Chinese innovation. "Some of what you see in R&D is the outsourcing of innovation in China," she said.
Another factor is the difference in purchasing power for R&D dollars, especially when it comes to hiring talent. China produced 4.7 million graduates in science, technology, engineering and mathematics in 2016 -- more than eight times the 568,000 in the U.S., according to the World Economic Forum. "When you spend a million dollars, how many scientists do you get?" said Barry Jaruzelski of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP. "You'd get more Ph.D.s in China than you would in the U.S."

Credit: By Timothy W. Martin
