For years, the biggest startup founders would dream of an initial public offering. It was the key to raising capital, drumming up attention and rewarding longtime employees and early investors with a big payout.
Not any more.
These days, many founders happily avoid the costs, disclosure requirements, scrutiny and regulations of going public. Many big startups are already well funded and famous. The one hitch: Their employees still want to get rich.
They're finding the solution is the tender offer, an arrangement where shares are sold to a set of investors in a prearranged trade and employees and early investors can cash out some of their holdings. Elon Musk's rocket maker, SpaceX, and payments giant Stripe are marquee, repeat users.
Private companies have sold more than $6 billion worth of stock in tender offers so far this year, almost double the amount last year, according to Nasdaq Private Market, whose technology helps companies complete the transactions. This tally includes only deals completed via NPM, and would be even bigger if it included deals done on other marketplaces or done privately. This year 42% of tender offers have been completed by companies that have done at least one such offer before, the highest proportion on record, according to NPM.
"It's become so much more mainstream," said Jamie Hutchinson, an attorney at Goodwin Procter who helped organize Facebook's 2009 tender offer, which popularized the maneuver. "It's now become something employees expect."
SpaceX has discussed offering current and former employees the chance to sell stock to investors -- ranging from blue-chip investment firms to wealthy individuals -- in a secondary offering that would value it at about $350 billion. SpaceX tends to launch a tender offer twice a year, once in the summer and once in the winter.
This shift is changing what it means to be a private company, rekindling fears about how well the public markets are working and sparking debates about who is knowledgeable enough to buy private stocks where there is limited liquidity and information. The tender offer is helping these companies stay private even longer. The number of so-called unicorns -- private companies valued at $1 billion or more -- has shot up to around 1,250, from 47 a decade ago, according to CB Insights.
Fanatics, a sports merchandise, collectibles and betting company that has been private for years, recently completed another tender offer that allowed employees to sell $100 million in stock. Glenn Schiffman, chief financial officer of Fanatics, said the company has no immediate plans to go public.
The early employee share sale arrangement made its debut in its modern form in 2009. Hutchinson, the Goodwin Procter lawyer, was cheering on his daughter at a lacrosse game in Annapolis, Md., when a large venture-capital investor called.
Facebook, then the most high-profile startup around, was losing employees and frustrating early investors who wanted to sell valuable shares. But executives didn't want to go public yet.
The investor told Hutchinson they had an idea that could solve that problem and needed him in Palo Alto, Calif., immediately. Hutchinson left the bleachers and headed to the Baltimore airport.
The idea was to transfer employee shares in an organized fashion to one large investor. Large investment fund DST Global agreed to buy up to $100 million shares of Facebook for $14.77 apiece, valuing the company at around $6.5 billion. Employees could request to sell up to 25% of their vested shares, or up to $1 million worth of shares. DST also bought an additional stake directly from the company.
One paralegal used an old-fashioned calculator and scrap paper to add up how many employee shares could be sold at what price. She kept the rolls of paper, taped together, as a memento.
"The world changed for us the way we did that transaction," Hutchinson said.
Tender offers have now taken on a fairly standard shape, and marketplaces like Nasdaq Private Market were started to broker the deals. In 2013, there were 10 tender offers on NPM and SecondMarket, another marketplace that has since merged with NPM, said Eric Folkemer, who co-founded NPM which has now split out of the exchange. This year he estimates NPM will reach 100 transactions.
Databricks, an artificial-intelligence and analytics company, is currently in discussions to raise money to buy back employee stock, allowing it to further delay its IPO. TikTok parent ByteDance made plans for a similar stock buyback for early investors and employees before the end of the year.
"While the IPO market has been closed for two to three years, what do you do?" said Aman Verjee, general partner at Practical Venture Capital.
Verjee's firm invested in Australian design company Canva in 2020 when it was valued at around $10 billion. Earlier this year, it sold about half its stake in a new Canva tender offer at a $26 billion valuation.
U.S. companies have raised $31 billion in traditional IPOs this year, well below the 10-year average, according to data from Dealogic. The IPO market went cold in late 2021, when the Fed signaled it would start raising rates, and has been slow to bounce back.
The average private company is older and worth more than ever before. The median IPO company is 10 years old, up from 6 in 2000, according to data from researcher Jay Ritter at the University of Florida's Warrington College of Business.
Some companies are now offering regularly scheduled opportunities for employees to cash out some of their stakes, said Shawn Murphy, head of private markets at Morgan Stanley at Work, which helps startup employees manage their wealth and benefit plans.
"Many early employees have a significant portion of their wealth in these private shares," Murphy said. "This provides them with an opportunity to pay off their student loans or buy a house."
In 2019, autonomous-driving-technology startup Nuro raised nearly $1 billion from SoftBank Vision Fund. Jiajun Zhu and Dave Ferguson, the two founders, called employees to a town hall and offered them the chance to sell up to 10% of their vested shares to SoftBank.
Jennifer Perez, a product manager, said she was torn for a few weeks. On one hand, she had student loans and two young children at home. On the other hand, she expected Nuro to go public or be acquired soon, and her windfall then could be much bigger. She decided to wait.
More than five years later, Nuro remains private.
"I should have done it," said Perez, who no longer works at Nuro. "I still have all my shares."
Stakes in pre-IPO startups are considered riskier than buying publicly traded stocks because they have looser disclosure rules and can be harder, if not impossible, to sell at a moment's notice. That has led regulators and lawmakers to restrict these stocks to investors with a large enough incomes or bank account. A group of lawmakers have proposed legislation that would allow any investor who passes an exam to buy private securities.
Dan Czerwonka, who has worked at startups like automated-delivery company Zipline, has participated in tender offers. One came after he left an employer. Another was in October, but he was limited to selling only a small percentage of his holdings.
"A tender offer is almost an emotional victory. It says, 'We're a real company,'" says Czerwonka, who is now general counsel at Varda Space Industries.
Generate image description

Credit: By Corrie Driebusch
