Peter Diamandis, the founder of the X Prize Foundation and a proponent of space travel for the masses, isn't exactly known for earthly ideas. He is, after all, behind several commercial spaceflight outfits, and soon he'll launch a new company for, yes, asteroid mining.
But his new book, "Abundance: The Future is Better Than You Think," is more about Earth-based issues than outer space, such as clean water and how robotics can keep us out of nursing homes. "I felt like it was something I had to do," Mr. Diamandis said at a party for the book Wednesday.
In a room where guests casually tossed around phrases like artificial intelligence and protein folding, Mr. Diamandis's co-author, Steven Kotler, acknowledged that many of these concepts "sound really crazy." But there was one exception. "Rocket science is actually very simple," Mr. Kotler said. "Small container, big flame." (It was perhaps the simplest part of a conversation on a "supersonic free fall": a Red Bull-sponsored project where a sky diver will attempt a jump from space. The issue, Mr. Kotler explained, is that breaking the speed of sound could cause an extreme version of "shaken baby syndrome" in the diver.)
During the party, at a home underneath the Ed Koch Queensboro Bridge overlooking the East River, Mr. Diamandis opened up the floor for a Q&A. First question: "What do you eat for breakfast?" He declined to answer. Speaking privately later, the conversation returned to space travel, and whether it will lead to colonizing the galaxy. Mr. Diamandis was unfazed. "If we have the ability to back up our biosphere like you back up your computer, I think there is a moral obligation to do that," he said. "What opened up the American West was resources -- oil, gold, land," he said, as if it were just as easy to find those commodities elsewhere in the universe.
Mr. Diamandis rejects the notion that reducing consumption will save the planet: "I'm not interested in slicing the pie into thinner and thinner slices. I'm interested in baking more pies." Speaking of which, a movie version of the book is already in the works.
Credit: By Jen Wieczner
