The White House released its budget blueprint for fiscal 2020 on Monday, and the details reinforce the country's real fiscal problem: Entitlement spending is swallowing up every other national priority, including defense. The big question is how much defense spending President Trump can salvage without accepting another bipartisan budget blowout known as an omnibus spending bill.
The President's 2020 proposal reflects the budget choices made in the last two years: Outlays would soar to $4.75 trillion in 2020, a 4.8% increase, following an estimated 10.2% increase in fiscal 2019. This is a product of the bipartisan deal the GOP struck to concede more spending on domestic programs to Democrats in order to make up for the long defense decline of the Obama years. Democrats had political leverage because of the annual spending caps passed in the Budget Control Act of 2011, and those caps were waived for two years.
The deal had to be done, but it isn't cheap, and federal spending will rise to about 21.3% of GDP this year and next. Revenues will rise more slowly due to the 2017 tax reform, but they will still increase by 9.5% over two years, or an average of $155 billion a year, if the economy keeps growing as it did in 2018. The feds are expected to take in about $3.65 trillion in fiscal 2020, for a budget deficit of $1.1 trillion.
Even that deficit may be understated given that the White House budget includes a 5% cut in nondefense spending, though it proposes more money for some departments like Veterans Affairs but less for the others like the Environmental Protection Agency. The cuts have little or no chance of happening with Democrats running the House.
The real political action will be the debate over defense. Interest on the federal debt is on track to exceed defense spending by 2024. Mandatory spending is on auto pilot, and these entitlements are now about two-thirds of the federal budget. Defense spending is about 3% of the economy, down from 6% in 1986. That compares to 15% of GDP in 2017 for "payments for individuals," such as transfer programs like Medicare and food stamps, up from 6.2% in 1970 and 11.7% in 2005.
The President wants $750 billion for defense in 2020, up from $716 billion in 2019 -- a substantial 5% increase. The budget includes important priorities like more missile interceptors, 110 new jet fighters and artificial-intelligence research and development.
The White House considered a defense cut for 2020 but wisely backed off. Republicans fought to increase defense spending because years of sequestration cuts had eroded the military to the point of a readiness crisis. The decay came from reduced personnel proficiency such as fewer flying hours and less skilled maintenance staff. The rebuild will take several years.
The Administration is proposing to reach the $750 billion defense target by using an account known as the overseas contingency operations fund. That fund exists ostensibly to supplement funding for the war on terror and is exempt from the budget caps. The White House would bump contingency funding to $165 billion in 2020 and $156 billion in 2021, up from $69 billion in 2019.
Democrats are already objecting, so the contingency fund work-around has a chance to succeed only if Senate Republicans and House defense hawks hold firm on the nondefense spending caps that will need 60 Senate votes to break. Some GOP budget strategists think they can use the overseas contingency fund work-around to break the defense caps with 51 votes while enforcing the domestic cap with 60 votes. Barack Obama used that loophole to fund the State Department.
That would lead to a political brawl but it's the best chance Republicans have to gain leverage over nondefense spending while getting more money for defense. And the spending brawl will happen in any case.
Mr. Trump would be on stronger ground politically here if he hadn't declared a national emergency to raid military construction funds for his border wall. This has angered GOP defense hawks. Democrats will remind voters that the last time they increased defense spending, Mr. Trump pilfered some of it to pay for his political project.
---
If Republicans don't hang together, this will probably end with another game of government-shutdown roulette, and another omnibus bill that obviates the President's spending veto. Congress's budget process is broken, but Congress doesn't want to fix it because it works for the spenders, if not for taxpayers. Better hope the economy keeps growing enough to fund national defense.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Pentagon Must Spend Its Money Better, Not More of It" -- WSJ March 21, 2019)
