Logistics companies are increasingly building artificial intelligence technology into their operations, but many say they are taking it slow when it comes to incorporating the kind of chatbots that are becoming a growing part of the consumer scene.
Executives say they are intrigued by the potential cost savings and efficiency of the ChatGPT-like tools known as generative AI. First, however, they have to make sure the digital approach won't frustrate their customers who are shipping millions of dollars worth of goods around the world.
Freight brokerage RXO, trucking firm XPO, logistics technology provider Phlo Systems and shipping company DFDS are among the businesses looking at how generative AI could transform their customer-service divisions by automating tasks such as tracking shipments, booking loads and declaring imports.
Companies have been searching for ways to use generative AI in their operations since software developer OpenAI launched its ChatGPT bot last November. That program and others like it can sort through huge amounts of information, recognize patterns, make predictions and respond to questions in a humanlike voice, enabling them to complete tasks that previously took hours in a few minutes.
Law firms have started using AI to perform legal research, draft documents and analyze contracts. Retailers are analyzing customer search queries and guiding shoppers to other products that might be relevant. Customers of travel company Expedia can chat with a bot to plan a trip, while people shopping at grocery seller Instacart can get answers to questions about recipes.
Logistics companies say generative AI eventually may be used to improve forecasting, procurement, inventory management and shipping decisions.
For now, they are experimenting with using the tools to run customer support, which they see as a natural application for the technology that can understand questions in plain conversational language and quickly respond with a thorough answer.
Experts say the technology could improve the customer experience by providing relevant, tailored answers to questions in minutes, as opposed to chatbots that are programmed with preset answers or human workers who need time to find the answer.
But generative AI is limited in its capabilities. The program is only as good as the data it has been trained on, experts say, and even then the chatbot occasionally answers questions incorrectly. Many companies have security concerns about training the system using proprietary data or customer information, leading some to ban their workers from using ChatGPT.
The stakes are especially high when using generative AI to make supply-chain decisions, industry experts say. Customer support in logistics involves helping retailers and manufacturers move large volumes of shipments by aircraft, trucks, trains and containerships, and the data behind those decisions is often proprietary, fast-changing and extremely complicated.
Using generative AI with retail and industrial customers is "a delicate balance," said Jared Weisfeld, chief strategy officer at Charlotte, N.C.-based RXO. "When you think about what could go wrong over the life of the load, you as a carrier, you as a shipper, sometimes you don't necessarily want to be talking to a chatbot."
Weisfeld said RXO is looking at how to automate tasks such as customer support and booking loads for small- and medium-size businesses, which could answer customer questions faster and free up the company's sales staff to focus on bringing in new clients.
Still, the company will keep the option for clients to chat with a human.
"You can't have a shipper go ahead and log on to the system where the order's late and you're pinging a chatbot. You need a hybrid approach," Weisfeld said.
The central question for RXO is, "How do we increase the efficiency of our people? How do we do so in a way that makes our customers' lives easier, not the exact opposite?" he said.
Jonathan Wright, global managing partner of finance and supply chain transformation at IBM Consulting, an arm of International Business Machines, said for the technology to gain traction, supply-chain managers will have to fully trust it when placing orders for goods, managing inventory and negotiating with suppliers.
"We have to have understanding and knowledge of what AI I'm using, what data I'm using and really tight governance around that," Wright said. "In our personal life, we might be comfortable with 80, 90% correctness. In our business world, it's got to be tight -- 110%."
XPO plans to train an internal version of a ChatGPT-like bot to allow customers to track freight, get rate quotes and create requests to pick up shipments. Jay Silberkleit, XPO's chief information officer, said the company will keep the information private and take control over what data is used to help ensure answers are relevant and accurate.
U.K.-based Phlo Systems recently rolled out an AI-powered chatbot for customs declarations that replaces a system that was programmed with a list of frequently asked questions, said Chief Executive Saurabh Goyal.
A customer importing fish to the U.K. from a European country, for example, can ask the chatbot what kind of declaration they need and they will receive a response in plain language, Goyal said. The chatbot is handling about 70% to 80% of questions today, with the rest sent on to human workers to resolve.
Denmark-based regional shipping company DFDS has taken a slightly different approach by using generative AI for software development for now, with an eye toward how the technology might someday be used in customer support.
"What we need to be very sensitive about is, what is the quality of the answers you can get out of generative AI?" said Rune Keldsen, the company's chief technology officer. "Generative AI is very strong at large data sets and crunching large amounts of data, but it's less strong at ensuring the predictability of the answers that come out."
Credit: By Liz Young
