Should the U.S. invest in a generation of new intercontinental ballistic missiles? What has really propelled decades of consistently rising computer performance? Is research into new forms of nuclear power a dead end? And should we credit Elon Musk with revolutionizing the automobile industry, or is he just riding the coattails of history?
These are the sorts of questions that researchers who study the history of innovation and what it says about the future say we can now answer -- thanks, of course, to innovation. Using both previously untapped pools of data and new analytical methods, along with the usual tools of modern-day forecasting -- namely, the predictive algorithms often described as "artificial intelligence" -- they are taking a quantitative approach to examining how quickly technologies improve.
The result isn't a crystal ball for what's next. Indeed, one of the conclusions of this group of academics is that attempts to predict the exact nature of the next technological advance are doomed to fail. But their research could help us understand how quickly existing technologies are getting better.
If they work, these innovation-prediction algorithms stand to benefit investors, company leaders and government planners. The goal is to help us make better-informed decisions about where to direct money, time and attention. Whether that means deciding what's in our portfolios, or which line of R&D to pursue to solve a pressing problem, these systems can help, says Christopher Magee, an emeritus professor of engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and one of the authors of a forthcoming paper describing such a system.
Dr. Magee, who spent 35 years at Ford Motor in areas including technology strategy, says one of his motivations for conducting this research is that he always felt as though he and other analysts were just guessing when they tried to predict what technology a company should invest in next. He also felt their guesses were fraught with personal bias.
Now Dr. Magee and others can answer in a fraction of a second the question of how quickly any given technology is advancing. And anyone else can too, by typing the name of that technology into a Google-like search engine the researchers created. Robotics, for example, is improving at the rate of 18.5% a year, which sounds like a lot, except that the average rate of improvement for the more than 1,700 technologies the researchers studied is 19% a year.
The underlying driver of this improvement is that all technologies, even software, are ultimately governed by the laws of physics, which over the long run determine just how far, and how quickly, we can get them to evolve.
The researchers trained a prediction algorithm that can determine the pace of progress for all technologies currently mentioned by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office that have at least 100 patents related to them.
The MIT team's research shows that "it is the physics of the technology that really matters," says J. Doyne Farmer, a professor of mathematics at the University of Oxford who wasn't affiliated with the work.
Research done by Dr. Farmer's group at Oxford backs up one main finding of this and previous research: Viewed across decades, individual technologies change at a surprisingly steady rate. This rate is due to the underlying physics that any given technology is built on, and not to any particular genius or single breakthrough to which we might usually attribute technological advances.
"It isn't how good the managers are, or how wisely the capitalists spend," says Dr. Farmer. "It's a matter of picking the right horse and riding that horse."
Looking at innovation this way might not be as romantic as our countless hero-worshiping stories of daring inventors and entrepreneurs taking huge risks. But it is a much more reliable way to get the results that most people actually need out of investments in technology, argue these researchers.
Here's an example. The team at MIT says that in conversation with parts of the U.S. Defense Department, a question came up related to the military's effort to revamp America's nuclear missiles: As the U.S. debates investing in a next generation of these missiles, will the rate of improvement in the power of lasers soon mean that such missiles could be shot down, should they lack defenses against such weapons?
It's a question as old as the controversy over the Reagan-era Star Wars program, only now, say the MIT researchers, we have an answer. If we look at the historical rate of improvement in both lasers and missiles, it is likely we'll be able to shoot down unprotected nuclear missiles with lasers at some point in the next 15 to 25 years, say the researchers.
The Defense Department didn't respond to a request for comment.
Another question with huge implications for the future of humanity is which technologies we should bet on to produce electricity. In research yet to be published, Dr. Farmer and other members of his group compared the rates of improvement in solar photovoltaic technology and nuclear power, and found that while the cost per watt of solar power is now 0.1% what it was 70 years ago, the cost of nuclear power actually went up.
"So if you're talking about the future, it isn't nuclear," says Dr. Farmer.
"I would neve argue that teams and people don't matter," says Dr. Magee. "Great scientists are just a little bit ahead of the curve -- they aren't unbelievable heroes who do what no one else can do, and neither is Elon Musk."
Bill Buxton, a researcher at Microsoft Research, articulated in 2008 a theory that distills some of these insights into a simple concept. He calls it the "long nose of innovation," and it describes a graph plotting the rate of improvement, and often adoption, of a technology: a period of apparently negligible gains, followed by exponential growth.
"This work is valuable because it shows there are flashes of insight, and people do make changes incrementally, but in general you're building on something that existed previously," says Mr. Buxton, referring to the MIT research. "If we get rid of the hero worship and look at the actual process of innovation, we find that it is learnable, just like the piano is learnable."
Generate image description

Credit: By Christopher Mims
