Fidelity Investments' asset-management chief will retire in February, the latest change at a business under pressure to adapt to investors' appetite for low-cost funds.
Steve Neff, a 23-year Fidelity veteran who spent most of his career in technology roles, was tapped in 2018 to lead asset management, the division that oversees the firm's stock and bond pickers. He will leave the firm a little more than a year later, Abigail Johnson, Fidelity's chief executive, wrote Tuesday in a memo to employees.
Mr. Neff will be succeeded at the Boston-based financial firm with Bart Grenier, an executive at Fidelity International Ltd., Fidelity's sister company in London, Ms. Johnson wrote. Mr. Grenier, 60 years old, had held a variety of roles in the business before leaving Fidelity for a post at Deutsche Bank AG's money-management arm. He ran another asset manager, The Boston Co., until he returned to Fidelity in 2017.
Mr. Grenier will take over a business that is racing to meet individual investors' growing preference for low-cost index portfolios. Like many peers, Fidelity struggled to stem the loss of client money from its actively managed funds, which decades ago powered rapid growth at the firm.
And while Fidelity's diverse collection of businesses, which includes online brokerage and back-office services for wealth managers, have insulated the firm from the full impact of the fund outflows, the losses have crimped profit margins.
Fidelity oversaw more than $2.8 trillion in assets as of Sept. 30, including some $2.3 trillion in actively managed funds.
"Bart is the ideal candidate to succeed Steve," Ms. Johnson wrote. In her memo, Ms. Johnson called Mr. Neff an "inspirational leader" who leaned on his experience as Fidelity's former technology chief to help expand the money-management unit's use of cloud computing and artificial intelligence.
Mr. Neff, who will be 68 when he retires, had approached Ms. Johnson recently with his desire to step away and spend more time with his adopted school-age son, a person familiar with the matter said.
Mr. Neff had succeeded Charles Morrison as asset-management chief. A former bond manager, Mr. Morrison retired in October 2018. Earlier that year, Fidelity moved the longtime head of its equities division, Brian Hogan, into a new role and tabbed Pam Holding and Tim Cohen as co-heads of the stock-picking unit.

Credit: By Justin Baer
