Robots on the loose in the world are clumsy and sometimes make bad decisions. They trip on sidewalks and fall down stairs and into water fountains.
What about robots on ice?
The sport of curling -- sometimes called "chess on ice" -- is a hotbed of dynamism, making it the perfect training environment for nimble robots of the future, according to new research.
Humans are good at figuring out the intricate physics of object-ice interactions that affect how giant stones slide across a frozen surface. Machines, however, can freeze up in the real world.
Until now. Curly, a new curling-playing robot, has a better handle on those complexities, thanks to an artificially intelligent brain that can quickly assess and map the icy environment, the state of play and optimal strategies for winning, according to a paper published Wednesday in the journal Science Robotics by a team of roboticists at Korea University in Seoul.
The white, turtle-shaped robot, recently beat out elite curling South Korean players in a series of four matches, losing only once, according to the study.
Curly's triumph is the latest example of machines besting humans at their own games -- but it marks an important step forward: Other big wins for the robots have been in digital environments, where the physics of the real world didn't get in the way.
Previous storied defeats for humans came from algorithms, including Facebook Inc.'s bluffing poker champion and Google Deepmind's AlphaGo. Those systems didn't have physical bodies; their brains existed solely in the digital world. The machines were playing on their home turf.
"At some point you have to start tackling the real world, and all of a sudden that's when things get really, really hard," said Mike Haley, vice president for research at design-software provider Autodesk Inc., who wasn't involved in Curly's design. Most "simulated environments for robots today are never fully representing the physics, the natural behavior of the world" because it is so complex and computationally intensive.
Curling is a team sport in which human players use a stick to grab, maneuver and propel a 40-pound puck, or stone, across the ice toward a red-blue target that resembles a bull's-eye. Curly clinches the stone with a pair of grippers that sit close to the ice. Like the human players, the robot releases it at a specified point in the court after accelerating with it.
When robot brains graduate into physical bodies and spaces, they don't know how to account fully for the unforeseen, whether that's an unexpected open manhole or minute changes in friction, humidity, temperature and ice melt that affect how a curling stone glides across a court.
"If you would freeze everything, sorry for the pun . . . then it would be wonderful. It would be ideal, but then comes the problem that with every throw, the ice changes," said Klaus-Robert Muller, a machine-learning expert and one of the Curly study authors. It is impossible to gather enough data to account for all permutations, he said, so if the robot stuck to what it learned in simulation for an entire game, it wouldn't be able to hammer out a winning strategy and "then you would be miserable."
Even if Curly threw a stone in a way that was advantageous during a previous turn, changes in the ice and ambient conditions could affect how far the piece traveled the next time around by 6 to 13 feet, which could make the difference between winning and losing, Dr. Muller said.
To dominate the ice, the robot was equipped with anti-slip software, without which it was more prone to constant wheelies, Dr. Muller said.
During one game against top human curlers, the robot scanned the ice to figure out its strategy for sliding its stone toward the target. One of Curly's stones was already on the inner red circle. The humans' pieces had stopped feet before the blue outer circle, blocking the bull's-eye and scrubbing Curly's chances for a straight shot.
The machine didn't want to knock off its own stone, so it took that into consideration. With its stone tucked under its body, it started moving toward the release line. At just the right moment, it let go of the stone, a bit off center. The stone stopped in the red circle, part of it on the center, in the general area it had aimed for. The robot ended up winning that match.
While AI developers and roboticists say the technology is interesting and applicable to domains such as self-driving cars or drones, some think the victory dance should be put on ice because the competition didn't include what's become the hallmark of curling: sweeping. The often-furious ice-scrubbing action is meant to heat up the ice, reducing friction and making it easier for the stones to glide toward their target.
"That would have been my first guess as to what it does given Roombas," said Than Tibbetts, communications director for the Brooklyn Lakeside Curling Club in New York. "It seems like a natural thing for it to sweep the ice."
The authors point out that some versions of the sport don't include sweeping, and that Curly was able to play well alongside humans in a demonstration game where humans swept and the robot threw.
"These special matches are a good example of collaborative robots in the real world," said Seong-Whan Lee, lead author of the Curly study. "It is not about humans versus robots but rather humans and robots cooperating."
---
Frances Yoon contributed to this article.

Credit: By Daniela Hernandez
