The Nasdaq Composite pulled back, dropping for a third consecutive trading session, ahead of the highly anticipated earnings report from chip giant Nvidia.
The tech-heavy index fell 0.3%. The S&P 500 rallied late in the session to close up 0.1%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average managed a gain of about 48 points, or 0.1%. All three indexes are up for the month and year, with the S&P 500 up 4.4% in 2024.
Nvidia loomed large over the market, with investors bracing for the company's quarterly results. Viewed as a big beneficiary of the boom in artificial-intelligence developments, Nvidia has seen its shares soar over the past year and has become one of the largest U.S. companies by market value. Its heavy weighting in the S&P 500 and Nasdaq makes it highly influential over the direction of the broad market.
Shares of Nvidia fell 2.9% in regular trading after a 4.4% drop the day before. The information-technology sector of the S&P 500 fell 0.8%, the worst-performing segment of the broad index.
In aftermarket trading, Nvidia rose 7% after reporting that quarterly sales tripled and beat Wall Street expectations.
Investors also pored over newly released minutes from the Federal Reserve's policy meeting in late January. The minutes signaled that most Fed officials are worried about cutting interest rates too soon.
That reinforced a reality check for many investors who about a month ago had seen rate cuts coming as soon as March. Those hopes have faded since the Fed's January meeting, when Chair Jerome Powell said at a news conference that officials weren't likely to cut rates at their meeting next month.
A recent string of economic reports underscored that inflationary pressures remain, further clouding the outlook for Fed rate cuts. The Labor Department said the economy added twice as many jobs as forecasters had anticipated in January and inflation also came in above expectations.
"The market is catching up with what the Fed has been saying," said Dana D'Auria, co-chief investment officer at Envestnet. "We're not going to get the rate cuts as soon as everybody was hoping."
The benchmark yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note rose to 4.323% after settling at 4.276% on Tuesday.
Shares of Palo Alto Networks sank 28% after the cybersecurity company cut its revenue outlook for the full year. Teladoc Health shares dropped 24% after the digital-health company's outlook for the current quarter and 2024 missed Wall Street's expectations.
Walgreens Boots Alliance stock fell 2.5%, while Amazon.com shares inched up 0.9%. The e-commerce giant will replace the pharmacy chain in the 30-stock Dow industrials index, effective as of the start of trading Monday.
Credit: By Hannah Miao
