[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
After years of growing at breakneck speed, Tesla seems to be slowing down. This is sensible, but investors haven't bestowed a $867 billion market value on the company because they like common sense.
Chief Executive Elon Musk was unusually downbeat on Tesla's third-quarter earnings call late Wednesday. The world's richest person warned that the company's hotly anticipated new model, the Cybertruck, could take 18 months to turn a profit given the "immense work" required to reach volume production. And he bemoaned the impact of higher interest rates on vehicle affordability, which implies Tesla is struggling to shift inventories despite this year's price cuts.
Musk has complained about interest rates before, but now he seems closer to acting on his worries. When discussing the factory project in Mexico that will build Tesla's next-generation, lower-cost car, the CEO said he doesn't "want to go full speed into uncertainty." He ominously cited the scarring experience of 2009, when General Motors and Chrysler went bankrupt and Tesla was "hanging on by a thread."
The irony is Tesla bulls had been counting on this vehicle, which Musk described as "utilitarian," precisely to make the brand more accessible to a wider field of buyers. The CEO made no reference on Wednesday to old ambitions such as selling 20 million vehicles a year.
Tesla's slowdown has yet to appear to be an official strategy, so it could change with Musk's mood. In its outlook statement, the company kept its usual language that it is "planning to grow production as quickly as possible" and repeated its target of achieving 50% annual growth on average over several years. But Musk also responded to an investor question about the prospect of slower growth next year by saying that "it's not possible to have a compound growth rate of 50% forever."
Musk is hitting the accelerator on artificial intelligence. He said in his prepared remarks that driverless cars and humanoid robots could make Tesla "the most valuable company in the world by far."
These technologies aren't cheap: Operating expenses rose 43% from a year earlier to a record $2.4 billion in the third quarter. Capital spending was another $2.5 billion, up 36% year over year. Nor do the fruits of Tesla's AI labors seem imminent. Musk dodged an investor question about his latest time frame for delivering so-called robotaxis.
The growth in overheads was one reason why Tesla's third-quarter results were the worst in years. Lower profit was expected after price cuts and weak deliveries, which were partly the result of factory upgrades over the summer. Even so, the company missed expectations at almost every level, with quarterly earnings per share down 44% year over year.
Even ignoring spending on moonshots, margins were weak. The company's gross automotive margin excluding regulatory credits, a key measure of vehicle profitability, was 16.3%, down from 18.1% in the second quarter and the lowest since at least mid-2019, when Tesla changed the way it reported results. The fat profits the company made in the second half of 2021 and 2022 increasingly look like an anomaly of the pandemic era of free money and product shortages.
The question for the stock is how the combination of a less profitable, slower-growing core car business and heavy spending on tech ventures with very uncertain outcomes will sit with Tesla's investors. Of course, these investors have a higher risk tolerance than most. They don't seem to care about lower profit, having bid the shares up this year even as the earnings outlook has deteriorated.
They might care more about slowing growth: The promise of Tesla's driver-automation technology partly rests on the hope that the company will be able to sell it across a broad base of Tesla drivers. The shares dived more than 9% on Thursday.
With slow progress on the Cybertruck, Tesla's car business faces leaner times well into 2024. That puts even more pressure on its big AI bets to deliver results. Now more than ever, Musk needs to show driverless cars can work to keep the Tesla faith alive.
Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
