Major stock indexes notched records Tuesday, while small-cap stocks extended their outperformance over megacap technology shares.
The S&P 500 rose 0.6%, clinching its 38th record close of the year. The Dow Jones Industrial Average advanced more than 700 points, or 1.8%, also securing an record high. That marked the blue-chip index's biggest one-day percentage gain since June 2023. The Nasdaq Composite edged 0.2% higher.
Stock-market leadership has shifted in recent sessions as investors rotate from shares of artificial-intelligence-focused tech behemoths, which dominated the first half of the year, to the relative laggards, such as industrials and small companies.
The Russell 2000, a benchmark of small-cap stocks, rose 3.5% for its fifth consecutive session of gains. The small-cap index has outperformed the Nasdaq Composite by about 11 percentage points over the past five trading days, the largest degree of outperformance since December 2000, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
The Russell 2000 has beaten the S&P 500 by about 10 percentage points over the same period, the widest five-day outperformance on record, based on data going back to 1986.
"While the dominance of tech has made sense, for the rally to extend, we think it is healthy for the rally to broaden," said Sinead Colton Grant, chief investment officer at BNY Wealth.
The move into beaten-down segments of the market reflects increased confidence that the Federal Reserve is on track to potentially begin cutting interest rates in September as inflation cools. Traders are pricing in near-certain odds of a rate cut in September, up from about a 73% probability a week ago, according to CME Group's FedWatch.
Investors are also recalibrating expectations for the 2024 election, after Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump survived an assassination attempt over the weekend. Bets on a Trump election victory have grown, according to PredictIt data. The former president favors policies like tax cuts that some investors believe could encourage spending and boost the economy.
The benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury yield declined to 4.168% from 4.231% Monday, when it climbed in response to increased expectations of a Trump re-election.
In economic news, June retail-sales data showed American shoppers are remaining resilient. Retail sales were unchanged in June from the prior month, the Commerce Department said, while economists expected a 0.4% decline. Spending in May was also revised higher.
"We're seeing the engine of the U.S. economy continue to be very robust," Colton Grant said.
A number of strong earnings reports from banks and other bellwether companies also boosted stocks.
Shares of UnitedHealth Group rose 6.5%, boosting the Dow industrials. The company reported stronger-than-expected earnings and revenue, and held its 2024 guidance steady. UnitedHealth suffered a cyberattack in February that weighed on quarterly results.
Bank of America's shares jumped 5.3% after the lender reported quarterly results that beat Wall Street estimates and said its income on lending would improve during the second half of the year.
Shares of Morgan Stanley gained 0.9% after the bank posted a 41% year-over-year increase in profit.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.3% and the FTSE 100 lost 0.2%. At midday Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.1%, but the Shanghai Composite was down 0.5%. S&P 500 futures were down 0.1%.
Credit: By Hannah Miao
