Songs from cultures around the world -- from love ballads to lullabies -- exhibit some universal patterns, according to a new study of music makers across hundreds of societies that hints at the psychology behind music's broad appeal.
No matter where they are from, similar-sounding songs are associated with the same social activities, such as infant care, healing, love and dance, the study found. The findings were published Thursday in the journal Science.
The research suggests a fundamental property underlying music's uncanny hold on the mind, several evolutionary biologists and musicologists said -- at a time when people listen to more music than ever, streaming some 611 billion songs on demand last year, according to Nielsen data.
"That is something that has been strongly debated," said evolutionary biologist Tecumseh Fitch at the University of Vienna in Austria, who studies human speech, music and language, and wasn't involved in the project.
From Tuvan throat-singing and K-pop stylings to the pentatonic Berber songs of North Africa, and the 22-tone classical ragas of India to America's 12-bar blues, songs all appear to share a basic sense of tonal structure.
"Music is something that has bedeviled anthropologists and biologists since Darwin," said anthropologist Luke Glowacki at Pennsylvania State University and a senior author of the study. "If there were no underlying principles of the human mind, there would not be these regularities."
Conducting an experiment in the digital humanities, data scientists and anthropologists combed through a century's worth of field recordings and reports to identify shared features in the playlists of humankind. To eliminate the biases of culture, sexism, music perception and Western scholarship, the researchers used a machine learning algorithm to sift musical data for patterns, cross-checked by musicologists and more than 30,000 listeners recruited online.
Many experts who study the music of other cultures are wary of such algorithm-driven approaches because of the unconscious biases surrounding music perception that can creep into code.
"This could open the way to something bigger," said ethnomusicologist Elizabeth Tolbert at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, who wasn't involved in the study. "But they may be over-interpreting their results" amid so much variation in music.

Credit: By Robert Lee Hotz
