The chief executive officer of Etsy Inc. defended the company's strategy to become an online shopping destination that can compete with Amazon.com Inc. and said recent moves that have been unpopular among some sellers would benefit them in the long run.
More than 20,000 sellers on the digital marketplace have signed a petition against Etsy's decision to raise the commission it charges on each transaction to 6.5% from 5%. Some have temporarily closed their shops in protest.
"I think there will be fewer and fewer places online to buy things, and in order to be one of those few places that can truly stand next to Amazon, you've got to do something different," Etsy CEO Josh Silverman said in an interview Tuesday at The Wall Street Journal's Jobs Summit.
Mr. Silverman said the additional revenue from the fee increase won't be used to pad Etsy's bottom line but will build out the company's customer-support team and bring in more buyers. "Before the pandemic we had just over two million sellers; now we've got well over five million sellers," he said. "So, we've got to be bringing them the demand that they need to be able to succeed."
Started in 2005, Etsy had an active-buyer base of about 90 million shoppers as of last year. The company emerged as one of the pandemic's biggest winners, benefiting fromhomebound shoppers who shifted more of their purchases online. Sellers generated about $12.2 billion in merchandise sales on Etsy last year, compared with $5 billion in 2019.
Some shop owners have said more sellers are violating company rules against hawking mass-produced items. Mr. Silverman on Tuesday said the company is investing in artificial intelligence and scaling its team of agents responsible for ferreting out listings that violate Etsy's policies.
Protesting sellers want Etsy to scrap its Star Seller program, which the company started last year. They say the program, which Etsy uses to reward sellers for good customer service, makes it harder to have the flexibility they expect as small-business owners because Etsy determines the metrics for success. Lori Peterson, an Etsy seller and one of the strike organizers, said it is difficult to take time off for weekends or vacation because responding too slowly to messages can cause sellers to lose their Star Seller ranking.
Mr. Silverman said the program is a way for sellers to control their own destinies. "When you look up what does it take to succeed on Etsy, you'll see a ton of different books and videos that all say the same thing: put a bunch of keywords in your titles. That can't be the right answer," he said. "What needs to be the right answer is to provide great quality service to buyers."
Credit: By Charity L. Scott
