Donald Trump's election victory is seen as a blow to Silicon Valley, putting the presidency in the hands of a vocal critic of several big technology companies and an advocate of policies tech executives have said could hurt the industry's development.
During his campaign, Mr. Trump didn't offer a specific plan for how he would tackle technology policy -- unlike his Democratic opponent Hillary Clinton, who in June issued a detailed tech platform that executives broadly applauded.
Meanwhile, Mr. Trump's advocacy of tighter limits on immigration and trade alarmed an industry that prizes high-skilled immigrants and gets most of its revenue from overseas.
The electorate's endorsement of Mr. Trump's populist message, which broadly blamed elites for the problems of many disaffected Americans, also could spell trouble for Silicon Valley, which has spawned companies that delivered far more in profits and stock-market valuations than they have jobs for middle-class workers.
Mr. Trump took aim at several big names in technology during the campaign. He called for a consumer boycott of Apple Inc. due to its refusal to help the Federal Bureau of Investigation access a terrorist's iPhone over privacy concerns. He accused Jeff Bezos of using the Washington Post, which he owns, to advance the interests of Amazon.com Inc., the e-commerce giant he founded and runs -- a claim the Post and Mr. Bezos strongly disputed.
And, as he did with other companies outside technology, he claimed International Business Machines Corp. was moving jobs overseas.
The GOP candidate received scant support from prominent technology executives other than entrepreneur and venture capitalist Peter Thiel. Hewlett Packard Enterprise Co. Chief Executive Meg Whitman and Cisco Systems Inc. Chairman John Chambers, two stalwart Republicans from the industry, both backed Mrs. Clinton.
A number of tech executives and investors voiced alarm at the election results Tuesday, with one prominent venture capitalist, Shervin Pishevar, even suggesting California should secede. "If Trump wins, I am announcing and funding a legitimate campaign for California to become its own nation," said a post on Mr. Pishevar's Twitter account Tuesday night as the Republican candidate headed toward victory.
The tech sector thrived under President Barack Obama. The four most valuable companies in the world -- Apple, Google parent Alphabet Inc., Microsoft Corp. and Amazon -- are all tech companies. Mrs. Clinton's technology policy blueprint broadly echoed the Obama administration's, emphasizing a close relationship with the private sector.
Debates about encryption, privacy and other tech issues are likely to intensify during Mr. Trump's presidency, which will begin as the tech industry appears on the cusp of disruptive innovations -- in areas such as self-driving cars, robots and artificial intelligence -- that would require new policy responses.
Aaron Levie, chief executive of online-storage company Box Inc. and a Clinton supporter, said much of Mr. Trump's rhetoric is antithetical to many views of Silicon Valley.
"What we need are very sound policies and an approach that works for bringing everybody into this innovation economy and into the future," Mr. Levie said in an interview Wednesday. "And the only way to do that is by a very productive partnership between both the private sector as well as the public sector."
Tusk Holdings, which advises tech startups on regulatory strategies, said in a note to clients that Mr. Trump's election could spur new discussion on technology's role in displacing workers -- such as concerns that autonomous vehicles could take jobs from truck drivers.
There could, however, be a silver lining for tech companies. Scott Kessler of CFRA Research said Mr. Trump's win, coupled with continued Republican control of Congress, increases the chances for changes to the tax code that could enable U.S. companies to bring home more overseas profits.
And Mr. Trump is likely to adopt a light regulatory touch that could benefit tech businesses, said Robert Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation. A Trump administration is unlikely to expand regulatory oversight on encryption, or in areas of innovation such as artificial intelligence, meaning there will be "a lot more freedom to innovate with data and algorithms, so that is very good for tech," Mr. Atkinson said.
Still, the lack of specific policies from Mr. Trump during the campaign leaves uncertainty on hot-button issues such as the Obama administration's "net neutrality" rules, which generally bar telecom companies from favoring some traffic over others. Most technology companies support those rules, though many telecom providers oppose them.
While Mr. Trump didn't offer an official position on net neutrality, he expressed displeasure with the Federal Communications Commission's Open Internet Order through a tweet, "Obama's attack on the internet is another top down power grab."
Billionaire investor Mark Cuban worries that Mr. Trump will embrace advisers who are antitechnology. If so, "one of the greatest growth engines of the country could be diminished," Mr. Cuban said in an email before the election. "In that case we could see emigration of talent, rather than immigration."
Credit: By Trisha Thadani
