The blockbuster earnings report last week from chip maker Nvidia proved that companies are willing to spend big for artificial intelligence.
Unlike previous waves of innovation that were funded by information-technology departments' budgets, some companies are setting up allocations just for AI. The money is often earmarked by the chief executive officer, a sign that using the technology is a priority at the highest level.
Nvidia's chips underpin all of the most advanced AI systems, giving the company a market share estimated at more than 80%. The strength of the AI boom was on full display last Wednesday, when the company reported sales of $22.1 billion for the quarter ended Jan. 28 and forecast $24 billion for its current quarter, each more than triple that of the year-earlier periods and ahead of Wall Street's bullish expectations.
Much demand is coming from tech companies, which use Nvidia's GPUs, or graphics processing units, to build the physical infrastructure for AI that supports surging demand from corporate customers.
But as Nvidia's Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress noted, "Building and deploying AI solutions has reached virtually every industry."
Eli Lilly Chief Information and Digital Officer Diogo Rau said he felt the enthusiasm for the technology during the drugmaker's annual budget-planning cycle.
"I walked out of there with twice as much money from my boss and the rest of the executive committee because everybody wanted to get invested in AI," he said.
Rau, who reports directly to the CEO, said the company set up a pool of money just for funding AI initiatives. He serves as a sort of trustee for how it is doled out, but it doesn't take away from any other investments the technology department is making. Rau declined to say exactly how much money is going to AI but said "it's a lot."
"We always want more money, or we thought we always wanted more money, but now we have more than we know what to do with," he said, adding "there's a lot of pressure on us to innovate."
Out of 400 U.S. CEOs surveyed last year by KPMG, 72% said generative AI is a top investment priority.
Generative AI, a type of artificial intelligence that can create various types of content in response to a user's prompts, surged in popularity after OpenAI released its chatbot ChatGPT in late 2022.
"This last year, we've seen generative AI really becoming a whole new application space, a whole new way of doing computing," Jensen Huang, Nvidia's co-founder and chief executive, said Wednesday. "A whole new industry is being formed, and that's driving our growth."
CarMax has employed machine learning, a branch of AI, in a commercial strategy that draws on a combination of online and bricks-and-mortar channels, according to CEO Bill Nash.
"Generative AI is something new that we have begun using in a number of ways to support the business, and I have allocated budget to explore how we can integrate Gen AI into further improving our customer and associate experience," Nash said.
For example, the used-car retailer has used AI in creating a virtual "sweeper" that examines photos of cars and retouches imperfections in the background, such as a dirty garage floor, Shamim Mohammad, executive vice president and chief information and technology officer, said last year. The company gives customers near-instant offers for their used cars, a capability that is powered by AI.
CarMax has taken measures to ensure the technology is deployed responsibly and with proper guardrails, Nash said. He said he has made it a priority to educate himself and the board about generative AI's opportunities.
At insurance provider Travelers, overall technology spending has risen in the last five years and exceeded $1.5 billion in 2023, according to CEO Alan Schnitzer. During that time, the company said, it has expanded spending on strategic technology initiatives by nearly 70%. "That includes a meaningful increase in investments to develop or acquire cutting-edge AI capabilities built on modern cloud technology," Schnitzer said during an earnings call in July.
The potential uses in the insurance industry are many and varied, according to Schnitzer.
Some of Travelers' current AI capabilities are aimed at driving efficiency through automation, augmenting aspects of underwriting, claims handling, service delivery and more, he said on the call.
"On the most advanced end, we're leveraging generative AI in large language models, and we've been doing so for several years," he said.
LLMs are deep learning algorithms, trained on enormous amounts of data, and capable of summarizing, creating, predicting, translating and synthesizing text and other content.
In the company's Bond & Specialty business, proprietary large language models have processed hundreds of thousands of broker submissions, helping the company reduce intake time from hours to minutes, he said.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette and Steven Rosenbush
