Intel said it would further separate its chip-manufacturing and design operations as part of a new raft of measures to weather one of the most significant crises in its five-decade history.
Intel also is pausing factory projects in Germany and Poland for two years, and putting a manufacturing project in Malaysia on hold until demand picks back up, Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger said in an interview. The company also will slash the number of office locations, he said.
Gelsinger has been gradually separating Intel's manufacturing and chip-design operations, after making the company's factories available to outside circuit designers shortly after taking the role more than three years ago.
The manufacturing operations started to report separate financial results this year, but they will now become an independent subsidiary under Intel.
Increasing the separation between the two operations will allow the manufacturing arm to get financing independently, allay customer concerns about its independence and bring it more culturally in line with a contract chip maker, Gelsinger said.
The plan stops short of splitting off and selling the manufacturing operations, which many analysts and investors have encouraged Intel to consider. It could pave the way for such a move later, although Gelsinger said the company is better as one.
Intel also said that it reached a multibillion-dollar agreement for Amazon.com's cloud-computing arm to manufacture chips at Intel factories using an advanced chip-making technology expected to go into production next year. Intel also will make custom versions of its server chips for Amazon, it said.
Intel earlier Monday said that it was awarded up to $3 billion by the Biden administration to build manufacturing for the U.S. defense industry, confirming a win that has been largely expected since last year.
News of that defense deal helped fuel a 6% jump in Intel's stock, which nevertheless remained about 60% below its highest point over the past year as of Monday's close. Shares jumped another 8% in after-hours trading following Intel's other announcements.
Intel's newest moves are the product of a board meeting last week to discuss strategy and how the company is meeting goals laid out last month.
Intel will cut the number of its office locations by two-thirds by the end of this year as part of the streamlining, Gelsinger said, centralizing small and disparate teams that weren't capital efficient.
"Taking two-thirds of those locations away is a big statement about building a simpler, more-efficient and operationally more-nimble Intel," he said.
Monday's announcements build on measures Gelsinger laid out at the start of August, including cutting thousands of jobs and slashing costs by more than $10 billion next year. That came as Intel reported quarterly sales that missed expectations and sent its already beleaguered stock plunging further.
Gelsinger came in more than three years ago with a plan to revive Intel as a chip-making behemoth.
He pledged to catch up to Asian rivals in chip-making technology, while opening Intel's factories up to outsiders and vastly expanding its production capacity.
Aided by new government incentives, Intel announced large new chip factory projects in Arizona, Ohio, Germany and other places since Gelsinger took the helm. In the U.S., Intel was given a preliminary award of up to $8.5 billion through the Chips Act of 2022 -- legislation Gelsinger lobbied for.
Some of those projects have moved ahead quickly, including one in Arizona, although others have slowed amid cuts to Intel's capital spending. The Ohio project remains under construction, although the company delayed it from its initial timeline.
To finance the expansion amid Intel's challenges, Gelsinger has spearheaded deals with big pools of capital to take equity stakes in factory projects. In June, it struck a deal led by Apollo Global Management for a $11 billion investment in a factory in Ireland. It made a similar deal in 2022 with Brookfield Asset Management involving facilities in Arizona.
The current boom in artificial intelligence took hold about two years into Gelsinger's turnaround effort, and has largely benefited rivals -- especially Nvidia, whose chips have become a standard in creating and deploying the most-advanced AI systems. Fevered buying of Nvidia's chips sapped demand for Intel's AI offerings.
Gelsinger's aim had been to make five leaps in chip-making technology in four years, but Chief Financial Officer David Zinsner said at a recent conference that the company would skip over one of its incremental advancements because its most cutting-edge chips set to start arriving next year were performing so well.
The cost savings of the skip were worth the trade off, Gelsinger said.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
