Companies that operate telemedicine platforms have been among the biggest beneficiaries of the coronavirus pandemic, thanks to a surge in demand from people seeking online medical advice and drug prescriptions.
In China, however, increased regulatory scrutiny and impending rule changes for the internet healthcare industry have taken the wind out of the sector's once-highflying stocks.
Shares of Ping An Healthcare & Technology Co., Alibaba Health Information Technology Ltd. and JD Health International Inc., which are listed in Hong Kong and backed by some of China's largest and most innovative companies, have plunged between 50% and 70% in the year to date. That compares with a roughly 13% drop in the city's Hang Seng Index, and has placed them among the worst-performing internet-technology stocks this year.
Having prospered in sectors from insurance to e-commerce, corporate giants Ping An Insurance (Group) Co., Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and JD.com Inc. in recent years leveraged on their brands and huge consumer followings to disrupt the healthcare industry.
Their healthcare units provide online medical consultations and operate some of the most popular internet pharmacies in the country, and have millions of paying users.
Chinese authorities earlier on encouraged the growth of the telemedicine industry, which has increased people's access to doctors, alleviated strains at overcrowded hospitals, and lowered the cost of consultations and prescription drugs -- especially for individuals with chronic health conditions. HSBC Global Research in March predicted that the online pharmaceutical market in China was set to grow almost 10-fold to 1 trillion yuan, the equivalent of about $157 billion, by 2030.
The pandemic has also boosted people's usage of internet healthcare platforms and online pharmacies. That resulted in big share-price gains for the three telemedicine companies last year and in early 2021. Since then, a broad selloff in many Chinese internet-technology stocks triggered by regulatory clampdowns on numerous industries has also dragged down the sector's stocks.
The number of online consultations on non-hospital telemedicine platforms increased more than 20 times in 2020 from the previous year, Ye Quanfu, the head of China's National Institute of Hospital Administration, said at an internet healthcare industry summit. The August event was attended by other government health officials.
In late October, the National Health Commission, the country's health authority, released new draft rules for the telemedicine industry that mapped out minimum professional qualifications for doctors that provide medical consultations online. They also said artificial-intelligence technologies shouldn't be used in place of actual doctors to diagnose conditions.
The news sparked a selloff in the shares of Ping An Healthcare, which lost more than a third of their value in less than two weeks. The company uses AI to pair patients with doctors, and to help "guide their diagnostic decision making, and customize recommendations on medications," it said in its recent annual report.
The rules said internet healthcare platforms shouldn't offer initial or remote medical consultations for conditions other than common or chronic diseases, and that they needed to check patients' drug prescription records from bricks-and-mortar hospitals before dispensing medicines online.
The moves followed reports in domestic Chinese media outlets and complaints on internet forums about medical misdiagnoses by some online platforms, and the issuance of online drug prescriptions that weren't properly vetted by doctors. Some online platforms have generated digital prescriptions for patients who filled in self-diagnosing information, regardless of whether the individuals were previously treated at a physical hospital, according to the state-run Xinhua News Agency.
The tighter rules for the telemedicine platforms could slow the sector's expansion. Several brokerage analysts recently cut their stock-price targets for the listed online healthcare companies, saying they expect a growth slowdown in sales of online prescription drugs.
Many remain bullish on the industry. "It seems unlikely the regulator wants to completely prohibit the use of A.I. in online medical services. Rather, it appears focused on curbing unethical and irresponsible conduct," said Leon Qi, an analyst at Daiwa Capital Markets, in a recent report about Ping An Healthcare. The firm has a buy rating on the stock and a target price of 60 Hong Kong dollars, which is nearly double its current level. Ping An Healthcare's revenue has been growing strongly, but the company has yet to turn an annual profit.
In recent months, Chinese authorities have highlighted the important role telemedicine can play in care for the elderly, and in improving efficiency in the medical system, said Charlene Liu, an analyst at HSBC who covers the sector. That all points to the "government's support towards the long-term growth of the sector," she added.
Generate image description

Credit: By Anniek Bao
