Corrections & Amplifications
Keith Dreyer is chief science officer of the American College of Radiology Data Science Institute. The Capital Account column on Friday about artificial intelligence incorrectly gave his title as chief data science officer for the American College of Radiology.
(WSJ Nov. 30, 2017)
This month, a team of computer scientists at Stanford University said their artificial-intelligence program had diagnosed pneumonia on chest X-rays more accurately than human radiologists.
"Should radiologists be worried about their jobs?" one of the scientists, Andrew Ng, tweeted.
Probably not. In fact, they ought to be relieved: AI is more likely to make their jobs easier than redundant.
Radiologists today face the same problem of most professionals: too much data. Machine learning, the latest iteration of AI, can sift through that data and spot patterns humans might miss. But machines don't know what to do with that information -- at least not yet. Only humans do.
In recent decades, the volume of medical images has skyrocketed, reflecting growing patient loads, more types of scans and the number of images each exam produces. CT scans that once captured one dimension of the body can now capture all three, generating hundreds or even thousands of detailed images.
Some 800 million radiology exams are conducted annually in the U.S. generating roughly 60 billion images, or one every two seconds for every radiologist, estimates Steve Tolle, vice president of global strategy at International Business Machines Corp.'s Watson Health Imaging. "And we have an expectation they are getting it right every time," he says.
The strain of all that data, he says, is why some images in Britain go weeks without being read, why many radiologists are burned out, and why radiologist shortages loom despite high pay.
IBM thinks AI can relieve those strains. It is one of many companies developing AI applications for medical imaging. IBM scientists feed a computer with thousands of images for which humans have already determined if tumors or some other condition are present. The computer generates a model that can analyze new images to try to figure out whether tumors are present.
In one experiment, IBM Watson diagnosed the presence of melanoma on images of skin lesions with 76% accuracy, higher than the 71% average of eight dermatologists. The company hopes that some day a doctor or nurse will be able to take a photo of a skin lesion and upload it to an AI application that can tell you how likely it is to be cancer.
Since AI learns from patterns identified by humans, it can't know more than humans, but it can be more consistent and less biased in applying that knowledge.
Radiologists tend to look for things they have seen recently, says John Park of Anne Arundel Medical Center in Annapolis, Md., who is working with IBM Watson. By contrast, he says, once AI has seen something, it never forgets, and brings that knowledge to bear on every image. This could be of particular value in poor countries with too few trained radiologists.
But AI can only assert probability, not certainty, of what an image shows. It "may point out to me things I may have missed, but then I have to ascertain whether that reading is accurate or not," says Jaime Murillo of Sentara Healthcare, which serves Virginia and North Carolina.
This is what limits AI wherever it is applied. Facebook, like radiology, struggles with too much information. Facebook hopes that some day AI will be able to police for objectionable content.
But determining what's objectionable requires a Facebook member to report something to the "community operations" team, which then decides whether it should be removed. Thereafter, AI watches for similar content and prevents it from being shared. Facebook is hiring thousands of humans to make those calls.
In "many of the everyday AI applications, the machine predicts the most relevant options and sorts them, but the human makes the actual choice," says Avi Goldfarb, an economist specializing in AI at the University of Toronto.
An algorithm can be trained to look for a specific condition, but "most of the time you don't even know what you are looking for," says Keith Dreyer, chief data science officer for the American College of Radiology.
Maximum accuracy requires that the algorithm be trained separately for every condition and disease, a costly and labor-intensive process. Then, notes Dr. Dreyer, the Food and Drug Administration must approve the system and doctors then integrate it into their practices.
While some commercial AI applications for medical imaging exist, IBM Watson has yet to release any; a spokeswoman says proposed applications for breast and skin cancer will depend on regulatory timelines.
The panic over AI stealing jobs is reminiscent of the worry nearly two decades ago over offshoring of jobs of all types. Some economists predicted international broadband connections meant much of the reading of medical images would be outsourced to radiologists in India earning a fraction of American salaries. It never happened.
U.S. regulators didn't want unregulated doctors reading American patients' images, and the requisite skills and experience were too scarce in emerging markets. The number of U.S. radiologists has thus risen more than 40% since 1995.

Credit: By Greg Ip
