BANKS PENINSULA, New Zealand -- Armed with a .22-caliber rifle, a GPS tracker and a dog named Scmack, Jason Millichamp set off with a license to kill. His mission: find and eliminate brushtail possums, an intruder that eats baby birds and strips vegetation from native trees.
Millichamp, a 59-year-old former helicopter mechanic, is on the front lines of New Zealand's drive to be "predator free" by 2050. That means eradicating invasive species such as possums, rats and mustelids -- a group that includes weasels and stoats.
Millichamp and Scmack, who locates possums with his nose, are the mop-up team. They are often deployed to find the last few animals, after most possums in an area have been killed with poison or traps.
On their recent expedition at a cattle farm, Scmack detected a possum living in a hollow tree on a hillside. By the time Millichamp scrambled up, he couldn't find it.
But farther down the trail, Scmack found another possum in a cluster of vines. Millichamp poked toward the animal with his walking stick, then shot it. Scmack retrieved the animal, but it was still alive, so Millichamp shot it again.
"Unfortunately, to protect our birds, we've got to kill these things," he said. "In essence, it shouldn't be here."
Countries all over the globe are fighting against invasive species. In the U.S., foreign mussels are wreaking havoc in the Great Lakes, invasive fungi are threatening trees in Hawaii and non-native carp are invading rivers and lakes. Many governments employ strict biosecurity rules at points of entry, such as throwing away fresh fruit and inspecting imported wildlife.
New Zealand's campaign is unusual because it aims to eradicate small, mobile and fast-breeding predators from the entire nation. Increasingly sophisticated traps, equipped with cameras and artificial intelligence that can identify species in real time, are being deployed. Scientists have developed a toxic bait that specifically targets rats and is largely harmless to other animals. Researchers are exploring whether genetic technology can stop some creatures from breeding.
But the effort, introduced nearly a decade ago, is proving controversial. Animal-rights groups are alarmed about the ethics of killing millions of creatures. Some scientists argue that alternative approaches, such as moving threatened animals to sanctuaries with predator-proof fences, might make more sense.
The predator-free plan "retains the dream of permanently eliminating highly fertile and short-lived pests by direct frontal assault -- lethal control -- over large geographic areas," said Carolyn King, an emeritus professor at the University of Waikato who has studied stoats. Although the plan has had some local successes, "it has never explained how it can do this at landscape scale," she said.
For this volcanic country in the South Pacific, the plan tackles a legacy of its colonial past. New Zealand's native animals, including flightless birds like the kiwi, evolved without ground-dwelling mammalian predators. That made them vulnerable to the mammals that arrived with European settlers in the 19th century.
Some native animals are easy prey. Kiwi chicks are likely to be eaten by stoats without some form of predator control. A government report last year estimated that more than 75% of native reptile, bird, bat and freshwater-fish species groups are threatened with extinction or are at risk.
"Either we accept that we're on this journey of biodiversity decline, or we do something about it," said James Willcocks, director of the citywide program to eliminate predators in Wellington, New Zealand's capital.
Others worry that the goal is unachievable without a radical leap in technology. The target predators often breed faster than they can be removed, catching the last few animals that avoid traps or baits is costly, and guarding against reinvasion is difficult, scientists say.
Airdropped poison baits have been used to eradicate predators from uninhabited islands, but that is a problematic strategy if people live nearby. Another issue: The official plan doesn't include feral cats, an invasive predator, or non-native animals such as deer and pigs that destroy habitats needed for local fauna to thrive.
Then there is the cost. The latest estimates suggest up to $6 billion will be needed for the campaign to succeed. That could be a challenge for a country of 5.3 million people -- roughly the population of South Carolina -- that has been struggling economically.
"Most people would love it if rats and possums and stoats would be removed from the country. If you could press a button, almost everyone would do it," said Ally Palmer, a senior research fellow at the University of Auckland who has studied public perception of the program. "But there are some ongoing concerns about the 'How?' And also, about the 'Can we?'"
On one predator-free island -- home to threatened species such as a flightless parrot called the kakapo -- the government spent some $295,000 over eight months tracking down a single stoat. Still, that was cheaper than moving the threatened animals and eradicating predators from an entirely new island, officials say. The effort involved trap experts, dogs, trail cameras, setting and monitoring 100 traps, and helicopters to transport people and equipment.
Even some supporters aren't sure the 2050 nationwide goal is achievable. "I think it's a pipe dream," said 83-year-old Georgie Oborne, who lives on the Banks Peninsula.
Conservation officials say the predator-free plan will become more feasible as new technology comes online, bringing down costs.
"If we get this right, we just do this once, and we've reset the country and native wildlife can thrive," said Brent Beaven, the official at New Zealand's conservation department in charge of the strategy.
In Wellington, one of the 18 locations where conservation groups are experimenting, the group used traps and bait stations, tracker dogs, hundreds of cameras, and reports from community members to eliminate rats and mustelids from the Miramar peninsula.
The Wellington group is pushing into new neighborhoods while maintaining a vigilant watch for invaders. Some weeks ago, a community member noticed a dead rat that a tracker dog later traced to recently delivered firewood.
"We're reasonably confident that we can do possums," said Rob Forlong, chief executive of Predator Free 2050. "With rats and stoats, they are a lot harder."
Credit: By Mike Cherney
