PITTSBURGH -- In the auto industry's war for tech talent, Ford Motor Co. made an unusual $1 billion bet last year to fund an artificial-intelligence company in Pittsburgh with fewer than a dozen employees.
The aim was to build expertise in automated driving by offering job recruits a potentially lucrative perk that Dearborn, Mich., car maker couldn't otherwise provide: an equity stake for new hires in a fast-growing startup.
The company, Argo AI, has since grown to about 330 employees, in part by luring away software engineers and robotics researchers from Apple Inc., Uber Technologies Inc. and other tech companies. Ford, which holds a majority stake in the company, is banking on Argo to help it catch up in the race to build driverless cars.
"Every employee is an owner," said Argo Chief Executive Bryan Salesky. "They're able to benefit from the upside being created in a direct way. That can't be offered with a large company where the stock goes up and down with earnings."
Ford aims to start selling a fully autonomous car for commercial use in 2021. Argo is also working on an autonomous-driving system that they can eventually sell to other companies, too.
As cars become more high-tech, auto makers are scrambling to hire workers with expertise in fields such as robotics, computer science and machine learning. But they are often at a disadvantage, unable to match the high pay and equity offered by Silicon Valley. That has forced car makers and their suppliers to get more creative to recruit workers.
General Motors Co. committed roughly $1 billion two years ago to buy Cruise Automation, a driverless-technology startup in San Francisco that had only 40 employees at the time. With GM's backing, Cruise has expanded to 740 employees, making it a key recruiting hub in Silicon Valley. Last month, the unit attracted a $2.25 billion investment from Japan's SoftBank Group Corp.
Toyota Motor Corp. in 2016 created a robotics and autonomous-driving research institute affiliated with Stanford University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the University of Michigan. Nissan Motor Corp. is working with National Aeronautics and Space Administration engineers to develop robotic-vehicle technology.
Ford's partnership with Argo is unique: The auto maker didn't acquire the startup outright, choosing instead to become its client and financial backer. Argo's task is to develop a so-called "virtual driver system," which consists of sensors, software and hardware, and then work with Ford engineers to integrate it into a new driverless-vehicle design.
Ford likely won't be first to market with a self-driving car, said Sam Abuelsamid, an analyst with Navigant Research. Alphabet Inc.'s autonomous-car unit, Waymo, plans to start a robot-taxi service in the U.S. later this year. "But they're making the right moves to put together a business model that's going to be commercially feasible," Mr. Abuelsamid said.
Argo's Mr. Salesky, who formerly served as a director of hardware development with Google's self-driving car program, said he started Argo in 2016 with Peter Rander, the company's president, to work more closely with auto makers.
Argo benefits from its proximity to Pittsburgh's Carnegie Mellon University, which has one of the world's top robotics research institutions. Messrs. Salesky and Rander were both researchers there, and many of Argo's recent hires have come from a group of scientists that Uber poached from Carnegie Mellon three years ago to build its own driverless-car program.

Credit: By Christina Rogers
