Global investors are betting that Japan is on course to pull out of its long economic slump, reflecting hopes that growth is accelerating world-wide and sending stocks to multiyear highs.
Japan's economy, the world's third largest, expanded at its fastest pace in two years in the second quarter and is on its longest growth streak in more than a decade, spurred by its central bank's ultraloose monetary policy and a nascent recovery around the globe. Business and consumer spending have rebounded, a weaker currency has made Japanese exports more competitive abroad and stimulus from the Bank of Japan continues to support markets.
The combination has meant good news for Japanese stocks. The Nikkei Stock Average hit a two-year high Monday. The close was some 2.2% below the 2015 high, which was the highest since 1996.
Yet many investors remain cautious on Japan, where relatively cheap stocks and the promise of a resurgent economy have lured generations of bargain hunters. Rallies in the Nikkei over the past few years have come and gone, but the average has never approached the 1989 high of 38916, stopped by lackluster growth, low inflation and poor corporate governance. While Japan's stocks have traded at a nearly 40% discount to their global peers, flows from foreign investors have been sporadic, with few willing to buy into Japan for the long term.
Many investors would see a sustained rebound in Japan, where growth has lagged behind Europe and the U.S. for decades, as a sign that the global recovery from the financial crisis is picking up steam.
"The U.S. recovered, and then Europe came on and accelerated, and now it looks like the Japanese data is starting to come along," said Torsten Slok, chief international economist at Deutsche Bank. "Despite the facts staring them in the eyes, people hang on to the old story for too long before they realize a new story has developed."
The Japanese market's long funk has roots in the bursting of the "bubble economy" in the early 1990s. Land and stock prices collapsed, sending Japan's financial system into a tailspin from which it didn't fully recover until the early 2000s. Companies and consumers tried to pare debt, leading to deflation and a sense of stagnation, while political turmoil delayed shareholder-friendly policies.
Through false starts and years of subpar economic performance, many global investors have stayed away, even as Japanese companies have become more profitable.
Return on equity -- one measure of profitability -- has improved to around 8.4% in 2017 from just above 5% when Prime Minister Shinzo Abe took office in late 2012, according to research by AllianceBernstein Holding LP. Yet Japanese stocks trade on average at 1.5 times book value, or the total value of their assets outside of what they owe -- a 36% discount to the developed-market average.
"Investors have left Japan for dead and are only now starting to come back," said Vadim Zlotnikov, chief market strategist at AllianceBernstein.
But "many investors are still skeptical," Mr. Zlotnikov said. "People have been burned over and over."
Even as signs of improvement mount, the Bank of Japan continues to support markets by buying 6 trillion yen ($53 billion) in exchange-traded stock funds annually. Japanese companies have taken steps to make themselves more attractive to investors, such as adding outside directors to their boards and boosting returns through share buybacks.
Areas where Japanese companies are at the forefront include artificial intelligence and robotics. The country's auto-parts makers are poised to benefit from a move to electric vehicles, while cosmetics makers and makers of electric-vehicle parts reap profits from selling to Asia's growing middle class, investors said.
Benjamin Segal, a senior portfolio manager at Neuberger Berman, says he has grown more optimistic on Japan and added select companies to his equity portfolio this year. "I'm emerging from the 'no way' camp into an incrementally more positive view," Mr. Segal said. "There does seem to be change afoot."
Japanese companies "merit more of an inspection today they would have a year or two ago, or even 10 years ago," he said. Among the stocks he owns are chemicals and cosmetics maker Kao Corp. and air-conditioner manufacturer Daikin Industries Ltd.
Still, money managers own too few Japanese equities, and the yen is "grotesquely undervalued," Charles Gave, founder of research firm Gavekal, wrote in a note to investors. Corporate profits have grown at a faster pace in Japan than in the U.S. for the past five years, he said, while Japanese companies are sitting on around $4 trillion in cash. "The great beauty of these recommendations is that nobody . . . is positioned accordingly," he wrote.
Japan's economy remains shaky, especially because wages haven't grown rapidly enough under Mr. Abe to spark solid consumer spending. There is no guarantee of Japan's relative political stability, nor that the uneasy peace among the region's biggest powers will hold for the long term. Some investors are nervous about Mr. Abe's plans to push through a tax increase for 2019. A recession followed a sales-tax increase in 2014.
Others, however, see signs of long-sought change. Masakazu Hosomizu, a Chicago-based portfolio manager at RMB Capital, said investors were watching whether the Japanese government follows through on corporate-governance changes. Mr. Abe last week called an early election for Oct. 22 and called for a "productivity revolution" powered by greater investment in robotics and artificial intelligence.
"The biggest focus in the market is whether the current momentum will continue," he said. "What we're asking ourselves is if this can last for the next five years or 10 years."

Credit: By Ira Iosebashvili and Kosaku Narioka
