SAP gained more than $17 billion in market value after the German business-software company raised its revenue and earnings forecasts for the year amid strong demand for artificial intelligence.
Shares of SAP closed 2.1% higher in Frankfurt, adding more than 15.89 billion euros, or roughly $17.19 billion, in market value and lifting it to nearly 264.44 billion euros, according to FactSet data. The group briefly overtook ASML Holding as Europe's most-valuable technology company earlier on Tuesday after its stock climbed more than 5%.
The company behind the Concur travel and expense-management platform raised guidance for cloud and software revenue, operating profit and free cash flow this year following a jump in sales at its core cloud business and higher earnings in the third quarter.
SAP Chief Executive Christian Klein said a significant part of cloud deals in the quarter included AI use cases. The company has doubled down on efforts to cash in on the technology in recent months, cementing new AI partnerships and expanding existing ones as it seeks an edge over rivals.
Reporting on a non-IFRS basis, SAP said total revenue increased 10% at constant currencies to 8.47 billion euros. Revenue from SAP's core cloud business jumped 27% to 4.35 billion euros. Operating profit grew 28% to 2.24 billion euros.
Analysts had forecast total revenue of 8.44 billion euros, cloud revenue of 4.35 billion euros and an operating profit of 2.07 billion euros, according to a non-IFRS consensus provided by the company.
SAP, like other European software companies, presents its figures as two sets of numbers. One set is based on the International Financial Reporting Standards -- an international accounting method that seeks to provide a global reporting standard -- though analysts and investors tend to follow SAP's non-IFRS numbers, which exclude restructuring expenses and acquisition-related charges.
For the year, SAP now expects non-IFRS operating profit at constant currencies of 7.8 billion euros to 8 billion euros, above a previous range of 7.6 billion euros to 7.9 billion euros. Cloud and software revenue at constant currencies is expected between 29.5 billion euros and 29.8 billion euros, compared with previous forecasts of 29 billion euros to 29.5 billion euros.
Credit: By Mauro Orru
