A federal investigation into a major leak of highly classified U.S. documents has cast a spotlight on a social-media outlet popularized by videogame enthusiasts.
On Discord Inc.'s online platform, users chat about games, investing and other topics in mostly private, invitation-only groups called servers. Like others in social media, the company has at times struggled to rein in bad actors.
Discord has been accused of being used to share child pornography and playing a role in the Charlottesville, Va., violence in 2017. The company said its highest priority is to ensure a safe experience for users, and that it investigates and responds to policy violations.
San Francisco-based Discord has about 150 million monthly users worldwide, making it much smaller than social-media leaders such as Meta Platforms Inc.'s Facebook and ByteDance Ltd.'s TikTok, which each have more than one billion monthly users.
Discord got its start in 2015 as an easy way for people to communicate while playing online games. An early mover, it grew in popularity by providing several ways to interact, and gradually expanded its appeal to a variety of users, who say it offers higher-quality audio than other chat services.
With Discord, which can run on a desktop or mobile phone, users set up servers for chatting via video, audio or text. The majority of servers are private. Discord, which is free to use, makes money by selling enhanced versions of its chat software, starting at $2.99 a month.
In addition to chatting while playing games, people use Discord to watch movies and do homework together. Among its largest groups are servers dedicated to games such as Riot Games Inc.'s "Valorant" and those on Roblox, as well as artwork created using generative artificial intelligence. The platform also hosts communities supporting Ukraine's cause.
In April 2021, Discord ended discussions over a possible acquisition offer from Microsoft Corp. The company was valued at $14.7 billion as of September 2021, and it had raised $1.1 billion as of March 2022, according to PitchBook Data Inc.
Discord said it is cooperating with law enforcement on the probe into the classified documents leak.
The leaked documents, which appear to have numbered in the hundreds, stayed among the members of a tiny group on Discord until early March when another user reposted several dozen of them to another group with a larger audience. From there, at least 10 files migrated to a much bigger community focused on the computer game Minecraft.
The latest leaked reports include a range of U.S. intelligence assessments, some not related to the war in Ukraine.
"Someone was just taking a bunch of pictures and putting them up there" on Discord, said Thomas Rid, a professor of strategic studies at Johns Hopkins University.
Discord uses a combination of machine learning, employees and volunteer moderators to weed out behaviors that violate its policies. The firm has about 900 employees and roughly 15% work in trust and safety.
Discord said it always seeks to find and remove abhorrent content from its platform. It said it uses the latest technology to find such content and punishes users who post it by banning them and sometimes reporting them to authorities.
---
Robert McMillan contributed to this article.
Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
