Fei-Fei Li, a renowned pioneer in artificial intelligence, says a conversation with her mother changed the course of her career. She notes that her parents, who brought her to the U.S. from China when she was 15 with hopes for a better life, had always been supportive of her work. But about a decade ago her mother asked: "Fei-Fei, what exactly do you do?"
As Li writes in her new memoir, "The Worlds I See: Curiosity, Exploration, and Discovery at the Dawn of AI," Li, 47, explained how her interest in the "mysteries of intelligence" spurred her to create a massive data set of images to teach computers how to identify objects in the world. That feat is now widely credited with helping to spawn the "deep learning" revolution in AI. Her mom was intrigued but unmoved. "What," she pointedly asked, "can AI do to help people?"
The question was unexpectedly humbling, and Li says it pushed her to see AI as a tool, not just a concept. Now, as a computer science professor at Stanford University and co-director of its Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, which she helped found in 2019, Li is calling for both innovations that improve people's lives and better safeguards against AI's dangers. Those include, she says, the spread of disinformation, the threat to jobs posed by automation and the rise of algorithms with inherent biases against nonwhite, nonmale users.
"As we create more and more powerful technology, we need to make sure we are not just exacerbating intolerance, exacerbating unfairness," Li says from her office at Stanford. She is troubled that most AI products are managed by the private sector, and universities and other nonprofits can no longer afford to build the kind of aspirational, problem-solving technology she hopes to see. "Not a single university in America has the resources to train ChatGPT," she says, referring to the popular chatbot created by OpenAI, which got a $10 billion infusion from Microsoft in January. In September, Amazon announced it would invest up to $4 billion in Anthropic, a rival to OpenAI.
Li has been calling for federal investment in AI research by academics and nonprofits, and welcomes President Biden's recent executive order, which she believes will "catalyze AI innovation" by including such funding. She wants to see Congress enshrine such resources into law. She argues that the power of AI to both create and solve big problems is too great to relinquish its development to the wealthiest private companies. "AI can really help us find a cure for cancer, it can help to superpower our teachers, it can help us map out biodiversity," she says. "But we could miss these discoveries if diverse voices aren't at the table."
Li credits her own unconventional background with inspiring her interest in using AI to improve healthcare. "Having taken care of immigrant parents who don't speak English, and for many years didn't have the means to have health insurance, I have some insights that maybe a technologist from an affluent background would never have," she says. In partnership with Stanford Medical School and Hospitals, Li and her students are figuring out how AI can improve hospital hygiene, relieve staff of tasks and improve patient safety. Given that medical errors are a top cause of U.S. deaths, and the industry suffers from high burnout rates, "this is an area where a lot of help is needed," she says.
Growing up in Chengdu, Li sensed that her life lay elsewhere. Despite the claims of some of her teachers that boys were "biologically smarter" than girls, she was a top student, fascinated, she says, by the poetry and "grandeur" of physics. When she and her parents secured U.S. visas and moved into a cramped one-bedroom apartment in Parsippany, N.J. in 1992, she felt buoyed by the fact that Albert Einstein had been an immigrant, too.
At Princeton University, she balanced her studies with helping her parents run their dry-cleaning shop. Her interest in physics gave way to computers, which she believed could decode and even model the workings of the human mind. "I was inspired by asking audacious questions about the universe, like, 'What is intelligence?'" she says. As a doctoral candidate at the California Institute of Technology, Li began exploring how the brain processes what it sees, guided by a hunch that teaching visual comprehension to machines could be key to creating artificial intelligence. (She also met Silvio Savarese, a fellow grad student in computer science, now her husband and the father of their two children.)
Against a "chorus of detractors," she writes, Li began categorizing images for a huge database to teach vision to computers. At Stanford, where she was invited to bring her lab in 2009, she unveiled ImageNet, a repository of 15 million images across 22,000 categories. It got little attention until 2012, when an algorithm trained on this data was able to identify previously unfamiliar pictures 85% of the time, surpassing all prior efforts. By 2015 a machine trained on ImageNet could beat the human error rate of 5.1%.
By then, interest in AI had moved beyond academia into Silicon Valley, with some disturbing results. In 2015, Google and Yahoo algorithms notoriously mislabeled photos of Black people as "gorillas" and an "ape," respectively, which highlighted some of the perils of relying on data sets and algorithms that were created mainly by white men. "If the people behind a product's design and decision-making come from only one angle, we're going to miss a lot," says Li.
She promptly helped found what would become AI4ALL, a nonprofit that aims to increase diversity and inclusion in AI, with funding from Melinda French Gates and Nvidia founder Jensen Huang. "If we're not cultivating the curiosity and talents of children from every background, we might just miss incredible human capital," says Li, who says she has often felt lonely as a rare woman in a field dominated by men.
Her 21-month spell as chief scientist of AI at Google Cloud, while on sabbatical from Stanford in 2017 and 2018, drove home what Li calls "the messiness of this technology." She says her time at the center of a controversy over a Google Cloud contract with the Defense Department, which spurred some employees to resign over the potential for AI tools to be used to target lethal drone strikes, felt like "a coming-of-age moment" for AI. Amid growing public concerns over flawed facial-recognition software, self-driving-car deaths and threats to privacy, Li decided it was time for a new framework for thinking about these problems, which she branded "human-centered AI."
From her lab, which brings together economists, sociologists, political scientists, physicists and others to better understand AI's effects, Li says she is cautiously hopeful that lawmakers will figure out how to regulate AI without killing innovation. Given the power of the technology, she says it's too dangerous to let big tech companies regulate themselves. "If you're taking a pill, do you want to know that the FDA has conducted randomized trials to test its effectiveness?" she asks. "Or do you want to just believe the company when it says it's safe?"
Credit: By Emily Bobrow
