Laguna Beach, Calif. -- With their valuations and earnings down, and their guidance gloomy, America's tech companies have entered a phase when they have to be brutally honest with themselves about what really works. This means executives are trimming staff, moonshots and unprofitable distractions. They're also deciding what to focus on.
It's a transition away from more than a decade of "gee-whiz" projects -- think self-driving cars, flying cars, metaverses and crypto. The task at hand now: building and expanding businesses that actually make money.
This past week of earnings reports from America's biggest tech companies hammered home this theme. Google parent Alphabet, Microsoft, Facebook parent Meta Platforms and Amazon reported results that caused their already-battered stocks to fall further.
At The Wall Street Journal Tech Live conference this past week, it was impossible to miss a recurring theme: the gravity of this moment, and the ways leaders are being forced to quickly adapt.
Asked about the sudden, industrywide decline in sales of semiconductors, Intel Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger said: "Misery loves company -- and that's the nature of the semiconductor industry."
Evan Spiegel, CEO of Snap -- whose market value has tumbled more than 80% over the past year -- spoke candidly about having had to discontinue innovative hardware products like its Pixy drone because they were low-margin businesses. He said his company had to focus on what could directly affect its bottom line, from making more revenue per user on advertising to continuing to expand the audience for its core social-media product.
Amid all this gloom, though, the inherent optimism of the tech industry also shined through. And that belief that better times are just one more breakthrough away isn't entirely irrational, given what has happened to America's tech industry in downturns past.
Historically, when venture capitalists tighten the purse strings and shareholders in public companies start demanding answers, the tech industry is forced to focus on what can actually generate value for their customers -- and revenue for themselves.
During financial crises, belt-tightening leads to the rollout and broad adoption of existing but not yet widely used technologies, according to lecturer and consultant Carlota Perez, who studies what drives revolutions in technology.
It might seem at first counterintuitive -- wouldn't the good times be when technologies are most widely deployed? But it turns out those are the times companies lose self-discipline and spend on projects that might go nowhere.
Now is a time when companies are shifting their attitudes and strategy from "what can we do?" to "what do we need to do?"
Waymo, born in 2009 in what was then Google's moonshot lab, Google X, is a good example of this.
In September Waymo hired a new finance chief to help the company expand to new regions and types of vehicles, a company spokeswoman told the Journal. Given the enormity of the transportation industry, if Waymo hits on a way to make robotaxis work in many cities, even just some of the time, Waymo's growth in the coming years could turn it into a business of significant scale for Alphabet.
As for the rest of the tech industry, what does focusing on what actually works look like? Lessons from past downturns, combined with other trends unique to the present, suggest directions they might take.
Many of the collaboration tools that got the world's knowledge workers through the pandemic were founded soon after either the 2000 or 2008 crashes -- from Zoom Video Communications (founded in 2011) to Slack (evolved from a videogame company that started in 2009) and Atlassian (2002).
All of those onetime startups are now either big companies in their own right, or are owned by big companies. And companies still need tools for remote collaboration, since hybrid work necessitates them as much as fully remote work did.
As with past downturns, there will be new companies and industries that will either be born during this time or will see their growth accelerate.
Roelof Botha, a partner at venture-capital giant Sequoia, said on stage at Tech Live that investors have more opportunities to find and evaluate good startups in a down market.
Webvan was a rapid-delivery company that saw a huge run-up in its valuation before it went bust in 2001. While it failed, one of its laid-off leaders, Mick Mountz, took from his time there the lesson that e-commerce warehouses needed a great deal more automation than was available at the time. That led him to found Kiva Robotics, the logistics-automation company. Kiva was eventually bought by Amazon, and has been the linchpin of the company's e-commerce fulfillment infrastructure ever since.
Now, a new wave of more-capable robots is arriving, as technologies like machine learning and computer vision have matured.
Boston Dynamics, a company that was founded in 1992 but didn't release its first product commercially -- Spot, the robot dog -- until 2020, exemplifies this trend. In a panel on stage at Tech Live, CEO Robert Playter said that Spot is now covering more than 23 kilometers a day in an inspection tour of an Anheuser-Busch brewery, using a heat-sensing camera and a special auditory sensor to find machines that might fail soon or are wasting energy.
No corner of the tech bubble saw a more furious run-up in valuation or a more precipitous crash than the value of cryptocurrencies and blockchain-based virtual goods.
When pressed on what applications of cryptocurrencies and the blockchain will prove durable, Sam Bankman-Fried, CEO and founder of crypto exchange FTX, pointed to speeding up the process of transferring money between banks, and at the same time reducing the transaction fees paid by merchants. Re-plumbing the connections among the world's financial institutions is hardly the sort of thing that has gotten crypto fans most excited in the past few years.
It's another example of hype-fueled tech seeing its more outlandish manifestations laid low, and companies turning toward the things that it might actually do well, no matter how boring they might seem.
Herman Narula, CEO of the metaverse company Improbable Worlds, pointed out in a panel that the world already has a number of popular metaverses, and all of them are games, including Fortnite and Roblox. If Facebook's own ailing metaverse, Horizon Worlds, can also be thought of as a kind of game, then staking a giant company's future on what is essentially a new, unfinished game "is a really difficult thing to see working out successfully," he added.
Tellingly, Facebook unveiled a new "pro" virtual-reality headset along with a partnership with Microsoft, which will be making its workplace-software available in the headset.
If it works, this realignment of the metaverse from a place to have fun to a place to get things done may represent the point at which Meta figured out an actual use for the metaverse.
Phil Libin, CEO of artificial-intelligence company All Turtles and a self-described "metaverse hater," sat on the same panel as Mr. Narula. Mr. Libin summed up the state of investment in the metaverse in a way that could apply to all tech investment in the foreseeable future.
"Now more than at any other time in history," he said, "it is time to invest in the real world."
Credit: By Christopher Mims
