The U.S. and China are accelerating research on how to integrate artificial intelligence into their militaries as part of a global race to take advantage of the fast-developing technology.
Among the priorities for both sides: weapons that can find their way to a target without human help and AI tools to identify targets from satellite images.
In one recent trial by China's National University of Defense Technology, a swarm of dozens of drones overcame test jamming signals by aiding each other, according to state media accounts. Then, without help from a human operator, they found and destroyed a target with loitering munitions, state media said.
The U.S. held a joint exercise with the U.K. and Australia in April to use AI-enabled drones in a swarm to track and simulate attacks on ground vehicles such as tanks, self-propelled guns and armored vehicles. In the exercise, organizers said they retrained the drones while in flight by transmitting updates to AI targeting programs.
And earlier this year, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency offered a contract opportunity for a "swarm-of-swarms" project, which could potentially combine swarms of air, land and sea-based AI-guided drones.
A recent study of hundreds of AI-related military procurement records conducted by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., found that around a third of all known contracts in the U.S. and China from an eight-month period in 2020 were for intelligent and autonomous vehicles, the largest share in both countries.
Ukraine has used drones with some autonomous capabilities to counter the Russian invasion, providing one of the first real-world testing grounds for AI-driven drone technology.
"The U.S. military in particular is learning a great deal about the value of these technologies on the battlefield from the conflict in Ukraine," said Margarita Konaev, deputy director of analysis at the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. The study by Konaev's group found that AI tools for intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance accounted for the second-largest share of procurement contracts in both countries.
Recent breakthroughs in AI have heightened expectations for military applications and led to concern that the U.S. may lag behind China.
In 2021, Chinese military publications showed officials discussing an approach to warfare that incorporates advances in big data and artificial intelligence to help identify U.S. vulnerabilities and then uses all the branches of its military to launch precision strikes.
China's Defense Ministry didn't respond to a request for comment.
The Georgetown researchers foundless evidence from procurement contracts that the U.S. or China are working on giving AI authority to independently make strategic decisions or launch major strikes, such as with nuclear weapons.
The Pentagon didn't respond to a request for comment.
Credit: By Alastair Gale
