BEIJING -- China's leading smartphone maker and one of its largest internet companies are in a showdown over user data, the big prize in the emerging era of artificial intelligence.
To build its AI capability -- so that its phones can, say, make restaurant suggestions based on a user's text messages -- Huawei Technologies Co. is collecting user-activity information on its advanced Honor Magic smartphone. Among the information captured: text messages sent using the WeChat social-media app.
WeChat owner Tencent Holdings Ltd. contends that Huawei is effectively taking Tencent's data and violating the privacy of WeChat users, according to people familiar with the situation.
It has asked the Chinese government to intervene, these people say.
Huawei denied violating user privacy, saying in a written statement to The Wall Street Journal that it captures the information only from users who give their approval through the phone's settings.
"All user data belongs to the user. . .it doesn't belong to WeChat or Honor Magic," the company said. "User data is processed on the Honor Magic device after user authorization."
Tencent declined to discuss the Huawei dispute specifically, but said in a written statement to the Journal that it "is committed to protect user privacy and data."
"From an industry perspective, we are working closely with stakeholders including telco operators, handset manufacturers, app developers as well as the regulators to build a healthy ecosystem that benefits users and the industry as whole," the company said.
Both Tencent and Huawei are based in Shenzhen. The WeChat app has nearly one billion users, and Huawei is China's No. 1 smartphone maker by shipments.
User data is growing more valuable, coveted by device makers as necessary to build effective AI and by social-media companies such as Tencent for tracking users' habits, the better to sell them products and services.
Tencent wants China's Ministry of Industry and Information Technology to intervene in its favor, according to the people familiar with the situation. The regulator has instead suggested the warring parties come to terms on their own, said a person briefed on the matter.
The ministry didn't respond to a request for comment.
In its statement, Huawei said the Honor Magic has passed tests devised by the ministry to show it doesn't violate privacy regulations, and that it hopes for an amicable resolution.
"As more companies around the world start investing heavily in AI, greater competition between hardware companies and internet companies is unavoidable," Huawei said. "We hope that all parties in the ecosystem can come to the table and discuss plans for industry development, collaboration, and rules of engagement."
The bounds of customer privacy and the right to gather personal data to improve nascent AI technologies are hot topics across the industry. Data is seen as the determining factor in the success of AI-driven devices, but that data is now closely held and guarded by giant internet companies.
"Data being monopolized by big internet companies would eventually affect the development of mobile-internet industry in China," said Wang Yanhui, secretary-general of Mobile China Alliance.
The Honor Magic, which was launched in December and retails for 3,699 yuan ($550), uses AI technology to adapt the phone's performance. For example, the apps on the homescreen move automatically depending on frequency of use, and a text message about Thai food might lead the phone to recommend nearby Thai restaurants.
Alphabet Inc.'s Google provides a similar function through its Google Assistant. If a user who has activated the app sends a text about meeting at a restaurant, Google Assistant can "read" it and automatically display relevant information such as restaurant reviews and locations.
In this case, a hardware manufacturer -- Huawei -- is moving into an area long dominated by internet and software companies. As handsets become increasingly similar, Huawei and others see AI as a way to stand out.
This isn't the first battle between the Chinese giants. WeChat's fingerprint authentication for payments isn't available to users of Huawei's recent devices, unlike their iPhone counterparts. Huawei and Tencent couldn't agree on data-storage terms, people familiar with the matter said.
---
Yang Jie and Alyssa Abkowitz in Beijing and Dan Strumpf in Hong Kong
