[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Two early movers on artificial intelligence have a way to go before the technology starts generating significant business. But if their latest quarterly results are any indication, it may be Microsoft's game to lose.
Microsoft and Google parent Alphabet saw improvements to their core businesses during the September quarter according to results posted by the companies late Tuesday. Google's ad revenue grew 9% year over year to $59.6 billion during the quarter, beating Wall Street's expectations and up from the 3% growth reported for the June period. That was helped by YouTube's ad revenue, which rose 12% for its quickest pace in nearly two years. It probably isn't a coincidence that this was during a period in which Hollywood's strikes resulted in fewer new TV shows and movies.
But it was different for Google's cloud business, where revenue grew 22% year over year to $8.4 billion. That was 3% below Wall Street's forecasts and contrasted sharply with the trend for Microsoft's much larger cloud business, where its Azure public cloud service saw revenue jump 29% to an estimated $16.7 billion during the same quarter. Azure's growth was up 3 percentage points from the June quarter, while Google Cloud lost six points of growth in the same period.
Microsoft's results showed strength in other areas. The sharp drop in PC sales seen earlier this year moderated, giving a strong boost to the operating earnings for Microsoft's segment that includes its Windows operating system. The segment, which contains the company's suite of business software, delivered its highest operating margin in at least a decade. Microsoft projected better-than-expected revenue and operating income for the December quarter, boosted by its acquisition of Activision Blizzard. Google, per its longstanding practice, refrained from giving any financial forecast.
The differing results caused a sharp reversal for both stocks. Microsoft's share price rose nearly 4% in after-hours trading after having lost 6% since the company's last report. The stock of Google's parent slid more than 6% after having jumped 14% since its last report. The results will likely reignite the debate from earlier this year about which company is in a better position to capitalize on the growing interest around generative AI. Microsoft's aggressive adoption of ChatGPT's technology drove its stock to outperform Alphabet's for the first half of this year. But Google has long been using AI to power its internet-search business and has been moving quickly to catch up.
Microsoft has an advantage given that the majority of its existing business comes from selling software and cloud services to businesses that are more inclined to pay early on for technology that can help automate everything from coding to spreadsheet analysis to PowerPoint creations. The company said Tuesday that more than one million users are paying to use its AI-enabled CoPilot feature. That may jump significantly as the tool becomes generally available to users of its Microsoft 365 suite of software next month.
Google's Bard chatbot was described by Chief Executive Sundar Pichai on Tuesday as "an early experiment and complementary experience" to the search engine that is the company's dominant business.
Still, a long race awaits both and an expensive one at that. Microsoft had a record $9.9 billion in capital expenditures during the quarter, while Google's capex bill topped $8 billion, which the company noted was "somewhat muted" due to the timing of supplier payments. Both are expecting to see those bills rise in the months ahead. Both name-checked Nvidia's H100 chips -- the expensive and much-in-demand processors powering GenAI capabilities in data centers. Wall Street sees capital expenditures for the tech duo topping $30 billion during this year, more than four times the average of the 100 largest spenders on the S&P 500.
In the AI world, you have to spend an awful lot of money to make money.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
