Excitement around 5G is eclipsing the prospects for a competing technology that General Motors Co. and Toyota Motor Corp. are backing, potentially giving rivals a leg up in the race to introduce vehicles with state-of-the-art internet connectivity.
The U.S. government has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in Wi-Fi-based technology known as DSRC, or dedicated short-range communication, that allows cars to link to "smart" traffic lights designed to smooth congestion and provide warnings about accidents or weather conditions ahead.
GM and Toyota strongly support that technology. But Ford Motor Co., BMW AG and other auto makers are pressing the Trump administration to allow them to leapfrog that system by fast-tracking fifth-generation cellular broadband in automobiles. Known as 5G, it transmits data at as much as 10 times the speed of current broadband and improves reliability by potentially shrinking a self-driving car's ability to stop to one inch, from one yard with today's network.
The showdown between the Wi-Fi-based and cellular-based standards for connected cars echoes winner-take-all format wars in other industries, and is a sign of how software is emerging as a new battleground for auto makers. The stakes are high as U.S. motor-vehicle deaths have risen in recent years. Car makers say vehicle-to-vehicle communication will ease congestion and improve safety.
Speeding up adoption of new technology is a priority for an industry that has lagged behind mobile-phone makers when it comes to connecting devices to the internet. The global market for connected cars is forecast to grow nearly threefold by 2022 with more than 125 million new internet-connected cars shipped over that five-year period, according to Counterpoint Research.
Current broadband, known as 4G, has enabled Wi-Fi hot spots and streaming, allowing passengers to surf the internet or watch videos in cars.The next wave of cellular technology will usher in new entertainment and safety features, enabling cars to access cameras on other vehicles that could alert them to accidents, obstacles and driving conditions.
Ultimately, drivers might even be able to order a Starbucks drink from their dashboard or take a nap while artificial intelligence operates the vehicle. Companies such as BMW say faster data transmission through next-generation broadband is critical to accelerating this push.
"We are on a broader scale pushing the telecommunication companies to roll out 5G as quickly as they can," said BMW management board member Peter Schwarzenbauer.
GM and Toyota, meanwhile, have models already equipped with DSRC and are urging the Trump administration to support a 2016 proposal that would require auto makers to start phasing it into new cars as of 2021. The Transportation Department has yet to make a final ruling on that Obama-era proposal, even as auto makers are already well into the design phase of 2021 model-year vehicles.
"Getting the rest of the industry to follow has been tough sledding," said Steve Schwinke, director of GM's advanced development and connected services.
One issue with the technology backed by GM and Toyota is cost. Telecommunications companies plan to pay for upgraded cell towers and roadside antennas for 5G to service their existing networks. To fully deploy DSRC, billions of dollars in government-funded infrastructure is required, according to a U.S. Transportation Department estimate.
That short-range technology also would add about $300 to the price of a vehicle for dedicated equipment, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration estimates. Most new vehicles come installed with cellular modems, so there would be little additional cost to drivers for 5G.

Credit: By Chester Dawson
