Alaska Airlines said it is joining forces with a venture-capital outfit to create startups from scratch that will develop technology the airline believes can give it a leg up on emerging aviation tech.
The partnership is the latest example of corporations boosting their presence in the startup and venture-capital ecosystem to keep abreast of new technology that could disrupt their industries.
Seattle-based Alaska Airlines said it would work with Santa Monica, Calif.-based UP.Labs to develop six startups over three years that focus on the future of transportation. UP.Labs is a division of multistrategy investment firm UP.Partners.
Alaska Airlines corporate development director Pasha Saleh said it would use the partnership to focus on decarbonization technology to help it meet company targets to cut emissions. The airline is interested in sustainable fuels, alternative propulsion options, such as electric motors, and artificial-intelligence-powered flight routing technology that can boost efficiency, Saleh said.
"We've surfaced a set of nearly 100 potential problems, problems that can be solved by new startup companies that don't exist just yet," Saleh said. "The primary purpose we did this was to get closer to technology that will be part of the future and to make sure we can kick-start it."
The push to get a leg up on emerging tech that could reduce its carbon footprint comes as Alaska and other airlines have set ambitious decarbonization targets. Alaska, for its part, has set a goal of net-zero carbon emissions by 2040. Saleh said developing new technology is key in accomplishing that goal.
The collaboration between the carrier and UP.Labs comes as more legacy corporations are looking to tech startups to help them innovate. Alaska Airlines, for instance, started a venture capital arm in 2021 to back some of the same tech its incubation partnership will focus on. United Airlines also launched a venture division in 2021.
Investors have been bullish on carbon and emissions tech even as investment across all startup sectors has fallen. Investors committed $4 billion to U.S.-based carbon and emissions tech startups during the first half of this year, according to analytics firm PitchBook Data. Investors committed $6 billion to the sector during all of last year.
UP.Labs has two other similar corporate partnerships, one of them with automaker Porsche. This year, Porsche and UP.Labs said they jointly founded a Los Angeles-based AI startup that captures and analyzes vehicle data.
Alaska Airlines is a limited partner in UP.Partners' venture capital fund UP.Ventures.
The first year of the partnership will focus on identifying challenges in Alaska Airlines' business that, if solved, would be of high value, Saleh said. UP.Labs will then develop proof-of-concept solutions that are tested using Alaska Airlines' data before launching businesses.
UP.Ventures will lead seed deals for the startups and Alaska Airlines, through a financial instrument created for the UP.Labs partnerships, and will maintain a roughly 20% equity stake in the startups, said UP.Labs founder and Chief Executive John Kuolt.
Saleh said giving rise to startups that can pursue advancements in alternative fuel sources for jets will be one primary focus in the partnership.
"The biggest lever that the airline industry has to decarbonize over the long term is sustainable aviation fuel," Saleh said. "This fuel can be dropped directly into an airplane as it exists today with minimal change to the engine."
Credit: By Marc Vartabedian
