The American constitutional system functions well when one political party dominates the government or when two evenly matched parties have enough common ground to make compromises. When both parties are closely and deeply divided, gridlock is the norm and legislative success the exception. With thin margins in Congress, this is the situation Joe Biden faced as he took the oath of office.
The early comparisons between Joe Biden and Franklin D. Roosevelt (or Lyndon B. Johnson) ignored this reality. After FDR routed Herbert Hoover in 1932, he assumed office with a majority of 313-117 in the House and 58-37 in the Senate. In the depth of the Great Depression, Democrats were willing to approve just about anything the president proposed, and the Republicans didn't matter.
After LBJ's overwhelming defeat of Barry Goldwater in 1964, Democrats controlled the House by a majority of 295-140 and the Senate 68-32. Although the split between Northern and Southern Democrats complicated the path to civil-rights legislation, President Johnson could mobilize large partisan majorities, often supplemented by the votes of moderate and liberal Republicans, to enact much of his agenda.
By contrast, the past three decades have been an era of closely balanced parties unprecedented in American political history. Of the 17 presidential elections between 1920 and 1984, 11 were decided with popular-vote landslides of 10 points or more. In the eight elections since 1984, not one candidate has reached that margin of victory.
Democrats held the majority in the House for four unbroken decades after the 1954 election. Since then, the chamber has changed hands four times (in 1994, 2006, 2010 and 2018). There is a better than even chance that the House flips again in 2022.
Unlike the House, only a third of the Senate stands for re-election every two years, which makes the recent volatility of the upper chamber even more remarkable. After Democrats held the majority for 26 consecutive years after 1954, control of the Senate has changed seven times, including two periods when the body was evenly divided 50-50.
When control of Congress and the White House is up for grabs in nearly every election, governing in the national interest becomes more difficult. The minority is more likely to view issues as opportunities to cast the majority in an unfavorable light, and the majority will be less likely to make concessions. Because the actions of committee chairman and even individual members can affect the entire party's chances in the next election, power flows toward party leaders, who enforce "message discipline" and press wavering members to stick with their party.
Bright-line contrasts with the other party take priority over the more nuanced stances that compromise requires. Besides, compromises may disappoint the party's base, making stalwart supporters less interested in voting, especially in midterm elections. The time and political space that governance requires are replaced by 24/7 political combat. Even on issues that enjoy support across party lines, such as infrastructure, the incentive is to score partisan points, not focus on the many areas of agreement.
There is reason for hope, however. New challenges are opportunities to transcend traditional divisions and forge new alliances. The rise of China, for instance, has produced broad support for investments in new technologies and production processes such as artificial intelligence and robotics. As a result, the Endless Frontier Act, now on the Senate floor, will likely attract a bipartisan majority.
Even on old stalemates, progress is possible when some members of both parties conclude the cost of continued inaction is too high. The battle between "defund the police" and "defend the police" is a dialogue of the deaf that does nothing to curb law-enforcement abuses or rebuild trust between frontline officers and the communities they serve. A bipartisan, bicameral negotiation over a reform proposal has made substantial progress in recent weeks, and if a compromise can be forged on the scope of legal immunity police enjoy, a bill could reach President Biden's desk by the end of the summer.
Finally, many members of the House and Senate came to Washington to get things done and are dismayed by the partisan combat they encounter. Despite daunting obstacles, many are reaching across the aisle to work with members of the other party with efforts such as the House Problem Solvers Caucus and less formal arrangements such as the Senate's "G-20" (10 members from each party). If these conversations yield a clearer understanding of each side's red lines, even the deep divide between today's parties may prove surmountable.
Credit: By William A. Galston
