Tom Cruise's $291 million summer blockbuster "Mission: Impossible" film is packed with thrilling stunts, including one in which the 61-year-old actor rides a motorcycle off a cliff and deploys a parachute seconds later.
Its box-office performance was less impressive.
Box-office data provider Comscore said Paramount's "Mission: Impossible -- Dead Reckoning Part One" pulled in $56.2 million in the U.S. from Friday to Sunday, making it the weekend's top performer, ahead of "Sound of Freedom" and "Insidious: The Red Door." Overall this summer, that haul puts the film in seventh place among opening-weekend performances, behind other franchise installments such as "Spider-Man: Across The Spider-Verse," "Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3" and "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny."
Unlike many other popular films this summer, "Dead Reckoning Part One" opened on Wednesday. It is expected to earn $235 million through Monday, $80 million of that coming from the U.S., Paramount said.
Pressure has been high on older stars such as Cruise and Harrison Ford to turn around Hollywood's lackluster summer by tapping into fans' nostalgia. The domestic box-office haul from May 1 to July 12 is down 7.7% compared with the year-earlier period, and 19% below the total for the same period in 2019 before Covid struck, according to Comscore.
"Cruise is unique among the older generation of stars, with an unmatched reputation as a filmmaker and star absolutely dedicated to the movie-theater experience," said Paul Dergarabedian, a senior media analyst at Comscore.
The actor once again plays Ethan Hunt, leader of an American spy agency, who in this film faces a mysterious artificial-intelligence villain. Much of the big-budget film was shot in Italy during the pandemic, which inflated costs and stretched out its production time line.
The earnings from Cruise's latest film beat other installments of the franchise, Paramount said. When "Mission: Impossible -- Fallout" debuted in 2018, it grossed $77.5 million in the U.S. during its first five days, Paramount said.
While box-office earnings have fallen this year, there have been some successful showings at the theater, particularly from films based on popular franchises, including "The Super Mario Bros. Movie" and "Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3."
Two other high-profile releases fell flat.
Pixar's "Elemental," a $200 million animated romantic comedy, earned an estimated $29.5 million at the box office domestically in its opening weekend in one of the worst debuts in the studio's history. It added an estimated $15 million internationally.
"The Flash," a Warner Bros. Discovery story about a time-traveling superhero that cost about $200 million to produce, took in about $55 million in the U.S. and Canada during its three-day debut. It earned an additional $75 million internationally.
Releases later this summer could send box-office results surging, with highly anticipated films such as Greta Gerwig's "Barbie" and Christopher Nolan's "Oppenheimer" opening this weekend.
---
Estimated Box-Office Figures, Through Monday Sales, in Millions Film Distributor Weekend* Cumulative % Change 1. Mission Impossible: Dead Paramount $56.2 $80.0** -- Reckoning Part One** 2. Sound of Freedom Angel Studios $27.0 $85.5 37% 3. Insidious: The Red Door Sony $13.0 $58.1 -61% 4. Indiana Jones and the Dial of Disney $12.0 $145.4 -56% Destiny 5. Elemental Disney $ 8.7 $125.3 -13% *Friday, Saturday, Sunday and Monday in North American theaters **Opened on Wednesay Source: Comscore
Credit: By Nora Eckert
