China's attitude toward Islam is a gobsmacking double standard. At home, Beijing persecutes members of the Uighur minority for practicing their faith. Overseas, China supports Masood Azhar, a hardened jihadist condemned by the U.S. and other major democracies for fomenting terrorism against India.
The most recent instance of Chinese hypocrisy came earlier this month, when China's representative to the United Nations vetoed a Security Council proposal to designate Mr. Azhar, founder of the Pakistan-based jihadist group Jaish-e-Mohammed, or Army of Mohammed, as a global terrorist.
The motion, co-sponsored by the U.S., the U.K. and France, earned the backing of 14 out of 15 Security Council members, leaving China as the sole holdout. JeM claimed responsibility for a Feb. 14 suicide car-bombing in Indian Kashmir that killed more than 40 paramilitary soldiers and triggered tit-for-tat airstrikes by India and Pakistan. The U.S. and the U.N., among others, already recognize JeM as a terrorist group. This is the fourth time in a decade China has aided Mr. Azhar by arguing that it needs more time to examine his case before it can acquiesce to adding him, individually, to the list.
Contrast China's hands-off approach to Mr. Azhar with its treatment of Muslims at home. According to Sophie Richardson, China director for Human Rights Watch, the impunity with which Beijing has been able to persecute the Uighurs highlights "Chinese exceptionalism at its worst." Ms. Richardson points out that if any other government "arbitrarily detained a million Muslims, the world would respond differently."
Communist authorities view the Uighurs, a Turkic Muslim minority of about 11 million in northwest Xinjiang province, as a potential security threat. Since 2014, Beijing has stepped up efforts to suppress Uighur religion and culture. To that end it has built a high-tech police state in the province that uses tens of thousands of cameras, biometrics including DNA and voice samples, artificial intelligence and big data.
In Xinjiang, signs of Islamic piety -- such as growing a beard or donning a headscarf -- can land a person in trouble. So can praying at home, teaching one's children about Islam, and traveling to any of 26 "sensitive" mostly Muslim-majority nations (including Pakistan). The government bans parents from giving their children "overly religious" Muslim names, including Saddam, Imam and Mecca. According to Human Rights Watch, "the government's religious restrictions are so stringent that it has effectively outlawed Islam."
Suffice to say Mr. Azhar would not be welcome in China. JeM preaches a harsh form of Islam that regards holy war against non-Muslims as a religious duty. In 1994 Indian authorities arrested Mr. Azhar after he came to Indian Kashmir from Pakistan in the early years of an insurgency. The following year, Kashmiri militants took six Western hostages, including two Americans, in an unsuccessful attempt to spring Mr. Azhar from an Indian prison. (One escaped, one was beheaded and the others are presumed dead.)
In 1999 Mr. Azhar's comrades secured his release by hijacking an Indian Airlines plane to Taliban-controlled Kandahar, Afghanistan. One of the men released along with Mr. Azhar, the British-Pakistani Omar Saeed Sheikh, masterminded the 2002 murder of Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl. Over the years Indian authorities have accused JeM of pioneering suicide bombing in Kashmir, a 2001 assault on India's Parliament, and two high-profile attacks in 2016 on an airbase and an army camp.
Why does China back a violent Islamic radical? Pakistan. "They are supporting their strategic partner," says Gautam Bambawale, a former Indian ambassador to both Beijing and Islamabad. "Though China says it opposes terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, in this case it is actually supporting a terrorist."
Beijing may believe it is keeping India off balance, but its policy also carries costs. By poking a finger in India's eye, China is turning a potential friend into a sworn enemy. It should not be surprised if the development of the U.S.-India military relationship accelerates.
China also shows the world that despite its large economy, it does not behave like a responsible power. Otherwise it would worry about perpetuating instability in South Asia, a region that borders the restive Xinjiang province.
Since 9/11, China has framed its oppression of the Uighurs as part of its own war on terrorism. This has long been a smokescreen. But given how cavalierly China takes the rest of the world's concerns about terrorism, the smoke may be about to clear.

Credit: By Sadanand Dhume
