When Josie Francis wants to buy an especially extraordinary new hat, she doesn't go to any old boutique in Los Angeles where she lives.
No, she waits till she returns to her native Wisconsin and visits her local gas station.
"I get so many compliments on the things that I buy from literal gas stations," said Francis, 27, who works in digital marketing. "I can guarantee that no one in my circle is gonna have this hat I bought from this gas station off of I-94 in Wisconsin."
Call it "gas station core." In between putting $25 on pump three, discerning shoppers like Francis are scouring the racks at their local Gulfs and QuikTrips for accessories that are appealing in that so-bad-they're-great kinda way.
"It's the whole idea of like, 'Oh I can just go into this tacky, kitschy place and find something and make it trendy,'" said Alex Hartman, the creator of Nolita Dirtbag, an Instagram account that lovingly mocks arch New York fashion trends.
We've all seen this stuff on road trips: Souvenir hats in firetruck red or camo, sometimes with rhinestones and often with ChatGPT-level slogans about hunting or Jesus-related puns. And $12 wraparound shades with reflective lenses that shimmer like an oil stain in the sun.
"There is something fun about trying this stuff on and looking in that little mirror that they have like above the rack with the Takis right next to you," said Hartman, who recently watched a friend buy a schlocky baby-blue Yankees hat at a gas-station shop in Long Island.
Shopping has, in many ways, become an uninspiring activity: We see something on Instagram or on your favorite actor or a friend, google it and buy it. It can all feel very preprogrammed and predictable.
Committed shoppers know that if they want something really distinct today, they have to journey farther afield. This has given rise to pell-mell resale sites like Depop, littered with evidence of heretofore forgotten trends (spaghetti-strapped baby doll T-shirts, scratchy skirt suits, cargo capri pants, etc.) and birthed a whole new generation of insatiable thrift shop scavengers.
That same appetite for idiosyncrasy has convinced certain shoppers that Buc-ee's, not Bloomingdale's, is where their next great fashion purchase is lurking.
"People ask what brand is that and I'll just be like, 'Oh, you know, just a random gas station,'" said Chason Howard, 28, a music producer in Atlanta who goes by Popstar Benny. His prized high-octane buy is a camo cap with the phrase "The Buck Stops Here," stitched along the front. (Howard stressed he has never actually hunted.)
Howard makes a point to pop into gas stations around the country while touring America. "It's like, I'll probably never be off this side road on the Texas highway ever again, let me peek inside," Similarly to checking every single rack at a thrift store, he advised that you "gotta turn every stone."
Each station has its own distinct stock, and if you spot, say, a pink camo hat with a bass stitched on it at a rest stop outside Denver, the odds are pretty good you'll never see that exact shimmery cap again. (Gas station-core aficionados claim mom-and-pop fill-up spots have more enticing assortments than nationwide chains.)
Tariq Khan, a gas station owner in West Hempstead, N.Y., said that he purchases his store's merchandise from vendors that cater to convenience stores. "They go store to store and they have a bunch of novelties and they try to sell you those," said Khan. "I spend an hour and I pick items which I know I can sell."
These high-margin items -- $4 watches, Pokemon-type games and hats that say "New York" -- give his business a boost. "We buy [hats] for $3, $4, and sell for $10," he said. With that one hat, he said he can make roughly the profit from selling four packs of cigarettes.
The margins are appealing, but Khan also sees the job as a bit of "trendsetting." He recalled that years ago, before New York state legalized marijuana, hats with pot-esque leaves were "selling like hot cakes."
"We got like six of them, we sold six of them in the same week," said Khan, who had to call up the vendor and quickly order more of these high-times hats.
The country may be more polarized than ever, but there is also something so flatly American about this trend. Howard likened it to the recent mainstream embrace of country music, a genre that so often heralds those cliched pastimes of drinking beer, hunting and hanging out -- the same cliched pastimes that these hats pay homage to. "There's just something really cool about dressing like a real American," said Howard.
That line of thinking appears to have a broad reach. The Canadian rapper Drake, who is currently touring the U.S., recently posted a photo to Instagram Stories of himself wearing a hat that was primo gas station fare, with an American flag in the center, a denimish fabric and embroidered stars. "Catch me in traffic looking generic American all summer," read his caption. And many other recent fashion fads -- jorts, Bass Pro Shop trucker hats, low-rise jeans -- read as quintessentially, unmistakably American.
Of course, there's a healthy helping of campy posturing at play here. "When I buy a hat that has a fishing lure that says 'Bite Me' on it, I don't actually mean to be aggressive," said Jake Joyce, 36, a recruiter for a cannabis company living in Wauconda, Ill. Yes, he is a lifelong angler, but caps like this, laden with their he-man phrases, also clash playfully with his kindly Midwestern personality.
Josh Gonzalez, 28, the creative director at an LGBTQ-focused healthcare nonprofit living in Austin, said he was drawn to those wraparound sunglasses because of their exaggeratedly macho look. The glasses are "a little bit wacky and campy and kind of unserious."
They are also quite affordable, making for an extreme statement at little cost. Gonzalez recently picked up two pairs of wraparound shades for $15. The only downside? They're not very durable. A pair melted in his car in the Texas heat.
Despite the thriftiness of this authentic gear, there has been a peculiar premium embrace of gas station-esque gear. Gas Station Sunglasses, a higher-design New York brand that is not literally sold at gas stations, sells $40 mirrored shades with an Exxon flair. Much further up the ladder, Balenciaga specializes in oversize wraparound-style sunglasses at around $600 -- far more than the price of filling up a tank.And this month, California streetwear label Stussy released a $45 "souvenir strapback" hat that looks direct from a convenience store rack. It sold out, in four distinct colors, quickly after being released online.
Luke Fracher, the owner of Luke's New York, a resale store in New York City that caters to downtown cool-hunters seeking say, $550 Rick Owens leather shorts and $1,100 tattered Vetements jeans, recently also began selling his own gas station caps. He buys caps that say things like "Born to Hunt, Forced to Work" and stitches his shop's logo on the side, selling them for the comparatively steep price of $40.
To market the hats, he photographed people wearing them at -- where else? -- a gas station, and said he's sold around 500 to date. Enough profits to fill a gas tank many, many times over.
Credit: By Jacob Gallagher
