Novelist and essayist Chuck Klosterman stood in the back of an independent bookstore in Cobble Hill on Thursday night, excitedly explaining the text on his T-shirt, which read, "I am not a Robot. I am a Unicorn."
"Last year," said Mr. Klosterman, "an artificial intelligence lab set up two computers to have a conversation, just to see what they would say to each other, and one accused the other of being a robot, and then the accused computer said that it was a unicorn! If you Google that, you'll get like a million results."
Mr. Klosterman was at the BookCourt for a reason unrelated to both robots and unicorns: Grantland, a sports and pop culture website that sportswriter Bill Simmons founded with ESPN, at which Mr. Klosterman is a contributing editor, was publishing its third book and hosting a reading and party to celebrate.
Outside the Brooklyn store, a storm raged, with audible cracks of thunder and flashes of lightning coming through the store's skylights. The event's host, Grantland staff writer Andy Greenwald, opened the reading by saying, affectionately, "You guys could spend your apocalyptic weather event anywhere, but you chose to spend it with us."
More than 100 people, primarily men in their 20s, packed into the bookstore to sip wine and hear Grantland writers and editors read pieces that had been published on the website, but didn't necessarily appear in the book. Rembert Browne, a staff writer, stood in the back of the room moments before taking the stage and quietly remarked, "I just picked what I'm about to read two minutes ago."
The publication of a book of material freely available on the Internet was a subject of awkward celebration for the readers and the audience. "We're a computer website but we choose to publish a book, so we cover all of our bases," joked Mr. Greenwald, cheekily evading an explanation of the rationale behind the book.
But one writer incidentally suggested that publishing a book was a way to lift Grantland above the daily crossfire of Internet commentary: "I didn't go $60,000 into tuition debt to do that," said Jay Caspian Kang, a novelist and Grantland writer, answering an audience question about why Grantland doesn't seem to engage with the Web commentariat as much as other websites.
And although most of the readings went off without a hitch, it became clear that writing originally meant for the Internet occasionally lost something in translation to printed and spoken word.
During his reading, staff writer Amos Barshad interrupted himself to explain the websites that he had hyperlinked to in certain parts of his piece.
Subscribe to WSJ:
Credit: By David Shapiro
