What if you could replace most of your Web searches and apps with a single interface that just gets things done? That is the premise of Facebook's new "M" -- a "digital assistant" available through its chat app, Facebook Messenger.
Still in beta, M is only available to approximately 10,000 people in the Bay Area. If M works, it could mean Facebook will open up a major new front in its battle with Google for your attention, and in the process give the social-networking site access to a gigantic pool of direct-response advertising dollars that has so far eluded the company.
Even if M doesn't succeed, it is in the vanguard of services that will bring about a sea change in how we interact with computers, a massive transition from using our devices as finicky tools to asking our devices to simply take care of things for us.
"I just can't imagine a future in which I pick up my iPhone and browse 115 apps to do a task," says Dennis Mortensen, CEO and founder of x.ai, a virtual assistant that schedules meetings for its users. "There are plenty of jobs where I don't need the app -- what I need is the job done."
Plenty of companies are trying to get to this future, and their products include Apple's Siri, Microsoft's Cortana and the voice-recognition systems Google integrates into its apps and operating systems.
Facebook already has several advantages over these. The first is that unlike voice-driven systems, chat is already a familiar interface for billions of people. The total number of people using messaging services is more than 2.5 billion, and estimated to grow to more than 3.6 billion by 2018, according to Michael Wolf, chief executive of tech consulting firm Activate. The second is scale, since Facebook messenger already has more than 700 million users. This yields Facebook's third advantage, which is that with access to so many users, Facebook has a plausible way to get the gigantic quantity of conversational data required to make a chat-based assistant sufficiently automated.
At present, says Alexandre Lebrun, who heads the Facebook team that built the artificial intelligence for M, humans participate in answering requests sent to Facebook's M. These requests can take almost any form, from asking M to make you a restaurant reservation to sending your friends a parrot.
M is watching humans handle requests that M itself isn't yet smart enough to handle, and every day it learns a little more and gets a little better at handling those requests, says Mr. Lebrun. This means that even as Facebook has kept the number of humans "powering" M more or less constant, progress made by its underlying algorithm allows Facebook to roll it out to more people every day, on account of the increased automation. (A spokesperson for Facebook said that eventually the company will also hire more human trainers for M.)
The key technology here isn't the AI that powers M -- the underlying code and algorithms are largely open source, says Mr. Lebrun -- but the data Facebook is accumulating from every conversation.
Mr. Mortensen says he can't imagine how Facebook will make M available to all of its users when it is still so reliant on humans to do its job, at least without hiring many thousands of people to power it. But Mr. Lebrun says that if M can handle at least 80% of user requests on its own, "we have a very scalable solution." The most frequent requests are the most easily automated, he adds.
What is at stake here is who gets to control the primary interface of mobile devices. If search was the dominant interface of the PC and the web, then chat, both through voice and over a text-based interface, has the potential to take over as the first place users go to on mobile devices. The stakes are high. Currently, Google is by far the biggest player in "direct response" advertising, which is the kind of ad that pops up when we are searching for an airline ticket, a new laptop or any other purchase.
A 2014 report from eMarketer puts the share of digital advertising that goes to direct response ads at 59%. In other words, if Facebook can convince people to use a digital assistant like M instead of a search engine, it more than doubles the size of the ad market Facebook can capture and the gains, most likely, would come at Google's expense.
M also has the potential to open up Facebook to the same scrutiny faced by search engines before -- namely, how can we trust the results? How do we know that the restaurant didn't simply pay to be recommended? With a digital assistant we are letting a system decide for us, unlike a search engine, which presents a menu of options.
It is possible that Facebook is taking on a task that is simply too big.
Ted Livingston, CEO and founder of Kik, a popular messaging app, says his own company is working on "bots" that allow people to interface not just with the Internet but with things in the real world, like menus at restaurants. Kik's solution presents users with a straightforward set of preprogrammed choices.
"We're not sure if people are looking for this all-encompassing AI experience," says Mr. Livingston.
I'm not sure I agree with that -- after all, science fiction is full of computers as smart as humans, doing our bidding. The real question is whether, as many in the industry claim, basic AI is finally smart enough to do that.
Credit: By Christopher Mims
