An Apple advertisement that depicts a patchwork of creative tools being crushed and revealing a new iPad in their place is facing broad criticism on social media.
The ad, which Chief Executive Tim Cook posted on X after Apple unveiled new iPads Tuesday, depicts a studio filled with musical instruments, a record player, cans of paint with vibrant colors and other items being physically crushed by what appears to be a giant compressor.
When the compressor lifts, an ultrathin iPad is all that remains in place of the tools.
"Apple's new iPad Pro ad is a rare fail from a normally flawless advertiser," Peter Intermaggio, a former marketing and advertising executive for companies including Comcast, wrote on LinkedIn. For a brand that "elevates creators, this is an ad that celebrates destruction. It is heavy handed and nihilistic."
While the ad, named "Crush!" emphasizes the thinness of the iPad, a point Apple executives highlighted when they unveiled the device, some critics saw it as an ominous symbol of the company's power, the rise of artificial intelligence and its potential to replace human creativity.
"The destruction of the human experience. Courtesy of Silicon Valley," actor Hugh Grant posted on X.
An Apple spokesman didn't comment.
Apple has long been seen as one of the most creative and dominant corporate advertisers, launching numerous campaigns that are among the most widely admired in the industry and in popular culture.
Co-founder Steve Jobs was personally involved in many of the company's most successful campaigns, including "Think Different," which launched after Jobs's return to the company.
Some people drew a contrast between the iPad ad and Apple's iconic 1984 Super Bowl spot, which introduced the Macintosh personal computer. That ad shows a dystopian world in which a giant screen featuring a Big Brother-like figure is smashed by a hammer thrown by a colorful track athlete.
Apple announced new iPads on Tuesday, with the Pro version featuring the new M4 chip that enhances the device's artificial-intelligence capabilities, the company stated. The company also bragged that the new 13-inch iPad Pro is the company's thinnest product ever with a thickness of 5.1 millimeters.
Apple hopes the new iPads will revitalize one part of its business that has been hit with a consistent sales slump. Revenue for its tablet business has declined nine out of the last 10 fiscal quarters.
Credit: By Aaron Tilley
