As markets get wilder, some Wall Street traders are getting richer.
The return of volatility might be making many rank-and-file investors queasy, but it is proving to be a boon to some trading desks at the biggest banks.
Many desks focused on derivatives tied to stocks are set to generate billions of dollars more in revenue this year, as choppy markets give traders more opportunities to make lucrative, against-the-grain bets on these financial instruments. It is a contrast to recent years, when these desks slumped amid calm markets.
As a result, the top traders on banks' equity derivatives desks are expected to take home some of Wall Street's biggest paychecks. Pay for the highest ranks could top $3 million this year, a few hundred thousand dollars more than a year ago, according to a survey by headhunting firm Options Group.
The big payouts reflect Wall Street's continued shift toward trading based on math savvy and deep dives into data, rather than guts or Rolodexes.
They also highlight how financial firms are wary of losing traders with quantitative chops to the technology and cryptocurrency companies that are competing with the banking business both for consumers and employees. That is particularly true of younger "quants" who make up Wall Street's talent bench for its most complex businesses.
Michael Karp, chief executive of Options Group, said that as banks decide pay over the next few weeks, they are likely keeping one eye on the arrival of Amazon.com Inc. and expansion of Alphabet Inc. in New York that is making the city a tech hiring hub to rival Silicon Valley, increasing competition for key skill sets.
"Quant strategies, artificial intelligence, data science -- there's going to be a lot of pressure not to lose people in these areas," Mr. Karp said.
Equity derivatives desks deal in notes, options, margin loans and other instruments whose values are derived from stock prices. Investors use them to bet not just on whether prices are going to rise or fall, but how much or how rapidly they will change. Clients -- often hedge funds and other active investors -- use the complicated trades to hedge against or bet on that volatility.
Volatility was historically low in recent years, killing off demand for equity derivatives desks' sophisticated services. The S&P 500 index marched steadily higher, which gave traders fewer opportunities to bet on single stocks or indexes. Low interest rates made traders optimistic about the U.S. economy. And investors broadly shifted from the active investing the desks offered to passive investing, such as buying stakes in index funds.
The calm spell in U.S. markets broke this year, with stocks falling and interest rates rising. A popular measure of volatility, the Cboe Volatility Index, or VIX, recorded its biggest jump in history in February. The move was so severe that it triggered the demise of some exchange-traded products tracking the gauge, leaving losses across Main Street and Wall Street.
Volatility has slipped since then, but traders say business is still good. Some bigger banks are arranging an unusually large number of multibillion-dollar custom equity derivatives trades for traditional investors such as insurers and pension funds that want to hedge against volatility, according to people familiar with the trades. Retail investors are buying so-called structured notes, which offer protection from extreme losses in stocks in exchange for upfront fees. And there have been more big deals providing financing to individuals and companies based on their stockholdings.
Still, the choppiness hasn't been good for everyone. "If you're in the options business, changing volatility is a good thing. If you're a pension fund, maybe not," said David Hait, founder of data firm OptionMetrics.
Mr. Hait counts among his clients banks and hedge funds, which have welcomed the change. To celebrate, he has been distributing hats labeled "I Love Volatility."
---
Equity Derivatives
Give Banks a Boost
The much bigger paydays for equity derivatives traders expected this year are a contrast to other parts of Wall Street, where activity has been slow.
Compensation in equity derivatives units should rise 9.5% globally in 2018, according to Options Group. Investment bankers, meanwhile, are expected to get a 0.3% raise, and pay for fixed-income traders is expected to drop 2.6%.
For the dozen largest investment banks globally, equity derivatives revenue in the Americas soared 84% in the first half of 2018 from the same period a year earlier, to $3.8 billion, according to industry tracker Coalition.
Banks such as Bank of America Corp., BNP Paribas SA, Citigroup Inc., Goldman Sachs Group Inc., JPMorgan Chase & Co., Morgan Stanley, Societe Generale SA and UBS Group AG, which have big options operations, have benefited from the market gyrations.
Goldman's options desk earned more than $100 million over a few days that month, because its traders anticipated the big demand for new positions, people familiar with the firm said.
Last year's bank results were also hit by a loss involving Steinhoff International Holdings NV. Several banks shared a $1 billion loss for a stock-based loan to the South African furniture retailer, whose shares collapsed in value amid an accounting investigation.
The increased activity at derivatives desks is sparking poaching across Wall Street. Bank of America, for example, hired a string of top traders in the U.S., including William Hillegass from Barclays PLC last year and Henri-Emmanuel Lewinger from BNP Paribas this year, according to people familiar with the moves.

Credit: By Telis Demos and Gunjan Banerji
