President Biden's executive order restricting investments by U.S. firms in some Chinese technology sectors over national-security concerns threatens to cause problems for investors with existing deals in China.
U.S. venture firms have been pulling back from China amid rising tensions between the countries, but many had gone all in on China, and the order may restrict reinvesting in existing portfolio companies and potentially hurt returns.
"It could have a chilling effect on an existing investor's liquidity," said Jacob Osborn, partner and co-chair of the global trade practice at the law firm Goodwin Procter LLP.
The Biden administration issued the order on Wednesday to restrict Americans from investing in some Chinese companies developing advanced semiconductors, quantum computers and artificial intelligence, which are critical in military, intelligence, surveillance and cyber uses. Americans also must notify the U.S. government regarding some direct investments in such technology.
Venture investors typically repeatedly invest in portfolio companies. If investors can't reinvest, they risk seeing their stakes and influence over a company watered down, reducing their potential returns.
While the executive order won't apply retroactively, it might limit the ability of investors to continue backing portfolio companies involved in prohibited technologies. The Treasury Department will define the technologies, set rules around follow-on investments, and solicit public comments for that.
"The reinvestment concern is certainly something we will look at closely," Osborn said.
American venture investments in China once boomed, flowing into some sectors now under scrutiny in Washington.
U.S. venture investors participated in more than 700 deals for Chinese startups in the artificial-intelligence and semiconductor technology sectors, broadly defined, since 2016, according to PitchBook Data. In total, U.S. venture firms have taken part in more than 2,700 Chinese startup deals worth $165.7 billion since 2016, according to the research firm.
U.S. investment, however, dwindled to participation in 30 China deals totaling about $200 million in the second quarter, the lowest quarterly numberof deals since at least 2016, according to PitchBook.
Credit: By Yuliya Chernova and Angus Loten
