Barry Silbert, the founder of beleaguered crypto conglomerate Digital Currency Group, unveiled plans Wednesday to launch a decentralized artificial-intelligence company called Yuma.
The company will provide capital for entrepreneurs to build applications on the Bittensor network, a fledgling blockchain that is still largely unknown outside of crypto circles.
Yuma will be the fourth subsidiary under DCG, the sprawling crypto company that Silbert said he modeled after Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway. Silbert and DCG ran into trouble during the 2022 crypto-market meltdown and faced allegations that they defrauded investors. A lawsuit from the New York attorney general followed. DCG lending arm Genesis Global Capital filed for bankruptcy.
Now, Silbert is planning his comeback.
He and other industry executives are betting that a wave of crypto-friendly policies and deregulation under the coming Trump administration will usher in a renaissance that allows new companies and projects to flourish. Bitcoin prices have soared more than 30% since Election Day and recently topped $94,000 for the first time.
The crypto industry has also been itching to find a profitable intersection between digital assets and AI. Bitcoin miners sought new life by retooling their mining rigs or computers when the AI mania began. Venture-capital investors have been looking for startups that claim to bridge the sectors.
"DCG is back," Silbert said. "We're building, we're investing, we're launching a new business and we're looking forward."
Silbert, a 48-year-old finance veteran who started his career on Wall Street, said he is "100% convinced" that he and the company will move past the lawsuit, whether through dismissal or litigation. DCG's other divisions include crypto-asset manager Grayscale Investments, exchange Luno and bitcoin-mining company Foundry.
He intends to dedicate most of his time to building out Yuma. Silbert said the Bittensor network and its native TAO token remind him of bitcoin's early days.
Silbert, who bought bitcoin when it traded below $10, is making a similar bet on the TAO token. DCG started buying the token near the same price and has accumulated more than $100 million. The token was trading at about $470 and had a market cap of about $3.5 billion as of 4 p.m. ET, according to CoinMarketCap data.
As it did for bitcoin, ether and other tokens, DCG's Grayscale asset-management arm in August launched a trust that holds TAO.
Critics say Bittensor is vulnerable to hacks and other cyberattacks like all emerging blockchains. In July, the blockchain was paused after about $8 million in TAO tokens was stolen from people who verify transactions for the network.
Credit: By Vicky Ge Huang
