[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Losing isn't really an option for Intel Corp. But winning may also be hard to come by, at least for a while.
Intel remains the world's largest chip maker by revenue, with more than $60 billion in sales expected for this year. And it maintains nearly total dominance in two key markets: personal computers and servers. But Intel's stock also has been among the worst-performing among semiconductor peers over the past year, even to the point of ceding its crown as the largest chip company by market value to Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co.
Why? Because when you're on top, there is nowhere to go but down. Intel is facing fresh challenges in its core markets on multiple fronts. New chips this year from longtime rival Advanced Micro Devices are targeting the sweet spots of high-end PCs and servers. And in the data center, Intel is also facing threats from the development of ARM-based processors that use a different computing standard, as well as the growing use of graphics chips from Nvidia that are better-suited to many artificial-intelligence applications. Not coincidentally, Nvidia and AMD have been the best-performing chip stocks of late, having gained 207% and 179% over the past 12 months, respectively.
Intel relies on its data-center business to fuel growth as PC sales continue to slip, so it isn't taking the matter lying down. The company rolled out its newest line of Xeon server chips this week. That came just a few weeks after AMD launched a new line of server chips called Epyc. Neither is likely to factor much into earnings results for the June quarter to be reported in the next few weeks, but Intel noted that it has already sold more than 500,000 units of the new Xeon family since November under an "early ship" program.
AMD, with annual revenue that equates to about one-third of just Intel's R&D budget, simply doesn't have the scale to overtake its much larger rival. It can put a wrinkle in its growth prospects at an inopportune time, though: AMD is expected to grow its computing and graphics segment revenue by 34% this year. Intel's far larger data-center business is expected to grow by 7%, its slowest year on record. And while Intel's stock is cheap at 12 times forward earnings -- 12% below its three-year average -- any disappointment in data-center sales over the next few quarters will likely pressure the shares further.
AMD, meanwhile, has the advantage of starting from zero in servers. That means the sales it does get will likely be at Intel's expense. In fairness, AMD will have to keep delivering strong sales into next year to show its gains have true staying power. That is far from certain now, but investors haven't been giving Intel the benefit of the doubt.
This column is part of a series on what is next for the booming semiconductor industry.

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
