Who said this? "To really rebuild the industrial heartland of America, you need a committed national policy of tariffs, of protecting American industries." It was J.D. Vance during his successful 2022 campaign for U.S. Senate. This thinking is dangerous and pervasive -- bipartisan battiness. In reality, tariffs impose costs on all Americans to subsidize a few jobs.
Missouri Sen. Josh Hawley, also a Republican, has proposed the Raising Tariffs on Imports from China Act. All he's missing is a colleague named Smoot to reprise the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act and cause a market crash and depression. Mr. Hawley said in June that "in the last 20 years in the state of Missouri, we have lost 60,000 jobs to the People's Republic of China -- that number nationwide is almost four million." No mention of the better jobs that were created. There were 130 million nonfarm payroll jobs in 2003 vs. 156 million today.
You're going to hear a lot about tariffs this election cycle. President Trump's tariff triplets -- Steven Mnuchin, Peter Navarro and Robert Lighthizer -- whispered populist gobbledygook in his ear that he was Tariff Man. Now Mr. Trump has proposed 10% tariffs on all imports. That sounds strong but it's actually a weakling move, especially with U.S. industrial capacity already near an all-time high.
In October, the Journal ran an article by Oren Cass of American Compass titled, "Why Trump Is Right About Tariffs." It's filled with dime-store economic thinking, claiming that tariffs are for raising government revenue and that our service economy is about "cutting hair" and "serving fast food." Mr. Cass completely ignores that phones, medical equipment and other imports are often designed in the U.S. Sure, they are assembled overseas, but their value, usually software, is created here. Should we put tariffs on search engines and social networks? Of course not. China blocks ours to force its citizens to use inferior products. Tariffs denote weakness, not strength.
With tariffs, you get false price signals and less innovation. They misallocate capital and human resources by having entrepreneurs chase fake opportunities. Domestic manufacturers love tariffs, which allow them to raise prices, but the rest of us have to overpay for goods while manufacturers become lazy. The largest and lowest-cost electric-vehicle manufacturer in the world, China's BYD, is effectively kept out of the U.S. by Trump and Biden tariffs, and we now have a glut of unprofitable and expensive domestic EVs.
If all the chips in an iPhone were made in the U.S., I calculate we would be paying close to $2,000 for one and unit sales would decline 50%. Would you upgrade at that price?
Margins matter. Capital flows to its highest returns. Trade-deficit figures don't tell you how profitable manufacturing is. Foxconn, which assembles phones for Apple, had an operating profit margin of 2.63% in 2022. Apple's was 30.2%.
Should we go back to making low-margin clothes and toys or focus on perfecting gene therapy, generative artificial intelligence, next-generation logistics and advanced missile systems? We shouldn't encourage labor to deteriorate human capital in dead-end industries because that wastes energy, creates pollution and increases regulation. Tariffs steal the opportunity cost of doing something better.
The double whammy of tariffs and inflation damages our engine of growth. First, tariffs are inflationary. Second, raising prices destroys growth and jobs by killing elasticity, which is how lower costs drive higher sales -- think PCs and cellphones.
The government is awful at picking winners and losers. President Carter wasted billions on synfuels. Fracking proved to be the answer. Remember the Obama car? In 2014 he gave Chrysler to Fiat hoping all Americans would drive the matchbox Fiat 500. I was hoping not to mention Solyndra, so I won't. But the Chips+ Act giving billions to Intel for fabs in Columbus, Ohio, is a waste. We could have prepaid for chips from a domestic source instead. About the only government trade policy that makes sense is denying our enemies advanced technology, and that's really a defense policy.
Compounding the tariff troubles, White House national security adviser Jake Sullivan has falsely declared a "Washington consensus" for an "industrial strategy." (Don't dare call it by the disgraced term "industrial policy," though that's what it is.) Politicians shovel money into EVs and green energy and "reshoring" supply lines. We all pay more.
It's baloney. Mr. Sullivan is again picking winners and losers. Let's take a quick snapshot of past industrial policy: Steel? Failed. EVs? Gluts. Price controls on medicine? Shortages. Renewable energy? It's pricing lower-income folks out of driving to work and heating their homes.
We have the world's strongest economy. Tariffs are a sign of weakness. Let markets, not vote-buying politicians, decide which industries will bloom from the ground up. Tariffs and industrial policy are for losers.
Credit: By Andy Kessler
