Corrections & Amplifications
In an interview published June 14 in the Journal Report about WSJ D.Live Asia, Richard Liu spoke about JD.com Inc.'s record of success with customers during the past 12 years. The article incorrectly said the past decade. Also, Mr. Liu discussed cheaper prices in relation to Chinese companies in general. Because of an error in translation, the article incorrectly suggested that he referred to JD.com specifically. His discussion of the market outlook focused on the outlook of the logistics segment within the e-commerce sector. The article incorrectly suggested his comments applied to the entire e-commerce sector. Separately, JD.com had 12,000 yuan ($1,760) of business when it started out. The article incorrectly gave the figure as $12 million. A corrected version of the edited English excerpts from the interview, which also was updated to change or add wording to clarify the translation of the interview, can be found at WSJ.com/Corrections.
(WSJA June 22, 2017)
Richard Liu is the chairman and chief executive of JD.com Inc., China's second-largest online retailer after Alibaba Group Holding Ltd.
He sat down with Li Yuan, The Wall Street Journal's China technology columnist, to discuss e-commerce in China and how his company plans to expand internationally. Edited excerpts follow.
MS. YUAN: Where is the Chinese e-commerce market headed and how much success do you predict you will have?
MR. LIU: During the past decade, we have had a lot of success with logistics. The record speaks for itself. But now we have to diversify.
Five years ago, everybody was overwhelmed by the rocketing increase in the number of e-commerce orders. But now everybody is getting a share of the market. For courier companies that means you either have to control costs or you go away. So we are trying to diversify because that's the only way to survive.
MS. YUAN: You want to make inroads in the U.S. Are you going to recruit new brands to sell or just export what you already have?
MR. LIU: In the past, we have concentrated on small sellers and small suppliers. We tried to get business through cheaper prices, but we believe that things have gotten to a point where this has become quite unsustainable. If we keep selling cheap stuff, then people will only patronize us a few times and then leave us. And so we are going to move up the market. And the first step is we're going to introduce marquee Chinese brands into the U.S.
MS. YUAN: You recently said you were developing heavy-duty drones to deploy in Shaanxi province. You also are building up smart warehouses. How do you plan to use technology to position yourself for the future?
MR. LIU: From acquisition and procurement to warehousing to logistics, everything is now being placed under the control of smart technology. We plan to make use of artificial intelligence and robots to create a business model that is almost totally out of human control. This is going to cut our costs and improve our efficiency.
MS. YUAN: If you are going to resort to a lot of automation, what does that mean for your staff?
MR. LIU: I'm not saying that we can do away with all blue-collar workers. Right now maybe we need 10,000 customers to make even. But in the future we may only need 1,000 customers to break even or to make a profit due to automation.
We aim to eventually have more than one million drones to carry out our various operations. But we would need a huge team of maintenance staff to keep them up, so we will have to continue to train people.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: What is your strategy for entering overseas markets?
MR. LIU: We have two channels. The first is to transplant our [Chinese business model] to developing markets such as Indonesia. That means deploying things like smart warehousing to keep costs low. This year, we definitely plan to make inroads in Indonesia.
The other channel is the European and the U.S. market. We believe it's only a matter of time before many Chinese brands such as Huawei Technologies and others become world-renowned. So we are going to concentrate on high-end Chinese products and try to introduce them to developed overseas markets.
MS. YUAN: You already are locked in a fierce battle with peers in China. Won't you be stretched too thin if you open up a second battlefront in a place like Indonesia?
MR. LIU: When we were only doing $12 million worth of business, Alibaba already was huge. We had no business competing with them. But after a decade, we can fight them on equal footing. Now, if we can make it in China, we can make it in many, many other places in the world.

Credit: By Li Yuan
