Major stock indexes are more beholden to the moves of a handful of big tech companies than ever.
And none more so than Nvidia, the market darling of the artificial-intelligence craze. Investors' fervor for the graphics chip maker sent it to a multitrillion market valuation in record time. The stock is the best performer in the S&P 500 this year, more than doubling in 2024 after more than tripling in 2023.
Now the third-largest company in the S&P 500 by market value, Nvidia is known for greater volatility than some of its megacap peers. Its earnings and conference calls have become must-watch TV, with the report leading to market reactions that rival those seen after reads on the entire U.S. economy.
Tuesday's market action highlighted just how influential the stock has become -- and the potential risk it poses to Americans' retirement portfolios.
Nvidia shares dropped 9.5% in the session despite no company-specific catalyst. Data showing weakness in demand for U.S. factories resurfaced economic concerns and pressured the stock market as a whole.
The shares erased nearly $280 billion in market value -- greater than the market caps of Chevron or PepsiCo, and easily the most ever by any company in a single day. It was the fifth occasion this year in which Nvidia shed more than $200 billion in market cap. Nvidia was the largest contributor to the Nasdaq Composite's 3.3% drop on Tuesday as well.
The stock's roughly 700% rise from two years ago has also included the three largest single-day market cap gains on record.
Nvidia is the poster child of a broader trend of dominant performance from the largest stocks. Together, the Magnificent Seven group of big tech stocks make up about 32% of the S&P 500's market value. Those same companies represented just 9% of the index in 2015. Nvidia's market value was just $17.7 billion at the end of 2015.
Market cap-weighted indexes like the S&P 500 -- the most widely tracked index in the U.S. -- benefit when big stocks go on a tear. But skeptics caution that index-tracking investors are more exposed than ever to just a handful of stocks, mostly in the same industry.
Generate image description

Credit: By Alana Pipe and Jack Pitcher
