[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Japan's last blockbuster initial public offering of the year comes with a holiday discount. But cheap isn't always a bargain.
Memory-chip maker Kioxia will start trading next week after raising about $800 million, valuing the company at around $5.1 billion. That is a far cry from its $18 billion valuation when a consortium led by Bain Capital purchased the business in 2018 from Toshiba, which was desperately patching financial holes after significant losses in its nuclear division.
It is also quite a discount from the $16 billion Kioxia was looking for in a scrapped IPO in 2020. The company blamed U.S. sanctions on China's Huawei Technologies, which was one of its customers, for pulling the deal. The performance of other memory stocks since then shows an even starker contrast: South Korea's SK Hynix has more than doubled while shares of U.S.-based Western Digital, which is a joint-venture partner of Kioxia, have gained nearly 80%.
One key reason is Kioxia's more substantial debt -- a legacy of the Bain-led leveraged buyout. As of September, the company had around 750 billion yen, equivalent to $4.9 billion, of net debt -- equal to around 1.2 times its shareholders' equity. Western Digital's ratio is less than 0.5 times and SK Hynix's is under 0.3 times.
This high debt burden not only increases financing costs, it also makes capital investment harder, something crucial in an industry where scale and innovation matter. The company has been losing market share in particular to SK Hynix. Kioxia's market share in the NAND flash memory market dropped to 15.1% last quarter, from 17.8% in the first quarter in 2023, according to industry tracker TrendForce.
Only around a quarter of the funds raised in the IPO will go to the company, with the remainder coming from sales by Bain and Toshiba, which still owns around 40% of Kioxia.
The business has shown improvement in recent quarters after two years of losses during a memory-market downturn. Kioxia will benefit from artificial intelligence's booming demand, but it may not be in the sector's hottest area. Kioxia focuses on NAND flash memory used in storage. The most sought-after memory product in AI is a type of DRAM used in processing, called high-bandwidth memory, which allows faster data transfers. SK Hynix and Micron, which do both DRAM and NAND, have been ahead in HBM, while market leader Samsung also makes HBM but lags behind these two in technology.
There is potential for Kioxia to become an acquisition target, given the industry's need for consolidation, but that could be a long shot. Western Digital explored purchasing the company in recent years, though those discussions have stalled. SK Hynix holds convertible bonds that could convert into a 15% stake in Kioxia, which could be an obstacle to potential deals. An acquisition by SK Hynix, however, could face tough regulatory hurdles given SK Hynix's size.
Kioxia trades at around 1.3 times book value at the IPO price -- lower than its peers. But it is cheap for a good reason.
Credit: By Jacky Wong
