Excitement over artificial intelligence is powering a boom in what was once a small niche in the commercial real-estate business.
Developers are rushing to build hundreds of data centers, especially those with the high power and cooling systems that AI servers need. Blackstone has grown its data-center development pipeline to more than $15 billion from only $1 billion in two years. Investment firms such as PGIM Real Estate and IPI Partners are raising billions of dollars for data center-specific funds, according to people familiar with the matter.
Tech giants such as Google, Microsoft and Amazon Web Services leased more than 2.3 gigawatts of capacity in North America data centers this year. That exceeds last year's record level, according to datacenterHawk, a data, research and consulting firm.
Overall, the industry has 15 gigawatts in new capacity in the planning stages for North America, datacenterHawk said. That is enough to power about four million homes.
Data centers are the physical real estate that house the internet. Inside these warehouselike structures are the servers that store cloud computing and process the digitized software, apps, photos, emails, movies and all other data on the web.
Because of its complexity, AI computing like OpenAI's ChatGPT typically requires data centers to provide more power and cooling than less sophisticated programs.
Data centers' strong growth sets it apart from most other commercial real-estate sectors, which are struggling with high interest rates and flagging demand.
Data-center owners have been less bothered by rising rates because their business is booming and their tenants are willing to pay higher rents, according to analysts and data-center companies.
Marc Ganzi, chief executive of DigitalBridge, a digital infrastructure company, has been investing in data centers for 29 years. "And I've never seen a market demand backdrop like we're seeing today," he said.
DigitalBridge is planning to add data centers with one to two gigawatts of capacity each year for the next five years.
Shares of two of the largest public data-center companies Equinix and Digital Realty Trust soared in late May after AI-chip maker Nvidia reported better-than-expected first-quarter earnings. The firms' shares are up year-to-date, while the FTSE Nareit Composite Index is down about 12%.
Ganzi estimated AI makes up about 20% of DigitalBridge's demand today with the rest mostly coming from cloud-computing businesses. "We just don't see this slowing down," he said.
But the rapid growth of data centers faces some significant obstacles. It isn't clear where they are going to get electricity for the power-hungry AI computers and air-conditioning systems of the new projects planned.
Capacity is limited and environmentalists are raising alarms about data centers' impact on the environment.
In the U.S., one of the most popular locations is a 30-square-mile section of northern Virginia dubbed "data center alley."
Last year, the regional utility Dominion Energy notified customers that new data centers in the area might not be able to gear up as fast as they would like until the end of 2025.
"The most limiting factor today is the need for power," said Greg Blank, senior managing director of Blackstone's infrastructure group.
Blackstone acquired data-center giant QTS Realty Trust for $10 billion in 2021, with the majority being owned by the firm's infrastructure group and Blackstone Real Estate Income Trust.
Credit: By Peter Grant
