BEIJING -- Secretary of State Antony Blinken urged Chinese leader Xi Jinping to cut back on his nation's support for Russia's defense industry during a meeting in the Chinese capital on Friday and warned that the U.S. was prepared to act if Beijing didn't heed its concerns.
"Russia would struggle to sustain its assault on Ukraine without China's support," Blinken said at the end of a three-day trip to China.
"In our discussions today, I made clear that if China does not address this problem, we will," he added, alluding to economic sanctions under consideration by the Biden administration, first reported this past week by The Wall Street Journal.
Beijing has offered few indications that it will go along with the U.S. demand, however, raising the potential for inflamed tensions between the world's two largest economies ahead of November's presidential election in the U.S.
As Blinken met with Chinese leaders on Friday, a spokesman for China's Foreign Ministry slammed U.S. pressure tactics during a regular daily briefing as "extremely hypocritical and irresponsible."
The growing tensions over Russia represent a departure from what in recent months had been a steady improvement in U.S.-China ties. Xi didn't address Russia at all in his public remarks while meeting Blinken, instead reiterating his longstanding call for the U.S. to view China more favorably. "We hope the U.S. can also look at China's development in a positive light," Xi told Blinken at the Great Hall of the People.
"This is a fundamental issue that must be addressed, just like the first button of a shirt that must be put right in order for the China-U.S. relationship to truly stabilize, improve and move forward."
A November summit meeting in California between Xi and President Biden led to the resumption of bilateral military-to-military contacts, fresh efforts to curb the role that Chinese companies play in the global trade in fentanyl and discussions on the risks of artificial intelligence.
During an earlier stop in Shanghai, Blinken touted the importance of student exchanges and people-to-people diplomacy.
But as Blinken engaged in hours of meetings in Beijing on Friday with Xi and other top Chinese officials, there were an array of thorny security and economic issues, including China's help in Russia's push to revive its arms industry, China's military posture in the South China Sea and differences over Taiwan.
U.S. officials say that China has provided Moscow with optics, microelectronics, drone engines and other materials that, while not lethal weaponry, have nonetheless strengthened Russia's military industry at a critical stage in the conflict with Ukraine.
In 2023, 90% of Russia's microelectronics imports, important for the production of missiles, tanks and aircraft, came from China, U.S. officials say. Beijing, U.S. officials add, has also helped Russia improve its satellite capabilities for use in the war in Ukraine.
Raising the stakes, Russian President Vladimir Putin said Thursday that he is planning to go to China in May. That visit would mark Putin's first foreign trip since his re-election in March and underscores the priority that the Kremlin places on expanding its security and economic ties with Beijing.
China has heeded Western calls not to provide arms to Russia and Blinken said that Beijing had cautioned Moscow against considering the use of nuclear weapons when Russian forces suffered battlefield setbacks during the first years of its invasion.
But a brisk trade between the two neighbors in so-called dual-use goods, which have military and nonmilitary applications, has boosted Moscow's efforts to rebuild its military industry, which has been constrained by Western sanctions.
Biden complained about dual-use exports in a call with Xi earlier this month. U.S. officials, meanwhile, have encouraged European nations, which have extensive trade ties with China, to press Beijing on the matter as well.
The Journal reported this week that U.S. officials were drafting sanctions that would cut off some Chinese banks from the global financial system if Beijing rebuffed its demands.
Chinese officials have repeatedly complained that the U.S. is seeking to hamper its economic development by limiting its access to advanced chips and going after some of its leading technology companies, such as TikTok owner Bytedance, while selling weapons to Taiwan. "Overall, the China-U.S. relationship is beginning to stabilize," Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi said at the start of his meeting Friday with Blinken.
"But at the same time, the negative factors in the relationship are still increasing and building. . .China's legitimate development rights have been unreasonably suppressed and our core interests are facing challenges."
One area where incremental progress was expected is counternarcotics. Curbing the global trade in fentanyl is a high priority for Biden during this presidential election year.
In the months since Xi and Biden met in California and agreed to restart joint efforts to combat the drug trade, the two countries have convened a series of high-level meetings on the matter, including exploring ways to coordinate law-enforcement activities.
"We appreciate the work that's been done in the time since then to build that cooperation," Blinken told China's Minister of Public Security Wang Xiaohong during a separate meeting on Friday. "There is more that needs to be done to have a sustained impact," he added.
The biggest sticking point is the role of Chinese companies in the production of chemicals used to make fentanyl and other drugs. For years, such chemicals, known as precursors, have been openly sold over the internet, creating a marketplace for drug cartels to connect with their suppliers.
China has been slow to impose limits on such chemicals, a source of frustration for U.S. officials.
Blinken on Friday called on China to regulate the chemicals in line with its U.N. commitments and prosecute those who make the precursors used to produce fentanyl.
China says the U.S. is attempting to make it a scapegoat for its failures at home to curb the crisis. "Fentanyl is not a problem of China, nor is it caused by China," the Foreign Ministry said ahead of Blinken's visit. "That said, China has not stood idly by, but is willing to help the American people."
---
Ann M. Simmons contributed to this article.
Credit: By Michael R. Gordon and Brian Spegele
