BERLIN -- The German owner of Politico and other U.S. outlets announced a restructuring of its domestic operation, floated potential disposals and unveiled plans for a new headquarters in New York City as it shifts its focus to the U.S.
Axel Springer SE, one of Europe's largest news organizations and the only one with a major U.S. presence, said it would slim down its corporate structure in Germany and phase out the print editions of its publications as it seeks to become a leading digital-only publisher.
The company aims to boost earnings in its German media business by around 100 million euros, equivalent to $106.1 million, in part through cost cuts over the next three years, Chief Executive Mathias Dopfner said.
The cuts will mainly affect the company's German dailies Bild -- Europe's biggest-selling tabloid -- and Welt. Springer will focus on developing its U.S. assets, which include Washington politics portal Politico, general news outlet Insider and business-focused website Morning Brew, Mr. Dopfner said in an interview.
Mr. Dopfner said that the print editions of the company's newspapers would be phased out in the coming years and that artificial intelligence will replace humans for some news coverage. Journalists will focus on scoops, investigations and long-form features.
He said media companies must take ChatGPT, the popular language module that can generate well-written -- though often factually inaccurate -- essays, and other AI developments seriously as a challenge to their business.
"Only those who create the best original content will survive, and the only way forward is to invest in original journalism," Mr. Dopfner said.
Springer has acquired several U.S. businesses in recent year and the company's U.S. expansion could include another major acquisition, Mr. Dopfner said, "if a super-brand with extremely big journalistic quality and proven digital strategy were to come to market."
The expected job cuts in Germany will hit middle management and supporting functions such as layout and production, but some journalists could also be affected, according to the company. Employees will initially be offered buyouts, but layoffs can't be ruled out, Mr. Dopfner said.
Mr. Dopfner wants to keep expanding Springer's U.S. presence and plans to make Politico the company's global flagship publication, with the goal of ultimately overtaking the New York Times and The Wall Street Journal in audience numbers and advertising revenue.
Springer is now setting up a new American headquarters in New York's SoHo district, in a futuristic building designed by award-winning Japanese architect Toshiko Mori, Mr. Dopfner said.
"The biggest growth chances for our digital assets are in the U.S.A. -- the biggest media market and largest democratic market in the world," he said.
Politico is expanding in the U.S., notably in California, and in parts of Europe such as France and Britain. In just over a year, the group hired 400 journalists across its U.S. newsrooms, and it will continue to hire in the coming years, Mr. Dopfner said.
---
Alexandra Bruell in New York contributed to this article.
Credit: By Bojan Pancevski
