WASHINGTON -- Technology is improving the way companies report and audit their financial statements, but it could increase the time it takes them to implement new standards.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board is examining how companies are using automation and similar technologies in their accounting and reporting efforts, particularly when it comes to implementation of new accounting standards.
It might take more time to apply new, innovative solutions to reporting under new accounting rules.
FASB Chairman Russell Golden said he was "disappointed" that many software companies weren't ready for new lease-accounting rules that went into effect this year.
"Technology will allow, I believe, more information to be provided to the marketplace," Mr. Golden said at The Wall Street Journal's CFO Network Annual Meeting on Tuesday.
"But the spread between the day in which we issue the requirement and the effective date, I think, will be stretched out longer and longer."
Accounting and audit tasks are being automated in an effort to free up employee capacity. A little more than one-third of finance tasks at large, global companies are already done through some form of automation or artificial intelligence, according to a 2018 study by Accenture Strategy, a unit of Accenture PLC. That figure is set to rise to 45% in 2021.
The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board has put together a task force to advise the regulator on how companies are using technology in the audit process across industries, said Chairman William Duhnke III, who was also speaking at the CFO Network meeting.
It is an effort to increase the understanding of what is being done.
"First and foremost, we want to make sure that we're not impeding technological innovation," he said. "Then, of course we have a responsibility to make sure it's not affecting the quality of the audit."
FASB has devoted a substantial amount of resources to monitoring the implementation of new rules, Mr. Golden said.
Later this week, the board is expected to take up a revenue-recognition issue focused on modifications of subscription software. "I think that's healthy for the system," he said.
Mr. Golden also called for the streamlining of some accounting standards to help minimize complexity.
"There are five different ways to account for convertible debt under U.S. GAAP (generally accepted accounting principles)," he said. "I personally think that's four too many."

Credit: By Kimberly S. Johnson
