Microsoft Corp. agreed to buy Activision Blizzard Inc. in an all-cash deal valued at about $75 billion, using its largest acquisition by far to grab a videogame heavyweight that has been roiled by claims of workplace misconduct.
The deal, if completed, would sharply expand Microsoft's already sizable videogame operation, adding a stable of popular game franchises including Call of Duty, World of Warcraft and Candy Crush to Microsoft's Xbox console business and its own games such as Minecraft and Doom. Microsoft said the transaction would make it the world's third-largest gaming company by revenue, behind China's Tencent Holdings Ltd. and Japan's Sony Group Corp.
The deal is valued at $68.7 billion after adjusting for Activision's net cash, Microsoft said.
An acquisition also would mark the latest and biggest move by Microsoft Chief Executive Officer Satya Nadella to reshape Microsoft through a string of deals that have helped make the world's second-highest-valued company a powerhouse in business computing and a rising giant in videogames.
The deal entails significant complications, too. Shares in Activision had been down nearly 30% since California regulators filed a lawsuit against the company in July alleging sexual harassment and gender-pay disparity among the company's roughly 10,000 employees.
Activision shares, which jumped in premarket trading Tuesday after The Wall Street Journal reported the company was close to a deal with Microsoft, ended the day at $82.31, gaining 26%. Microsoft shares fell 2.4% Tuesday to $302.65 amid a broader market selloff.
Bobby Kotick, Activision's longtime CEO, is expected to leave after the deal closes, according to people familiar with those plans.
Microsoft had said in its announcement Tuesday that Mr. Kotick "will continue to serve as CEO of Activision Blizzard," and that after the deal closes "the Activision Blizzard business will report to Microsoft gaming chief Phil Spencer." But the companies have agreed that he will depart once the deal closes, the people said.
In an interview, Mr. Kotick didn't specifically address his status after the deal closes, but said he has told Microsoft he will "always be available to ensure that we are going to have the very best integration."
Since the California lawsuit, Activision, Mr. Kotick, and its board of directors have been under pressure from shareholders, business partners, and others over the misconduct allegations. Following a Wall Street Journal investigative article in November about Activision's handling of workplace issues, nearly a fifth of Activision's employees signed a petition calling for Mr. Kotick to resign, and Mr. Spencer told Microsoft employees the company was evaluating its relationship with Activision.
Microsoft approached Activision about a deal in November, after the Journal's article, people familiar with the matter said. A Microsoft spokesman declined to comment on the timing of the acquisition. An Activision spokesperson didn't respond to a request to comment.
Activision has made public a number of changes in recent months that Mr. Kotick has said are intended to make it a welcoming and inclusive workplace, including a zero-tolerance harassment policy and an end to mandatory arbitration for harassment and discrimination claims.
On Monday, the Journal reported that Activision had pushed out or disciplined more than 80 employees since July as part of efforts to address harassment and other misconduct allegations.
"We see the progress that they're making that was pretty fundamental to us deciding to go forward here," Mr. Spencer said about Activision's plans to address workplace issues.
The deal follows a boom in the videogame business during the pandemic. It also comes as Microsoft and other technology giants are jockeying for position amid major changes in the sector, including a shift toward cloud-based gaming and the rise of a virtual world known as the metaverse where people can play, work and shop across different platforms using digital avatars.
Mr. Nadella's Microsoft has shown an enormous appetite for acquisitions -- but Activision is more than twice the size of its previous biggest deal. In that earlier purchase, Microsoft paid more than $26 billion for professional social network LinkedIn Corp. in 2016, pushing Microsoft into social media.
Last year, Microsoft made what was then its second-largest purchase, paying $16 billion for artificial intelligence company Nuance Communications Inc. to help accelerate growth in the healthcare market.
Microsoft has stumbled in some of its deal efforts, noticeable in the defeat in 2020 of its attempt at buying parts of short-video app TikTok from Chinese parent company ByteDance Ltd. Microsoft also engaged in unsuccessful talks to buy social networking company Pinterest and chat startup Discord Inc.
After those deals fizzled, Microsoft decided to double down on investments in its gaming ambitions, one person familiar with Microsoft's strategy said.
Since taking over as CEO in 2014, Mr. Nadella has spent more than $10 billion to buy more than a dozen game studios, including the companies responsible for the Doom franchise and Minecraft.
In October, at the Journal's WSJ Tech Live conference, Mr. Spencer, the Microsoft gaming chief, said the company wasn't slowing down on its gaming acquisition spree. "We're always out there looking for people who we think would be a good match and teams that would be a good match with our strategy, so we're definitely not done," Mr. Spencer said.
Microsoft's gaming strategy increasingly is focused on growing its subscription business, called Game Pass, which for a monthly fee lets gamers have access to a catalog of games. In the past, Mr. Nadella has likened the Game Pass strategy to the "Netflix for games." Microsoft announced early last year that Game Pass had 18 million subscribers. With Activision, Microsoft said it has 25 million subscribers.
The transaction is expected to close by July 2023.
Buying Activision would increase Microsoft's videogame revenue by about half. Analysts estimate that Activision's sales in 2021 totaled $8.7 billion, according to FactSet, while Microsoft reported $15.4 billion in gaming revenue for the fiscal year through June, accounting for about 9% of its total.
Activision's stock had been rising, amid the videogame industry's pandemic surge, until the July lawsuit by the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing, which alleged gender pay disparity and sexual harassment at the company. Activision has disputed the department's allegations.
The company also has been under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Activision has said it is cooperating with the SEC.
Generate image description

Credit: By Cara Lombardo, Kirsten Grind and Aaron Tilley
