Elon Musk poured roughly a quarter of a billion dollars into two pro-Trump political groups during the recent election cycle, new filings show, an extraordinary sum for an individual that far exceeds what he had publicly indicated he was giving.
The billionaire gave a total of $238.5 million in cash and in-kind contributions during the cycle to America PAC, the super political-action committee that he formed this year, according to a Federal Election Commission filing covering mid-October through Nov. 25. That total included $75 million in the last two weeks of October alone.
A separate filing revealed that Musk also was the sole funder behind RBG PAC, a super PAC formed in mid-October that ran ads touting then-candidate Donald Trump's promise to not support a federal abortion ban. The PAC's website features a photo of late Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and claimed that her thinking on abortion matched Trump's. Musk gave RBG PAC $20.5 million in October from a revocable trust, according to its filing.
The disclosures, in filings that became public late Thursday, show the extent to which Musk was a major financial force driving Trump's successful campaign.
Since Trump's election victory, Musk has been a steady presence alongside the president-elect at Mar-a-Lago, offering input on nominations and the formation of the cabinet. Trump has named Musk to serve as the co-head of the Department of Government Efficiency, or DOGE, which Trump said will operate outside of the federal government to cut regulations and spending.
Musk's personal wealth is on track to jump by more than $100 billion since the election, in part because investors are betting his companies will benefit from his deep involvement in the Trump administration.
Tesla's shares rose 47% between Election Day and Thursday's close, equating to an increase of about $49 billion on paper for Musk's stake, which is nearly 13%, according to FactSet. SpaceX is seeking to sell shares at a valuation of about $350 billion, up from $210 billion over the summer, which would translate to a paper gain of about $59 billion for Musk's stake in the rocket company. And xAI, his artificial intelligence startup, recently completed a funding round valuing it at $50 billion, more than double its value from the spring.
The total sums disclosed in the new federal filings show that Musk spent more than his public comments indicated during the election. After The Wall Street Journal reported in July that he privately told people he would donate about $45 million a month to America PAC -- which would have been equivalent to roughly $180 million during the remaining months of the campaign -- Musk said he was donating at a "much lower level."
Musk's total is also larger than that of some other big-name Republicans. Conservative super-donor Miriam Adelson gave $106 million to the pro-Trump Preserve America super PAC plus another $931,000 directly to the Trump campaign.
Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman and Anthony DeBarros
