SHANGHAI -- Baidu Inc. will share software technology it is developing for self-driving cars in a bid to catch up with competitors including General Motors Co. and Waymo, the self-driving unit of Google parent Alphabet Inc.
Open-sourcing Baidu's capabilities in functions such as route planning, vehicle control and operating systems will help Baidu and the autonomous-vehicle industry develop more rapidly, Baidu group President Qi Lu said in an interview.
Mr. Lu said Beijing-based Baidu, best known for its Chinese search engine, is in talks to use its technology with several Chinese, U.S. and German auto makers but declined to identify them.
Baidu and other executives are in Shanghai this week for Auto Shanghai, China's biggest annual car show, where they will discuss Baidu's push into autonomous vehicles.
Mr. Lu, a former senior executive at Microsoft Corp., was hired in January as the No. 2 to Chief Executive Robin Li. In that role, he will also oversee Baidu's push into artificial intelligence, which includes self-driving cars.
In his first one-on-one interview since taking the job, the 55-year-old Mr. Lu acknowledged the company had recently lost some of its top talent, including chief scientist Andrew Ng, who announced his resignation in March.
"We certainly wish some of the people you mentioned, especially Andrew, had not left," Mr. Lu said. "They had made tremendous contributions to Baidu," Mr. Lu said.
"At the same time, people do move. In our industry, it's somewhat the norm," he added.
Baidu is betting that the value from autonomous vehicles is centered on collecting and processing data from riders, said Michael Dunne, president of Hong Kong-based Dunne Automotive, an advisory firm that facilitates auto-tech investments between the U.S. and China.
"In five to 10 years, autonomous-driving functions will be standard in the industry, just like power steering. Then, the value will come from the data in the car: what people do, where do they go," Mr. Dunne said.
The open-platform concept was tested by Tesla Inc. founder Elon Musk almost three years ago, when Mr. Musk decided to offer open access to Tesla patents out of frustration that electric-vehicle sales remained a fraction of total car sales.
A San Francisco startup called Comma.ai began offering its self-driving software online free last year after facing safety questions from U.S. regulators about the company's aftermarket kit designed to give certain Honda Motor Co. vehicles semiautonomous features similar to Tesla's Autopilot system. The startup's founder, George Hotz, said his product was aimed at self-driving enthusiasts and researchers.
---
Tim Higgins in San Francisco contributed to this article.
Credit: By Liza Lin
