My dinner was made by an oven with a mind of its own.
The artificial intelligence June oven serves up a pretty tasty baked salmon. Slide in a tray of raw fillets and its camera IDs what's on your menu. The Wi-Fi-equipped June chirps, and an icon of salmon shows up on its touch-screen door. Insert a probe into the fish, close the door and pour yourself a Chardonnay, because the June will cook the salmon to your liking.
A robotic Mrs. Cleaver, the June oven is humankind's oldest appliance reinvented for the machine-learning age.
Can it replace Mom's home cooking? No. AI still hasn't mastered bacon, for one. But dining with a June for a month gave me a glimpse of a future where we don't need to be chefs to make restaurant-grade meals.
Created by June Life Inc., a startup that includes former Apple engineers, the oven is audacious for many reasons, including its price: $1,500.
It's the Maserati of toaster ovens, with instant-on carbon-fiber heating elements and a dual-fan convection mechanism for faster, more-precise cooking. It costs two to three times as much as a fancy "dumb" countertop oven.
At launch, the June knows only about 50 recipes, and they aren't always especially smart. (You can cook your own recipes too, of course.) Yet living with the June, I came to appreciate it in a more practical context.
Do I want an oven with camera, Wi-Fi and the ability to send alerts to my watch? Not particularly. But do I want an oven that keeps me from screwing up what I'm cooking? Now you've got my attention. I made some outstanding dishes in the June, from roast broccoli to a whole chicken, while I was busy doing other stuff.
The oven's appeal may be generational. More young professionals subscribe to meal-kit services like Blue Apron, which deliver ready-to-cook ingredients and simple recipes. Why? They're overworked and many grew up with parents who were overworked, too, and didn't pass along cooking skills.
What if the oven knew what was in the Blue Apron box? The June can't do that today, but you can see where this is heading.
To understand what the June can and can't do, my editor Wilson and I cooked more than four dozen dishes with two June ovens. We were satisfied with about three quarters of them.
Salmon is one of the June's best dishes, and one that I've been known to screw up on my own. During cooking, the June's computer monitors temperature in the oven and inside the fish, via that probe. A readout in the app lets you monitor the progress and warns you shortly before it is done. Its camera lets you peek inside the oven: Baking salmon, live-streamed and available for posterity in the June app. (This certainly redefines food porn.)
The question is: How does the June oven define "done"? Professional chefs trained its software to identify the temperature and cooking pace that worked best in their test kitchen. We found it pretty much ideal across multiple salmon meals. And we got restaurant-quality broccoli, Brussels sprouts, potato wedges, chocolate chip cookies, pork chops and roast chicken without opening a cookbook.
With steak or lamb, the June transitions on its own between roast and broil, but it won't flip the meat for you. June's software also factors in hotter oven temperatures when you're cooking multiple recipes back to back -- like several dozen chocolate-chip cookies.
The software has its downsides. While not onerous, the June's touch-screen menus can involve more taps than your traditional oven. And there are bugs: While I tried to cook lamb chops on Saturday night, the program kept crashing. June says it is fixing this and has fixed other bugs we noticed.
It didn't take long to find the point where cooking science overwhelms the June's AI. When I made chocolate cookies with a 6-year-old, the June's automatic recipe did fine at first. But when my little helper decided to go with giant gobs of cookie dough, the oven didn't know to adjust its recipe. We got gooey cookies.
The June has room to improve. There's a scale built into the June's feet: What about using that to determine how much water is lost through evaporation? And right now, the camera built into the hood recognizes raw ingredients. What if it detected changes in shape and color to determine doneness? That would have helped with cookies and steaks, which aren't really done until they're brown.
Nothing underscores the challenges more than bacon. The June turned out bacon a wee bit too crispy for my taste and burned a few of Wilson's batches. Even if the oven adds crispness and thickness settings, it can't keep up with bacon's wild inconsistencies.
For me, I'll know it's time to buy an intelligent oven when one learns to make an incredible peach pie, something I've been working two decades to perfect. I might get jealous when a robot oven beats me at my own game. But given the progress of AI, I won't bet against it.
Credit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler
