Despite many promising leads, more than 120 drug treatments for Alzheimer's disease have failed. But Cambridge-based biotech company Biogen revived hope on Tuesday with its announcement that it would seek Food and Drug Administration approval for a drug it abandoned earlier this year.
Biogen's experimental Alzheimer's drug aducanumab targets beta-amyloid proteins that form plaque in the brain, which many scientists believe contributes to the debilitating disease. Investors and doctors considered Biogen's drug the best hope in years for patients with early-stage Alzheimer's, and the FDA in 2016 granted it fast-track designation for approval.
But Biogen in March abruptly suspended its drug trials after a "futility analysis" based on data from December indicated patients were unlikely to show meaningful improvement. That judgment may have been premature. Biogen had continued to administer the drug to patients with a certain genetic variation at higher dosages. The company spent the next several months parsing patient data and discovered that patients in one trial with a certain genetic variant who took higher doses until March exhibited less cognitive decline.
In June Biogen met with the FDA, which suggested more analysis. Randomized placebo-controlled trials have long been the gold standard in medical research, but some patients are more likely to benefit from treatments based on biomarkers or genetic variants. Former FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb has advocated alternative trial designs that can be adapted based on early clinical data showing which patients are most likely to benefit from treatments. This has generated resistance from some in the medical community, but Biogen's trials show how tailoring trials can illuminate positive effects.
"The evidence came over time. We collected a tremendous and complex set of data, including biomarkers and imaging," CEO Michel Vounatsos told CNBC on Wednesday. About six million Americans suffer from Alzheimer's, and the silver lining is that its prevalence provides rich data that machine-learning models can break down to discern patterns.
Biogen says it met with the FDA again Monday and received written comments from the agency before deciding to seek approval for what could become the first drug to slow Alzheimer's progression. Biogen's possible breakthrough may encourage more research. It's also a reminder of the vast sums that drug makers pour into innovation, which politicians in Washington are threatening to undermine with price controls. They can't put a price on a person's life or memory.
