HONG KONG -- China's tech sector is showing the strain from last year's sweeping U.S. export restrictions, which seek to stall Beijing's ambitions in cutting-edge industries such as artificial intelligence and supercomputing.
Semiconductor imports to China are falling. Chinese companies say they are struggling to get key components and machinery. And chipsets that have been remodeled to make them less powerful so they fall within U.S. rules are now threatened by the possibility of additional restrictions.
The distress signals show Washington's nine-month-old policy of denying Beijing access to the most advanced semiconductors and the tools to make them is starting to bite, despite loopholes and workarounds keeping some key components flowing.
The restrictions also show the obstacles facing China in developing domestic alternatives for some of the most sought-after foreign semiconductor technologies.
"The controls appear to be making it harder and costlier for China to gain certain inputs," said Emily Benson, a senior fellow specializing in trade and technology at the Center for Strategic and International Studies think tank.
Customs data released by Beijing in July highlighted the reality for Chinese buyers of high-end chips: Imports of semiconductors fell by 22% in value terms during the first six months of 2023 from a year earlier. Imports of chip-manufacturing equipment dropped by 23%.
Leading chip-manufacturing regions accounted for the lion's share of the decline in semiconductor imports. Taiwan, home to Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., the world's largest chip maker, accounted for about 40% of the drop in China's chip imports during the first five months of the year. South Korea, home to Samsung, SK Hynix and other chip giants, accounted for almost one-third. The U.S. restrictions affect foreign companies that use U.S. chip-making tools -- which virtually all of them do.
There are likely other factors at play behind drooping semiconductor imports. China's economy is slowing amid weaker global demand. Beijing has also invested heavily in domestic technology industries in a push for greater self-reliance, though that will take time to bear fruit. In the meantime, China lacks the ability to make the most advanced chips, with key elements in their supply chain controlled by the U.S. and its allies.
Japan on July 23 restricted the export of crucial semiconductor-manufacturing equipment, following curbs announced by the Netherlands.
Last month, the largest listed subsidiary of Inspur, China's top maker of servers used to develop AI, issued a warning to investors: Citing tight supply, the company said it is struggling to get chips critical to powering its AI servers, the powerful machines used in laboratories and tech companies to develop advanced AI.
Unable to access the latest chips, China's AI contenders risk falling behind in a sector that Beijing has said it aims to lead the world in by 2030. UBS said it expects global demand for AI products to reach $300 billion by 2027, up from $28 billion last year.
Other Chinese companies are facing challenges getting parts. In late June, China's leading maker of memory chips, Yangtze Memory Technologies, urged suppliers to show "integrity" and deliver machinery parts it had already purchased.
The U.S. export rules announced last Oct. 7 included caps on the power of certain processors used in AI applications and in supercomputers, as well as restrictions on the types of chip-making machinery, components and software China can import.
While selling top-end chips and tools to Chinese buyers may no longer be an option, some Western companies are benefiting from China's accelerating buildup of domestic chip capacity. ASML, the Dutch maker of lithography machines that are critical to chip making, posted a 27% rise in second-quarter revenue, driven in part by sales to China.
---
Yoko Kubota in Beijing contributed to this article.
Credit: By Dan Strumpf and Clarence Leong
