Give People Money
By Annie Lowrey
(Crown, 263 pages, $26)
The War on Normal People
By Andrew Yang
(Hachette, 284 pages, $28)
The concept of a universal basic income, or UBI, has become part of the moral armor of Silicon Valley moguls who want a socially conscious defense against the charge that technology is making humanity obsolete. The logic of UBI runs that if every adult received $12,000 annually in free, unfettered cash, then we would not need to worry about an ocean of underemployed men who numb their feelings of worthlessness with computer games and opioids. The folly of UBI is that it sees a cash payment as a substitute for purpose and accomplishment and that it enables joblessness when we should be encouraging employment and job-creating innovation.
Two new books examining UBI are better than their subject deserves. Annie Lowrey's "Give People Money" advances the general progressive case for UBI as a new link in the safety net. Andrew Yang's "The War on Normal People" is squarely targeted at the techno-dystopians who see UBI as a response to a jobless future in America.
Ms. Lowrey's case is stronger, even though her best chapter, "The Kludgeocracy," focuses on India and other poorer countries rather than the U.S. She argues that these nations should "shift away from subsidy programs toward cash transfers or other simpler benefit programs." Providing cash, rather than, say, rice or a "sprawling rural employment guarantee scheme," has the virtues of "universality, simplicity and unconditionality." Universality is important because "the Indian government struggles to determine who is poor and who is not." Simplicity is important because complexity invites corruption and inefficiency. Unconditionality is important because many programs create perverse incentives: Urbanization provides the best path from poverty to prosperity, yet rural-employment schemes keep workers home on farms.
The evidence from cash-transfer experiments abroad, like GiveDirectly in Africa and Brazil's Bolsa Familia, is quite positive. Mr. Yang notes that, among cash recipients, "domestic violence rates dropped, mental health improved, and people started eating better." Poverty is the defining problem of the developing world, and cash is the most direct weapon against poverty. But does that logic carry over to the wealthy, but underemployed, U.S.?
Distinguished intellectuals on the right, including Milton Friedman and Charles Murray, have advocated for simple cash transfers instead of various welfare programs, a move that would stop the government from micromanaging the lives of the poor. The problem with Friedman's perspective, which Ms. Lowrey well recognizes, is that taxpayers are typically not interested in funding jaunts by food-stamp recipients to Las Vegas even if those trips really do bring more satisfaction than health care and fresh vegetables. In any case, Ms. Lowrey has little interest in "eliminating the country's existing antipoverty programs and converting them to a UBI," because she believes such a change "would likely result in an increase in poverty." Instead, she wants to add cash transfers to the existing safety net, in order to reduce American poverty.
This is a tenable position, unlike the view advanced by tech moguls -- and Mr. Yang -- that UBI is a sensible response to mass joblessness. I share Mr. Yang's worries about the future of work, but I remain convinced, even after reading both of these books, that UBI is the wrong answer to this challenge. We need policies that encourage job creation and working, not policies that pay people not to work.
In the mid-1960s, about 5% of men aged 25 to 54 were jobless. For 40 years that share has risen, and for much of the past decade the rate has remained over 15%. Suicide, divorce and opioid abuse are all associated with nonemployment, and many facts suggest that the misery of joblessness is far worse than that of a low-paying job. According to the most recent data, only 7% of working men in households earning less than $35,000 report being dissatisfied with their lives. But that share soars to 18% among the nonemployed of all incomes. This suggests that promoting employment is more important than reducing inequality.
Yet despite Mr. Yang's hopes that UBI will somehow "enable people to more effectively transition from shrinking industries and environments to new ones" and will be "perhaps the greatest catalyst to human creativity we have ever seen," 50 years of evidence about labor supply in the U.S. suggests that giving people money will lead them to work less.
The Negative Income Tax experiments of the 1970s -- when poorer households in a number of states received direct cash payments to keep them at a minimum income -- are the closest America has come to a UBI. But they did not show "minimal impact on work," as Mr. Yang suggests. Rather, they produced a quite significant work-hours reduction of between 5% and 25%, as well as "employment rate reductions . . . from about 1 to 10 percentage points," according to one capable study. Moreover, these experiments occurred at a time when most men were more firmly attached to the labor force. The combination of free money and artificial intelligence today could have far more catastrophic effects. Ironically, UBI could easily help to create a dystopian, jobless future, as more money induces more workers to leave the labor force even as entrepreneurs put diminishing effort into innovations that employ less-skilled Americans.
There are many sensible ways to fight mass joblessness. We could reduce the regulations that stymie entrepreneurship. We could reform benefit programs, like disability insurance, that deter work. We could reduce the payroll tax for low-income workers and their employers, and we could even reward low-income workers with wage subsidies (a per-hour boost) paid for by taxpayers. A future in which two-thirds of America lives off UBI is a true horror. If we "give people money," we should do it by subsidizing them to work.
---
Mr. Glaeser is a professor of economics at Harvard, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute and the author of "Triumph of the City."

Credit: By Edward Glaeser
