LE BOURGET, France -- Escalating concerns about cyberthreats are prompting the aviation industry to devise an unlikely new safeguard: real-time warnings to pilots about potential hacking attempts.
Work to develop such systems, which have prompted disagreements between some in the industry, are part of separate efforts by France's Thales SA, Raytheon Co. and other companies to expand cyber protections for aircraft. Airbus SE and Boeing Co. support the pilot-alerting goal, reflecting a desire to try new things as global threats intensify and evolve.
But interviews at the Paris Air Show showed there isn't an industrywide consensus on the concept, a version of which is under development and could start to be tested on some commercial aircraft by late 2018. Large suppliers such as Honeywell International Inc. and Rockwell Collins Inc. -- which provide cockpit equipment for many airliners -- are skeptical about the need for such proposed capabilities.
The debate isn't likely to affect cybersecurity systems on today's airliners or even those built in the next few years, though it could have an impact on how the digital cores of future models will be protected.
Proponents of alerting see advanced systems on aircraft as being able to identify attempted or successful cyberintrusions, with the data feeding into artificial intelligence features powerful and adaptable enough to automatically respond to the hazard. "The conventional ways by which we've protected ourselves in cyber may need to change" as threats evolve, said Greg Hyslop, Boeing's chief technology officer.
Allan McArtor, chairman of the Airbus unit that operates in the U.S., Canada and Latin America, also sees a need for greater industry sophistication in battling potential cyberthreats. "We haven't been able to make a very convincing argument" to the public about why aircraft are safe from outside intrusion, he said. What is missing, he added, is "a convincing cyberthreat architecture that allows us to be aware of attacks" when they take place, including warnings going directly to the cockpit.
The push for new approaches generally tracks recommendations from an earlier U.S. government-backed study group. The group of experts also concluded that airline vulnerabilities extend to maintenance operations.
In September, the Federal Aviation Administration's top technical advisory group adopted language seeking to ensure that cybersecurity protections would be incorporated into all future industry standards.
Thales decided years ago that it wasn't sufficient to merely devise elaborate protections. "We must have some real-time capabilities to detect and respond" if an intrusion is under way, said Thomas Hutin, one of the company's top cybersecurity officials.
Carl Esposito, president of Honeywell's Electronics Solutions Business unit, sees no need for such drills, pointing to the extraordinary rigor and care avionics suppliers use in writing code. Existing safety systems are effectively impenetrable from the outside, he said, because of "encryption, security keys and end-to-end verification" of users already embedded in the software. In the event a warning comes to the cockpit, he maintained, aviators aren't cybersecurity experts, so "what could the pilots do about it anyway?"
These different assessments of the industry's cyber vulnerabilities -- and what leaders should do combat future attacks -- partly reflect the uncertain nature of threats. Industry officials agree there hasn't been a single verified instance of safety systems being breached on a large commercial jetliner. But experts' warnings are getting louder about the dangers.

Credit: By Andy Pasztor
