WASHINGTON -- The Senate approved a bipartisan, $250 billion bill boosting government spending on technology research and development amid rising competition from China and other nations.
The bill passed 68-32 on Tuesday. It won approval after being delayed just before the Senate's Memorial Day recess, as some Republican lawmakers raised last-minute concerns about its size and scope.
The legislation represents a potential landmark effort to turn the tide on several long-term trends in U.S. competitiveness. Those include eroding federal investments in research overall and a shrinking share of the world's semiconductor manufacturing.
Backers contend the U.S. also has lacked an agency clearly focused on cutting-edge science such as artificial intelligence technology. The bill proposes an expanded role for the National Science Foundation to fill that gap.
"Today's bill is about investing in that innovation economy of the future," said Sen. Maria Cantwell (D., Wash.), who heads the Commerce Committee. She and others compared the legislation with previous federal efforts that helped lead to breakthroughs in computer networks, energy, biosciences and other areas.
The bill that won passage, known as the U.S. Innovation and Competition Act, still needs approval in the House, which has been weighing somewhat different approaches. The size of the final vote tally in the Senate suggested that the package could see wide support.
Much of the legislation authorizing major spending increases also must still be funded by Congress.
Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.), who has led the push for the package, said it would help the U.S. halt a gradual decline as the world's leader in scientific research and innovation. By some estimates, federal R&D spending in recent years has totaled less than 1% of U.S. GDP -- and less than 3% of total federal spending, the lowest since before the space race of the 1960s.
"When all is said and done, the bill will go down as one of the most important things this chamber has done in a very long time, a statement of faith in America's ability to seize the opportunities of the 21st century," Mr. Schumer said Tuesday before the vote.
Some Republicans have pushed back, contending the bill costs too much and interferes too much in the economy, mimicking China's top-down approach to investing in favored sectors and companies.
"This bill will increase government's influence over the private sector while weakening America and making us less competitive by increasing our debt," Sen. Ron Johnson (R., Wis.) said.
The bill aims to expand the government's role in tech research, including through the National Science Foundation, an independent federal agency that promotes such research. The measure would authorize about $190 billion in spending to strengthen U.S. advanced technologies to better compete globally, according to a recent Congressional Budget Office analysis, although not all of it would be new spending.
The bill also has become a vehicle for a number of other tech-related initiatives. One would authorize about $52 billion for encouraging more semiconductor production in the U.S.
Arvind Krishna, CEO of International Business Machines Corp., called the bill a "visionary piece of legislation" that encourages "the type of public private collaboration that took humanity to the moon."
The vote coincided with the release of a Biden administration report calling for increased incentives for semiconductor research and manufacturing. According to the Semiconductor Industry Association, the U.S. share of global semiconductor manufacturing capacity has fallen from 37% in 1990 to 12% now.
"The [bill] will not only boost investment in manufacturing capacity here at home but foster an innovation ecosystem and protect a critical supply chain," Al Thompson, vice president of U.S. government relations at Intel Corp., said in a statement.
Another provision would ban downloads of the Chinese-owned social media app TikTok on all government phones. Previous bans included military and Homeland Security devices. The U.S. has said TikTok data could be shared with China's authoritarian government. TikTok has said it would never do so.
As originally envisioned, the bill would have provided $100 billion over five years for a new technology directorate at the National Science Foundation to fund research into artificial intelligence and machine learning, robotics, high-performance computing and other advanced technologies. An additional $10 billion would be authorized for the Commerce Department to designate regional technology hubs for research, development and manufacturing of key technologies.
But some lawmakers -- skeptical about the focus on the foundation -- succeeded in cutting the allocation to its new technology directorate by about two-thirds, and shifting some of that money to the Energy Department, which oversees 17 national laboratories.
Lawmakers supporting the change argued that giving so much new responsibility to the foundation could undermine the national labs' research.
The lengthy debate reflects the government's struggles to reorganize itself around the need to accelerate development of artificial intelligence and other advanced technologies, which many experts believe could become vital to new military weapons.
In the House, the different version of the legislation being developed by the House Science, Space and Technology Committee would establish a new National Science Foundation directorate that would emphasize finding solutions to a range of challenges, from global competitiveness to climate change. The committee plans to vote on the package next Tuesday.
The Biden administration said recently that it supported the Senate bill.
---
Lindsay Wise contributed to this article.
Credit: By John D. McKinnon
