When the first digital data miners churned out the first primitive profiles of advertising readers and viewers a couple of decades ago, the landscape of marketing -- the business of promoting your products, services and message to a receptive audience -- was transformed. Data about consumers, their tastes and habits, and the ability to manipulate it so that you could target exactly who you were looking for, finally offered an answer to that age-old marketer's complaint about wasting half the money you spend on advertising but not knowing which half.
This application of the digital revolution to marketing not only improved the efficiency of advertising, of course. It upended an entire business model. Traditional advertising -- seemingly hopelessly broad and untargeted -- looked obsolete. Conventional media companies, for whom ad revenue was their lifeblood, saw their businesses blown up.
Newspapers, magazines, traditional TV, radio and film all scrambled to get on the digital data train. But the 21st century giants -- Google and Facebook -- had already commandeered it, and with their scale offered advertisers a vast reach no media company had ever come close to enjoying. In a virtuous circle of market concentration, increasingly sophisticated algorithms building on exponentially expanding piles of data were channeling marketers directly to eager, willing and spendthrift consumers and businesses while they searched or streamed or socialized. By last year the two companies accounted for around 60% of all digital ad spending.
That was the future. But in the past year the future hasn't looked quite so certain. For some time now the eagerness with which marketers had been flocking to the Digital Duopolists had begun to be matched by doubts -- about reliability, accuracy, ad metrics. In 2018, those doubts have been magnified by something potentially even more challenging to the digital ad sellers -- revelations about how they have been handling the data, evoking outrage at what many critics see as a reckless or even dismissive approach to individuals' privacy.
The cascading revelations about how Facebook is alleged to have used or misused the data of its users -- from apparently helping facilitate the murky political tactics of Cambridge Analytica to instances of company employees accessing private data for their own ends -- have sent trust in digital marketing plummeting. Despite efforts by Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook CEO, on a penitential tour this year through world capitals, the company has been unable to shake the fear that its very business model -- with the fat margins it produces -- is built entirely on the effectiveness with which it uses individuals' data to help companies (and perhaps unscrupulous types too) reach them.
Already a backlash was in the works. Just last month, new European regulations came into effect -- the General Data Protection Regulation, or GDPR, a comprehensive set of rules, with tough sanctions for nonenforcement, on how companies may compile, use and distribute data about their and other customers. Advertisers, traditional media companies, and perhaps above all consumers themselves are demanding that companies such as Facebook mean what they say when, as the company's chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, put it earlier this year, "Advertising and protecting people's information are not at odds."
This is the backdrop to this week's 2018 Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity on France's Cote d'Azur. These salient issues of privacy, data protection, the proper use of individuals' digital information, seem likely to dominate much of the discussion among media leaders, tech companies and advertisers. As the usual crowd of highflying executives from old and new businesses alike sip rose on their yachts and exchange dinner recommendations against the tranquil waters of the summer Mediterranean, they'll hear diverse views about the uncertain next phase of the digital revolution.
In this special report we explore multiple aspects of this evolving scene: how companies are seeking to rely more on their own proprietary data on customers rather than on third parties; the far-reaching implications of GDPR; and whether the U.S. should follow suit with similar tight rules.
We also look at some other big issues under scrutiny this week -- how new technologies such as voice assistants are changing marketing; what's happening generally to trust in social media; the increasingly complex politics of marketing in a partisan and hyperpoliticized market, among other issues.
The Journal is in full sail at Cannes -- no debate will go unreported, no interview uncovered, no sun-kissed beach unstrolled, no canape undigested. And we ourselves are hosting a series of discussions on topics such as artificial intelligence, the future of brands and, of course, privacy and the threats to it.
We will look at the emerging new trends in advertising and marketing as we feature interviews with business leaders, chief marketing officers, industry specialists and others.
You can follow us at our CMO Network online pages and in the Journal -- digitally and in print -- every hour of every day for coverage of all the major news of the week.
Bonne semaine!
---
Mr. Baker is editor at large of The Wall Street Journal.

Credit: By Gerard Baker
