Faced with a burgeoning number of Covid-19 patients, hospitals are turning to artificial intelligence to help with diagnoses and assessments. So far, the results are mixed.
Several hospitals around the world have started using AI software -- which learns from experience -- to check lung scans for signs and severity of the disease. Some radiologists have used AI in combination with other signals, like a patient's oxygen levels, to help doctors make some treatment decisions.
Others use it to more quickly diagnose Covid-19. Computer tomography (CT) scans or X-rays can take hours or less, while swab tests can take days to get results.
The goal is to speed up patient time in the hospital and ease pressure on radiologists, who sometimes assess hundreds of scans a day. Some hospitals are getting free trials of the software; others are already using it to make clinical decisions.
While the technology has shown promise in recent years in checking for tumors and other lung anomalies, some doctors said AI makes errors when it comes to coronavirus. Others said that while the technology can arm them with extra information, it is too early to tell if it has made their work more efficient or helped save more lives. That underscores a yearslong challenge of proving the usefulness of AI in health care, researchers say. While AI systems can often work well in trials, their results can beunderwhelming in the more unpredictable, real world.
"I don't think at the moment that our workflow significantly improved," said Francesco De Cobelli, head of radiology at San Raffaele Hospital in Milan, in an area of Italy hard hit by the virus. The hospital has been trying AI software from three different vendors to help assess X-rays and CT scans.
His team immediately found errors in a system from Qure.ai Technologies Pvt. Ltd., a Mumbai-based startup. The system made the disease look worse than it was. "The problem is this software has been built . . . not for Covid but for tuberculosis," Dr. De Cobelli said. His team spoke daily with engineers from Qure.ai to retrain its system, and the issue has been fixed, he added.
Qure.ai Chief Executive Prashant Warier said the AI system's early problems were resolved and that the hospital is now a paying customer.
AI companies have touted accuracy rates of 96% or higher in detecting Covid-19 in lung scans, but researchers are skeptical those numbers can be achieved in the real world. That is because they build their algorithms by training them on hundreds or thousands of lung scans from patients who didn't necessarily suffer from Covid-19, but from other diseases.
It has taken five years to validate AI systems that can detect breast cancer, said Hugh Harvey, a British radiologist who consults for health-tech firms. "There's no way anyone has done that specifically for Covid in the past three months."
In Moscow, dozens of hospitals are sending CT scans to the city's department of health to be assessed using AI software as part of a clinical trial. If successful, it could lead to doctors using the software themselves in hospitals to help make treatment decisions.
For now, doctors are apprehensive, said Ivan Blokhin, a medical researcher helping conduct the trial. "They simply don't know the strengths and weaknesses of the algorithms," said Dr. Blokhin, who has assessed hundreds of scans using online software from RADLogics Inc., a U.S.-Israeli AI company. He added that doctors are wary of sending patients home based on an algorithm's decision.
Dr. Bolkhin said one challenge of the new approach is getting used to new, unvalidated measurements. Radiologists typically look for visual signals of the virus, referred to as "ground-glass opacities" from their appearance, and assess how they are moving through the lungs -- an assessment that can't easily be translated into a number by AI systems, said Dr. Blokhin.
Instead, RADLogics' algorithms show how many cubic centimeters of a patient's lungs have been affected by Covid-19, accompanied by 3-D illustrations or a red box added to the scan. "We don't have enough studies to show this is a parameter we need to look at," he said, adding that doctors didn't always agree with the assessment of the red box.
RADLogics Chief Executive Moshe Becker said the company had processed thousands of patient cases in China, Russia and Italy, and that the system needed to be tested and validated locally to ensure it works well.
Some physicians say the software is helpful. "It's like a safety belt, so they don't miss anything," said Sergey Morozov, who works in diagnostic imaging for Moscow's health department, which has used AI to screen hundreds of Covid-19 patients.
The Campus Bio-Medico University Hospital in Rome has been using software from Beijing Infervision Technology Co., a Chinese startup, to assess about 100 coronavirus patients a week since mid-March. Bruno Beomonte Zobel, head of the hospital's imaging center, said AI software from Infervision sometimes confused Covid-19 with other forms of viral pneumonia. However, he gives high marks to the software's ability to identify the severity of the disease, and says the system is worth using. "You manage many more examinations in a shorter time, he said.
Infervision said Covid-19 has many similarities with viral-induced pneumonia and that its AI was making progress in differential diagnosis.
Senior radiologist Fabricio Machado also praised the AI software he was using at Prevent Senior, a Brazilian private hospital network, to give an "abnormality score" to the X-rays of Covid-19 patients. The software -- developed by South Korean startup Lunit Inc. -- has been used on more than 4,000 patients across eight hospitals. It is too early to say for sure if the AI had sped up hospital stays, Dr. Machado said.

Credit: By Parmy Olson
