How are American workers doing? Neither the middle class nor the poor have fared well in recent decades -- but don't blame tax cuts, a too-low minimum wage or the greed of the 1%. In rich countries around the world, the top half of the income distribution has been pulling away from the bottom half. Productivity growth among high-wage workers, driven by technological change, is the reason.
When measuring wage dispersion, economists frequently look at the 90/50 ratio -- the wage of the worker at the 90th percentile divided by the wage of the worker at the median. In 2017 the 90th-percentile worker earned around $108,000, while the median worker earned around $45,000 a year -- a ratio of 2.4. That's an increase from 2.2 since 1997. Over the same period, the 50/10 ratio -- the median wage divided by the wage at the 10th percentile -- stayed flat, at 2.1.
There have been short periods when low-wage groups gain relative to others. The President's Council of Economic Advisers recently touted the rise in earnings of the 10th percentile relative to the median, with a 6% rise in wages at the 10th percentile during the last quarter of 2018. But the larger trend is that the middle and bottom have gained only slightly in 20 years and they seem to be moving in lockstep. Half the country makes only a little more than 20 years ago.
In other rich countries the story is similar. In the U.K. and Germany over approximately the same two-decade period, the top half of earners gained relative to the bottom half. The same was true on average for 16 countries that belong to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development between 1997 and 2015.
Workers' living standards depend on wage levels, not wage ratios, so it can be misleading to compare ratios. In Germany and the U.K., for instance, the 90/50 ratio is lower than in the U.S. But the median American worker earns 6% more than the median German worker and 17% more than the median British worker. Among the 18 OECD countries for which recent data are available, the U.S. ranks third in median earnings, despite having the third-highest 90/50 ratio. There is little doubt that the median American worker enjoys a higher living standard than most of his OECD counterparts even while lagging behind wealthier Americans.
Still, wage growth for the median worker has stalled at about 0.5% a year in the U.S., as well as in France and Canada. In Japan, there has been no growth at all. The widespread nature of this pattern suggests that what is occurring reflects an underlying global phenomenon.
The likely explanation is that changes in trade and technology have raised the productivity of highly trained, highly educated workers relative to the less skilled. Wages tend to move with productivity, so that if differences in worker productivity grow, wage differences will also grow.
The data provide some clues on how to remedy this situation. Here's where wage ratios become informative. Germany is a wealthy country, second only to the U.S. among Group of Seven nations in gross domestic product per capita. The median German earns 55% of what the 90th-percentile German worker earns, while the median American worker earns only 41% of what the 90th-percentile American worker earns. The German middle class does better compared with top-earning Germans than the American middle class does relative to top-earning Americans.
But this isn't a case of rich Americans taking advantage of poor ones. Workers in the 90th percentile aren't financiers. Instead, they are primarily college-educated managers and administrators, software and hardware developers, nurses, salespersons and supervisors. Median workers are typically those with high-school diplomas.
Germany has a system that relies heavily on vocational training. Those who don't go to college obtain market-oriented skills during their high-school years. That training appears to boost their productivity relative to their American counterparts. Average productivity in the U.S. is high, but there are many Americans whose productivity is low because the U.S. educational system doesn't develop real labor skills for those who don't go on to college. German vocationally trained workers, many in services, do better relative to the average than do American high-school graduates, let alone American high-school dropouts.
Some Silicon Valley executives worry that their genius coupled with the spread of artificial intelligence will eliminate jobs for many workers. Technological advances do tend to favor the highly skilled relative to the less skilled. But if AI is going to be a problem, it has yet to reveal itself. Labor markets are tight, not slack.
Still, it is reasonable to worry that future technological advances may raise productivity so much that demand for lower skilled labor will fall. The solution isn't to reduce or retard technological progress, the primary driver of increased living standards. Nor is it to guarantee wages for the poor. At best, that is a patch rather than a remedy. The fundamental problem is the growing productivity gap.
The goal of policy makers, in education and the labor market, should be to bring up the skills of the lower half of wage earners so that they compete more effectively with the top. Only narrowing the skills gap can address the problems of the working and middle classes.
---
Mr. Lazear, who was chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers from 2006-09, is a professor at Stanford University's Graduate School of Business and a Hoover Institution fellow.

Credit: By Edward P. Lazear
