Life was good for Krista Jancik. At 35, she was working as an art director at an advertising agency and living in the trendy West Loop neighborhood of Chicago. Still, she said, "Everything was feeling a little too routine." Initially, Ms. Jancik considered planning a big vacation -- China, maybe, or Australia -- but then she came across an ad for Remote Year: a fledgling travel company that spirits groups of remote workers away on a year-long journey around the world. Though Ms. Jancik's job was not conceived as a remote position, within weeks, she'd sold her company on the benefits of such an experience, broken her lease and boarded a plane to Malaysia. Now, she lives in a new city each month -- Kuala Lumpur, Prague, Marrakesh -- and fits in island-hopping excursions in Thailand or camping trips to the Sahara around her normal workload. "I feel constantly in motion," she told me via video chat from Belgrade, Serbia. "I feel more productive, more active, more creative."
Long-duration travel has historically been the purview of backpackers roaming the hostel circuit, or a class of moneyed jet-setter with no apparent need for a regular paycheck. Recently, though, a new crop of companies has emerged with the aim of helping working stiffs take their jobs on the road.
Remote Year, the leader in the field, was started in 2014 by two Chicago roommates, a strategy consultant and a venture capitalist. On a whim, the duo posted an ad online broadcasting the opportunity to work remotely and travel with a community; within a month, they had collected 50,000 email addresses. "We realized we were onto something," said Sam Pessin, one of Remote Year's co-founders. The company scooped up $12 million in venture funding in 2016, now has teams on the ground in 14 cities around the world, from Cape Town to Medellin, and will put 10 groups of around 50 travelers on the road this year.
For a $5,000 lump sum and fees of $2,000 a month, Remote Year provides its customers with a year's worth of flights from city to city, and everything they need to hit the ground running in a new locale: a place to live, a co-working space and local staff for troubleshooting and sightseeing tips. The company also hosts regular social events, like wine tastings or neighborhood walking tours. One month, you might find yourself taking surfing lessons in Lisbon. The next, zipping around Hanoi by moped.
Mr. Pessin said Remote Year can squeeze a lot out of the modest fees by focusing on cities where the tourism appeal is high, but the cost of living is low; think Hanoi and Lima, not Hong Kong and London. The company negotiates long-term apartment leases in bulk. Participants said their living quarters varied in quality from place to place -- a swanky high rise in Bangkok, a "dank" basement apartment in Lisbon -- and tend to be centrally located and clean, albeit basic. You might have your own studio or a private bedroom within a house or apartment shared between members of your travel cohort.
A handful of other services offer their own tweaks on a similar theme. Hacker Paradise organizes one- to two-month residencies everywhere from Bali to Buenos Aires, and draws a tech-centered crowd of entrepreneurs, web-developers and creative types. Wi-Fi Tribe offers flexible drop-in, drop-out communities in dozens of locations; Unsettled, which puts together two-week and one-month retreats around the world, has found a niche among midcareer professionals thinking through their next move. What they all have in common is their appeal to so-called "digital nomads": people who can work from anywhere, so long as the Wi-Fi signal is good.
The rise of this untethered lifestyle has been fueled by the convergence of a few complementary trends. The growth of the gig economy and telecommuting are only some of the factors. Mark McSpadden, vice president of digital experience for Sabre, a travel technology company, said that declining rates of home and car ownership, marriage and procreation among people in their 30s -- the largest demographic for this kind of lifestyle -- have freed up money for travel, and given young professionals less to stick around for.
The clientele of companies like Remote Year include lots of entrepreneurs and freelancers -- writers, graphic designers, marketing consultants -- but a surprising number of Fortune 500 employees participate, too. Mr. Pessin said that half of his customers are employed full-time while on the road, and that Remote Year has teams dedicated to selling companies on the benefits of this type of working gap year as a tool for both recruiting and leadership development.
All of the programs are selective and favor applicants who seem eager to contribute to a communal lifestyle, whether through hosting a talk on machine learning or pitching in with potluck dinners. Few couples tend to apply, and only Hacker Paradise and another such service called the Remote Life can accommodate families. Unsettled and Hacker Paradise overtly target personal and professional growth through activities like goal-setting sessions, local networking opportunities and workshops. "The main things that we look for . . . is someone who shows up with intention," said Michael Youngblood, a co-founder of Unsettled. "We don't necessarily care what that intention is, whether they're starting a new bitcoin company or trying to figure out the meaning of life."
All that focus on the community can be a double-edged sword: It staves off the loneliness of solo travel but can also be wearying, and hinder immersion in the local culture. "It's very easy to spend your time with no one but Remote Year people," said Kate Bagoy, who traveled with the company in 2017, and has been living out of a suitcase while working as a business coach ever since. Ms. Bagoy said she misses the logistical support that Remote Year provided -- she now spends hours each week managing travel details -- but ultimately, she has realized that she prefers to move around the world at a slower pace, and without traveling as part of a herd. "You can get burned out on travel," she said. "Now, I'm grocery shopping, I'm trying to get my exercise in, I'm really trying to understand a culture more. I'm living my life, just in a scenic backdrop."
---
LATITUDE MOVE / COMPANIES THAT CATER TO NOMADIC PROFESSIONALS
Hacker Paradise
Organizes one- to two-month residencies for techie travelers in places like Cape Town, Seoul, and Buenos Aires. From $450 a week for accommodations, workspace, SIM card and local events; hackerparadise.org
The Remote Life
Groups of around 20 set up shop in a new location, such as Bali or Siem Reap, each month. Travelers can join for as little as a week, but three months is average. From $2,000 a month for accommodations, workspace, SIM card and local events; theremotelife.com
Remote Year
The category leader, and the biggest commitment. Offers four and 12 month itineraries exploring a new city each month. From $11,000 for four months for travel between cities, accommodations, workspace and local events; remoteyear.com
Unsettled
Shorter-duration retreats designed for midcareer professionals in places like Mexico City, Tuscany and Nicaragua. From $1,700 for two weeks for accommodations, workspace and local events; beunsettled.co
Wi-Fi Tribe
Divides the year into several "chapters" in a range of different locations, from Berlin to Malaysia. Members have the flexibility to join for as little as one, or as many as 10. From $900 for four weeks for accommodations, workspace and local events; wifitribe.co

Credit: By Elizabeth G. Dunn
