The just-released movie "The Imitation Game" credits mathematician Alan Turing with ending World War II two years early and saving 14 million lives. So it might seem strange to say it undersells Turing's legacy. And yet that's the case.
It's true that as the movie depicts, Turing gave the Allies an incredible advantage by cracking the German Enigma code. This allowed England and her allies a degree of visibility into their enemy's plans that present-day spies can only dream of. But a more comprehensive account of Turing's work tells us something astonishing: Code-breaking was but a sidebar to Turing's larger ambitions.
Like Newton and Einstein, Turing strove to understand something fundamental about reality itself. And as the inventor of the mathematical abstraction that enabled all subsequent devices we call "computers," some of his insights are more relevant today than ever.
In 1936, before England had entered the war or captured an Enigma -- a machine capable of creating codes so strong that they were considered unbreakable -- Turing wrote a paper that answered a central question in mathematics and logic: Are there things that cannot be computed?
At the time, a "computer" was literally a person, working with pencil and paper or perhaps a mechanical calculator as an aid. Mathematicians were interested in whether or not this hypothetical computer-person could, starting from a set of axioms, determine whether any statement in the universe was true or false.
Building on the work of others, Turing realized that the way to answer this question was to replace the human with a "universal" mechanical computer. Turing didn't need to build such a computer; it was enough to describe it mathematically, which he did.
Turing's machine was an astonishing feat, unifying many previously disparate strains of thought while also answering his important question. It turns out the answer is not only that there are things in this world that cannot be computed, but there are infinitely many such statements.
Turing's design later inspired others to build physical computers, and the rest is history. To this day we recognize computers to be Universal Turing Machines. Turing played no small role in spanning the gulf between his abstract ideas and the physical world, since the machine he built with other British code-breakers was, while not a proper computer, an electromechanical calculator of a level of sophistication never before seen.
This gave rise to the whole of our digital age, and with it increasing concerns about whether machines increasingly will replace human jobs.
What does Turing's research tell us?
"There is some scientific basis for the view that humans are doing something that a machine isn't doing -- and that we don't even want our machine to do," says S. Barry Cooper, a mathematician at Leeds and the foremost scholar of Turing's work.
The math behind this is deep, but here's the short version: Humans seem to be able to decide the validity of statements that should stump us, were we strictly computers as Turing described them. And since all modern computers are of the sort Turing described, well, it seems that we've won the race against the machines before it's even begun.
To be sure, almost every part of what I just described is the subject of debate by mathematicians, philosophers, physicists and even neuroscientists. And it's not clear that theoretical limits to what our machines can do cannot be partly overcome in the real world.
But we don't have to dive all the way down to the first principles of computing and thinking to understand a basic truth realized by Prof. Cooper and the rest of Turing's heirs: The machines we create are not, indeed cannot be, one-for-one replacements for humans.
"The great thing about a computer is that it does what it does incredibly well, and you can rely on the outcome," says Prof. Cooper. "But asking our machine to be CEO of the organization you work in, well no, we've got enough algorithmic thinking coming from above."
Often, when pundits talk about the companies building the future, we talk about them as if the world they are creating is an inevitability. Whether it's big data and artificial intelligence replacing knowledge workers or taxicab drivers giving way to Uber drivers and eventually self-driving cars, the sense is that with time, humans become progressively less necessary.
But I think Turing, widely considered the father of artificial intelligence, would see things differently. He invented the Turing test for determining if a machine was intelligent -- you simply interview it and make up your mind for yourself. It's a surprisingly nonalgorithmic process for determining the truth or falsity of a statement: "Is this thing like me?"
Our machines are not like us. We could make them like us if we want, says Prof. Cooper, by putting them in mechanical bodies and raising them like children. But we already have a much more efficient way to create human-level intelligence, one that has proved robust even in the face of the titanic changes brought about by its own creations.
The future of technology isn't about replacing humans with machines, says Prof. Cooper -- it's about figuring out the most productive way for the two to collaborate. In a real and inescapable way, our machines need us just as much as we need them.
---
Follow Mr. Mims on Twitter @Mims; write to him at christopher.mims@wsj.com.
Credit: By Christopher Mims
