International Business Machines Corp. formally launched a Watson product for financial regulation, rolling out artificial-intelligence tools to help financial institutions comply with rules and detect possible financial crimes.
The company's entry into the regulatory-compliance field, in which a number of firms already use AI to manage immense amounts of data, follows its September purchase of financial consulting firm Promontory Financial Group.
IBM is looking to build on Watson's presence in the health-care sector, in which the company has used partnerships and acquisitions of health-care providers to improve care, particularly for cancer patients.
"We were very convinced after our experience in health care that it wasn't a technology-alone solution," Alistair Rennie, general manager of Watson Financial Services, said. "You need to partner with experts who know the process, who have the expertise."
The move by "Jeopardy"-winning Watson comes as financial firms continue to embrace AI and "machine learning" to manage data that must be analyzed for regulatory compliance and crime prevention.
IBM rolled out three Watson tools on Wednesday. One analyzes regulatory text to identify obligations that companies might face and help assess whether their compliance programs are up to the task. Another assists banks in detecting suspicious customers and transactions, and a third seeks to make "big data" at financial firms more accessible to decision makers when developing new business strategies.
Other technology firms already provide such services. Digital Reasoning Systems Inc., an artificial-intelligence firm based outside Nashville, Tenn., has contracts with Nasdaq Inc. for monitoring global trading and works with Goldman Sachs Group Inc. to prevent financial misconduct by traders. The firm counts Goldman Sachs and Credit Suisse Group AG among its investors.
The role of these companies, said Digital Reasoning founder and President Tim Estes, is to take the huge amounts of unstructured data from client firms and make it usable for compliance and surveillance purposes. "All the data is there; it's a bunch of crude oil in the ground. We're the refiners above ground," Mr. Estes said.
Eugene Ludwig, the chief executive of Promontory Financial and a former U.S. comptroller of the currency under President Bill Clinton, said the new technology would benefit regulators, too.
"Regulators should be quite cheered by this," he said, pointing to anti-money-laundering compliance as an area in which both firms and regulators would mutually benefit.
Credit: By Gabriel T. Rubin
