Sustainability specialist GEF Capital Partners has raised $325 million to back midsize companies that help other businesses consume energy more efficiently, including property managers striving to reduce electricity costs and carbon emissions.
The Arlington, Va.-based firm recently wrapped up its second North America-focused fund, GEF US Climate Solutions Fund II, to invest in sectors such as clean energy and energy efficiency as well as waste and water management. GEF makes similar investments in Brazil and India through separate vehicles.
The amount collected for the new fund exceeded the firm's initial $250 million goal, GEF said. Founded in 2018 as a spinout of investment firm Global Environment Fund, GEF Capital now oversees assets of about $1.5 billion.
Backers of the new fund include European asset managers Blue Earth Capital, HQ Capital, Ingka Investments and Quilvest Capital Partners. Swedish pension Forsta AP-fonden, Finnish bank Nordea and Granite Capital Management in New York also backed the fund, according to GEF.
The firm has made six investments so far through the new fund, accounting for roughly half of its capital, said Daniel Prawda, a GEF managing partner and founder. He added that the firm sees particular opportunities in energy efficiency-service providers that cater to hotel chains and office-building operators, which are striving to reduce costs to compensate for a drop in occupancy levels following the pandemic.
Stuart Barkoff, a GEF managing partner and founder, cited the firm's investment in InSite, whose software and engineering professionals help building managers and other clients save electricity by optimizing cooling and heating system settings according to occupancy levels, among other things. The Washington, D.C., company serves hotel chains such as Four Seasons, Barkoff said. GEF backed the business through the new fund.
"Commercial real estate is facing a bit of a crisis right now and they are trying to figure out ways to reduce their costs," he said. "We have an opportunity here with InSite to help them reduce costs in a stressed environment."
Another business backed by the new fund, Mountain View, Calif.-based Polargy, provides products such as aisle containment systems, modular walls and structural ceilings used in data centers -- a sector in which energy efficiency has become crucial to offset the demand from power-hungry artificial-intelligence computer systems.
Rapidly expanding AI technology is expected to help alleviate the breakneck rise in electricity demand it spurred, which is attracting investors to developers of AI-powered energy-efficiency software, according to asset managers.
Credit: By Luis Garcia
