President Dwight D. Eisenhower warned of "the military-industrial complex" in his January 1961 farewell address. The term has become a powerful bogeyman, implying a conspiracy between the military and its suppliers to operate in their own interests. But in today's security environment, Western countries need a military-industrial complex -- a real one, not a bogeyman.
"The term military-industrial complex is primarily used to describe the armed forces and the companies that make their equipment, but today our adversaries are increasingly focusing on new and different technologies," says retired Gen. Richard Barrons, who until 2016 was commander of Britain's Joint Forces Command. Russia, for instance, has proved adept at electronic warfare and social-media manipulation. The West is innovating, too, but whether in robotics, biosciences or artificial intelligence, most of that progress is being made by private companies with civilian customers in mind.
The nature of warfare is changing. In addition to preparing to fight conventional battles, Western militaries now must find ways to combat hybrid warfare -- disinformation campaigns, cyberattacks, election interference. An adversary can inflict enormous harm through such attacks without deploying a single soldier. "We're locked in confrontation every day, with the risk of open conflict erupting at the speed of clicks and missiles," Gen. Barrons points out.
In a 2015 report, Lloyd's of London estimated that a successful cyberattack targeting 15 states in the Northeastern U.S. could leave 93 million people without power for days while disrupting water supplies and port operations. Mortality rates would spike and the overall cost to the American economy could reach $1 trillion. Lloyd's calls it an improbable but technologically possible scenario for which insurers should be prepared.
Election interference is already a problem. Sweden's counterintelligence agency identified fake social-media accounts trying to discredit the country's September 2018 parliamentary election by spreading false information about vote-rigging. Destroying voters' faith in the democratic process could ultimately prove more damaging than an armed attack.
Combating these threats will require a broader understanding of national security, one that includes business and nonprofit leaders as well as military brass. The armed forces, government, business and civil society must work together to craft a common national-security approach embracing both hard and soft power.
For a model, look to Finland. For nearly six decades, the Finnish government has offered the National Defense Course, a quarterly boot camp for leaders from the armed forces, government, industry and civil society. "The beauty is that every sector of society is present," explains retired Lt. Gen. Arto Raty, a former director of the National Defense Course. "Yes, the course is run by the armed forces, but it's not a military course. It's a national security course."
The curriculum of the 3 1/2-week course, which is capped at 50 participants, focuses on Finland's national-security strategy and uses crises around the world for decision-making exercises. The instructors include both military officers and business leaders. "Sparing senior executives for three weeks is a huge investment by the private sector," Gen. Raty says. But companies consider it a wise one: The course has a two-year waiting list. After five years, graduates reconvene for two refresher courses. Alumni form an exceptional network and regularly organize events of their own.
Without the course, many of the participants would never cross paths. The course has allowed Finland to bridge the national-security gap between civil society and the armed forces that exists in most other developed countries. "For us, working together is a matter of survival," Gen. Raty says. A 2017 Eurobarometer poll found 95% of Finns trust their army, the highest rate in Europe. The figures were 66% in Germany and 65% in Poland.
Though launched in 1960, the National Defense Course is a perfect answer to hybrid warfare. Because hybrid warfare targets all parts of society, defense must be equally seamless. Like the Finns, other countries should realize that collaboration among the commercial, nonprofit and military sectors is a matter of survival. Business leaders are often bewildered by the rapidly changing global security situation. In the digital era, geography is no insurance policy. Hackers can cross oceans no navy ever would.
For many in the West, the idea of generals and admirals fraternizing with chief executives and other elites is the stuff of nightmares. A strict wall of separation is meant to keep the dreaded military-industrial complex at bay. But the threat from hybrid warfare neither recognizes nor respects such walls. For our own safety, we need to tear them down.
---
Ms. Braw directs the Modern Deterrence project at the U.K.'s Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: The Coast Guard Leads the Way in Industry Partnerships" -- WSJ Jan. 8, 2019)

Credit: By Elisabeth Braw
