Eric Schmidt, ex-CEO and executive chairman at Google, walked back remarks in which he said his former company was losing the artificial intelligence race because of its remote-work policies.
"I misspoke about Google and their work hours," Schmidt said in an email Wednesday to The Wall Street Journal. "I regret my error."
Schmidt, who left Google parent Alphabet's board more than five years ago, spoke earlier at a wide-ranging discussion at Stanford University in California. He criticized Google's remote-work policies in response to a question about Google competing with OpenAI.
Video of the talk was posted this week by Stanford Online, a division of the university which offers online courses. The video, which had more than 40,000 views as of Wednesday afternoon, has since been set to private.
Schmidt said he asked for the video to be taken down. He declined to comment further. Stanford didn't respond to a request for comment about the video.
"Google decided that work-life balance and going home early and working from home was more important than winning," Schmidt said at the talk. "The reason startups work is because the people work like hell."
Google and OpenAI have instituted similar return-to-office policies since the pandemic. Both companies have mandated that people come to the office three days per week since 2022.
The search-engine company on Wednesday touted the benefits of hybrid work. The company said it reaches out to employees who don't show up three days a week to remind them about the in-person requirements.
Schmidt joins a long list of corporate leaders, including JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon and Tesla CEO Elon Musk, who have complained about work-from-home policies, saying they make companies less efficient and less competitive. Dimon said in an annual letter a few years ago that people in the upper ranks "cannot lead from behind a desk or in front of a screen." Musk has said workers need "a minimum of 40 hours in the office per week."
"Flexible work arrangements don't slow down our work," Alphabet Workers Union, which represents more than 1,000 employees in the U.S. and Canada, said in a post on X. "Understaffing, shifting priorities, constant layoffs, stagnant wages and lack of follow-through from management on projects -- these factors slow Google workers down every day."
Alphabet had roughly 182,000 employees as of the end of last year, according to its annual report.
Google has been playing defense on AI since OpenAI launched ChatGPT in late 2022.
Credit: By Joseph De Avila
