[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
How hot is the latest artificial intelligence technology? Hot enough, it seems, to distract investors from what really drives the business for some of the largest tech companies these days.
Amazon.com, Microsoft and Google parent Alphabet Inc. all will report March-quarter results this week. Those results are expected to roundly show another notable slowdown in growth for their respective cloud-computing services following a weak December quarter as large companies continue to scrutinize their spending on technology -- even for areas such as cloud and security that are considered crucial in the modern age.
They are big businesses: Amazon's AWS, Microsoft's Azure and Google's Cloud segments generated a combined $157 billion in revenue last year. But, according to consensus estimates from FactSet and Visible Alpha, that combined revenue is expected to show 21% year-over-year growth for the March quarter -- 4 percentage points lower than the growth shown in the December quarter and the lowest combined growth on record for the three. The June quarter is expected to show further deceleration, with combined revenue growth falling below the 20% threshold.
Amazon's AWS -- the largest of the three -- is expected to log an increase in first-quarter revenue of just 15% year over year, which would be its slowest growth on record. Operating earnings for that segment are expected to register a slide of 17%, year over year.
Analysts also expect record-low growth for Microsoft's Azure of 27% year over year.
Google Cloud, a little over half the size of Azure, is expected to log a revenue increase of 29% for the first quarter. But the search giant might have some better news on its bottom line, at least optically. According to a filing Thursday, Google is reallocating some expenses from its cloud business to its core search segment. The reclassifications trimmed more than $1 billion from the cloud segment's reported operating loss for 2022 and will likely help the unit tip into profitability sooner.
Despite the expected business slump, shares of all three have soundly outperformed the S&P 500 and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite heading into this week. And while some of that can be chalked up to recovery following a rough 2022, another key facet is hype over generative artificial intelligence technology that all three are incorporating into their services.
Microsoft was the first to hop on the bandwagon, with Chief Executive Satya Nadellaannouncing in mid-January a plan to adopt the popular ChatGPT technology from OpenAI across its products. The stock has jumped 21% since then, which is double the Nasdaq's gain over that time. Alphabet shares are up 16% since then -- also solidly beating the market despite the wide perception that Google is now running behind its rival in the AI race. Even Amazon is cashing in on the hype, despite having made its first substantive announcements about generative AI less than two weeks ago. Amazon's shares have jumped 9% since CEO Andy Jassy issued his annual letter to shareholders on April 14. It declared that generative AI was "going to be a big deal for customers, our shareholders, and Amazon."
It is too early for generative AI technology to be driving much if any revenue for all three companies, but it isn't too early for the costs of those projects to start hitting their bottom lines. And those higher costs will come as the slumping economy compels more large companies to slow down their tech spending. Tim Horan of Oppenheimer trimmed his estimates for Amazon's AWS and Microsoft's Azure businesses earlier this month, noting that "enterprises are sweating legacy on-prem infrastructure longer as they take a wait-and-see approach to the economy."
In another report this month, UBS analyst Karl Keirstead cited field checks suggesting that efforts by large enterprise customers to trim and optimize their cloud spending "are well beyond any historical norm, and our checks suggest that optimization efforts will be deeper and last longer than most think." In a preview note on Microsoft last week, Brent Thill of Jefferies says the company faces a "tough setup -- but does it matter with AI?"
We might see soon just how far chatbot hype can go.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
