[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Who says only the house wins in Vegas?
Oracle used its annual user conference in Las Vegas to unveil unexpectedly strong financial targets late Thursday. The big surprise was a projected $104 billion in revenue for fiscal 2029 -- 18% ahead of the consensus estimate tabulated by Visible Alpha.
The software company's stock rose a fraction on Friday, capping a week in which the shares had already surged after a well-received quarterly report Monday.
Hitting that 2029 target would require average annual growth in the midteen percentage range over the next four years. That's a feat Oracle hasn't managed in nearly two decades -- going back to a point when it was less than half its current size.
Such long-term targets are never slam-dunks, which is why many analysts don't even forecast that far out. "These are staggering growth rates/scale but raise questions around the 'How,' which wasn't fully answered," wrote Tyler Radke of Citigroup Friday.
On the other hand, Oracle has been on a big run of late. The company has steadily grown in cloud computing to become a strong fourth player in a field long dominated by Amazon, Microsoft and Google.
That has put Oracle in a unique position to partner with the other three, given its large legacy business of providing database software to large corporations and government agencies. Oracle's scaled-up cloud business has also set it up well in the burgeoning field of generative artificial intelligence.
Wall Street is getting on board. About 58% of analysts rate Oracle a buy -- the most bullish ratio in at least five years, according to FactSet. And Friday's uptick puts the shares' year-to-date gains at 55% -- beating all the megacap tech stocks save Nvidia.
That sets a high bar. Oracle's shares now fetch 25 times forward earnings. That is 55% above the five-year average and a 20% premium to the S&P 500 -- against which Oracle has typically traded at a discount.
For some, like Jackson Ader of KeyBanc Capital Markets, the new long-term target "justifies continued multiple expansion," meaning it can keep trading at a richer valuation. Here's hoping Oracle's crystal ball is seeing clearly.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
