Everyone needs a breather.
We like to picture our careers as straight, steady lines to the top, each year bringing the satisfied glow from a higher salary, sharper skills, a bigger title.
Then actual life hits. We have babies, or sick parents. We get tired. Companies change, too, freezing head count or cutting back on promotions.
Sometimes, the only thing to do is to tread water.
"It doesn't need to be this continuous upward trajectory," says Becca Carnahan, a Massachusetts-based coach who counsels midcareer parents.
There's a smart way to be on hold, she says, so that you can ramp up again when the moment is right -- if you want to.
Start by reminding yourself what you're prioritizing instead of climbing the ladder. Maybe you're choosing stability or your family or health. Focus on what you're adding, not giving up. This can help alleviate the guilt and insecurity that Carnahan says she's seen plague clients in moments of career stagnation.
"It feels like a bit of an identity crisis to not want the next thing right away," she says.
Keep a running list of what you are still accomplishing, she adds. Get more efficient by tapping tech, such as artificial-intelligence products or a new Excel formula, to streamline some basic duties. (Bonus: You're building a new skill.) Spend a week tracking your time, looking for areas where you're spending hours but not producing stuff your boss really cares about.
When you're offered that big project or business trip you don't want to take, center your response on what you are doing right now. I'm dedicated to this client project, so it's not the right time for me. Or, I'd love to take that on, as soon as I finish this presentation for the sales team.
Sometimes, being transparent can help.
James Greenebaum, a marketing professional in Albuquerque, N.M., was long open with his manager about his role caring for his mother, who had cancer for 17 years. When her treatment stopped working last spring, he knew he had to turn his focus from the promotion he'd been working toward.
"My priority was not my job," he says.
He took a 12-week leave from work, a request that felt natural after keeping his manager in the loop during earlier days working from his mom's house and blocking time to administer her medication and do her chores. He was able to be fully present during the weeks leading up to her peaceful death at home.
He returned to work ready to hunker down with his projects. Within a year, he got the promotion. Like many of the people I talked to for this column, he said he has no regrets about prioritizing family.
"It's OK to wait," Tim Johnson, the chief human-resources officer for workers' compensation company Pinnacol Assurance, told me.
Years ago, he said yes to a new job in Florida, though it required his wife to abandon the teaching degree she was on the brink of completing in New York. He felt guilty about sidelining her career that way, he says. When a similar offer popped up recently that would have put a wrench in his wife's master's degree, he said no.
"There will always be opportunities," he says.
So much of our success at work is about how we present ourselves -- how we sell our ideas, how we support our colleagues, how we raise issues to our bosses. It can be upsetting to realize sheer effort, or checking every box we think we're supposed to check, isn't necessarily the thing that gets you ahead. Maybe it's a little freeing, too.
Don't have a big win to announce at a meeting? Focus on asking insightful follow-up questions instead, says Ovul Sezer, an assistant professor of management and organizations at Cornell University who studies how to make good impressions. Questions make the speaker feel respected, and signal your own intelligence, she says.
Likewise, asking a higher-up for advice is flattering and validating to the recipient. With our egocentric way of viewing the world, we tend to think highly of people who come to us for our brilliant take, Sezer says.
New research from Sezer and colleagues also finds that sharing what you're going through -- your family responsibilities, a fraught moment in your career -- can lead people to see you as likable, as long as you do it the right way. Flick at your struggles as part of a broader, positive story about your learning and growth.
So many of us believe job opportunities are black or white -- you either jump at an opening when it comes or never get the chance again, says Dorie Clark, who consults with companies like Microsoft on leadership development and training. There's an in-between, she assures.
Even if you know you can't take on the big new role right now, contact the hiring manager. Note that the timing isn't right for you but that you think you'd be great in the position. Could they loop back if something similar opens up in the future?
You won't offend anyone, Clark says. And if the winning candidate ends up missing the mark or jumping ship, the job could be yours six months down the line.
Sometimes, our careers are frozen by no choice of our own.
Carter Cast spent eight years as a middle manager at PepsiCo, feeling stuck and inpatient, he says, as his peers rocketed ahead. He used the time to shadow executives and think about what departments provided paths to the top. Soon, he was leapfrogging others there, and then at Walmart, where he rose to become chief executive of the retailer's online division.
"People want such immediate gratification," says Cast, now an operating partner at a private capital firm, an entrepreneurship professor and a corporate board member. "You end up realizing your career is long and you have plenty of time."
Credit: By Rachel Feintzeig
