SoftBank Group Corp. has completed a $4.4 billion investment in office-sharing company WeWork Cos., a massive deal that demonstrates the outsize ambition of the Japanese conglomerate to wield influence in startups around the world.
The funding, which comes from SoftBank as well as its $93 billion technology-focused Vision Fund, is a bet on WeWork's burgeoning strategy to rent out chunks of office within a larger communal space, pitched with a hip, millennial-conscious vibe.
It is one of the largest single slugs of capital ever in a venture-backed startup, according to Dow Jones VentureSource, and brings WeWork's valuation to about $20 billion, making it the fourth-most-valuable startup in the U.S. behind ride-hailing company Uber Technologies Inc., home-rental site Airbnb Inc. and rocket maker Space Exploration Technologies Corp.
SoftBank also took two board seats at the seven-year-old company, suggesting an unusually high level of control for a late-stage investor.
"We are thrilled to support WeWork as they expand across markets and geographies and unleash a new wave of productivity around the world," SoftBank Chairman and Chief Executive Masayoshi Son said in a news release.
The Vision Fund, backed by Saudi Arabia's sovereign-wealth fund and numerous other investors, has shaken Silicon Valley in recent months, as Mr. Son has rapidly directed giant volumes of cash across the startup sector on a scale never seen before by a single investor.
And while Mr. Son initially billed the Vision Fund as a bet on the tech industry -- especially on emerging fields like artificial intelligence and deep learning -- it has strayed well outside traditional sectors like software and telecom to more far-flung categories. Beneficiaries of Vision Fund's capital include San Francisco-based Plenty United LLC, an indoor-farming startup that raised $200 million, and Jacksonville, Fla., online sports retail company Fanatics Inc., which this month raised $1 billion. Other investments include the acquisition of Google's robotics division Boston Dynamics and artificial intelligence company Brain Corp., in which the fund led a $114 million investment.
SoftBank also recently proposed an investment of at least $1 billion in Uber that the ride-hailing company's board is weighing, people familiar with the matter have said.
"From our perspective, the world is changing," Mr. Son said earlier this month at a SoftBank investor event. "With the evolution of IT, the evolution of the internet and the evolution of the smartphone, people's lifestyles are changing."
Even before the Vision Fund, Mr. Son had already turned SoftBank into one of Japan's biggest companies by making sizable investments in telecommunications, e-commerce and technology, including an early investment in Chinese internet company Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., a gamble on U.S. telecommunications company Sprint Corp. and a buyout of U.K. microchip designer ARM Holdings PLC.
WeWork, which essentially operates in the staid office-leasing business, isn't an obvious fit for a tech fund. The company leases space from landlords, carves it up into small glassy offices and rents them out to larger companies for an average of around $650 a month. While it initially billed itself as largely for startups and small companies that could do deals and business with each other, it has been expanding its reach into larger companies -- including tech giants such as Amazon.com Inc. and IBM Corp.
Still, many executives and analysts within the real-estate industry, as well as the tech sector, have been perplexed by WeWork's valuation, which is extremely high by real estate standards. IWG PLC, the parent of Regus, has a similar business model, although less cultural appeal and brand recognition with young workers. Its market capitalization equates to about $10,000 per desk. WeWork's valuation equals about $160,000 per desk.
---
Yoree Koh contributed to this article.

Credit: By Eliot Brown
