Election years can be tricky times for investors. Political preferences, emotions, the polls -- they all can make forecasting difficult at best.
So what's an investor to do?
Investors looking to position their portfolios for potential outcomes of this year's match between Vice President Kamala Harris and former President Donald Trump, and congressional races, can gain strategic insight from historical performance patterns. For instance, while stocks tend to go up regardless of which party controls the White House -- the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 57% during Trump's time in office, and is up more than 30% so far under President Biden -- they do tend to go up more during Democratic administrations. Factor in control of Congress, however, and the performance patterns shift.
Jamie Cox, managing partner for Harris Financial Group, cautions investors against making absolute, "emotionally driven" moves before the election, like shifting everything into cash. He encourages those who feel strongly about a party or the impact of the election to consider the sectors they own and make some small adjustments.
Still, market pros say historical performance can guide investors to make moves that consider various election outcomes and policy possibilities.
Ned Davis Research examined data from March 30, 1901, through Jan. 31, 2024, and found that the Dow Jones Industrial Average has risen at an annualized rate of 8.2% under Democratic presidents from the date of their inauguration and at an annualized rate of 3.2% under Republican administrations. When taking inflation into account, the Dow has risen at a yearly pace of 3.7% under Democrats and at a yearly pace of 1.4% under Republicans, it found.
The makeup of Congress, which is key for policy implementation, has also had an impact, Ned Davis found. Under Democratic presidencies, the stock market has performed better when there has been a check on power in Congress -- as is currently the case with a Democratic president and a split Congress. The DJIA posted a real return, after accounting for inflation, of 8.1% annually under such a scenario.
Under Republican presidencies, stocks have performed better when Congress is controlled by Republicans, with the DJIA posting a real return of 7.1% annually, likely due to the possibility of lower taxes and less regulation, it found.
Of course, the past is the past. While historical data can provide some insight into market behavior during presidential election years, the results can be skewed by unpredictable macro events, such as the 2008 financial crisis or the Covid pandemic. This makes it difficult to predict market movements simply on expected election outcomes. What's more, historical patterns may not repeat themselves.
Longer term, says Dan Lefkovitz, a strategist at Morningstar Indexes, "markets are driven by earnings and cash flow, and politics moves into the background pretty quickly." It is far better to prepare a portfolio that is "robust to a range of scenarios," he says.
During the initial months after a Democratic presidential candidate has won, cyclical stocks have outperformed other sectors, while defensive stocks have outperformed after a Republican win, Ned Davis Research has found.
Defensive stocks are those of companies that tend to have constant demand and stable earnings regardless of the state of the overall economy. Defensive sectors include consumer staples, healthcare and utilities. Cyclical stocks are those of companies that sell consumer discretionary items and tend to do better when the economy is strong. Cyclical sectors include basic materials, industrials and real estate.
When ranking the performance of the S&P 500's 11 sectors, cyclical sectors like communication services, energy and financials have the highest median relative returns six months after the election when Democrats have won, it found. This sector data begins in 1972 and ends in 2020, when the last election was held.
Meanwhile, defensive sectors of healthcare and consumer staples, along with financials and communication services, have done best when Republicans have won, Ned Davis found.
Looking at data for entire presidential terms from 1972, information technology and industrials have had the best track records of outperformance during Democratic presidencies -- each outperforming the Dow industrials 83.3% of the time -- while utilities have had the lowest, never outperforming the Dow, according to Ned Davis.
For Republican administrations, healthcare has had the best record, outperforming the Dow 75% of the time, while industrials have had the worst, outperforming 25% of the time.
Democrats are likely to be tougher on bank regulation, so banks may do well before the election if markets begin to price in a Trump victory, says Jeff Buchbinder, chief equity strategist at LPL Financial. Liquefied natural gas exporters may also rally on a potential Trump win, he says. President Biden put new approvals of LNG exports on pause, and while Harris has reversed her prior call to end fracking, he says, she would likely be less friendly to oil and gas producers if she wins the White House.
Additionally, the industrial sector could benefit from a potential Trump win because he is likely to speed up deglobalization, Buchbinder says. However, Trump is likely to be more aggressive on tariffs, and another trade war between the U.S. and China would have a negative impact on industrials, he says.
Healthcare stocks have historically performed more poorly when the president's party also controlled Congress, which reflects the risk that there may be an overhaul of the sector, according to Ned Davis Research.
"Healthcare is historically very policy-sensitive," says Buchbinder, and this year, "both candidates are trying to control drug prices; neither is friendly to Big Pharma so the sector may struggle regardless of the election outcome." Harris is expected to back off her previous Medicare for all proposal and continue to support the Affordable Care Act marketplace and Medicaid expansion, especially if she is working with a split Congress, he says.
Ultimately, says Morningstar's Lefkovitz, market reactions to presidential elections aren't always intuitive and may be short-lived. "Elections don't take place in a vacuum," he says. "There are always many variables interacting. Interest rates and inflation are big stories these days; artificial intelligence is another. Policy and regulations have an effect, but they're among many things that need to be considered."
In 2016, for example, investors expected domestic-oriented, economically sensitive small-cap value stocks to benefit from Trump's platform -- "which was turbocharged economic growth, tax cuts, regulatory rollbacks and infrastructure spending," Lefkovitz says. Such stocks rallied after his win, but in 2017 small-cap value was the worst-performing sector.
"A lot of key planks of the campaign agenda -- like infrastructure spending -- failed to advance, and expectations reset," says Lefkovitz.
Under Biden, traditional energy stocks have been the best-performing U.S. stock sector, he adds, "which is surprising given his focus on renewables."
---
Daisy Maxey is a writer in Union City, N.J. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Daisy Maxey
