International Business Machines Corp. is showing progress in delivering on Chief Executive Arvind Krishna's commitment to revive growth, posting a second straight quarter of higher revenue.
The second-quarter top-line increase, IBM's strongest performance in three years, comes at a time the company is undergoing extensive changes, including the planned spinoff of some of its legacy IT activities that remain a multibillion-dollar business.
Revenue in the three months ended June 30 rose 3.4% to $18.75 billion driven by its cloud, software and services businesses. The company reported adjusted earnings of $2.33 a share. A consensus of analysts expected sales of $18.29 billion and adjusted earnings of $2.31 a share, according to FactSet.
"With the economy reopening in many parts of the world, many markets and industries are getting back on track. We see this in North America and in select industries," Mr. Krishna said on a call Monday.
IBM shares rose 4.3% in after-hours trading. The stock has gained 10% in the past 12 months.
The current economy isn't without challenges, though. "There is a war for talent going on," Chief Financial Officer James Kavanaugh said on the call, adding that the company was investing to address its staffing needs.
When Mr. Krishna took the helm in April 2020, he pledged to restore growth at the veteran tech company. As part of those plans, IBM is planning to spin off a major part of its information-technology services operations in order to sharpen its focus on the booming fields of cloud computing and artificial intelligence, Mr. Krishna has said. The separation of Kyndryl is due to be completed by year-end.
The IT services operations that IBM is partly shedding were central to then-CEO Lou Gerstner's drive in the 1990s to transform the company from a lumbering tech giant focused on hardware to a huge player in services that were booming at the time.
Total cloud revenue was $7 billion in the latest quarter, up 13% from a year earlier. IBM has been betting on a concept called hybrid-cloud, where customers mix the use of cloud-computing servers with more traditional office-based ones. The company said it now had more than 3,200 users of its hybrid cloud, almost four times the number it had before buying Red Hat, Mr. Krishna said.
Changes at IBM go beyond the spinoff. Earlier this month the company said its second-highest-ranking executive, Jim Whitehurst, is leaving the company two years after he joined through IBM's $33 billion acquisition of cloud-software provider Red Hat. Mr. Whitehurst became IBM's first president in decades, helping to accelerate the company's cloud-computing business. He will continue to serve as an adviser to the company after his departure.
Generate image description

Credit: By Kimberly Chin
