ORACLE
ORCL +12%
Oracle sees hypergrowth in its AI future. The business-software company's earnings beat expectations, as companies interested in artificial intelligence drove strong demand for its cloud-infrastructure business. Growing AI demand has exceeded Oracle's ability to supply it, so the company is rapidly expanding its data-center capacity. Chief Executive Safra Catz said its generative AI business will be in "a hypergrowth phase" for the foreseeable future. Oracle shares jumped 12% Tuesday.
DOLLAR TREE
DLTR -14%
Dollar Tree on Wednesday said it would close about 1,000 of its Family Dollar stores over the next few years. The company also posted a quarterly loss. The discount retailer has been hit hard by store theft and low-income consumers who are spending less due to persistent inflation. Compared with Dollar Tree stores, Family Dollar locations are more concentrated in urban areas and sell groceries, cleaning products and other items at various price points. Dollar Tree shares slid 14% Wednesday.
SOUTHWEST AIRLINES
LUV -15%
Southwest on Tuesday said it was re-evaluating its financial guidance, partly due to delayed aircraft deliveries from Boeing. The jet maker has slowed production amid scrutiny from the Federal Aviation Administration and the Justice Department, stemming from the Jan. 5 Alaska Airlines MAX 9 door-plug blowout. Southwest shares dropped 15% Tuesday, making it the worst performer in the S&P 500.
UNDER ARMOUR
UAA -11%
The sportswear brand Wednesday said that Kevin Plank would return as chief executive, succeeding Stephanie Linnartz. Plank stepped aside as chief executive in 2019 but stayed on as chairman. Under Plank, the company rode a streak of rapid growth for years, reaching about $5 billion in annual sales, before its business hit a wall in 2017. The company has struggled with excess inventories and pandemic-era supply-chain issues. Under Armour lost 11% Thursday.
UNITED STATES STEEL
X -6.4%
On Thursday, President Biden opposed Nippon Steel's attempt to buy the American steelmaker, prompting concerns that the U.S. government could block the takeover. Biden didn't explicitly say he would block the deal. In December, U.S. Steel agreed to be acquired by Japan's Nippon Steel in a $14.1 billion deal. The United Steelworkers union criticized the takeover. U.S. Steel shares lost 6.4% Thursday, extending its losses after ending 13% lower Wednesday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
