Los Angeles -- California wasn't always a one-party state -- as its new Democratic governor, Gavin Newsom, was eager to note in a recent interview. "America in 2019 was California in the 1980s and 1990s," Mr. Newsom said. "The xenophobia, the nativism, the fear of the other, think back to Pete Wilson and Prop 187" -- a 1994 ballot initiative that aimed to combat illegal immigration. "That would make Donald Trump blush."
Pete Wilson, 85, begs to differ. He was the Golden State's Republican governor from 1991-99. "There has been this ceaseless fiction perpetrated," Mr. Wilson tells me, "that I conducted a racist campaign. That is flatly slanderous."
True, during Mr. Wilson's tenure California's conservatives waged polarizing battles over immigration and multiculturalism that echo in today's culture war. And over the long run, they lost -- badly. Democrats today control every statewide office, roughly 3 of 4 state legislative seats, and 46 of 53 U.S. House seats. California has long been considered a bellwether, so it's easy for progressives to look at this history, as Mr. Newsom does, and hope that Donald Trump's GOP is headed for the same fate as Pete Wilson's.
Yet Mr. Wilson says such complacency can "backfire on them." He cites the transformation of California's economy and its education system and the entrenchment of public-sector unions as key reasons his party has faded. While immigration and demographic change played a role, the liberal ascendancy in California was not simply a matter of being on "the right side of history."
Mr. Wilson has seen a lot of history. Before becoming governor, he served as mayor of San Diego (1971-83) and a U.S. senator (1983-91). He started in politics as an advance man for Richard Nixon's 1962 gubernatorial campaign. "It was a very different state," Mr. Wilson says. "It was not unusual to have Republican governors," and Nixon had carried his home state against John F. Kennedy in 1960. But incumbent Gov. Pat Brown "wasted no time in hanging on tight to JFK's coattails" weeks after the Cuban Missile Crisis, and Nixon lost.
Four years later, Ronald Reagan was "the Brown campaign's choice," Mr. Wilson recalls. "They didn't want to run against George Christopher," the last Republican mayor of San Francisco. But they were "shocked by the appeal that Reagan had." He beat Brown by 15 points and became president 14 years later -- one reason for California's reputation as a leading political indicator.
Like Reagan, Mr. Wilson first won public office in 1966, a state Assembly seat. A story from that campaign illustrates one of his insights about how California later went left. One issue at the time was whether public-school teachers should have the right to strike. "I planted that question in a debate," Mr. Wilson says, "knowing that there would be a Q&A." It worked: His opponent supported the right to strike, and Mr. Wilson "spelled out why that was a terrible mistake -- unfair to parents, unfair to children, who had no alternative."
Soon after, "I got a call, and it was from the California Teachers Association." To chew him out? No, to ask for a meeting, at which they offered him an endorsement and a campaign check. The union representatives explained, in Mr. Wilson's paraphrase: "We exist for the purpose of enhancing the quality and effectiveness of classroom teaching. And like you, we feel that having a legal right to strike would undermine that professionalism."
That changed over the next quarter-century: "What had been a professional organization became one that existed for the purpose of defeating any metric of performance, any accountability." It also became partisan -- a key source of organization and fundraising for Democratic politicians and liberal policies. In the 1990s, teachers "sent letters home with kids, to show their parents, saying Governor Wilson is anti-education; he wants to cut teachers' salaries" -- something Mr. Wilson calls a "total falsehood."
Educational quality has also been affected. "California had the best public-school system in the nation," Mr. Wilson says. "Today, it is struggling to keep from being the worst." Students graduate "abysmally ignorant of their own history" -- and that makes them, in Mr. Wilson's view, less prepared to appreciate conservative ideas.
Cold War-era California had a large U.S. military presence, which was an important GOP constituency. The Soviet Union dissolved during Mr. Wilson's first year as governor, and Pentagon Base Realignment and Closure commissions targeted dozens of California facilities during Mr. Wilson's tenure, including Mare Island, a naval shipyard northeast of San Francisco. Cuts in defense contracting were "even more dramatic" in changing the economy, Mr. Wilson says. He recalls a cabinet member's husband, "a very bright young aeronautical engineer" who had worked for McDonnell Douglas, an aerospace company. "They had this huge plant in Long Beach. Well, he was out on the streets, with his master's in aeronautical engineering." Defense workers left the state en masse, changing its political complexion.
The decline of defense coincided with the rise of high-tech. In the 1990s, Mr. Wilson recalls, "we were all for doing what we could for Hewlett Packard and for others." Silicon Valley wasn't especially political then, but eventually it joined Hollywood as a hard-left hotbed. This month Google dissolved its artificial-intelligence ethics board because employees denounced a conservative member, Kay Coles James, as "anti-trans." Mr. Wilson disdains such political militancy: "They have been fascists. They really have." He adds that he persuaded his consulting and law firm to represent Prager University, a conservative nonprofit, as it sues Google and YouTube for allegedly suppressing its content.
Today's California is more hospitable to corporate giants than to small businesses. "This is a state of haves and have-nots," Mr. Wilson says. "Silicon Valley is prospering, and the Central Valley" -- a farming center -- "is hurting." For many businesses, "not only are the taxes too high, but the regulatory excess is insufferable," especially on environmental priorities, so they leave for Arizona, Texas or somewhere else. Affluent urban professionals can afford to stay, and the poor are supported by the state's generous welfare policies. California's economic model especially squeezes working- and middle-class residents who might have voted for Mr. Wilson in the 1990s.
The left tends to focus on who's arriving in California rather than who's leaving -- which brings us back to Proposition 187. Mr. Wilson gets exercised at the suggestion that dark motives underlay his support for the measure. He's anxious to stress that America has "benefited hugely from the fact that we have the drive, the energy, the intelligence" of immigrants -- and to emphasize the importance of naturalization and assimilation so that immigrants can fully participate. "If you're going to live in this country, and not be a second-class citizen," he says, "you need to be able to speak the language. You need to be able to understand what the hell happens when there's an election."
When Mr. Wilson was mayor of the biggest U.S. city on the Mexican border, he asked to see President Carter to "tell him we were being impacted by illegal immigrants." He got a meeting with Attorney General Griffin Bell, "who was very gracious" but "had no idea" about the problem and told him: "I don't know that the president does, either." The issue wasn't on the national radar.
That changed by the time Mr. Wilson arrived in the governor's mansion. He claims services for people in the U.S. illegally -- including health care, education and incarceration -- were "costing California taxpayers an enormous amount of money, about 10% of the total budget." His administration unsuccessfully sued the federal government, and later he supported a ballot measure to deny public services to illegal immigrants -- and, most controversially, require that state employees like welfare and public school administrators report people they suspected of being in the country illegally.
Proposition 187 "was intended as a wake-up call to the federal government," which had been "derelict in their inattention to a crisis," Mr. Wilson says. It passed with 59% of the vote, but most of its provisions never took effect because of a December 1994 federal court injunction. Mr. Wilson's Democratic successor, Gray Davis, abandoned the state's appeals in 1999.
Today California's approach to illegal immigration is the opposite of Mr. Wilson's. In 2017 Gov. Jerry Brown signed the California Sanctuary Law, which limits local governments' ability to cooperate with federal immigration officers. Mr. Newsom wants to expand public services available to illegal immigrants, including subsidized college tuition and Medicaid. On his way out of office in 1998, Mr. Wilson supported Proposition 227, an initiative that required English immersion for foreign-language speakers in public schools. Voters repealed that measure in 2016.
Yet when progressives tell the story of multicultural triumph in California, they usually leave out one of Mr. Wilson's successes: Proposition 209, passed in 1996, which bans (at least on paper) racial preferences in higher education and public employment. Mr. Wilson tells a story of a 1990 campaign event where a young Latino Superior Court judge approached him. "He was absolutely outraged" at California's racial-preferences system, Mr. Wilson recalls, as he quotes the judge saying that when he walked into the courtroom, "I can see in the eyes of a lot of the lawyers. They figure, 'Well, here's an affirmative-action appointee. I hope he knows what the hell he's doing.'"
Ward Connerly, an African-American businessman, had been Assemblyman Wilson's chief of staff. When the governor offered Mr. Connerly a seat in his cabinet, he asked to be a University of California regent instead. A strong opponent of racial preferences, Mr. Connerly persuaded the regents to require colorblind admissions and subsequently led the campaign for Proposition 209, as well as similar measures in other states. The Democratic Legislature attempted in 2014 to repeal Proposition 209, but the effort failed amid resistance from Asian-Americans -- "the ones getting screwed" by preferences, as Mr. Wilson puts it. So much for the progressive narrative of the tolerant left vs. those who "fear the other."
Mr. Wilson thinks Mr. Trump is right that there is a major crisis at the border. But his political style is nothing like Mr. Trump's. In his inaugural address, Mr. Trump spoke of "American carnage." In contrast, Mr. Wilson says "this state is infinitely blessed in almost every way," but "we are suffering from self-inflicted wounds." Whereas Mr. Trump sometimes indulges in ethnic demagoguery, Mr. Wilson challenges me "to find one word, one statement, that I made during the campaign for 187, or after" that reflected prejudice.
Though Mr. Wilson is widely considered a moderate conservative, his example has been polarizing. Some of Mr. Trump's backers see deep-blue California as a political dystopia -- evidence that initiatives of traditional, well-spoken Republican politicians like the former governor will simply be swept away by the forces of liberalism, so something different is needed.
Meanwhile, some progressives see California as evidence that they can safely double down on their political agenda. That was the argument of a 2018 essay, "The Lessons of California in America's New Civil War" by Peter Leyden and Ruy Teixeira. Because "California is the future, always about 15 years ahead of the rest of the country," they claim, the national GOP will soon be cast into "the political wilderness."
Mr. Wilson, for his part, thinks the California Republican Party can make a comeback: "We just had an election for a new chair, and the new chair is a 38-year-old woman. She is Latina, and she is smart as a whip." And Democrats may be undone by their unsustainable union-backed spending policies. "The tax structure is so distorted," he says, that "you've got 1% or 2% at the top revenue levels who are paying better than half of it. If they leave -- it doesn't take that many of them to leave before you've got a totally unbalanced budget." He adds: "I don't think Newsom understands what he has bitten off. I mean he is, I think, in perilous trouble."
---
Mr. Willick is an assistant editorial features editor at the Journal.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: America Isn't Doomed to Follow the Left Coast" -- WSJ May 2, 2019)

Credit: By Jason Willick
