Microsoft will ask its main suppliers to use 100% carbon-free energy by the end of the decade, as it reported a 30% rise in emissions and acknowledged that the biggest challenge in meeting its climate goals comes from building new AI infrastructure and tackling the emissions from its supply chain.
Chief Sustainability Officer Melanie Nakagawa said the company will require "select scale, high-volume suppliers to use 100% carbon-free electricity by 2030" for goods and services delivered to Microsoft. The tech heavyweight said the requirements will be rolled out at the start of the 2025 fiscal year as part of an overall update to the company's Supplier Code of Conduct.
"Right now for so many it's just about getting them started. We have thousands upon thousands of suppliers. What we're looking at is those of the largest volume because that's really where the energy matters," Nakagawa said. She added that the company is "not there yet" with regards to dropping suppliers who fail to meet the climate goal.
Microsoft has an outsize influence over the tech sector due to its extensive supply chain and its dominant position within the market. Any move to force its suppliers to comply with the new directive is likely to send reverberations across the industry in the short term, but ultimately could have a significant positive impact on the sector's efforts to decarbonize.
In 2020, the Redmond, Wash.-based tech giant set the goal of being carbon negative by 2030. In its latest sustainability report, out Wednesday, the company said it is on target to meet that goal with regards to its Scope 1 and 2 emissions, those emissions that the company makes directly. However, it is falling short when it comes to Scope 3 emissions -- those that come from its supply chain, the life cycle of its hardware and devices and other indirect sources -- which last year made up more than 96% of the company's total emissions. While Microsoft reported a 6.3% fall in its Scope 1 and 2 emissions for 2023 compared with its 2020 baseline, its Scope 3 emissions were up 31%, raising total aggregate emissions by 29%.
Microsoft said building infrastructure to house and run its generative AI operations was one of the main reasons for the increase.
Some of Microsoft's main suppliers include Samsung Electronics, the Taiwanese semiconductor manufacturer RealTek and the South Korean chip maker SK Hynix. All three have net-zero goals that extend past the end of the decade. Samsung in its most recent sustainability report said it aims to transition to 100% renewable energy by 2050. RealTek in its most recent ESG report stated that it is committed to achieving 25% renewable energy use by 2030. SK Hynix, in its 2023 sustainability report, said it is aiming for 33% renewable electricity use by 2030. The companies didn't respond to requests for comment.
"Our top priority is to work with our suppliers to help them in meeting these requirements," Microsoft said. The company pointed to its partnership with climate solutions adviser 3Degrees to launch Supplier REach, a renewable electricity portal. The tool helps suppliers procure high-quality carbon-free electricity based on factors such as their geography and energy load.
RBC Capital analyst Rishi Jaluria said the move by Microsoft could ultimately be a competitive advantage for the company. "Microsoft is such a big vendor that I think some suppliers will have to change their processes to keep up," he said. "For Microsoft, there's a potential benefit from customers who share those same goals."
In its sustainability report released Wednesday, Microsoft identified water use as another area where it isn't yet on track. It said the company needs to do more to reduce consumption and in its efforts to replenish more water than it uses in its datacenter operation.
Credit: By Perry Cleveland-Peck
