Industrial conglomerate Honeywell International Inc. said it plans to introduce an early-stage quantum computer for commercial experiments within about three months, with JPMorgan Chase & Co. as the first public user.
A Honeywell executive said the machine is set to be the world's most powerful quantum computer by one measure, as it vies for a leading position in the nascent quantum-computing market against technology giants such as International Business Machines Corp., Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Microsoft Corp.
Tony Uttley, president of Honeywell Quantum Solutions, said the technology will be used by companies interested in significantly speeding up calculations and developing new materials and new trading strategies for financial services. The technology could also speed up calculations that involve machine learning, for use by industries such as aerospace and oil and gas. Honeywell already develops technology for those sectors.
"We believe that quantum computing is going to profoundly impact a number of industries," Mr. Uttley said.
Honeywell also has recently made undisclosed investments in quantum-computing software companies Cambridge Quantum Computing Ltd., based in the U.K., and Boston-based Zapata Computing Inc., Mr. Uttley said.
By harnessing the properties of quantum physics, quantum computers have the potential to sort through a vast number of possibilities nearly instantaneously and come up with a probable solution. While traditional computers store information as either zeros or ones, quantum computers use quantum bits, or qubits, which represent and store information as both zeros and ones simultaneously. No commercial-grade quantum computer has been built yet.
By 2023, a fifth of organizations, including businesses and governments, are expected to budget for quantum-computing projects, up from less than 1% in 2018, according to research and advisory firm Gartner Inc.
Mr. Uttley said Honeywell expects its machine to be "the world's most powerful quantum computer," based on an expected quantum volume of at least 64. The computer's current quantum volume is 16. IBM in January said its quantum computer had a quantum volume of 32.
Marco Pistoia, managing director and global technology head of applied research and engineering at JPMorgan Chase, said he expects to use quantum computing to speed up computing-intensive calculations. Such calculations include Monte Carlo simulations, which are commonly used to calculate the theoretical value of an option.
Quantum computing could also be used in portfolio optimization.
JPMorgan could also use the technology to detect fraud, because quantum computers can potentially take into account vastly more data points than traditional computers, including a mix of fraudulent and nonfraudulent data.

Credit: By Sara Castellanos
