U.S. stocks fell Friday to end the week in the red, snapping winning streaks for the major indexes.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite lost 1% and the S&P 500 fell 0.8%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 219 points, or 0.6%. All three indexes posted losses for the week, ending eight straight weeks of gains for the Nasdaq and a five-week streak of gains for the S&P 500.
Investors pointed to economic data that showed the global economy is cooling and policy moves that could tip it into a recession. Several overseas central banks raised interest rates this week, and Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell told Senate lawmakers that the central bank's inflation-fighting campaign likely isn't over.
"Frankly, investors are sobering up," said John Lynch, chief investment officer of Comerica Wealth Management.
The U.S. Composite Purchasing Managers Index -- a measure of activity in the manufacturing and services sectors -- slipped to 53 in June from 54.3 the prior month. A reading above 50 indicates that activity is increasing.
The numbers "are showing signs of a slowing economy," said Charlie Ripley, senior investment strategist at Allianz Investment Management. "Factor that on top of an equity market that's run higher, and people are looking to take a few chips off the table."
The three major U.S. stock indexes are still in positive territory for the year, with the Nasdaq up 29%.
Business activity in Europe slowed sharply in June because of weakening demand for services. Data also showed sharper than expected slowdowns in Japan and Australia.
Earlier this month, Fed officials agreed to hold interest rates steady after 10 straight hikes that have raised the benchmark rate to a range between 5% and 5.25%. But most of them projected two more increases this year, which would bring the rate to a 22-year high. Derivative markets show traders expect the Fed will likely raise interest rates one more time this year.
Government bond prices rose and yields fell. The yield on the U.S. 10-year Treasury note fell to 3.737%, from 3.797% on Thursday. Oil prices continued their recent slide on fears of a slowing economy. Brent crude futures settled at $73.85 per barrel, down 0.4% on Friday and 3.6% for the week.
All 11 sectors of the S&P 500 closed in the red.
Chip stocks underperformed after surging this year on investor enthusiasm over artificial intelligence. The PHLX Semiconductor Sector Index fell 4.5% for the week, including a 1.8% drop on Friday. Nvidia, the best performing stock in the S&P 500 this year, fell 1.9% on Friday, while Advanced Micro Devices fell 0.6%.
"It's more of a healthy pullback than a fearful pullback," said Virag Shah, portfolio strategist at Van Leeuwen & Co. "The market had a really good rally in the past two months or so after the debt ceiling deal was done and the AI craze took effect."
The semiconductor index is still up 38% for the year.
CarMax shares advanced 10% to close at their highest level since September, after the used-car retailer reported better-than-expected earnings.
3M shares rose 0.4% after the company agreed to pay up to $12.5 billion to settle hundreds of lawsuits brought by cities that said their drinking water was contaminated.
Credit: By Charley Grant
