WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration is planning trade measures to force Beijing to crack down on intellectual-property theft and ease requirements that American companies share advanced technologies to gain entry to the Chinese market.
The administration is considering invoking a little-used provision of U.S. trade law to investigate whether China's intellectual-property policies constitute "unfair trade practices," according to people familiar with the matter.
That would pave the way for the U.S. to impose sanctions on Chinese exporters or to further restrict the transfer of advanced technology to Chinese firms or to U.S.-China joint ventures.
American business frustration with Chinese trade and market-access practices has mounted in recent years, with U.S. business groups urging the government to take a tougher trade line with China. Many organizations have complained that the Trump administration hasn't pushed hard enough in areas like intellectual property, as it has focused more on Chinese manufacturing and China's $347 billion trade surplus with the U.S. last year.
That discontent has intensified as China's economy continued to expand and its computer and software sectors became bigger competitors internationally. Western firms fear China will use the regulations to bar foreign investments in areas that Beijing targets for investment, including semiconductors, advanced-machine tools and artificial intelligence.
One big question hanging over the White House review is whether the administration pursues any complaint through the World Trade Organization, or whether it chooses to impose penalties on its own without first seeking permission from the international body, which some Trump advisers have argued is incapable of dealing with China's trade practices.
The White House has been wrestling in recent weeks with how to navigate trade relations with China following a stalemate during mid-July bilateral economic talks that yielded no concrete progress. President Donald Trump in recent days has also expressed open disappointment with Chinese efforts to curb North Korea's nuclear program and administration officials have been increasingly outspoken in their criticism of Chinese trade practices.
The White House expects a crackdown on alleged Chinese intellectual-property expropriation would have widespread support among U.S. businesses, which have complained about China's business practices.
The response may be more divided, say industry officials. Those U.S. companies that want to keep their most advanced technology from Chinese hands would probably back the move, while others that want to license technology to Chinese firms could find the measures a hindrance. China could also retaliate by blocking U.S. investments or making life tougher for U.S. companies in China.
The Trump administration's exploration of new trade remedies against Beijing is significant in that they might involve dusting off long-ignored or little-used powers. In this case, one option under discussion is to use Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, which gives the U.S. government the authority to investigate alleged wrongdoing by trading partners and decide by itself the relevant penalty -- to act, in the eyes of critics, as judge, jury and executioner.
Another option under discussion would be to invoke the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, a 1977 law that gives the president broad powers to regulate commerce after declaring a "national emergency."
---
Ian Talley contributed to this article.

Credit: By Jacob M. Schlesinger and Bob Davis
