President Trump ordered an investigation Monday into China's alleged theft of intellectual property that could lead to retaliatory tariffs under the 1974 Trade Act. Before taking unilateral action in violation of international law, the Trump administration should bring cases against China at the World Trade Organization. It stands a good chance of winning precedent-setting judgments, which the WTO would enforce through economic sanctions.
Intellectual property accounts for nearly 40% of the U.S. economy, and the U.S. government has a duty to protect American rights holders abroad. The annual cost to U.S. companies of pirated software, counterfeit goods, and the theft of trade secrets is as much as $600 billion. Most of these losses occur in China.
After 16 years in the WTO, China still falls far short of fulfilling its obligations to protect intellectual property rights. About 70% of the software in use in China, for example, is pirated.
Beijing's mercantilist industrial policy, the Made in China 2025 program, aspires to make China a global leader in 10 strategic industries, including medical devices, artificial intelligence, driverless cars, and robotics. It requires that the domestic content of manufactured products be increased to 70%, state subsidies be granted, and companies in these targeted industries be protected from foreign competition.
U.S. and other foreign companies report being pressured by the Chinese government and by Chinese companies to turn over their patent rights, trade secrets and other intellectual property. Many major U.S. firms have long regarded this behind-the-scenes intimidation as simply a cost of doing business in China. Now that it could place them at a competitive disadvantage globally, they are turning to the U.S. government for help.
Most WTO rules impose negative obligations: Don't discriminate. Don't apply tariffs higher than you promised. But the rules on intellectual property are affirmative obligations: Do respect intellectual property rights. Do enforce them. Yet this aspect of the WTO intellectual property rules is largely unexplored in dispute settlement.
WTO members are required by these rules to "ensure" that enforcement procedures are "available" that will "permit effective action against any act of infringement." Moreover, these procedures "shall be applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to provide for safeguards against their abuse." The WTO Appellate Body, the final court of appeal for trade, has said that "making something available means making it 'obtainable,' putting it 'within one's reach' and 'at one's disposal' in a way that has sufficient form or efficacy."
Is this happening in China? Some maintain that the WTO rules on enforcement only require good laws on the books and good procedures in principle, which the Chinese increasingly have.
The better argument is that enforcement means enforcement and that these positive WTO obligations aren't being met if laws exist but intellectual property rights are widely infringed. The U.S. could bring a systemic challenge to China's intellectual property regime on the basis that the government is not fulfilling its affirmative enforcement obligations.
Trade secrets could be one part of a broad WTO challenge. The WTO agreement includes a rule requiring the protection of trade secrets, but it has yet to be asserted in a dispute settlement.
Another WTO rule requires that members administer all their laws, regulations and other actions in an "impartial" and "reasonable" manner. Is coercing foreigners out of their rights acting impartially and reasonably? If it can be shown using solid evidence that the Chinese government is engaging in such coercion, this could be another strong legal claim.
Some in the Trump administration evidently assume that protectionist Chinese actions aren't covered by WTO rules, but a lot of them are. In its membership agreement with the WTO, for example, China promised to ensure that approvals for foreign investments wouldn't be "conditioned on: whether competing domestic suppliers of such products exist; or performance requirements of any kind, such as local content, offsets, the transfer of technology, export performance or the conduct of research and development in China." That sounds like the makings of another strong legal claim.
If the U.S. insists on acting unilaterally under the Trade Act, the Chinese are correct that this would break WTO rules. It would lead to retaliation by China, emulation by others and a cycle of tit-for-tat trade actions that would shrink trade and the world economy.
Before the U.S. damages the trading system by acting unilaterally, White House lawyers should read the fine print of the rule book. The Trump administration can better protect Americans' intellectual property by working within the WTO.
---
Mr. Bacchus is a former chief judge of the World Trade Organization's Appellate Body. He served as a Democratic U.S. representative from Florida, 1991-95.

Credit: By James Bacchus
