The S&P 500 is back at record levels for the first time in two years. Information technology is the only one of the index's 11 sectors that can say the same.
Home to the likes of Microsoft, Apple and Nvidia, the tech sector is riding the mania over artificial intelligence and has propelled the market to a record close in five of the past six trading sessions. The S&P 500 is up 2.5% to start 2024, while the tech segment rose 5.9%.
The 10 other sectors are trading an average of 15% below their all-time highs, and none have set a record in January. The equal-weighted S&P 500, which gives the same status to the smallest and largest companies in the index, is down 0.3% this year.
The market's rally was much wider two years ago. Seven sectors -- industrials, financials, consumer staples, real estate, healthcare, utilities and materials -- joined tech to trade at new highs in the two weeks preceding the S&P 500's January 2022 record.
A narrow rally is a potentially worrying sign to some investors and strategists. When a handful of big stocks are responsible for most of the market's gains, it becomes more vulnerable to a downturn if a few of those heavyweights stumble, they say.
For example, if six of the biggest tech stocks were to pull back to their 200-day moving averages, it would knock about 5% off the S&P 500, according to an analysis from Bespoke Investment Group. (The 200-day moving average is a widely watched technical indicator used to gauge longer-term price trends.)
Tech dominated the market for most of last year, too. Investors were encouraged in the final weeks of 2023 when bets that the Federal Reserve would soon cut interest rates drove an "everything rally," boosting prices of assets from small-cap stocks to gold and bonds.
They expected more of the same in 2024, but some of the optimism from the pivot party appears to be fading. Hotter-than-expected economic data have powered the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note back above 4%. Investors, in turn, have pushed back their expectations for the timing of the first rate cut, potentially making it harder for stocks to extend their climb.
All eyes will be on the Federal Reserve's policy meeting Wednesday as investors look for clues about when and how far officials might cut interest rates. Friday's monthly jobs report will offer the latest look at the strength of the labor market. And earnings reports from tech companies including Microsoft, Meta Platforms and Amazon.com could provide further insight into whether the market's gains can be sustained.
"The notion of a recession has been completely obliterated from the mind and the positioning of most portfolio managers," said David Rosenberg, president at Rosenberg Research & Associates. "There is tremendous confidence in the soft landing -- perhaps confidence that is now bordering on complacency."
Big tech stocks aren't the only ones setting new highs to start 2024. Berkshire Hathaway, Visa, McDonald's and Marriott International are among those that have joined Microsoft, Meta, Google parent Alphabet and Nvidia.
Shares of smaller companies, on the other hand, have largely missed out on the rally. The small-cap focused Russell 2000 index is off about 20% from its November 2021 record.
Credit: By Hardika Singh
