Artificial-intelligence image generators are evolving before our very eyes. Way, way back in January, systems such as OpenAI's DALL-E might have rendered a human with backward fingers or a floating extra eyebrow. By March, some images were realistic enough to fool a large number of people.
There was that image of Pope Francis in a white puffer coat, not to mention photos of Donald Trump getting arrested, among others.
While AI-generated content can be fun, it poses risks to industries and everyday interactions. It can be used to spread misinformation, infringe on intellectual property or sexualize photos of people.
Behind many of these AI images is Midjourney, which can turn text prompts into images, or blend existing images. Its latest version has done the most to date to blur the line between reality and fiction, professors and researchers say. Other image generators include DALL-E, which powers Microsoft's new Bing Image Creator.
Some developers are building tools that can analyze images for signs of AI origin. Unless the tools keep pace with the image generators, even they can be fooled.
Optic, an AI trust-and-safety company, launched AI or Not, a site where you can share a photo or illustration and the site determines whether it was made by a human or an AI. You can upload an image directly to the website or paste an image's URL.
You can also tweet or retweet an image at Optic's Twitter account, @optic_xyz, along with the hashtag, GBP aiornot, and you'll get a reply telling you what it believes, along with its confidence level as a percentage.
Optic's tool examines artifacts in each image that are invisible to the human eye, such as variations of brightness and color in images, says Chief Executive Andrey Doronichev.
The tool had a 95% accuracy rate until Midjourney released its latest software, and the accuracy dropped to 88.9%. Optic's team updated AI or Not so it could spot the new Midjourney images. Microsoft's Bing Image Creator, which uses a newer DALL-E version, also threw off the tool.
Hive, an AI company that tags content, has also updated its free AI-generated content detector to keep pace with evolving image generators. The tool uses AI to determine the origin of both images and text.
The company estimates that it accurately detects about 95% of AI-made images, but widely shared images tend to be better than the rest. When people share AI images, they choose the best of the fakes, so it becomes tougher to figure out what's real, says Hive CEO Kevin Guo.
"It's an arms race," he says, noting that Hive will keep evolving. "We look at all the tools out there and every time they're updating their models, we have to update ours and keep up the pace."
For now, if you're trying to find out whether an image is AI-made or real, run it through both tools from Optic and Hive. If at least one indicates it's AI-generated, it probably is.
You can also get better at detecting fake images with your own eyes.
Where and when you see an image should help you determine whether it's real, says Amit Roy-Chowdhury, a professor of electrical and computer engineering at University of California, Riverside. Look for parts of an image that seem out of place. One is a person's expression, which might not appear realistic or might look off in some way in AI-generated photos, he says. Some images may have missing elements, such as a mirror or glass window that doesn't show a person's reflection, he added.
The real problem may not be that generative AI is getting harder to detect, but that more people are using it to trick others.
"It has the potential to be very, very harmful without being super smart," he says.
Credit: By Ann-Marie Alcantara
