Slack Technologies Inc. built up a $3.8 billion valuation and buzz as one of Silicon Valley's hottest startups by getting millions of office workers to use its group messaging app. Now some of the tech industry's biggest players want to be part of the conversation.
Microsoft Corp. this month unveiled its Teams workplace collaboration service, which came on the heels of Facebook Inc.'s launch last month of Workplace by Facebook. The tech giants' moves put pressure on the San Francisco startup,whose user base is tiny by comparison.
"I've been paranoid about this for a long time," Slack Chief Executive Stewart Butterfield said in an interview after the Microsoft Teams announcement.
Slack has been bracing for the assault. It signed a partnership last month with International Business Machines Corp., to use its Watson artificial-intelligence services.
The growing battle reflects more than excitement about the prospect of a more efficient alternative email. Tech companies envision messaging as a gateway to other business software from various vendors.
For instance, a worker could type in the chat box to book vacation days in a human resources program or enter a transaction in an expense reporting program. The company that provides that interface could wield extraordinary power in the enterprise-software market.
Slack already lets users beef up messages with information from partners -- tweets from Twitter Inc. or customer information from Salesforce.com Inc. -- and add comments to files and share them.
The messaging service offers a free version but itstwo paid tiers, at$6.67 and$12.50 per user permonth, are considered costly by some standards. It doesn't disclose revenue or other financial data.
Slack already has battled other competitors large and small, including Atlassian Corp.'s HipChat and Alphabet Inc.'s Google Spaces,and Symphony Communication Services LLC, a startup backed by Wall Street.
(Dow Jones Newswires, which is owned by Wall Street Journal publisher News Corp, is a provider of news on the Symphony platform.)
Revenue from what International Data Corp. analysts call workplace-application messaging, which includes collaborative apps such as Google Docs and Skype videoconferencing, hit $4.4 billion last year, and IDC expects it to reach $6.7 billion by 2020.
Credit: By Rachael King
