[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Amazon will be selling an awful lot of goods this week. How profitably it can sell other stuff is the real $2 trillion question.
This year's Prime Day comes as the tech giant's investors have a big cause to celebrate. Revived sales growth and an even more robust improvement to the bottom line drove steady gains over the past year and a half, pushing its stock price to a record and its market capitalization past the $2 trillion mark.
Hype over artificial intelligence undoubtedly was a factor: Shares of Amazon, Microsoft, Apple, Alphabet and Facebook parent Meta Platforms averaged a 44% gain in the past 12 months, while Nvidia's stock price nearly tripled. The six companies account for more than 31% of the S&P 500's total market capitalization; adjusting for that, the S&P 500 Equal Weight Index is up a little over 10% in the past year.
But for Amazon, the trip has been more of a comeback. Its market cap neared $2 trillion three years ago -- around the time that founder Jeff Bezos handed over the chief-executive reins to Andy Jassy. The stock cratered over the next 18 months, losing more than half its value as revenue growth slowed just as a Covid-era expansion of Amazon's fulfillment network sapped its earnings power. Amazon's operating margin was 6.8% the quarter before Jassy took over; it hit 1.8% in the final quarter of 2022.
Investors are essentially betting now that the company won't go back into "investment mode." Operating income surged by triple-digit percentages over the past four quarters and is expected to hit more than $62 billion this year, according to consensus projections by FactSet. That would equate to an annual operating margin of nearly 10% compared with the 5% averaged over the past five years. Wall Street sees Amazon's operating margin staying in the double-digit range and continuing to expand through at least 2027, per FactSet's current estimates.
That will take much more than a successful Prime Day. This year's event is expected to net Amazon about $13.3 billion in global sales, up 6% from last year, according to Emarketer. But while the company stabilized its retail profits, its ad and cloud businesses are much stronger contributors to the bottom line. Both are showing strong momentum, as corporate cloud-computing demand and the burgeoning AI market are expected to drive AWS cloud revenue up nearly 18% this year compared with 13% growth last year.
Advertising is a $49 billion business for Amazon and is expected to get a further boost from the introduction of ads to the Prime Video service. Brent Thill of Jefferies estimates Prime Video could draw in about $2.9 billion in new ad revenue this year. And ad-industry analyst Brian Wieser says a new service to counter Temu and Shein could help ad revenue even more, as Chinese merchants look to boost sales over Amazon's site.
A $2 trillion market cap would seem to set a high bar for all those efforts. But Amazon's rapidly expanding bottom line has made its valuation look less crazy. The stock is trading at less than 40 times projected earnings for the next four quarters, compared with a multiple of 67 times when the company's market cap first crossed the $1 trillion threshold in early 2020, according to FactSet data. Amazon trades at a premium to Microsoft, Apple and Alphabet, but that gap has narrowed significantly as the company's earnings have improved.
At $2 trillion, the Everything Store has rarely been so cheap.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
