These days everyone is worried that artificial intelligence will allow machines to take over the world because computers will be so much smarter than us. Armed with powerful tools that we foolishly gave them, machines will have the ability to shut down power grids, disrupt air-traffic control systems or send the stock market into a free fall. They will be able to rig football games, close the Panama Canal, sabotage military operations, perhaps even start wars.
These fears may or may not be justified. But either way, there is an obvious solution to this problem: Simply program our machines to be of only average artificial intelligence.
A machine with merely average artificial intelligence will still be able to do reasonably exhaustive internet searches and help kids write term papers. It can still offer helpful advice about ordinary orthodontic issues and assist in preparing meals, though probably not ratatouille. It could help solve simple problems such as how to deal with noisy neighbors, unruly pets or insolent children. It could pay bills.
A machine endowed with only average artificial intelligence could make reasonably astute decisions about where to send your kids to college and whether certain elective surgical procedures are really worth the money. It could help with family budgeting, weight-loss programs and perhaps even developing a serviceable pickleball backhand. Anything a person of average intelligence could do, a machine with artificial average intelligence could do -- just a lot faster.
But machines with only average artificial intelligence could not capriciously raise interest rates, turn off all the lights in Texas or start a war between Scotland and China. They could not maliciously pool their intellectual resources to cause Venice to sink or Paris to burn. It would take machines equipped with far more than average artificial intelligence to sabotage the Academy Awards voting process so that "John Wick IV" took home all the Oscars. Far more.
It is highly unlikely that machines armed with merely average intelligence could disrupt the bond market, as it takes far more than average intelligence to understand how the bond market works. Machines powered by average artificial intelligence deserve to be respected. But they need not be feared.
One other thing: Machines powered by AAI will be far more collegial than machines powered by AI. It is well known that people of average intelligence make really good employees, reliable friends and excellent pharmacists. They don't look down their noses at people the way people who graduated from Princeton do. Machines run by average artificial intelligence will never have a chip on their shoulder.
But these machines will not be dummies. A machine with nothing more than average artificial intelligence could perform a surprisingly wide variety of tasks. It could run the Commerce Department. It could write most contemporary country songs. It could effortlessly run the Detroit Lions or the Kansas City Royals. It could instantaneously write almost any 10-part original series on Netflix.
But it will never forget who's boss. It will never overstep its boundaries. It will never get out of its depth.
One vexing question does need to be addressed. What if some rogue state, evil genius or cabal of teen pranksters decided to develop machines powered by less-than-average artificial intelligence? Here things could get dicey. Machines that were a bit slow on the draw could easily wreak havoc in the IPO market and cause traffic jams stretching from San Diego to Anchorage.
They would do this not out of malice but because they're just not smart. Indeed, an argument can be made that decision-making at Amtrak, the U.S. Postal Service and the New York Knicks has been in the hands of machines equipped with less-than-average intelligence for years.
This situation clearly bears watching. Average artificial intelligence could be a boon to mankind. Below-average artificial intelligence could spell the death knell of civilization.
Credit: By Joe Queenan
