Corrections & Amplifications
Japanese telecom company SoftBank Group Corp. owns a 20% stake in U.S. satellite startup OneWeb Ltd. and is set to hold 40% of a company that will combine OneWeb and satellite operator Intelsat SA. A Business & Finance article on Wednesday and a Business Watch article on Friday about the three companies incorrectly said SoftBank currently owns 40% of OneWeb.
(WSJ March 6, 2017)
Japanese telecom company SoftBank Group Corp. is orchestrating a deal between U.S. satellite startup OneWeb Ltd. and debt-laden satellite operator Intelsat SA in an attempt to deliver faster and cheaper internet connections world-wide.
OneWeb, which is 40%-owned by SoftBank, Tuesday said it would buy Intelsat, combining two very different types of satellite fleets that would offer low-cost, versatile connectivity spanning the globe. As part of the deal, SoftBank will inject $1.7 billion into the combined company, in which it will hold a 40% stake.
The deal, which is subject to approval by Intelsat bondholders, would lower Intelsat's roughly $14.5 billion debt by about $3.6 billion, while allowing OneWeb to further expand its ambitious satellite-production and deployment plans in the next decade.
The combination comes amid escalating efforts by other tech giants to find the recipe for ubiquitous internet links in the sky. Facebook Inc. is developing a high-altitude, solar-powered drone, called Aquila, to provide web access to remote locations. Alphabet Inc.'s Google is working on high-altitude balloons, dubbed Project Loon, and specialized satellites. Even Boeing Co, which in the past resisted the trend toward small satellites, is pursuing plans to possibly launch its own downsized fleet.
SoftBank, which runs a major cellphone provider in Japan and controls Sprint Corp. in the U.S., is chasing new deals as it seeks to control technologies it sees as essential in an age of increased connectivity, automation and artificial intelligence.
SoftBank Chief Executive Masayoshi Son is preparing to open a $100 billion fund, with the backing of Saudi Arabia's sovereign-wealth fund and other partners, in an attempt to become the world's biggest investor in technology over the next decade.
The proposed deal between OneWeb and Intelsat would be a major departure from the traditional way satellite-service providers have operated. It would feature a hybrid fleet of large Intelsat craft operating at high altitudes and eventually perhaps more than 2,500 smaller satellites circling much closer to the Earth.
Industry officials consider large, highflying systems better able to satisfy extensive demand in urban areas, partly because individual satellites have unmatched power and capacity. Constellations of smaller spacecraft such as the OneWeb plans to put up, however, cost less and typically have shorter lag times between transmissions from space and reception of signals on the ground. They often are preferred for serving dispersed demand over less populated areas.
The move is the latest marrying a startup space company with a more established player at a time many incumbent satellite-services companies are struggling with a capacity glut that is weighing on earnings. Luxembourg's SES SA last year agreed to buy all of O3b Networks Ltd. OneWeb's founder, Greg Wyler, also founded and serves as executive chairman of O3b.
Intelsat has weathered a string of acquisitions and leveraged buyouts stretching back more than a decade. Several private-equity firms acquired the company in 2004 for $3.1 billion. Four years later, a different set of private-equity partners closed a deal for the company relying on only $5 billion of equity and the assumption of more than $11 billion of debt. Recently, Intelsat's management has been seeking strategies to manage its debt and boost sales.
Stephen Spengler, Intelsat's chief executive, described the move as "an acceleration of the plans of both companies."
Pending approvals by bondholders and regulators, Mr. Spengler is slated to be chief executive and Mr. Wyler executive chairman of the combined company.
By building on OneWeb's technical advances and Intelsat's experience serving mature and emerging areas, the transaction provides "an opportunity to utilize" diverse assets and "create something that is larger than the individual companies," Mr. Wyler said in an interview.
---
Robert Wall contributed to this article.
Credit: By Andy Pasztor and Mayumi Negishi
