[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
An AI iPhone without AI may be a tough sell -- even for Apple.
Apple's shares fell nearly 3% Monday on reports indicating weak demand for its iPhone 16 family, preorders for which kicked off on Friday. Ming-Chi Kuo, an analyst for TF International Securities who closely monitors Apple's supply chain, wrote in a report Monday that preorder sales for the 16 lineup during the first weekend are down nearly 13% from last year's iPhone 15 family.
In his report Monday, Wamsi Mohan of BofA Securities noted shipment times for overall iPhone 16 preorders are shorter than at the same point last year. Most notably, ship times for the iPhone 16 Pro are averaging 10 days shorter globally than for last year's comparable iPhone model, according to BofA's data. Kuo likewise cited lower-than-expected demand for this year's Pro lineup as "the key factor" in the weaker preorders he is seeing.
That would be a problem for Apple, considering the role iPhone Pro models played in the company's ability to boost revenue from its mature smartphone business over the past few years. Ironically, the artificial-intelligence enhancements Apple is adding to this year's iPhone family may be undercutting the case for the Pro series, as all of the iPhone 16 models this year have an enhanced processor to power on-device AI. In a report last week after the announcement of the new phones, Toni Sacconaghi of Bernstein said "the Pro vs. non-Pro value proposition arguably appears less compelling this year."
Of course, such early sales data is far from definitive. And the fact that Apple's AI service dubbed "Apple Intelligence" won't even be available when the new iPhones hit stores on Friday means this iPhone cycle will likely be even more spread out than usual. Mohan of BofA notes Apple might have boosted production of this year's Pro models compared with last year, which could help account for shorter wait times this year. Apple has plenty of time to sell its new iPhones. Customers who want AI in their phones may be taking their time as well.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
