Shares of Nvidia, Meta Platforms and other highflying technology shares plunged Wednesday, sending the Nasdaq Composite to its worst day in more than a year.
A drop in Magnificent Seven shares helped push the tech-heavy gauge down 2.8%, its biggest one-day decline since December 2022. The S&P 500 fell 1.4%.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average, meanwhile, added 0.6%, clinching a fresh high.
Wednesday's moves show the big stock-market rotation that has gripped investors for much of the past week is still cresting through markets. It was the first time since 1999 that the blue-chip Dow notched a gain while the S&P 500 fell more than 1%, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
Now, some investors are grappling with how much further tech giants will fall after a stellar run that has sent the Nasdaq up almost 20% for the year.
"In the context of the last couple of years it really looks like a blip, rather than something that's exhausted at this point," said Tiffany Wade, senior portfolio manager at Columbia Threadneedle Investments.
Traders have been rapidly rejiggering their bets on the stock market's winners and losers over the past week. Many have trimmed this year's biggest gainers and piled into beaten-down smaller companies, which are expected to benefit from lower interest rates. An encouraging inflation report has rekindled hopes of a rate cut as soon as September.
Investors also fear that shares of chip manufacturers will face more U.S. trade restrictions regardless of who wins the November presidential election.
On Wednesday, Taiwan's TSMC, the world's biggest contract chip manufacturer, dropped after GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump took aim at the country's chip dominance, saying the American ally should pay for U.S. defense, in a Bloomberg Businessweek interview.
The iShares Semiconductor ETF dropped 7.1%, its biggest percentage decrease since March 2020.
Some of the chip stocks that have benefited most from the investor frenzy over artificial intelligence got also knocked. Nvidia shares lost 6.6%, while Qualcomm shed 8.6%.
"Tech is really overstretched," said Don Calcagni, chief investment officer at Mercer Advisors. "This is investors just taking profits off the table."
Meanwhile, investors flocked to corners of the market that seem undervalued. The SPDR Portfolio S&P 500 Value ETF rose for the ninth consecutive session to a record.
Shares of energy companies, financials and real-estate companies notched gains.
Treasury yields slipped further to 4.143% after closing Tuesday at 4.168%, the lowest level since March.
---
Chelsey Dulaney contributed to this article.
Credit: By Gunjan Banerji
