The Biden administration, in devising what it vows would be punishing economic penalties if Russia were to attack Ukraine, is factoring in whether China would come to Moscow's aid and circumvent sanctions and other punitive measures.
Administration officials are considering cutting off major Russian banks from global financial networks and employing novel export controls to ban the sale of global technology that relies on American software and equipment to Russian entities in sectors such as aerospace, artificial intelligence, maritime and others.
In weighing these options, the officials are having to assess how far Beijing would go to help Moscow by marshaling the resources of the world's second-largest economy to increase trade and supply financing and sanctioned goods, people familiar with the administration's discussions on the matter said. So far, these people said, the administration sees Beijing as unlikely to interfere substantially with any U.S. restrictions because that could jeopardize Chinese companies' access to the U.S.'s large domestic market, deep financial networks and critical technologies.
The technology export controls the U.S. is considering would hit at a particular vulnerability for Beijing: China is a huge importer of semiconductors, and the U.S. dominates the software and toolmaking equipment used to produce leading-edge chips. A U.S. export ban on global goods derived from chip-making tools and technology crippled Chinese telecommunications gear-maker Huawei Technologies Co.'s revenue.
As U.S. officials warn that a Russian attack on Ukraine could come at any time, the U.S. is having to contend with China's intensifying partnership with Russia, and Beijing's past willingness to circumvent U.S. sanctions on North Korea and Iran, according to current and former U.S. officials.
"If this was Russia by itself, they'd be in a much harder position, but with the Chinese on their side -- they've got the second-largest economy in the world -- and so that limits what you can get out of sanctions," said James Lewis, a technology expert and former diplomat now at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a think tank.
Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chinese leader Xi Jinping, who share a determination to undercut American power, held a summit this month hours before theopening of the Beijing Winter Olympics, releasing a statement afterward describing their partnership as having "no limits" and criticizing the U.S. and its alliances around the world.
The lengthy statement signals "a fundamental alignment" between the two countries, a senior administration official said. That Mr. Xi would meet with Mr. Putin while Russian troops are massed at Ukraine's border shows the Chinese leader's perception that what Russia is doing is legitimate, the official said.
Administration officials have warned Chinese officials that penalties imposed for a further Russian invasion of Ukraine could entangle Chinese companies that deal with Russian entities, the senior official said. U.S. officials are also reaching out to technology-industry executives to get the word out about possible export controls, the people familiar said.
Beijing objects to any U.S. use of export controls and economic sanctions on Russia, a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington said.
The administration appears to be adopting a wait-and-see strategy on sanctions, gearing the U.S. response to Russia's actions and then seeing how Chinese companies react, said technology-industry and other executives briefed by the administration about China's role in any sanctions.
Credit: By Kate O'Keeffe and Ian Talley
