China, Russia and Iran launched joint military exercises on Wednesday in the Gulf of Oman, in the latest sign of Beijing's efforts to expand its influence in the Middle East.
China's Defense Ministry said the five-day exercise would deepen cooperation between the three nations, posing a growing challenge to U.S. interests in the region.
The drills come days after China brokered a surprise diplomatic deal between Iran and Saudi Arabia that paved the way for renewed political ties between the Gulf rivals after a seven-year freeze.
Beijing's more muscular role in the Middle East creates new complications for the U.S., which has been trying to reduce its focus on the region so it can turn its attention toward China and Russia.
In 2021, U.S. intelligence learned that China was building a suspected military facility at a port in the United Arab Emirates.
The U.S. warned the Emirati government that the new construction could threaten ties with America, which led to a halt in the plans, The Wall Street Journal previously reported.
This week's joint exercise is the third of its kind, following similar drills involving the Chinese, Iranian and Russian navies in 2019 and 2022, the Chinese Defense Ministry said.
This year, the Chinese navy sent a guided-missile destroyer, the Nanning, to participate.
The 2019 and 2022 drills also took place in the Gulf of Oman, the Defense Ministry said.
A Chinese guided-missile destroyer participated in the 2019 exercise, while for the 2022 drill, China was represented by a guided-missile destroyer, a replenishment vessel, a shipborne helicopter and 40 marines.
Still, the exercise is significantly smaller than those anchored by the U.S. military, which is winding up an 18-day naval exercise in the Middle East involving 42 other nations, including Israel, Saudi Arabia and the U.A.E.
The U.S.-led exercise -- the largest in the region -- includes 7,000 personnel, 35 ships and 30 unmanned and artificial-intelligence systems, the U.S. Navy said.
Last year, the U.S. military carried out 70 naval exercises in the Middle East, said Cmdr. Timothy Hawkins, spokesman for the U.S. Fifth Fleet, the Bahrain-based regional headquarters for the U.S. Navy.
Of the 15 nations in the region active on the sea, he said, only Syria and Iran work with regional rivals to the U.S.
"We believe the U.S. Navy is well-positioned in the region as the partner-of-choice for nearly all who operate in the surrounding waters," he said.
China's People's Liberation Army has long maintained a presence in the Middle East and East African regions.
China has routinely deployed warships to the Gulf of Aden for counter-piracy operations and in 2017 opened the PLA's first overseas base in Djibouti, which Beijing describes as a logistics-support facility for its military.
Credit: By Dion Nissenbaum and Chun Han Wong
