The unemployment rate for U.S. information-technology workers ticked down to 2.8% in April from 3% in March, according to trade group CompTIA, a sign some companies might be hiring to support their artificial intelligence-related projects.
Tech companies, such as Microsoft and Salesforce, added about 4,280 workers in April, according to CompTIA's analysis, which is based on Labor Department data. The growth was led by hiring for technology services and software development positions, followed by cloud infrastructure, data processing and data hosting jobs, the group said.
Data and cloud underpin the use of generative AI inside companies -- providing the foundation to run the AI models and link them with private data so businesses can gather insights on their own information -- even if it isn't used right now.
"This could be an investment towards future growth, not necessarily the fact that every single company right now is pouring resources into AI," said Tim Herbert, CompTIA's chief research officer. "That's probably driving a fair amount of the cloud growth that we're seeing."
Technology services such as IT consulting have also been on the rise in 10 of the past 12 months, part of companies' efforts to bring in outside help to assist with AI initiatives, Herbert added.
Across the economy, however, job growth slowed. U.S. employers added a seasonally adjusted 175,000 jobs in April, the Labor Department said Friday. That is a vastly different picture than in March, when job gains surpassed 300,000. The overall unemployment rate rose to 3.9% in April from March's 3.8%.
Still, technology chiefs across sectors are cautious of bringing on workers while they sort out how AI will impact various IT roles.
Simon Green, chief information officer of cloud-software distributor Pax8, said some tech leaders are starting to view AI as an alternative to hiring.
The thinking is, "slow your hiring down and invest in licensing around AI instead, because you can look at it as a force multiplier," he said.
There is growing evidence that AI is starting to affect entry-level roles in IT, a trend that took root when companies began applying automation to reduce manual work, said Victor Janulaitis, chief executive of consulting firm Janco Associates.
"Companies are continuing to look at how to reduce costs," Janulaitis said, and that is pressuring leaders to hire more selectively for specific skills. "The general statistics are that the employment picture for IT professionals has not improved all that much."
CompTIA's analysis separates jobs at technology firms, which can include workers in areas like sales and marketing, from IT jobs at companies outside the tech sector, such as retailers, banks or hospitals.
Tech jobs throughout the economy fell by 0.3%, or 20,000 jobs, in April, the group said. Employers listed fewer new jobs last month, adding 179,000 job postings, a drop from the 191,000 postings added in March.
Mixed job indicators -- such as the unemployment rate improving despite fewer jobs -- aren't unusual when the broader economic outlook is uncertain, Herbert said. "There are lots of nervous CIOs and C-suite leaders. They're probably a little bit reluctant to hire, not knowing what's going to happen next quarter, next six months," he said.
Credit: By Belle Lin
