OpenAI's management chaos in November could have long-lasting effects on its business as some of the company's customers say it was a wake-up call about the risks of being too reliant on one company's tech.
Executives at companies that use OpenAI's software say they are increasingly looking to also use others' technology to protect themselves from the risks of problems at any one. OpenAI's competitors are using the opportunity to sign up wary customers.
After the November board coup that saw OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman removed and then reinstated, senior leaders at Walmart met to remind some internal tech team members that they shouldn't go directly to OpenAI to build AI tools. Instead, they needed to stick with Walmart's internally developed platform, which can swap in various AI models, to make sure Walmart's AI software won't go down, according to a person familiar with the matter.
A Walmart spokeswoman said the company's focus has always been on developing generative-AI tools that are compatible with many large language models.
Other companies worked quickly to make sure they were sheltered from potential fallout. Doug Merritt, the CEO of cloud- networking company Aviatrix, checked to make sure that his company's AI tools weren't OpenAI-dependent. Although Aviatrix uses OpenAI's tech for some features, it also relies on other companies' models. "We're still using ChatGPT," Merritt said. "But I feel more comfortable that we haven't proprietarily tied ourselves to it."
OpenAI's operating chief, Brad Lightcap, said that the company has "deep respect for the unique needs and aspirations of each customer." A company spokeswoman pointed to a blog post in November announcing Altman's return as CEO, saying the company didn't lose any customers during the period of management chaos.
Companies aren't outright dropping their deals with OpenAI. But even moving some of their future work to competitors could start to erode OpenAI's dominance as rivals -- from Google and other giants to fellow startups such as Anthropic -- are working to take away some of its momentum.
The problems at OpenAI "exposed an underlying concern that one choice isn't sufficient in most use cases," said Manyam Mallela, a co-founder of Blueshift, which sells AI marketing software that uses several types of AI.
Mallela said his company received calls in the days following the Altman-OpenAI board saga from concerned Blueshift clients. He told them that his company's software allows them to switch between OpenAI and models developed by Amazon.com's Amazon Web Services if they need AI backup.
The pressing need to consider backup reinforced a trend that had been playing out in recent months. Companies have been seeking to license AI software from several vendors and start using software that is cheaper and more task-specific than the powerful -- and relatively expensive -- tools from OpenAI.
OpenAI's competitors were quick to pounce on the company's shakiness. Amazon, whose cloud-computing business competes with OpenAI's largest backer and exclusive cloud provider Microsoft, took a veiled swipe at both parties during its annual convention in Las Vegas in November. Amazon Web Services CEO Adam Selipsky highlighted that his company provides access to several AI models, including ones made by OpenAI competitors Anthropic and Cohere as well as free, open-source software made by Meta Platforms called Llama 2.
"You don't want a cloud provider who's beholden primarily to one model provider," Selipsky said at the convention, with the giant words "Choice Matters" projected behind him.
Analysts and investors have seen AWS as a latecomer to the generative AI race. It introduced its new AI chatbot, aimed at businesses, at the convention a year after OpenAI's ChatGPT.
Other competitors say there has been an uptick in outreach from clients who are already using OpenAI. "The spike in enterprise inquiries after the recent events was obvious," said Martin Kon, president of AI startup Cohere. "No one wants to be locked into one AI provider or cloud -- especially now."
---
Miles Kruppa contributed to this article.
Credit: By Tom Dotan
