Growing up in a small Southern town, Jeff Abercrombie seemingly knew everybody -- old high-school classmates, hunting buddies, friends from church and countless clients of his small landscaping business based in Pickens, S.C.
So Abercrombie's death in December at age 49 hit the entire community hard. The car accident in which he died also seriously injured his teenage daughter, who spent five days in the hospital recovering. Suddenly, Abercrombie's 35-year-old wife and three children lost the family's breadwinner and faced significant funeral and medical expenses.
Stunned and looking to help, one of Abercrombie's clients set up a GoFundMe crowdfunding campaign with a $25,000 goal on behalf of the widow, Kasey Abercrombie. In roughly two months, the campaign raised more than $33,000 from over 90 donors.
"The outpouring of love and affection was amazing," Kasey Abercrombie says. "I had no idea the ways [Jeff] impacted the lives that he did." The donations helped pay for the funeral and cover some other debts. What is left will be used "mainly to finish raising our family," she says.
Crowdfunding is increasingly the go-to fundraising method for individuals in need. Roughly 30 million people gave and received financial help in 2023 via the GoFundMe platform, according to the company, perhaps the best known crowdfunding platform for personal causes. Others include Fundly, Plumfund and GoGetFunding.
Some campaigns are for obvious needs such as medical expenses, funerals and school tuition. But some people solicit donations to cover things like beauty-pageant expenses, Disney vacations and destination weddings -- which can lead to backlash online.
"Asking for money to fund a wedding or travel can sometimes be seen as overstepping," says Joe Cox, an associate professor of digital economy at the University of Portsmouth in Britain. "It takes a bit of nerve to ask people to fund those types of things."
Persuading donors to give to personal causes can be difficult because they typically don't offer rewards or incentives in exchange for money, Cox says. So success often hinges on tiny details in the appeal's wording, photographs and video, researchers have found.
And once a campaign is created, it must be managed. Frequent updates detailing the recipient's progress or plight typically increase giving. But most effective is when donors digitally "share" a link to the campaign on social media, using blogs, websites and via email. Indeed, GoFundMe campaigns that are shared six or more times in the first few days are 40% more successful than those that are shared less often or not at all, says Tim Cadogan, CEO of the San Diego-based platform.
To better understand the psychology of crowdfunding, researchers at the University of Rochester in New York analyzed 8,355 GoFundMe campaigns available on a single day in 2019 categorized by type, such as "accidents and emergencies," and by funding goals, reaching as much as $100,000. Using full-text search and facial-recognition technology, the researchers were able to identify a number of attributes linked to successful campaigns, defined as reaching or exceeding their stated goals.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the campaigns that are most likely to succeed are health-related, says Hanjia Lyu, a doctoral student in computer science and one of the paper's co-authors. But certain attributes made some health-related campaigns more successful than others. For example, the more faces shown in the campaign's main photograph, the higher the donor response. One hypothesis is that donors are responding positively to family photos taken before the accident or medical issue.
Another co-author of the paper, Jiebo Luo, has conducted more recent research in which artificial intelligence delved deeper into the visual aspects of medical-related appeals. Researchers analyzed campaigns that showed only one person in the main image, presumably the individual in need. Individuals who were pictured smiling and making eye contact with the camera raised the most money, as did campaigns that showed individuals in a hospital setting, says Luo, a computer-science professor at the University of Rochester.
Wording also affects success. GoFundMe's internal research has shown that descriptions of 545 characters or more draw more traffic and higher donations than short blurbs. The study analyzing the 2019 campaigns found that, in many cases, first-person appeals (I, me, we, us) are more successful than third-person (he, she, they, them), Luo says.
In a separate study, University of Washington researchers demonstrated a racial gap in 827 campaigns on GoFundMe in 2020 raising $100,000 or more. Even in highly successful campaigns, racial and gender disparities were evident, says Aaron Davis, an epidemiologist and co-author of the study. Recipients identified as white men raised the highest median amount, $186,180; this was $30,000 to $50,000 more than the other race and gender groups.
While bias may be partly responsible for that gap, research has also shown that white crowdfunding recipients typically have more education, a higher net worth and larger social networks than nonwhite recipients, creating a more promising donor pool, the study notes.
In addition to looking at how recipients are perceived, some researchers are exploring how donors want to be perceived. Cox, the University of Portsmouth associate professor, co-wrote a 2018 study hypothesizing that donors who divulge their names are seeking, in part, to boost their image. In analyses of two crowdfunding platforms, Cox found that donors who include their names typically support more causes but donate less to each one. Anonymous donors tend to support fewer campaigns but give more to each one.
"A sizable portion of funders of crowdfunding campaigns are at least partly motivated by image consciousness," Cox says. "If you contributed to a crowdfunding campaign, people all around the world can see that you did that."
---
Beth DeCarbo is a writer in South Carolina. Email: reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Beth DeCarbo
