WASHINGTON -- The White House is holding a conference on artificial intelligence Thursday, aiming to show support for the advanced technologies amid nagging worries about their potential effects.
The event "will call attention to the great American industries already using AI technologies to improve their services to the American people and to benefit the American worker," according to a draft White House schedule. "The stakeholder input collected at the event will inform federal government efforts to maintain U.S. leadership in AI development and deployment."
Artificial intelligence is software that enables computers to emulate human intelligence, handling tasks such as recognizing and processing images or language in applications including autonomous driving.
Experts view AI technologies as a big potential growth area for U.S. businesses. But the technology has raised concerns about the potential for job losses and other harms. It also has emerged as an area at the center of intensifying competition between the U.S. and China for global technological supremacy.
About 40 companies are expected to be represented at the meeting, including tech giants Amazon.com Inc., Facebook Inc., Alphabet Inc. unit Google, Intel Corp. and Microsoft Corp. Big nontech companies participating include Bank of America Corp., Boeing Co., General Electric Co., Ford Motor Co., Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Walmart Inc.
But companies generally are sending AI and information-technology specialists, not their chief executives. Intel CEO Brian Krzanich and CVS Health Corp. CEO Larry Merlo are among chief executives attending. Organizers say they don't believe President Donald Trump will attend.
The meeting -- to be held in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building -- is being cast as a dialogue that will help the administration shape future policies, including removing barriers to AI innovation.
The administration is hoping to strike a balance with the event, welcoming the benefits of artificial intelligence while also acknowledging potential political challenges.

Credit: By John D. McKinnon
