Independent nuclear-power company Talen Energy is betting its future on supplying power to technology companies that are looking for carbon-free energy sources to develop their artificial-intelligence capabilities.
Talen, which exited bankruptcy this year, is developing a 1,200-acre data-center campus with dedicated power supply from the Susquehanna nuclear plant in Berwick, Pa., according to the company's public presentations. Talen could lease, sell or form a joint venture with technology companies such as Google, Microsoft or Amazon.com to operate the facility, according to Talen shareholders and a report by investment bank Oppenheimer. In December, Oppenheimer analysts initiated coverage of the company, and added that such a deal could boost the company's cash flow by $50 million annually.
A power-supply contract to a tenant or buyer would yield higher rates than what Talen would earn in the wholesale power market since commercial customers, such as data centers, pay more for electricity, the company has said.
Microsoft declined to comment. Amazon had no comment and Google didn't respond to a request seeking comment.
Some of Talen's equity holders anticipate a boost in earnings and cash flow from such a transaction, they told The Wall Street Journal.
Nuveen Investments, Rubric Capital Management, Citadel and Monarch Alternative Capital are among the investment funds that became shareholders of Talen through its bankruptcy, according to bankruptcy court filings.
A Talen representative declined to provide details, saying the firm doesn't comment on any transaction of an "active nature."
For Talen, such a deal for its data center could be the linchpin of a comeback. The company filed for bankruptcy in May 2022 after a decline in power prices and surging natural-gas prices led to a cash crunch. The company wiped out $2.7 billion in debt through its bankruptcy process, and its lenders and bondholders agreed to invest $1.4 billion in fresh capital. The Susquehanna plant accounts for roughly two-thirds of Talen's earnings, and the company is in the process of selling and shutting down a collection of coal and natural gas-fired power plants.
Talen shares, which trade on the over-the-counter market, have climbed steadily since the company exited bankruptcy in May from $46 per share to $63.20, where it closed Dec. 27.
The data campus houses four substations and Talen plans to increase the capacity for its data campus to 780 megawatts, generating an estimated additional $115 million in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, according to Oppenheimer. Currently, Talen's campus has one building for a data center. The company hasn't disclosed how much it has invested in the facility, but Oppenheimer analysts estimate the company has spent $250 million.
AI searches require 10 times the computing power of regular searches. Ready access to the vast amounts of electricity needed to keep AI data centers running is becoming a sustainability challenge for companies. Talen's ability to connect its nuclear power plant to its data campus offers a carbon-free energy source that will become a valuable asset, shareholders said.
Companies looking to start data centers running AI face delays in getting permits to connect to grids, and long waits for the installation of transmission lines to connect utilities to their facilities, said Sean Graham, research director for the cloud and data centers at market research firm International Data Corp.
The delays in securing land and power in Silicon Valley and Northern Virginia, where many AI data centers are being built, can be years, said Andy Taylor, managing director at Carronade Capital Management, a Talen shareholder.
Technology giants such as Microsoft have identified nuclear power as the best source of carbon-free power that is reliable enough to power its AI ambitions. Constellation Energy, the nation's largest owner of nuclear plants, in June agreed to sell nuclear power to Microsoft for a data center in Virginia when wind and solar aren't available.
Credit: By Soma Biswas
