Technology stocks continued to limp through the first week of January.
The Nasdaq Composite notched its fifth consecutive day of losses, following its worst two-day start to the year since 2005. Shares of Amazon.com and Apple weighed on the tech-heavy index, dragging it 0.6% lower with their respective declines of 2.6% and 1.3%.
The benchmark S&P 500 slipped 0.3% after pulling back over the first two trading days of the year. The blue-chip Dow industrials edged up 10 points, or less than 0.1%. Investors often watch stocks' performance in January as a sign of what is to come in the year ahead, but some say the rocky start to 2024 is expected after the rally over the past few months.
"It's been a rough start for stocks, but I don't think anyone is all that concerned yet, because we had such a strong finish in the fourth quarter," said Liz Young, head of investment strategy at SoFi. "For now, we're just taking a breather."
Shares of Walgreens Boots Alliance fell 5.1% after the drugstore chain cut its next dividend by nearly half to 25 cents a share. Conagra Brands, the maker of Slim Jim and Healthy Choice products, slid 1.9% after saying it expects organic sales to decline rather than grow.
Brad Conger, deputy chief investment officer at Hirtle Callaghan, said he is confident in U.S. stocks but has less exposure to shares of the Magnificent Seven -- which includes Amazon.com and Apple -- than their representation in the broad-market index.
"We're overweight growthy-stocks -- just not the mega ones," he said.
The Magnificent Seven propelled the market last year, boosted by enthusiasm over artificial intelligence. Apple also gained $927 billion in market cap in 2023, but its valuation shrank $165 billion over the first three trading days of 2024, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
Conger's base case is for stocks to perform well as economic growth chugs along and inflation moderates. But a scenario where the economy overheats and bond yields surge back to 5%, or one where growth slows dramatically, could hit the Magnificent Seven particularly hard, he said.
Bond yields rose after weekly jobless claims -- a proxy for layoffs -- and a monthly employment report beat expectations, indicating the labor market remained robust in December.
The 10-year Treasury yield climbed to 3.990%. The persistently tight job market gives the Federal Reserve less reason to cut interest rates, easing some of the downward pressure on yields.
Brent crude settled 0.84 lower at $77.59 a barrel.
On Friday, investors will look to the nonfarm-payrolls report, arguably Wall Street's most closely watched labor indicator. "The first 'Jobs Friday' of the year is always exciting," said Young.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.7% and Britain's FTSE 100 rose 0.5%. At midday Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 and Hong Kong's Hang Seng were each up 0.5%. S&P 500 futures rose 0.1%.
Credit: By Eric Wallerstein
