Daily life in Shanghai has ground to a halt as parts of the city's social services collapsed under the weight of a strict citywide Covid-19 lockdown that is stretching into a second month.
Now, ordinary citizens have stepped up to fill the breach.
Volunteers, some of them engineers and programmers at China's biggest technology firms, have built an array of databases and networks to help provide disaster relief and information on medical care, pet shelters, how to cook with limited ingredients and other essential information. That is helping keep the city of 25 million afloat as some hospitals and public transportation are inaccessible and people remain locked in their homes.
These efforts include artificial intelligence-assisted platforms that match patients with doctors according to their medical needs, as well as crowd-sourced tip sheets on procuring medicine and emergency supplies.
Others have set up chat groups to help pet owners find temporary homes for their animals when they are sent off to quarantine. A host of crowd-sourced databases have also sprung up, listing outpatient clinics, hospitals and mental health support hotlines that remain open during the citywide shutdown. Others have created recipes for dishes that can be prepared with the scarce ingredients available in Shanghai, which have been widely shared.
Grass-roots aid projects like these played a key role in keeping basic elements of society running during the initial Covid-19 outbreak in Wuhan around two years ago. As with Wuhan's lockdown, Shanghai's residential committees -- which enforce Communist Party mandates and maintain social order at the grass-roots level -- have served as front-line workers, implementing the government's Covid-19 mandates. Still, they are thinly staffed and have been stretched to their limits.
On Thursday, China reported another 11,200 locally transmitted infections for the previous day, almost all of which were in Shanghai. The national tally was the lowest daily total in more than three weeks, suggesting the outbreak might be coming under control a month after authorities launched a phased lockdown in the city.
Guobin Yang, the author of a book on the Wuhan lockdown, said staffers at Shanghai's residential committees appear to be even more overwhelmed than people were in Wuhan two years ago. That has left residents on their own in figuring out how to get food and needed medical treatment, said Dr. Yang, a professor of communication and sociology at the University of Pennsylvania.
Many people are relying on the efforts of volunteers like Hua Rongqi, a 21-year-old Shanghai college student who created a publicly accessible database connecting patients with various medical needs to local community workers and hospitals. Three days after Mr. Hua shared the database online, help requests from more than 700 patients had been posted on the platform, which is called "Shanghai Medical Emergency Help."
Word of the database prompted a team from Tencent Holdings Ltd. to reach out and provide technical support. Other volunteers joined. The database has since expanded to become a comprehensive guide, with details on which hospitals are receiving patients with specific conditions, ways to procure medication, emergency hotlines, government-led disaster relief channels and links to social-media chat groups where patients have gathered to help one another.
Another platform, "We Are Here to Help," was founded by a group of software developers who work at major tech companies like ByteDance Ltd. and Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. Shortly after it first went online, the platform was flooded with requests, said one of its founders, an AI engineer in Shanghai who asked to be identified only by his surname, Wang.
At its peak, more than 1,000 people were visiting the website at any given time, asking for help getting medication, medical care and food.
"We are all in this together, and we wanted to do our part," Mr. Wang said. He said the site uses algorithms to categorize and triage requests before sending them to a list of about 800 volunteers, which includes police officers and doctors.
Other tools include an app plug-in that a Shanghai-based computer engineer designed, which allows users to automatically check out groceries on e-commerce apps every few seconds, before the platforms run out of inventory. The plug-in, which was shared on GitHub, a Microsoft Corp.-owned coding-collaboration site, was popular during the early weeks of the lockdown, when groceries were particularly scarce.
The WeChat messaging app is also a conduit for arranging group purchases of food and essential supplies.
---
Qianwei Zhang and Reddy Zhao contributed to this article.
Credit: By Shen Lu and Liza Lin
