When it came to Dow 20000, Goldman Sachs Group Inc. drove the index to the five-yard line. But International Business Machines Corp. and Boeing Co. got it over the goal line.
In the immediate aftermath of the presidential election, Goldman Sachs powered the Dow Jones Industrial Average higher. It was the biggest contributor to its historic drive to the 20000 level, contributing 21.9% of the gain the index notched since Nov. 8.
Of the Dow's 1735.77-point rise since the election, Goldman accounted for 378.91 points.
Goldman's rally -- the shares are up 30.4% since the election -- came as financial stocks overall rose sharply on hopes Donald Trump's administration would loosen regulatory shackles on banks, cut taxes and pursue pro-growth policies. And, importantly, all this would hopefully lead to higher interest rates, which help improve bank profitability.
Indeed, gains for the KBW Nasdaq Bank index since Election Day are more than double those of the Dow.
Mirroring investors' optimistic view, Bank of America Corp. Chief Executive Brian Moynihan said Wednesdaythat the U.S. economy was "on very sound footing," and that consumer and business confidence had jumped since the election.
"In less than a week you're seeing things happen," Mr. Moynihan said, referring to initiatives by Mr. Trump. That could bolster consumer and business confidence, although "now we will have to see how that will play out," Mr. Moynihan added in remarks to the Council on Foreign Relations in New York.
Mr. Moynihan has good reason to be cheery. Bank of America has gained even more ground than Goldman. Its 35% rise since the election is the best of any big-bank stock.
But Bank of America isn't in the Dow. And as Bank of America's rally gained further ground in mid-January on the back of its fourth-quarter results, Goldman lost steam. While the bank reported fourth-quarter earnings that beat analyst expectations, investors seemed to have already priced into financial stocks many of the benefits they expect to see in 2017.
At that point, IBM and Boeing stepped in to keep the Dow's momentum going. Those stocks were the second- and third-biggest contributors, respectively, to the Dow's rise since Election Day.
Much of their gains came this month, though. They contributed more than 80 points to the Dow's nearly 300-point rise so far in 2017.
Boeing gained 4.2% on Wednesday alone after the aerospace giant reported earnings that topped analyst forecasts. IBM is up more than 7% since the start of the year as the company attempts a transformation of its cloud-computing and artificial-intelligence businesses.
Although it flagged into the finish, Goldman remained the only Dow component to account for more than 10% of its increase since the election.
The ascent of Goldman's shares has helped lift the value of its executives' stock-based compensation plans. It has left the stock within striking distance of its all-time closing high of$247.92. That was hit in October 2007.
But Goldman isn't likely to dwell on its Dow victory. Speaking on the bank's earnings call earlier this month, finance chief Harvey Schwartz said he is "always rooting for the share price." But that, he added, isn't going to lead to Goldman "thinking about changing how we run the company."
---
Liz Hoffman contributed to this article.

Generate image description

Credit: By John Carney
