Expanding the frontiers of science is a deeply human activity. In practice, it can look a lot like a lottery.
My late friend Sam Treiman, an outstanding theoretical physicist, often greeted surprising claims with his "theorem": Impossible things usually don't happen. The joke, of course, is that sometimes they do.
The experimental discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in 1986 was one such time. Superconductivity is a state of matter that occurs in many materials when they are cooled to extremely low temperatures, close to absolute zero -- around minus 273 degrees Celsius. Maintaining such low temperatures is hard, and decades of searching for higher-temperature superconductors had stalled out at around minus 253 degrees Celsius. Then Georg Bednorz and Alex Muller began using complex ceramics, and within just a few months, physicists had achieved superconductivity at temperatures well above minus 170 degrees Celsius -- still way below room temperature but far easier to maintain.
When supposedly impossible things like this happen, there's glory to be had in explaining how and why. Where angels might fear to tread, I rushed in. After a seminar where I sketched out my ideas on the breakthrough, I asked a colleague, Elihu Abrahams, for his opinion. His reply was understated but brilliant. "You can't win the lottery," he said, "unless you buy a ticket." My attempts to understand high-temperature superconductivity never jelled, but I've often come back to Elihu's aphorism.
Exploratory work almost always leaves loose ends dangling, so figuring out when to go public can be tricky. The longer you delay, the more complete your presentation can be. But scientists also feel strong pressure to stake out territory. In science, as in patent law, priority is all-important. Promotions, grants, prizes and a place in the history books all ride on it.
As a result, we sometimes jump the gun. That can lead to messy situations and raise profound questions about the nature of scientific progress.
For instance, some theories suggest that protons spontaneously decay. Observing this would be a triumph, and researchers have worked hard to do it. Indeed, proton decay was "discovered" in sketchy experiments in 1983. Then it was undiscovered a few years later, as more definitive experiments exposed the overly aggressive interpretation of the earlier observations.
But what if the later experiments had found proton decay? That wouldn't have made the earlier experiments correct, but it would have been difficult, and contentious, to avoid crediting the breakthrough to the earlier work. A premature, bogus "discovery" can muddy the waters for the real thing.
This is hardly an isolated case. Consider supersymmetry, a beautiful idea that suggests the existence of new heavy particles, which could show up in high-energy proton collisions. Those particles have been discovered repeatedly. Physicists have also postulated the existence of other new particles to account for so-called dark matter, which astronomers need to explain the gravitational effects that they observe. Sure enough, those particles have also been discovered, over and over again -- only to be canceled later on.
Obviously, researchers should quickly share important, correct results with the rest of us. But reporting new approaches and posing new questions in work that is incomplete (or even wrong, narrowly considered) also can be valuable. And after all, eventually, the truth will out.
In other words, my friend Elihu's notion of scientific discovery as a kind of lottery isn't as cynical as it might at first appear. But it must be a lottery in which the scientific community exercises careful judgment, both in crowning winners and in assigning payoffs. That is why we have tenure committees, review boards, prizes and grant-giving agencies. Those institutions have evolved to cope with knotty intellectual-property issues that the scientific community has struggled with for centuries.
Kindred problems about assigning credit arise in technology and commerce, and recently in machine learning as well. When a complex strategy succeeds, how are we to assess the contributions of its many components? People coming at these questions from different perspectives might learn a lot from one another.
Lotteries are all around us. It's important to get them right.
Credit: By Frank Wilczek
