At Facebook Inc. headquarters in Silicon Valley this week, engineers and researchers huddled around computers in a new "war room" to fight misinformation ahead of the midterm elections. Almost 3,000 miles away, in Philadelphia, the fact-checkers hired to be on the front lines haven't received fresh marching orders.
The disconnect highlights how Facebook's efforts to combat fake news are playing out differently this election cycle than many expected. Although the company has touted its partnerships with organizations including Factcheck.org in Philadelphia that provide human fact-checkers to vet possibly phony posts, those groups are playing a limited role. The vast majority of Facebook's efforts against fake news are powered by artificial intelligence, not humans.
Factcheck.org is one of five domestic groups hired by Facebook to deploy human fact-checkers to help prevent a repeat of 2016, when the social-media giant's platform was flooded with misinformation aimed at sowing divisions before the presidential election.
On a recent morning, a Factcheck reporter reviewed a dubious Facebook post in which Democratic Rep. Nancy Pelosi purportedly praised President Trump's tax cuts, but other staffers busied themselves with workaday tasks such as vetting political advertisements.
Out of Factcheck's full-time staff of eight people, two focus on Facebook. On average, they debunk less than one Facebook post a day. Some of the other third-party groups reported similar volumes. None of the organizations said they had received special instructions from Facebook ahead of the midterms, or perceived a sense of heightened urgency.
ABC News, which was part of the fact-checking effort when it began last year, has dropped out. "We did a review, and we couldn't tell if it was really making any difference; so we decided to reallocate the resources," said a person familiar with ABC's decision.
Facebook says fact-checkers were always expected to play a supporting role, and the reality is that humans can't move quickly enough to identify and act on misinformation before it goes viral on a platform the scale of Facebook's, with billions of posts produced daily.
"Fact-checking has taken up a disproportionate amount of the conversation" around fake news, said Tessa Lyons, product manager at Facebook focused on the integrity of information in the news feed.
The most important function of human fact-checkers is to contribute to Facebook's understanding of the websites that share false news and provide feedback that helps machine learning become more effective, Ms. Lyons said.
Facebook's war room is staffed by employees rather than outside fact-checkers, although the company said it would include the outsiders in thorny decisions. One morning this week, several Facebook employees were tracking content across Facebook, WhatsApp and Instagram.
Facebook spends billions annually to improve its artificial intelligence for a range of tasks, including content moderation. It paid Factcheck $189,000 in the fiscal year ended in June, according to public documents.
Earlier this year, Facebook also recruited the Associated Press to do fact-checking in all 50 states, a spokeswoman for Facebook said.
The other groups involved since the start of the fact-checking effort are PolitiFact and Snopes. After ABC News dropped out, the Weekly Standard came onboard. Those groups either declined to comment or didn't respond to requests to comment about how much they are paid. Facebook also declined to comment.
---
Deepa Seetharaman contributed to this article.

Credit: By Georgia Wells and Lukas I. Alpert
