For every story about advancements in artificial intelligence technology in the driverless cars business, there are concerning headlines about recalls and accidents with autonomous vehicles. Still, we appear to be approaching a time when self-driving systems will be safer than having humans behind the wheel.
How will you handle such an inflection point?
As part of a series on the everyday ethical dilemmas posed by AI, we asked Wall Street Journal readers the following questions:
If AI systems become appreciably better at driving cars than humans are, would it be unethical for people to drive on their own, since this increases the risk of an accident and could cost tens of thousands of lives a year? What if AI was only somewhat better, but in the aggregate would still save thousands of lives a year?
Here are some of the thoughts they shared.
AI can't account for human behavior
"In the aggregate" seems to be the justification. Will that be a comfort when the system fails and runs into a school bus filled with children? AI may be better than some drivers, perhaps the elderly and impaired, or the very juvenile. But it cannot make the judgment that the guy in the next lane who is blaring music and revving his engine is probably going to jump the green light aggressively, even if you hear a siren in the distance. Driving isn't just assessing the movement of boxes, but the expected behaviors of their drivers.
-- Dorothy McGarrah, Woodland Hills, Calif.
It is simple math
Self-driving cars should be approved for mass use the second it can be shown that the probability of crashing is equal to or less than a human. That was yesterday, in my opinion.
Once AI's safety advantage is proven, if you can find an insurer for your self-driven Porsche, have at it.
-- Alan Wells, Louisville, Ky.
Keep out of traffic
Yes, humans should not be allowed to drive, at least not in traffic, when AI reaches any level that cuts back on traffic accidents. If humans, generally, were smart enough to make a good decision about whether they should drive -- given a safer, convenient, affordable alternative -- they would be smart enough to drive safely now.
-- Rob Norton, Sammamish, Wash.
We're only human
Anything that can do a job better or is at par with humans should be adopted. The testing of AI's driving capability in unique scenarios is required but overall, AI drivers aren't emotional, don't have road rage, won't be distracted with other things happening and they will not be tired.
-- Nauman Sheikh, Marriottsville, Md.
Just like smoking
It wouldn't be unethical, but auto-insurance companies and their actuaries will simply factor "human driver" into the insurance premium the driver pays. The better AI-driven cars get at driving -- and "driving down" accidents -- the more expensive it will be to drive on your own. It is just like people who smoke pay higher insurance premiums.
-- Tim McGuckin, Reston, Va.
Safety isn't everything
Safety cannot be made the be-all, end-all for how individuals are permitted to live and find happiness. It is somewhat unsafe to travel in a jet or a train, but does that make it unethical to use those to travel? We know it is unsafe to smoke cigarettes, and there's an ethical argument about how smoking hurts others, but we still let people choose to smoke, just drawing lines around where.
I'm sure that if the AI-driven cars became prevalent, those who wanted to drive themselves would be made pariahs, as having no concern for the welfare of their fellow humans. The battle between individual freedoms and the government mandating what is good for the public is just getting started.
-- Carol Healey, San Francisco
Depends how good AI gets
If AI-guided cars become what designers have been trying to achieve (nearly perfectly safe), then manually driving a car on public roads (except for an emergency) should be a traffic violation for the first offense, a misdemeanor for the second offense, and a felony for any subsequent offense. Safety of the general public takes precedence over a person's desires.
But if an AI is only slightly better, that's a different story. Those who are "driving challenged" (like most humans) are lazy, so they'll take to using AI much more readily than a skilled human driver. In that case, leave everything alone: Allow both manually and AI-guided vehicles on the roads.
-- John Parziale, Ocala, Fla.
Dollars will decide
The cost of repairing damaged vehicles and providing medical care for accident survivors is rising quickly, and insurance rates are rising in response. When next-generation, self-driving cars are rarely involved in accidents, insurance rates will rise dramatically for people who insist upon self-operating the vehicle.
-- Dave Christy, San Luis Obispo, Calif.
Distrusting the data
The most important step toward autonomous driving is the funding of unbiased studies and a thorough review of the metadata before the federal government fully approving autonomous driving. Most of the studies to date are biased, being sponsored by big tech and auto companies.
Only after a thorough and unbiased data analysis can we move toward autonomous driving. Human drivers should be allowed, however insurance premiums will be much higher for human drivers. That will discourage humans behind the wheel.
-- Nicholas Rao, Roswell, Ga.
Who's to blame?
People make ethical decisions while driving. Someone needs to be responsible for those decisions, not something. If AI messes up, there is no accountability. If my doctor messes up, he will have to deal with that emotionally, socially, legally and financially. AI doesn't, which makes it dangerous. Can AI have checks and balances in the same way humans can?
-- Brad Grizenko, Wake Forest, N.C.
Almost all or nothing
It will only be unethical for humans to drive when (and if) AI consistently and reliably can drive vehicles, under all circumstances, better than humans, and 99% of vehicles have self-driving.
-- Jeff Emerson, Portland, Maine.
'Somewhat better'? Hmm.
Yes, at some point it will be unethical for people to drive on their own. Right now it's already so with inexperienced drivers or people with poor vision. This logic is similar when applied to AI. As to the question of the "somewhat better AI" warranting limits in human driving, the quick answer is "no." The answer, however, can change back to "yes" should limiting human driving make a big difference in the evolution of lifesaving technology. That is, should AI's development be greatly hastened with less human driving, then this is a significant factor supporting the human driving limitations.
-- Wendelin Comen, Raleigh, N.C.
Not an ethics question
We already have a safer alternative to humans driving cars -- flying in airplanes. Still, lots of people prefer to drive. I don't think it's unethical to prefer driving over flying, so I don't think it would be unethical to drive instead of handing the wheel over to an AI.
-- Clint Eubanks, Houston
Driving test for humans
Humans should be able to take more sophisticated, logic-based driving tests. If they score within the range of an AI vehicle's driving, they should be allowed to drive. Another idea would be to have separate roads for humans and for AI-driven machines.
-- Dawn Taggblom, DeLand, Fla.
God-given right
Take my car away? No way. People in many countries and cultures consider their decision to drive as a God-given right. Especially in the United States. No matter what the data of auto manufacturers and insurance companies says, mandating AI as the designated driver is unethical and a dangerous precedent. Only exception, and then on an individual case-by-case basis: someone who shouldn't drive because of age, physical limitations, or mental or emotional problems.
-- Gerry Mandel, St. Louis
Ultimately, no choice
We have continually demonstrated that we need all the help we can get to save us from ourselves. When my friends drive away, I admonish them to stay alert, as every smartphone-wielding driver they meet is playing with a lethal weapon.
AI will eventually be a mandatory vehicle safety system that takes over when humans choose to control the vehicle themselves, but make a subsequent error in judgment that could prove injurious or lethal to themselves or others.
-- Wister Smith, Scottsboro, Ala.
---
Demetria Gallegos is an editor for The Wall Street Journal in New York. Email her at demetria.gallegos@wsj.com.
Credit: By Demetria Gallegos
