Ethics And AI
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE HAS a growing influence in areas from hiring decisions to how autonomous vehicles drive. As a result, today's students will increasingly face ethical decisions relating to AI in their future careers, some educators say.
For instance, how much risk is acceptable to build into machines? Engineers will need to make those determinations for their products, says Martin Peterson, a Texas A&M University professor of philosophy and engineering history and ethics. It could be a life-or-death calculation as artificial intelligence enters medical care, influencing doctors' diagnoses and treatments, he says.
Texas A&M is developing a class on the ethics of AI alongside more than a dozen other universities that have received funding from the National Humanities Center, a North Carolina-based nonprofit, to dig into these key issues. Each school will develop a course on responsible AI with money from the overall $800,000 grant to the center from Google.
"We need to discuss it with our students -- we need to give them the tools to think critically about AI," Dr. Peterson says.
The campuses will debut courses on responsible artificial intelligence in 2023.
Networking 101
RECRUITERS MEETING young job applicants might find themselves working an awkward room. Because of the virtual internships and online classes that were common during the pandemic, many students missed out on learning social skills important to their careers. Giving them explicit instructions on networking and professional ethics will be a greater part of the curriculum in the future, some campus officials say.
In the fall, Michigan State University's Broad College of Business is teaching a course for some undergrads that focuses on basics -- like resume development and making a LinkedIn profile -- and softer social skills. The class, piloted last year, will be required for many business students.
In one exercise, volunteers form a circle around someone acting as a recruiter, practicing the chit-chat common to networking events. The class will teach how to respectfully join a circle, what questions to ask and how to maintain a connection after an event, says Marla McGraw, director of career management. Sometimes, these mock conversations are students' first introduction to in-person networking. "The need was always there, but it wasn't as broad of a need," Ms. McGraw says.
Entrepreneurship In the Metaverse
BIG TECH COMPANIES' major investments in the metaverse could open money-making opportunities to entrepreneurs of the future. New classes will aim to teach students how to profit in this unfamiliar environment.
The University of Virginia's Darden School of Business is adding a course this fall on creating value in the metaverse.
Students doing business in the metaverse will need to reconsider ideas about pricing and cost of production, says Anton Korinek, an economics professor who will co-teach the class. Think of a New York penthouse with stunning views of Central Park. In the real world, the property has value because of its beauty and because the supply of such prime real estate is limited. In the metaverse, the apartment's views could be copied and sold many times over -- perhaps creating more potential value overall but lowering the value that comes from scarcity.
The digital vouchers of authenticity known as NFTs, or nonfungible tokens, seek to re-create the value from scarcity, Dr. Korinek says. How that plays out is another question.
"If so many of our big tech corporations are making big bets on the metaverse, there's bound to be some promise for value creation there," he said. "For a lot of students, it's going to be really beneficial to know a little more about it."
This fall's class has hit its 65-student capacity, and students are registering for a waitlist.
Credit: By Lindsay Ellis
