Would you entrust a personal-injury claim, divorce settlement or high-stakes contract to an algorithm? A growing number of apps and digital services are betting you will, raising questions about the limits and ethics of technology in the legal sphere.
Among the leaders in the emergent robo-lawyering field is DoNotPay, an app dreamed up by Joshua Browder in 2015, when he was a 17-year-old Stanford University student, to help friends dispute parking tickets. The app, which relies on an artificial intelligence-enabled chatbot, became popular, and has expanded its focus to other consumer legal services. In June it hit the million-case mark, helping save people upward of $30 million since it started, Mr. Browder says.
It can help you cancel unwanted subscriptions, get compensation from airlines and file lawsuits in small-claims court. The app costs $3 a month to use.
DoNotPay is one of a wave of tech startups trying to automate legal work. They include FlightRight, which helps get compensation for air-travel snafus; Robot Lawyer Lisa, which generates lease documents and non-disclosure agreements; and U.K.-based Farewill, which algorithmically generates wills based on users' input, although the documents are then checked by humans.
These services have attracted users largely by promising to save them money and time, as well as allowing them to draft documents or pursue smaller-value disputes without shouldering the high costs of hiring a lawyer.
Many of the services work the same way: Using information from the user, a program draws on stores of legal data to fill out a small-claims court filing, challenge a fine or write a cease-and-desist letter. Because the algorithm is tuned to make the optimal choices, it theoretically results in a better outcome than a person would get alone.
Skeptics say the legal profession is heavily regulated for a reason. Using robo-lawyers could get people into trouble if they malfunction, or if the people they sue on your behalf decide to fight back.
"As soon as there's some complexity or some resistance by the system, the automation is unable to handle it," says Ryan Calo, a law professor at the University of Washington who focuses on robotics and automation.
The question of who would be responsible for an erroneous filing by a legal bot on your behalf is largely unanswered by courts around the world.
Drew Simshaw, a law professor at Gonzaga University, wrote in a 2018 paper that the legal profession had to balance the benefits of access to do-it-yourself justice offered by apps against ethical concerns that arise when they veer into doing legal work autonomously. "The legal profession's advocacy for crippling restrictions on legal self-help solutions could potentially stunt the development of the larger AI revolution in law in ways that would ultimately favor large firms over the public interest," he wrote.
AI has to be careful to stick to providing legal information that helps people file cases without straying into giving legal advice, which in the U.S. could constitute practicing law without a license. Mr. Browder says his company hasn't been sued, and that it keeps up with changing laws.
Legal tech companies have faced challenges before, though.
Many startups in legal tech operate around the margins of cases. Divorcify, a startup founded by Boston-based family law attorney Casey Shevin, uses a chatbot to guide people through filing for divorce.
Others have avoided ethical scrutiny by focusing on serving lawyers rather than clients.
The messier cases, however, may stay in the hands of humans for some time to come, a conclusion Mr. Browder reached the hard way. A couple of years ago, he tested out a divorce-filing service that sputtered.
"Even in simple cases, there was too much human emotion and judgement involved, something that software is not good at understanding," he says.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
