We still speak of "turning a page," still aspire to be "open books" and recite "chapter and verse," but our pages are now webpages, our books are now e-books and audiobooks, and our chapters and verses are dissolving into images, emojis and acronyms (LOL). The printed book will survive as a high-status curio; as late as 2017, the British Parliament still "engrossed" its rulings onto vellum in medieval tradition. For most of us, however, the Age of Print that was inaugurated around 1455 by the Gutenberg Bible has already passed into the Age of the Internet which, ICYMI, began in 1994 with the launch of Netscape Navigator, the first commercial web browser.
"I see a rug being pulled out from under our understanding of the world: a crisis of cognition," Jeff Jarvis writes in "The Gutenberg Parenthesis" (Bloomsbury Academic, 328 pages, $27). Mr. Jarvis began his career as an analog journalist but became a digital pundit, so he knows the queasy feeling of living through the twilight of one way of knowing the world and into the dawn of another. The technical term is "epistemic crisis," a breakdown of shared reality. In American English, Mr. Jarvis notes, a "parenthesis" is usually a grammatical symbol, what the British call a round bracket. In British English, a "parenthesis" is the information contained between the brackets -- the "content," as it's now called. His book is about how the form defines the content: As Wittgenstein said, "The limits of my language mean the limits of my world."
The idea of a "Gutenberg parenthesis" was coined in the mid-1990s by three professors from the University of Southern Denmark: Lars Ole Sauerberg, Marianne Borch and Tom Pettit. Before movable type -- the left-hand parenthesis that opened the print -- information moved by word-of-mouth. Knowledge and memory were, as Mr. Jarvis puts it, "collective, collaborative, and often performative using rhyme and lyric." Books were rare and were handwritten by scribes whose "higher mission was to preserve the knowledge of the ancients." After Johannes Gutenberg, information was mass-produced in print, by machines. Books were everywhere. The sentence became the "organizing principle," and our cognition became "linear." Copyright law, enacted in England in 1710, created an economic basis for the print industry and turned the scribe into the author and the patron into the publisher.
"The Gutenberg Parenthesis" gives an accomplished and detailed survey of life between the brackets. Movable type and new methods of distribution, according to Mr. Jarvis, created first the public and then the masses, which caused governments to contain speech within censorship laws. The book-banners got to work almost immediately. In 1473 or 1474, the Venetian friar Filippo de Strata petitioned the Doge to stifle the printers because they were putting the scribes out of business. "They basely flood the market with anything suggestive of sexuality," de Strata complained, "and they print the stuff at such a low price."
The first book in English, a history of the Trojan wars, was printed in 1473 by William Caxton. His heir, the wonderfully named Wynkyn de Worde, opened a print shop in London's Fleet Street. The first printed newsletter appeared in Strasbourg in 1605, the year Cervantes inaugurated the novel with "Don Quixote." By 1704 London had nine newspapers and dozens of coffee houses where the conversation began on the page and broke into the room.
The magazine as high-end diversion was born with Addison and Steele's "Spectator" (1711-12), though the father of direct and demotic "newspaper English" was Benjamin Franklin. From the start, newspaper journalists were viewed as "paid agent[s] of politicians." As early as 1626, Ben Jonson had satirized the "credulous purchasers" of pamphlets and ballads. Jonson was a credentialed expert, a university man connected to the Court. These days, he would, like Mr. Jarvis, be advising the European Union on how to combat disinformation and hate speech.
The artists of typography raised print to an art: Baskerville, Jenson, Caslon, Bodoni. The technicians upgraded the machines. In the 1790s a team led by Charles Mahon, the Earl of Stanhope, pioneered stereotyping (casting a solid metal plate from a plaster mold so that a page did not need to be reset) and the use of an iron press. Steam-powered cylinder presses arrived in the 1810s, and multicolor printing using intermediate rubber "offset" cylinders began in the early 1900s. Stereotyping, among other 19th-century methods, was still used in the 1970s when Mr. Jarvis started work at the Chicago Tribune.
Print not only changed the material presentation of knowledge and its dissemination. It also, as Mr. Sauerberg of the University of Southern Denmark argued, changed "the very nature of cognition." The current closing of the right-hand parenthesis implies "a completely new and so far only partially glimpsed -- let alone understood -- cognitive situation." It might not be completely new. Marshall McLuhan, who hovers over "The Gutenberg Parenthesis" as Moses hovers over what used to be called the Book of Books, predicted that exchanging texts for images would break down the linear cognition of cause and effect, returning us to a pagan or primitive experience of the world. The novelty, then, lies not in the feelings of hapless wonder and terror that lie beyond print, but in the technological means that are carrying us there.
The "materiality of text" dissolved partly because of radio and newsreels, and partly because of new print technologies. In the 1960s, Gutenberg's "hot type" began to cool into "cold type" through photocomposition, word processors and xerography. As the commercial internet completes the dematerialization of information production, we are, Mr. Jarvis believes, "beginning to recover from half a millennium of creeping control by institutions." Tell that to the data-scrapers: This is the golden age of the snooper.
It is difficult to write a history of the present -- especially if, like Mr. Jarvis, you equate conservatives with "the far-right," bundle Trump voters with "Putinists," and believe that when reporters interview "extremists in their heartland diner-dens," they "normalize extremism." When "The Gutenberg Parenthesis" looks from the past to the present, it collapses into platitudes about "diversity" and "disinformation," just like our failing and increasingly brittle institutions.
Mr. Jarvis's problem, and ours, is that "new technologies forge institutional change," but no one can figure out what the new institutions should look like or how to preserve older values such as free speech and privacy. Meanwhile, the new institution is already here, dematerialized in plain sight: the cloud. Our institutions are failing because they resist integration into this amorphous and nearly infinite network, which they know will consume them.
The governing logic of the cloud is now emerging: machine learning and artificial intelligence. The detective novel "Death of an Author" (Pushkin Industries, 95 pages, $3.99) is, for now, a novelty: an AI-written text about the killing of Peggy Firmin, a Canadian novelist who might remind readers IRL of Margaret Atwood. The living author of "Death of an Author," the novelist Stephen Marche, says that 95% of it is machine-generated, using the programs ChatGPT, Sudowrite and Cohere; he has published it under the nom de computer Aidan Marchine. Reading the book is, like being online, at once amusing, alarming and depressing. The plotting is tighter than most literary fiction, but typical for its genre. The prose feels weirdly synthetic: "With a strange sense of comfort, like a dog being smoothed by a hand, Gus returned to bed."
If that phrase reads as though it had been translated from some future version of English, that is because it has been. In "Who Wrote This?" (Stanford, 344 pages, $30), the linguistics professor Naomi S. Baron describes how AI already permeates our cognition. In the 1980s, the composer David Cope programmed a computer to "generate new Bach-like works." The results fooled "at least some of the people some of the time." The same now goes for online prompts, telephone banking, corporate communications, political messaging, some journalism and many college essays.
Like a doctor dispensing a terminal diagnosis, Ms. Baron is calm, empathetic and desperate to find a bright side. So far, AI-produced language looks like a condensed parody of print. The data that generative AI and natural-language processing requires is scraped from inside the Gutenberg Parenthesis, apparently without regard for copyright. AI disgorges a cumulative consensus, and its programmers then correct it to reflect their own values, should they have any. The magic of creativity is, for now, beyond reach. But magic is a matter of effects.
"As a large-language model trained by OpenAI, I am not capable of creative thought or artistic expression," ChatGPT tells Ms. Baron. This is like Johannes Gutenberg saying, "As I am only a blacksmith who prints the Bible in Latin, I cannot comment on whether allowing me to print it in the vernacular might spark a Reformation, a century of religious war, and the birth of international law, free speech and the modern state system." We have burst our brackets. Only a power cut can save us.
---
Mr. Green is a Journal contributor and a fellow of the Royal Historical Society.
Credit: By Dominic Green
