OpenAI's board formed a safety and security committee after recently becoming embroiled in a legal battle over a new voice assistant in its latest artificial-intelligence model.
The generative AI company in a blog post published Tuesday said the committee will be led by directors Bret Taylor, who serves as chair; Adam D'Angelo; Nicole Seligman; and Chief Executive Sam Altman. A first task of the committee will be to evaluate and further develop OpenAI's processes and safeguards, it said.
The move comes after it launched GPT-4o, its new flagship model that powers its online chatbot ChatGPT, this month. Part of GPT-4o was a new female voice assistant, named Sky.
That voice assistant had taken center stage in a legal standoff between movie star Scarlett Johansson and OpenAI. Johansson has said she believes the voice of Sky sounded eerily similar to her own. Johansson voiced an AI assistant in the 2013 film "Her."
Although Altman and other OpenAI executives said they found inspiration in the movie, OpenAI has said Sky was never intended to resemble Johansson and that the company had hired a voice actor who recorded the part before any outreach to Johansson. The company said it aimed to develop an assistant like Apple's Siri or Microsoft's Cortana that users could talk to.
The Wall Street Journal previously reported Johansson was unsuccessfully courted by OpenAI to work with the company and voice a new assistant feature. OpenAI earlier in the month paused use of the Sky voice after receiving legal letters from Johansson's team of representatives, according to the Journal.
The rapid rise of artificial intelligence has stirred deep anxiety in creative industries over compensation and ownership of AI-generated content built off prior work. Generative AI chat tools tend to rely on text, images, music and videos from across the internet, including material that is copyrighted, valuable and often behind a paywall.
Wall Street Journal owner News Corp has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI.
Credit: By Denny Jacob
