Supply chains have taken a battering this year from the coronavirus pandemic and other extreme events -- and artificial intelligence has emerged as a critical tool for navigating everyday business in this environment.
The use of AI and its various subsets, such as machine learning, is enabling these companies to forecast demand with increasing accuracy and to optimize their supply chains, executives say.
"As a supply-chain provider, as a logistics provider, we are very much in the data business," said Mario Harik, chief information officer at XPO Logistics Inc., while speaking Wednesday on a virtual panel at the WSJ Pro AI Executive Forum
Mr. Harik said that events such as the accidental blocking of the Suez Canal by a shipping vessel this week demonstrate how supply-chain optimization and diversification have become essential. AI is a useful tool to quickly figure out how to reroute shipments and plan for extreme events by building redundancy into operations through multiple distribution facilities, he said.
AI can help optimize the placement of these facilities, he said, as well as the "intake flow and the outbound flow at facilities as well."
The Greenwich, Conn.-based company has views into consumer purchasing trends, as well as data from transport networks and other parts of the supply chain that give it unique insights into how best to organize supply routes, he said.
"We collect millions of data points from our operation and then we use our machine-learning algorithms to be able to help forecast either where demand is going to come from, or how to best optimize a certain part of the supply chain to be as effective as possible," he said.
Others have found that investments in AI have been paying dividends during the pandemic. At Koninklijke Philips NV, for instance, the company began experimenting with AI around 18 to 24 months ago, said Ivanka Janssen, its global head of supply chain, while speaking on the same panel.
As the pandemic hit, the company ramped up its production of ventilators and other medical equipment five or six-fold. But it also had to simultaneously scale down production in other areas as supply chains buckled under the strain of the pandemic. Operating in such a dynamic environment means that forecasting models become increasingly important, Ms. Janssen said.
Although companies have always invested in planning tools, the use of AI is showing promise in improving forecasting models, she said, even if getting it right is still a work in progress.
"With the use of artificial intelligence, we see that we get a different level of forecasting accuracy that has a true benefit throughout the supply chain," she said.
Credit: By James Rundle
