The House approved a $350 billion initiative Friday to boost U.S. competitiveness with China and other rivals, but differences with the Senate and emerging partisan divides signaled struggles ahead in reaching a compromise.
The Senate in June passed its $250 billion version of the measure, the U.S. Innovation and Competition Act, on a bipartisan basis. House leaders waited until the past few weeks to put together their own package, called the America Competes Act, as Congress wrestled with other spending proposals.
The House bill passed almost entirely on party lines, in a 222-210 vote. It shares common elements with the Senate bill. Both are aimed at increasing federal support for scientific research and particularly new technologies.
Both bills also provide for substantial new federal incentives to help bring advanced semiconductor manufacturing back to the U.S. -- another bipartisan priority.
Intel Corp. cheered the passage of the House version, noting its plans for $43.5 billion in new investment in Ohio, Arizona and New Mexico.
But Friday's partisan divide over the House bill -- along with differences between the House and Senate approaches -- concerned administration officials.
"Delay is the biggest enemy we have right now," Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo told reporters following the vote. "My message to everyone is to find common ground quickly . . . . This should take weeks, not months."
Ms. Raimondo said the most contentious of the numerous partisan disagreements over the House package concerned its trade-policy changes. House Democrats sought to make more use of trade-policy changes to counter overseas threats while also adding protections for U.S. workers.
One measure would offer new trade-adjustment help to workers affected by pandemic-induced trade and supply-chain disruptions, while also addressing "inherent racial disparities and inequalities in our economy," according to a House summary.
Other provisions would impose new federal oversight of U.S. cross-border investments in China and remove a loophole that allows for lower-valued products to enter the U.S. from China and some other countries without import duty or customs inspection.
Ms. Raimondo urged lawmakers to find common ground and not let disagreements "bog down this whole negotiation."
Other differences are between the House and Senate versions and further complicate the final negotiations.
One is over how to use scientific research to counter overseas threats. The Senate focuses largely on encouraging cutting-edge technologies, such as artificial intelligence and quantum computing.
The House, by contrast, wants to give more flexibility to federal science officials to decide which new ideas deserve to be jump-started. The House package also focuses more on global economic challenges and less on the specific threat from China, aides say.
Compared with the Senate, the House targets more funding and related policy changes toward issues such as climate change, human rights and domestic social inequality. Its version includes $8 billion to help developing countries convert to cleaner sources of energy.
Another difference is the House's inclusion of a new, $45 billion fund to provide grants and loans to strengthen U.S. supply chains and manufacturing.
The bill's sponsors say it provides for roughly $350 billion in overall spending, but the impact on deficits would be lower because not all of that money would represent new spending.
Republicans accuse House Democrats of using the competitiveness bill as a way to pass unrelated spending proposals, weeks after President Biden's $2 trillion Build Back Better initiative crashed in the Senate. "It has become a Frankenstein monster of other things," said Rep. Mike Gallagher (R., Wis.), citing climate-change spending.
Democrats say their bill will help solve supply-chain issues that are dragging on the economy, fueling inflation and frustrating Americans. "This bill deals with the independence and self-sufficiency of America in making things here in America that we need to have in order to grow our economy, create jobs and opportunity for our people," said Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (D., Md.).
Credit: By John D. McKinnon, Natalie Andrews and Yuka Hayashi
