Microsoft's and OpenAI's partnership is one of the hottest tie-ups in technology right now. The relationship has produced conflict and confusion behind the scenes, according to people familiar with the matter.
Microsoft invested billions to get early access to the generative artificial intelligence technology of much smaller OpenAI, a forerunner in the field. But it specifically invested 49%, a setup that helps the arrangement avoid antitrust scrutiny.
The result is a kind of open relationship -- together, but not exclusive. OpenAI has been arming some of Microsoft's biggest rivals, while Microsoft has effectively limited the potential search-engine customers for OpenAI.
There are some strong alignments. Microsoft hosts OpenAI's technology on its cloud and stitches it into its popular products, giving the software giant new bragging rights over rival Google as well as others. Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella and OpenAI CEO Sam Altman sing each other's praises at events declaring the start of a new era of computing.
At the same time, people within Microsoft have complained about diminished spending on its in-house AI and that OpenAI doesn't allow most Microsoft employees access to the inner workings of their technology, said people familiar with the relationship. Microsoft and OpenAI sales teams sometimes pitch the same customers.
Last fall, some employees at Microsoft were surprised at how soon OpenAI launched ChatGPT, while OpenAI warned Microsoft early this year about the perils of rushing to integrate OpenAI's technology without training it more, the people said.
The partnership is an unusual arrangement for the tech industry. Typically, a company like Microsoft would absorb a startup and its technology. By keeping OpenAI at arm's length, Microsoft has influence without control, while OpenAI gets a deep-pocketed backer and some freedom to explore other partnerships.
Much of the drama can be chalked up to the normal infighting and bruised egos that emerge when two companies join forces. But this unconventional coupling could run into further problems as both sides peddle comparable software and services, said Oren Etzioni, board member and former CEO of the nonprofit research organization the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence.
"What puts them in more of a collision course is both sides need to make money," he said. "The conflict is they'll both be trying to make money with similar products."
The companies have touted the benefits of their relationship. Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Amy Hood has called it a "great partnership" where both sides benefit. "When we grow, it helps them, and when they grow, it helps us," she said in April.
OpenAI was formed in 2015 as a nonprofit, research-oriented company working to build safe AI technology for the benefit of humanity. It created a for-profit arm in 2019, enabling it to raise billions from Microsoft. It now makes money by charging individuals for access to a powerful version of ChatGPT and licensing its large language models to businesses.
Both companies sell access to OpenAI's technology -- Microsoft as part of its Azure cloud services and OpenAI directly. Some companies say they were pitched the same access to products like ChatGPT -- one day by salespeople from OpenAI and later from Microsoft's Azure team. Some described the outreach as confusing.
OpenAI has continued to develop partnerships with other companies. Salesforce offers a ChatGPT-infused product called Einstein GPT. It is a feature that can do things like generating marketing emails, competing with OpenAI-powered features in Microsoft's software.
OpenAI also has connected with different search engines over the past 12 months to discuss licensing its products, said people familiar with the matter, as Microsoft was putting OpenAI technology at the center of a new version of its Bing search engine. Search engine DuckDuckGo started using ChatGPT to power its own chatbot, called DuckAssist.
Microsoft plays a key role in the search-engine industry because the process of searching and organizing the web is costly. Google doesn't license out its tech, so many search engines are heavily reliant on Bing, including DuckDuckGo.
When Microsoft launched the new Bing, the software company changed its rules in a way that made it more expensive for search engines to develop chatbots with OpenAI. The new policy effectively discouraged search engines from working with any generative AI company because adding an AI-powered chatbot would trigger much higher fees from Microsoft.
Several weeks after DuckDuckGo announced DuckAssist, the company took the feature down.
Credit: By Tom Dotan and Deepa Seetharaman
