Government bond yields hit decade-plus highs after another hot economic-data release fueled concerns that interest rates could remain elevated for longer.
The latest retail-sales report showed spending online, at stores and in restaurants rose a stronger-than-expected 0.7% in September from a month earlier. Treasury yields jumped afterward, with the benchmark 10-year bond yield rising to 4.846% from 4.709% Monday. It was the highest closing level since July 2007.
Stocks wavered between gains and losses, before closing little changed. The S&P 500 fell less than a 10th of a percent, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average added less than a 10th of a percent. The Nasdaq Composite was 0.3% lower.
Higher bond yields are pushing up borrowing costs for companies, individuals and home buyers. But U.S. consumers are still on a spending binge that has helped sustain the economy.
Economic indicators have repeatedly surprised to the upside in recent weeks, prompting bond traders to reset expectations for how long the Federal Reserve will keep its monetary policy restrictive.
"The Fed certainly won't like that higher rates are not deterring consumers from spending," said Gina Bolvin, president of Bolvin Wealth Management Group.
There is a "plausible story" that inflation is moving toward the Federal Reserve's 2% target, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond President Tom Barkin said in remarks released before a Tuesday speech in Washington. The Fed still has time to determine whether another rate increase is necessary, he added.
Some investors expect higher long-term bond yields to help the Fed cool inflation without further rate increases.
"If you read the tea leaves from the Fed statements, they feel like the bond market is doing a little bit of the work for them," said Jason Vaillancourt, global macro strategist at Putnam Investments.
Investors are also weighing the impact of a spate of Wall Street earnings and the Israel-Hamas war. Markets got a boost Monday on optimism that conflict in the Middle East had yet to escalate into a broader geopolitical crisis, after investors had piled into safer assets before the weekend.
"There's hope that the U.S. and some of its European counterparts can keep this from spiraling and potentially drawing Iran in. But I don't think anyone in markets has a good way to price that," Vaillancourt said.
Brent crude, the global oil benchmark, closed slightly higher at $89.90 a barrel.
In earnings, Goldman Sachs and Bank of America both beat estimates for third-quarter earnings and revenue. Johnson & Johnson raised its full-year sales guidance, and Lockheed Martin said it expected to increase sales this year despite the budget battle that has hit the Pentagon.
Chip-maker shares came under pressure after the Commerce Department said it would significantly constrict exports of artificial-intelligence chips, making it tougher for companies like Nvidia and Intel to sell products in China. Nvidia closed down 4.7% and Intel lost 1.4%.
Moderna shares fell sharply for a second day after the vaccine maker warned Monday that there is uncertainty over U.S. vaccination rates, making projections difficult. Moderna was the S&P 500's worst performer, dropping 6.1%.
VF, the owner of brands including Vans and The North Face, surged 14% after The Wall Street Journal reported that activist investor Engaged Capital has built a stake in the company and plans to push for changes, including steep cost cuts.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.1%. At midday Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.2% and the Shanghai Composite was down 0.5%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.1%.
Credit: By Jack Pitcher
