WASHINGTON -- The House passed a $280 billion bill aimed at making the U.S. more competitive in the semiconductor industry, despite a late push by Republican leaders to block the legislation over a separate Democratic spending proposal.
President Biden is expected to sign the legislation, which passed in a 243-187 vote. Twenty-four Republicans joined with Democrats to vote for the bill. One Democrat, Rep. Sara Jacobs (D., Calif.), voted present. Her family founded chip developer Qualcomm Inc.
The Chips and Science Act of 2022 will spend $52.7 billion on direct financial assistance for the construction and expansion of semiconductor manufacturing facilities, as well as other programs. It adds $24 billion in tax incentives and other provisions.
The bill was backed by almost all Democrats and 17 Republicans when the Senate passed it Wednesday, and several House Republicans had been expected to back the package as well, seen as critical to assuring passage.
But the level of their support was thrown into doubt when Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D, N.Y.) announced a surprise deal with Sen. Joe Manchin (D., W.Va.) on a Democratic climate, healthcare and tax bill that Republicans oppose.
Following the announcement of the deal, House Republican leaders told their conference to vote against the chips legislation.House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R., Calif.) urged colleagues to reject what he called a "deeply flawed bill," while pointing to the Manchin deal as bad policy, saying it would fuel inflation.
"The bill unlocks the Democrats' radical tax and spending spree," said Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers (R., Wash.).
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) in a tweet said Republicans were "willing to play partisan games with the health & financial security of the American people."
Rep. Michael McCaul (R., Texas) said he still planned to vote for the bill despite the surprise Democratic deal.
The spending package addresses the concern by lawmakers of both parties that the U.S. needs to attract more manufacturing of chips and technology as a response to Beijing's technological and economic rise.
The bill "helps fulfill the Biden administration's goal of revitalizing our domestic manufacturing economy," said Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo, who has lobbied lawmakers to support the package.
Democrats have touted this bill as a legislative victory ahead of the midterm elections in which Republicans are favored to win the House. Proponents said it would help the supply-chain woes that have dogged Americans trying to buy cars and appliances that rely on chips, though it could be years before the true benefits of the bill are seen.
The bill allocates $39 billion for semiconductor manufacturing, and includes $11 billion to advance semiconductor manufacturing research and workforce training, and a $2 billion fund to more quickly translate laboratory advances into military and other applications.
Several chip fabricators like Intel Corp., Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. and GlobalFoundries Inc. have already announced plans to build plants in the U.S. contingent on the bill's passing.
Chunks of that funding are expected to flow to rural states under new formulas for distributing research dollars.
The legislation also directs the Commerce Department to create 20 "regional technology hubs" designed to create more tech jobs across the country.
The technology R&D investments target fields including artificial intelligence, quantum computing, wireless communications and precision agriculture.
The National Science Foundation would oversee a new $20 billion directorate focused on accelerating the development of technologies critical to U.S. security, in addition to an increase to $61 billion for its core activities funding researchers at universities and elsewhere.
The Energy Department's Office of Science's five-year authorization would increase to about $50 billion to boost a series of programs focused on clean energy, nuclear physics and high-intensity lasers.
The bill also sets new long-term policies for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, instructing the space agency to give priority to the research required to bring Americans to Mars, as well as programs such as Artemis, which could put the first woman and person of color on the moon.
Credit: By Natalie Andrews
