[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
It is a good time to be in the business of making AI chips and servers. But even red-hot demand can't make supply magically appear.
Advanced Micro Devices saw first-quarter revenue surge 80% year over year in its data-center segment that sells chips used to power artificial-intelligence services. The company's projection for the second quarter implied 95% year-over-year growth for that key segment.
But Wall Street was expecting robust numbers, having propelled AMD's stock price up 77% over the past 12 months ahead of the report. Hence, even the company boosting its full-year projection for AI-chip sales by 14% fell short of some more lofty expectations. AMD's shares dropped roughly 9% on Wednesday.
Sky-high expectations really hurt Super Micro Computer, known as Supermicro. The company makes specialized AI servers using chips from AMD and more widely from Nvidia, and its growth has been on a tear, with first-quarter revenue of $3.85 billion triple from a year ago. But that fell about 3% below Wall Street's target for the company's third quarter that ended in March. Supermicro's stock, which more than tripled in value since the start of this year, fell 14% on Wednesday.
Both companies noted in their earnings calls on Tuesday that supply constraints are weighing on sales. "So there's no question at all that if we had more supply, we have demand for that product," AMD Chief Executive Lisa Su said of its MI300 chips.
Supermicro CEO Charles Liang noted supply shortages for its latest liquid-cooling systems, which are much in demand.
Those shortages are expected to be temporary. Supermicro nudged up its aggressive revenue target for the fiscal year ending in June to a midpoint of $14.9 billion, more than double what it made last year. But Supermicro has a capital-intensive business model and said Tuesday that it may need to raise more capital if demand keeps picking up. The AI gold rush isn't cheap, even for those supplying the picks and shovels.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
