OpenAI has a method to reliably detect when ChatGPT is used to write an essay or research paper. The company hasn't released it despite concerns that students are using artificial intelligence to cheat.
The project has been ready to be released for about a year, according to people familiar with the matter and internal documents viewed by The Wall Street Journal. OpenAI employees have wavered between the startup's stated commitment to transparency and a desire to attract and retain users. One survey the company conducted of loyal ChatGPT users found nearly a third would be turned off by the anticheating technology.
An OpenAI spokeswoman said the company is concerned the tool could disproportionately affect groups such as non-native English speakers. "The text watermarking method we're developing is technically promising but has important risks we're weighing while we research alternatives," she said. "We believe the deliberate approach we've taken is necessary given the complexities involved and its likely impact on the broader ecosystem beyond OpenAI."
Employees who support the release, including those who helped develop it, have said internally those arguments pale compared with the good such technology could do.
Generative AI can create an essay or research paper in seconds, based on a single prompt, free. Teachers and professors say they are desperate for help to crack down on misuse.
"It's a huge issue," said Alexa Gutterman, a high school English and journalism teacher in New York City. A recent survey by the Center for Democracy & Technology, a technology policy nonprofit, found 59% of middle- and high-school teachers were sure some students had used AI to help with schoolwork, up 17 points from the prior school year.
OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman and Chief Technology Officer Mira Murati have been involved in discussions about the tool. Altman has encouraged the project but hasn't pushed for release, some people familiar with the matter said.
Wall Street Journal owner News Corp has a content-licensing deal with OpenAI.
ChatGPT is powered by an AI system that predicts what word or word fragment, known as a token, should come next in a sentence. The anticheating tool slightly changes how tokens are selected, leaving a pattern. These "watermarks" would be unnoticeable to the human eye but could be found with OpenAI's detection technology. The watermarks are 99.9% effective when enough new text is created by ChatGPT, according to the internal documents.
Still, staffers have raised concerns the watermarks could be erased through simple techniques, an OpenAI employee familiar with the matter said. There is broad agreement within the company that deciding who can use this detector would be a challenge. If too few people have it, the tool wouldn't be useful. If too many, bad actors might decipher the watermarking technique.
OpenAI employees have discussed providing the detector directly to educators or to outside companies that help schools identify AI-written papers and plagiarized work.
Google has developed a watermarking tool that can detect text generated by its Gemini AI. Called SynthID, it is in beta testing and isn't widely available.
OpenAI has a tool to determine whether an image was created using its text-to-image generator, DALL-E 3, that was released for testing this past spring. The company has given priority to audio and visual watermarking because the harms are more significant than with text, particularly in a busy election year in the U.S., the employee familiar with the matter said.
There are tools developed by outside companies and researchers, and many teachers say they have used them. But they sometimes fail to detect text written by advanced large language models and can produce false positives.
Some teachers encourage students to use AI to help with research or provide feedback. The problem is when students have an app like ChatGPT do all the work and don't even know what they are handing in.
Discussions about the watermarking tool started before OpenAI launched ChatGPT in November of 2022, the people familiar with the matter said.
In April 2023, OpenAI commissioned a survey that showed people worldwide supported the idea by a margin of four to one, the internal documents show. That same month, OpenAI surveyed ChatGPT users and found 69% believe cheating detection technology would lead to false accusations. Nearly 30% said they would use ChatGPT less if it deployed watermarks and a rival didn't.
A recurring internal concern has been that the tool could hurt the quality of ChatGPT's writing. A test by OpenAI this year found watermarking didn't impair performance, people familiar with the matter said.
"Our ability to defend our lack of text watermarking is weak now that we know it doesn't degrade outputs," employees involved in the testing concluded, according to the internal documents.
In June, OpenAI senior employees and researchers met again to discuss the project. The group agreed the watermarking worked well, but the results of the user survey still loomed large. Staffers said the company should look into other approaches that were potentially less controversial but unproven, according to people with knowledge of the meeting.
They also said OpenAI needed a plan by this fall to sway public opinion around AI transparency as well as potential new laws on the subject, the internal documents show.
"Without this, we risk credibility as responsible actors," a summary of the June meeting said.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman and Matt Barnum
