The last successful foreign attack on multiple targets on U.S. soil wasn't 9/11. It was this past December. A cyberattack targeting software provider SolarWinds hit the U.S. government, Microsoft and cybersecurity firms such as CrowdStrike and FireEye. Unlike 9/11, the SolarWinds attack did its damage under cover of darkness. It didn't result in loss of life, but cyberattacks are extremely costly and increasing in frequency.
Malicious attackers exploit previously known vulnerabilities or discover new "zero day" vulnerabilities. SolarWinds-related attacks such as Sunburst and Supernova were examples of the latter. The WannaCry ransomware attack, which targeted Microsoft Windows in 2017, used a known vulnerability to infect more than 200,000 computers and inflict perhaps billions of dollars in damage.
One would think the U.S. is protected against known vulnerabilities. But a 2019 study found a 133-day average gap between the discovery of a vulnerability and the release of information about it to the public. Typically, this period is used to create a "patch" that fixes the vulnerability. But almost half the attacks that use known vulnerabilities occur during this window, before the fix is complete. Think of these as holes in the perimeter fences around U.S. embassies world-wide. There would be an outcry if it took 133 days to patch the holes, which terrorists used in the meantime to launch successful attacks. Yet this is the sorry state of U.S. cybersecurity today.
When a vulnerability is found, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, which maintains the National Vulnerability Database, takes a long time to talk to the vendor whose product contains the vulnerability, estimate its severity, understand the software code, assess the difficulty an attacker would have in exploiting it, and ensure the availability of a patch. Vendors often have little incentive either to cooperate or patch a vulnerability; the affected product might be old, unprofitable or in the process of being phased out, and sometimes the issue simply doesn't seem to rise to the level of serious concern.
That won't do. America needs a National Cyber Vulnerability Early-Warning Center. Just as a meteorologist is on a constant hunt for storm systems, an early-warning center would scour widely used software and hardware components for vulnerabilities. It would discover new weaknesses before adversaries do, fortifying defenses and increasing the costs of mounting an attack. China, Russia, Iran and North Korea have access to cheaper expertise. The only way to stay ahead and protect U.S. data and intellectual property is to invest big.
From there, the task would be to improve the management of known vulnerabilities. There is no proven scientific methodology here. To give priority to the analysis of one vulnerability over another, we must ask the following questions: Is it likely to be used in an attack? If so, when? And how severe would the consequences of an attack be? To trim the 133-day gap between discovery and public disclosure of a vulnerability, advanced machine-learning techniques will come in handy. The National Cyber Vulnerability Early-Warning Center could even use discussions of vulnerabilities on Twitter, Reddit and hacker forums to generate early answers and assign priorities. And just as buildings that adhere to green principles receive special LEED certification, companies that fix vulnerabilities quickly can be awarded Responsible Cybersecurity Provider certifications. If companies are encouraged to cooperate, the whole process will go faster.
We are used to seeing weather forecasts change as more information becomes available and changing our behavior accordingly. The same can be true for cybersecurity. An early-warning capacity may not detect every threat, but it would surely pick the low-hanging fruit and make it harder for adversaries to hit the U.S. There's no reason America should be an easy target. It is time to build a National Cyber Vulnerability Early-Warning Center before an even more damaging digital attack is upon us.
---
Mr. Subrahmanian is director of Dartmouth College's Institute for Security, Technology and Society.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: U.S. Has a Cybersecurity Warning System" -- WSJ April 6, 2021)
Credit: By V.S. Subrahmanian
