With robots on the march, many tech visionaries foresee a world with far fewer jobs. The advance of artificial intelligence and automation, they say, will make much of the work people do obsolete. Some entrepreneurs such as Tesla Inc. founder Elon Musk predict so little human work will be left that a universal social-safety net will be needed to maintain economic order.
But a sunnier employment picture can be painted. At least 21 new job categories may soon emerge from technological and other societal changes, says a new report from IT-services and consulting firm Cognizant Technology Solutions Corp.
With titles such as "genetic diversity officer," "virtual store sherpa" and "personal memory curator," these roles aren't science fiction, the study's authors argue. Rather, they are identified as jobs many employers will have to fill within the next decade.
"It's easier to understand what types of jobs are going to go away," says Ben Pring, director of Cognizant's Center for the Future of Work, who with two other Cognizant executives wrote the 2017 book "What to Do When Machines Do Everything." The idea behind the report, he says, was "to craft a credible narrative of what we're going to gain."
Other studies have concluded that artificial intelligence and automation can create jobs. Many companies building AI systems have found that humans must play an active role in both building and running them. In retailing, store jobs lost to e-commerce have been replaced by jobs in fulfillment centers.
But defining the jobs of the future can be tricky, some economists warn. Job creation depends on how much businesses invest in their workforces, the demand for certain products and services, and decisions made by workers, says Michael Reich, economics professor at University of California, Berkeley, and chairman of the Center on Wage and Employment Dynamics.
Still, he says he disagrees with the grim no-jobs future that some envision. "Even if an employer would love to replace all of their workers with robots to make their cars, someone needs to be able to buy those cars made by robots for the business to function."
Several of the jobs that Mr. Pring and his colleagues envision involve helping companies manage artificial intelligence and automation. There is what the study calls "data detectives": workers who dig into their employer's data stockpiles and generate business recommendations. "Man-machine teaming managers" will be needed to ensure machines and human workers collaborate in a way that maximizes results, the study says.
On the low-tech end of the spectrum, the study describes rising demand for "walker-talkers," gig workers who answer calls to assist and provide companionship for a growing elderly population as people live longer.
Mr. Pring and his colleagues say the dawning age of intelligent machines won't be without painful upheaval: They estimate about 19 million positions in the U.S. will be automated out of existence in the next 15 years, while employers create some 21 million new roles. At the same time, the majority of existing ones will likely be enhanced. "Work will change, but it won't go away," Mr. Pring says.
---
Kelsey Gee contributed to this article.

Credit: By Vanessa Fuhrmans
