They spam. They scam. They spread lies. They deceive and divide and delude. And nobody likes them. That malicious image is what comes to mind when human beings think about Twitter bots.
But that's not all they are. Twitter bots contain multitudes. They inform. They entertain. They make us smarter and make us smile. When they post alerts about natural disasters, like @EarthquakeBot, they can be a public service. When they share adorable pictures of animals, like @PossumEveryHour, they can be a guilty pleasure. And the best of these bizarrely charming automated robots provide more value than most accounts run by real people.
"Who doesn't love a handful of robots who promise not to rise up against us?" Twitter itself once asked.
Elon Musk, as it turns out.
Under his control, Twitter has spent the past few weeks in a peculiar fight about the future of bots -- and it happens to be a case study in Mr. Musk's business strategy.
The battle started two weeks ago, when Twitter suddenly told developers that it would begin charging for the access to systems they need to operate their bots, which was like asking people to pay for oxygen. The policy would govern even the friendly bots programmed to share interesting and practical information. But this being Elon Musk's extremely hardcore Twitter, it didn't last very long. There was such an uproar about what appeared to be a blatant cash grab that the company abruptly reversed course and these bots were spared.
A feud over access to a company's application programming interface might sound arcane, but the slapdash rollout and subsequent whiplash were typical of Twitter in the chaotic months since Mr. Musk's takeover.
"Please note that Twitter will do lots of dumb things in coming months," he wrote soon after shelling out $44 billion for his favorite social network. "We will keep what works & change what doesn't."
Do lots of dumb things, keep what works and change what doesn't.
This is the closest thing to an organizing principle for the management style of the world's most volatile and overworked billionaire.
Most executives prefer the strategy of not doing lots of dumb things, but Mr. Musk has never been anything like most executives. With advertisers disappearing, revenues way down and debt payments due, many of Twitter's business decisions are impetuous and based on his whims, including recent algorithmic tweaks to juice engagement. Mr. Musk seems to believe that even the ones that fail are necessary for his company's success. Some might call these glitches the classic tinkering of a genius entrepreneur. Others might call them dumb.
Which brings us back to the failed bot crackdown.
What a bot is depends on who you might be asking. The overly broad term lends itself to various definitions and interpretations that only deepen the confusion. It would be like saying people and porcupines are the same because they are both mammals.
Mr. Musk was referring to the malevolent kind when he said his company was "being abused badly right now by bot scammers & opinion manipulators" and proposed a $100 monthly paywall to deter them. This pitch did not go over well with users, who are fiercely protective of their benign robotic friends and spent the next few days berating the company in defense of accounts like @FrogandToadbot, which tweets quotes and photos from the illustrated children's books eight times a day. In response to an uprising that he characterized as "feedback," Twitter amended the rules again, pledging to keep a basic version of its free API for "bots providing good content that is free," as Mr. Musk opaquely put it.
Twitter did not respond to a request to comment.
But no matter what happens next, the whole mess has already been revealing -- and not just because it helps explain Mr. Musk.
The latest mayhem at Twitter has also demonstrated the human desire for bot companionship.
There are many different breeds of these bots. Some chronicle seismic activity. Others spark joy. One tweets photos of possums every hour. They analyze crude data from other parts of the internet, clean it up for public consumption and automatically post it to Twitter in a digestible format. In other words, bots are translators. They take information from one language and put it into another language.
The bots that post about earthquakes, possums and Frog and Toad were not born to "do bad things," as Mr. Musk describes their evil cousins. They're not trolls spewing propaganda, spammers yammering about crypto or the fake accounts that he vowed to purge when he bought the company.
These are the accounts that have been described by Twitter's former executives and its reigning chief twit as good bots.
They are bots like Bill Snitzer's.
Mr. Snitzer is a software developer in Los Angeles who felt a minor quake in 2009 and then felt an impulse to check Twitter. He was excited to find out if others had felt it, too. Then he was inspired.
"You know what would be cool?" he recalled thinking. "If I just made a bot that tweeted when there's an earthquake."
So he did. He wrote a basic script that runs around the clock with a simple function: As soon as it sees something in the U.S. Geological Survey data, it says something on Twitter about the magnitude, location and time of the earthquake. "The bots distill it down to what we need to know," he said.
One of the first confirmations of the recent devastation in Turkey came from Earthquake Robot, the Twitter bot that Mr. Snitzer programmed for the sole purpose of blasting out alarms on powerful quakes. He also built four bots that monitor Los Angeles and San Francisco, two that only tweet about big ones and two that will tweet about every quake, including a 1.3 in Malibu and a 2.0 in Berkeley, the barely perceptible tremors that make people check their phones to make sure they haven't gone nuts.
Mr. Snitzer's earthquake bots weren't just cool. They were quite useful and incredibly popular. Together they have more than 800,000 followers.
So when Twitter announced that it would charge an unspecified amount to keep his bots alive, then said never mind, then delayed the unveiling of a new API platform and asked developers for their patience in a dizzying sequence of events, Mr. Snitzer wasn't sure what to do next.
But the botmaker who found himself at the mercy of Mr. Musk was sure about two things. First, he was insulted. He didn't think it was right that it would cost him money to maintain something that so many Twitter users find invaluable. Second, he was conflicted. He didn't want to pay Mr. Musk, but he also didn't want to kill his bots.
Since then, the company has suggested that most good bots will be able to tweet 1,500 times a month, which is enough for hourly possums and should be plenty for Mr. Snitzer's accounts. If that limit becomes a problem for a bot that tweets only about big earthquakes, the world has much bigger problems.
As developers like Mr. Snitzer wait for clarity, the good bots of Twitter still exist. For now. And hopefully for a long time. They make the product worth using and reflect the sort of ingenuity that Mr. Musk should be encouraging, not banning.
In fact, Mr. Musk happens to be the target audience for Mr. Snitzer's earthquake bots: He's often in Los Angeles and San Francisco, and he's more frequently on Twitter.
He doesn't follow them. He might want to change that, too.
Credit: By Ben Cohen
