Over the past few weeks, the U.S. government has leaked the fact that it has run cyberattacks against Russia's electricity network and Iran's air-defense system. These attacks are part of a 21st-century cycle of hit-and-response in the cyber realm that threatens to escalate, spurring attacks that could threaten America's own poorly defended power grid and military systems.
Hearing stories like this, most Americans who think about cyberwar and cybersecurity will probably think the news is bleak. They may even conclude that, somewhat like resistance to the robotic Borg villains on "Star Trek," defense is futile in cyberspace. But it isn't.
Over the past 10 years, there has been encouraging news from the cyber realm: Many U.S. corporations have learned how to defend themselves from cyber criminals and even hackers deployed by hostile countries. The most quoted line at cybersecurity conferences has long been that there are only two kinds of companies: those that were hacked and knew it and those that were hacked and didn't know. But now, there is a third type of company: the "cyber-resilient" firm that suffers little or no damage when malicious hackers penetrate its network.
These cyber-resilient companies don't want to draw attention to themselves. During the so-called NotPetya attack in 2017, the Russian military launched a cyberattack on firms in Ukraine that reportedly caused more than $10 billion of collateral damage to companies in the U.S. and Europe. We heard plenty about the firms doing business in Ukraine that were badly damaged (including Maersk, Mondelez and Merck) but much less about the ones that suffered little (including Boeing, Hyatt and Delta Air Lines). They were the dogs that didn't bark.
Not so long ago, the technology didn't exist to permit companies to robustly defend themselves from cyberattacks. But now, by deploying dozens of specialized cyber-defense tools, some companies are minimizing their digital risk. (Disclosure: We are consultants and investment advisers in these fields, including work for the Paladin Capital Group, Symantec, Microsoft, McAfee and Oracle, among many others.)
The resilient companies usually share three qualities. First, their governance models don't bury their chief information-security officers but give them direct access to their CEOs and boards. Second, these firms create an internal "culture of security," largely through awareness and training programs. Third, these companies spend more on cyber defense -- often 8% or more of their IT budgets.
The market for cybersecurity products and services grew to $114 billion in 2018, reports the consulting firm Gartner Inc., up from $90 billion just a few years ago. Venture capital investment in cybersecurity technology is also up and may well have topped $5 billion in 2018 alone. Thousands of technology firms have sprung up, backed by this capital, to develop new solutions to online threats. Companies that are disrupting attacks are being rewarded by the markets. The cybersecurity firm CrowdStrike had a highly successful IPO in June and now has a market cap of more than $14 billion.
Savvy cyber defenders have identified the multistep process that a hacker must go through to penetrate a network and furtively remove valuable data. At each step along the line, the attacker can be discovered and cut off. New cybersecurity firms specialize in blocking one of those steps. String those products together, and a company has a decent chance of defending itself in cyberspace. One chief information-security officer at a major bank told us that, in five years, his bank will be largely immune to cyberattacks because it is upgrading from legacy systems that are insecure by default to cutting-edge systems that are secure by design.
Apple, Google and Microsoft all once dismissed concerns over cyber threats as overly hyped. In the past few years, they have all gotten religion and are investing in cybersecurity with the zealotry of the recently converted. These key tech companies now see bristling cybersecurity measures as a way to attract consumers who are increasingly wary of doing business online.
Large banks such as Citi, Bank of America and JPMorgan Chase also tout their investments in cybersecurity, with annual defense budgets in the hundreds of millions. Even a small business can conduct most of its work online, with the support of cloud service providers that have dedicated thousands of people and billions of dollars to protecting clients' data.
None of this is to say that the cybersecurity problem has been solved. Many corporations still do little more than check the boxes, spend too little and have no real cyber risk-management strategy.
Many government agencies are similarly poorly defended. The problem extends from the city and county level, where a pandemic of ransomware attacks has been identifying the weakest in the herd (the Baltimore and Atlanta municipal governments are among those that have suffered), to federal agencies and their supporting contractors. (Secrets from U.S. Customs and Border Protection were recently hosted online after a subcontractor was hacked.) And many utilities, such as power and gas companies, are still vulnerable targets for nation-state hackers.
Perhaps most troubling, many of America's costly new high-tech weapons appear to have been designed with inadequate consideration to the potential for cyberattacks. According to the Defense Science Board and the Government Accountability Office, military systems such as the F-35 jet fighter, Freedom class warships and Patriot missiles may be hackable.
Moreover, some of today's cutting-edge technologies offer opportunities for both cyber attackers and defenders. Artificial intelligence is already being used to defend networks but is rumored to also be in use for automated attacks. The vastly faster processing speeds promised by quantum computing may be able to design more secure networks but might also be used to break the encryption upon which cybersecurity depends. The Internet of Things (which would connect everyday systems and objects to the internet) and 5G networks may be timesaving social boons but will also bring online many devices that haven't been secured -- and, in some cases, cannot be.
Nonetheless, the lesson of the past 10 years is clear: Increasingly, we are getting the defensive technologies we need, as well as the policies on how to use them. What we lack is the will to implement the technological advances and policy shifts that will keep our companies safe. If the U.S. winds up in a devastating cyberwar with a hostile foreign power that plunges our cities into darkness, we will find the willpower afterward to seriously defend our companies -- but only after grave damage has been done. It would be so much wiser to generate that will now.
---
Mr. Clarke is a former White House counterterrorism and cybersecurity chief. Mr. Knake is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations and a former director for cybersecurity policy at the National Security Council. This essay is adapted from their new book, "The Fifth Domain: Defending Our Country, Our Companies, and Ourselves in the Age of Cyber Threats," to be published Tuesday by Penguin Press.

Credit: By Richard A. Clarke and Robert K. Knake
