State regulators are pushing back on U.S. life insurers' use of data science to speed up cumbersome application processes, citing concerns that artificial intelligence could unfairly discriminate against minorities.
Colorado's Division of Insurance is crafting regulations under a new state law restricting insurers' use of algorithms, predictive models and the information fed into them in a far-reaching effort closely watched by the industry.
Many insurers are using algorithmic underwriting of life policies to size up applicants' health quickly and make sales more convenient for consumers who prefer shopping online. The traditional process is slower and more costly, using an underwriter who might need weeks to gather medical information.
Insurers typically use the same data in algorithmic-based systems, in digitized form, as human underwriters do, according to executives. But regulators are concerned about unconventional information promoted by data vendors, including credit activity, property ownership, liens and evictions.
A survey by New York's top financial watchdog several years ago identified at least one insurer using either social media, retail purchases or internet activities in underwriting.
Individual life-insurance policy sales have been stagnant for more than a decade, stuck between about nine million and 10 million a year since 2007, according to the industry-funded research firm Limra. Its surveys consistently show many Americans believe they are underinsured and want more coverage. Life insurers are hoping to sell more policies to households by using data science.
"We believe automated underwriting puts insurance products in the hands of consumers who need them in the easiest and least intrusive way," said Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Co. Chief Executive John Schlifske. The carrier is aiming for half of the life-insurance policies it issues by year-end to be automated while moving to digitized versions of the data that its underwriters use. That would cut issuance time to three days from about four weeks or longer.
Colorado Insurance Commissioner Michael Conway said he isn't aware of specific instances of potentially unlawful bias in life insurers' use of the new technology. But "there are a ton of anecdotal stories about how algorithms can get things wrong" across many sectors, he said.
Colorado officials are fielding criticism that some of their early ideas for governance of the new technologies would risk bogging insurers down in documenting even the smallest of actions. Mr. Conway said insurers will have ample opportunity to weigh in before anything is final.
Some states, including New York and Connecticut, have put up guardrails for the use of new data sets and algorithms. Last year Connecticut began requiring, insurers to certify that their data use fully complies with antidiscrimination laws.
Credit: By Leslie Scism
