Stocks edged lower after disappointing earnings reports from retailers cast doubt on the strength of the consumer.
The cautionary signals landed on a market focused on two events later this week: Wednesday's quarterly report from Nvidia, which could test investors' faith in the artificial-intelligence trade, and Friday's speech from Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell, which could hold clues to the path of interest rates.
The S&P 500 declined 0.3%, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average retreated 0.5%, or about 175 points. The Nasdaq Composite added 0.1% as tech heavyweights including Apple and Microsoft defied the downdraft.
"Investors are unwilling to make any major bets in advance of the Powell Jackson Hole speech on Friday morning," said Matthew Palazzolo, senior investment strategist at Bernstein Private Wealth Management. "I'm not surprised we're seeing some sideways action."
Tuesday's earnings reports from Dick's Sporting Goods and Macy's sent those shares tumbling and raised questions about consumer spending more broadly. Dick's shares plunged 24% after the sporting-goods chain slashed its profit targets and said thefts of merchandise had been higher than expected.
Macy's shares fell 14% after the department-store chain reported that consumers bought fewer goods at its stores and delinquencies rose among its credit-card holders.
Investors said the pullback by consumers could have repercussions beyond the retailers' results.
"As consumers' dollars don't go as far and they buy lower volumes of things, the whole economy slows down," said Lauren Hill, co-portfolio manager of the Westwood Quality Value Fund.
The declines for stocks were broad-based, with seven of the S&P 500's 11 sectors and 20 of the 30 stocks in the Dow industrials retreating.
Concerns about consumer spending helped pull Nike shares lower for a ninth consecutive day, the longest losing streak ever for the athletic-shoe maker, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
Markets have been fixated this year and last on the central bank's campaign to tame price pressures by lifting interest rates. Inflation is now much lower than at its recent heights but remains above the Fed's 2% target.
Money managers will scrutinize Powell's remarks Friday for signs of how committed officials are to lowering inflation to their target level and whether they plan to raise rates again to do so.
"The Fed holds all the keys. That's what everybody's watching," said Jonathan Waite, fund co-manager and senior research analyst at Frost Investment Advisors.
The climb in the benchmark U.S. government bond yield paused. The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note fell to 4.327% from 4.339% on Monday. That had been its highest settlement since 2007.
Oil prices retreated, with Brent crude, the global benchmark, falling 0.5% to $84.03 a barrel as worries about China's economy weighed on expectations for demand.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 advanced 0.7%. Early Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.3% but the Shanghai Composite was down 0.6%. S&P 500 futures rose 0.3%.
Credit: By Karen Langley
