In the midst of the pandemic, Nvidia Corp. Chief Executive Jensen Huang engineered his company's biggest game-changer from his kitchen: a $40 billion acquisition that could cement his status as the semiconductor industry's hottest CEO.
The proposed acquisition of Arm Holdings from SoftBank Group Corp., in the chip industry's biggest deal ever, would transform Nvidia into a force across the most important arenas of computing, from servers and PCs to consumer electronics to smartphones, making it one of the most formidable threats Intel Corp. has ever faced. To do so, Mr. Huang needs to clear regulatory hurdles and potential opposition from competitors that may appeal to authorities to block the deal.
The deal is a milestone in an extraordinary run over the past few years, one that has transformed Nvidia from a niche maker of high-end graphics chips for gamers into the most valuable U.S. chip company. "I couldn't have dreamed two years ago that I'd be sitting here," Mr. Huang told The Wall Street Journal this week.
Nvidia's market value has soared to $319.8 billion, surpassing Intel's valuation of $214.5 billion, even though Nvidia had $10.92 billion in annual sales in its latest fiscal year, compared with $71.97 billion for Intel. Nvidia's bet on some of the hottest fields in tech, videogaming and artificial intelligence, have fueled investor enthusiasm, while Intel has stumbled with some of its most advanced chips.
It is a long way from 1993, when Mr. Huang dreamed up Nvidia on his 30th birthday at a Denny's in San Jose, Calif., with two like-minded engineers. They bet on a future where consumers demanded better computer graphics, which would require specialized, high-performance hardware that wasn't available at the time.
That bet has paid off. Videogaming took off, and its processors have found new applications. To deliver the best video content, Nvidia's graphics chips handle data differently than traditional designs, processing information in parallel rather than sequentially. That approach has proven useful to cryptocurrency mining and running AI software that is in increasingly hot demand.
The Arm deal couldn't have happened if it weren't for Mr. Huang's ties to SoftBank's CEO, Masayoshi Son, who bought U.K.-based Arm in 2016 for $32 billion. SoftBank invested in Nvidia and, at the end of June, held a stake valued at around $245 million at Monday's close.
SoftBank first approached Nvidia this year to gauge Mr. Huang's interest in making a deal. "At some point it became clear that SoftBank would be interested in maybe not holding on to Arm, and I just jumped on the opportunity," Mr. Huang said, adding his focus turned to ensuring Nvidia was the top bidder.
Mr. Huang limited his use of outside bankers and largely negotiated the deal with an internal team. Amid the pandemic, he worked out the terms not from the company's Santa Clara, Calif., headquarters, but from his nearby home outside Palo Alto, where he hosted virtual conferences and product launches from his kitchen.
To James Wang -- a former Nvidia product manager who is an analyst at New York-based asset manager Ark Invest, which is an investor in Nvidia through some of its funds -- the Arm deal is a sign Mr. Huang realized the next step of Nvidia's growth couldn't happen without outside help. "That's the attitude change that's enabled Nvidia to go from a big M&A-averse company to one that's just swinging for the fences," he said.
Arm, known for its power-efficient chip design, could become a potent tool for Mr. Huang to battle Intel across a broader range of products. Apple said in June it was ditching Intel in its Mac computers in favor of its own chip design with Arm ingredients.
Mr. Huang says Nvidia could offer Arm an entry into hardware for AI computations in devices like phones, watches, gadgets and cars -- areas where it had a more limited presence.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
