Amazon's Tune Speaks to Google Rivalry
For those wondering why Amazon.com would have the temerity to challenge both Spotify and Apple in the streaming-music game, it is likely the company has another target in mind: Google.
Amazon lifted the wraps Wednesday on its latest streaming-music service -- a significant expansion of what it first launched two years ago. Like many of the company's other offerings, Amazon Music Unlimited seems designed primarily to grow and serve its base of Prime customers who already fork over monthly fees for free shipping and other benefits. Prime users will get Amazon Music at lower prices than they would pay Spotify or Apple for comparable subscriptions.
That could give the company some traction against those two major streaming competitors. They have amassed more than 57 million paying subscribers between them to date. Amazon's pricing also contained an interesting new twist; users of its Echo voice-activated speaker can get access to the service for just $3.99 a month. That is about 60% below the starting prices for most streaming music plans, including those currently offered by Google.
It is an interesting move coming just a week after Google unveiled the first product that could give the Echo a challenge. Like the Echo, the Google Home is ostensibly a speaker that also serves as a voice-controlled home portal to the company's huge network. It is a market Google is serious about, evidenced by the fact that it priced Home at a 28% discount to the Echo. Google is also offering six months free of its premium YouTube Red service with the device.
To be sure, neither company's fate rests on a pair of speakers. But the internet landscape has shifted in such a way that an online retailer and a web search provider that made their fortunes in vastly different businesses now find themselves competing more frequently to keep their growth prospects bright.
Consider that Amazon and Google have both invested billions of dollars over the years to build up state-of-the-art, global networks powered by artificial intelligence. Right now, these networks primarily power their core businesses. But they also form the foundation for making each company's services indispensable to both businesses and consumers.
Amazon has been winning that race to date. When Amazon reports its third-quarter results later this month, analysts expect to see about $3.2 billion in revenue for its AWS cloud-services business, up 53% year over year. Google is believed to be running a distant third in this area behind Amazon and Microsoft.
In the home, Amazon has a two-year head-start with the Echo. The company doesn't release sales figures, but estimates from analysts range from 4 million to 12 million units sold to date. Whatever the number, it has been enough to disrupt established speaker brands such as Sonos, as well as enough to lure Google into the space.
Amazon's early position is strong, but not unassailable. Google, meanwhile, has powerful reasons to not want to be left behind in such key future markets, and it has deep pockets to fund its catch-up efforts. That will keep the pressure on Amazon. It can't afford to let the music stop.
-- Dan Gallagher
Low Rates Hurt Banks in Multiple Ways
Ultralow interest rates aren't just a problem for banks' lending books. In the U.K., they also are a pain for pension plans.
Several big U.K. lenders, such as Barclays, Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland, have large defined-benefit pension plans. The value of long-term promises these banks have made to plan members -- their liabilities -- increase when interest rates fall.
When the liabilities are worth more than the plan assets, the resulting deficit of the plan has to be deducted from regulatory capital, hurting the strength of the banks' balance sheets.
This could be a problem when banks come to report third-quarter results at the end of October, according to Citigroup analysts. The reason is that corporate bond yields in the U.K. dropped drastically after the Brexit vote, falling by a whole percentage point between late June and early August in the iBoxx AA index.
Such a big move could turn small pension surpluses into deficits, which might cut capital at Barclays by GBP 900 million ($1.10 billion) and at Lloyds by GBP 1.2 billion, Citigroup says. That would hit the banks' capital ratios by 0.25 and 0.55 percentage point, respectively, which would be uncomfortable but not disastrous. Barclays already has announced a big cut in its dividends for the next two years, while hopes that Lloyds might make special payouts already are facing some headwinds.
Right now, U.K. corporate-bond yields are on the rise again, so pension deficits could shrink by the end of the year. But the moves are a reminder that low rates can hurt banks in more ways than one.
-- Paul J. Davies
Euro Gets Wake-Up Call as Election Nears
Among the foreign-exchange fireworks, the euro looks like the currency 2016 forgot -- at least against the dollar. That could change as the end of the year approaches.
The euro has proved remarkably stable against the dollar this year. While the pound has plummeted and many emerging-market currencies have made strong gains, the single currency has moved for months in a narrow range centered around $1.12. But in the past week it has started to move, hitting its lowest point in 2 1/2 months on Thursday morning: just below $1.10.
The deliberations at the U.S. Federal Reserve in September show that policy divergence is back on the agenda, with the likelihood of a rate rise in the U.S. increasing. The gap between U.S. and German two-year bond yields -- locked, like the euro, in a narrow range for months around 1.3 percentage points -- has now widened to above 1.5 points. Meanwhile, the European Central Bank next week could seek to strike a slightly more reassuring tone on its bond-purchasing program, although investors seem likely to have to wait until December for action.
The other force that could drive the pair is political risk, and more in the U.S. than in Europe. The U.S. election campaign is entering its final phase. Markets tend to pay limited attention to politics until absolutely forced to consider them. The pound has shown what can happen when markets get their assessment of the political outlook -- and thus the structural basis for an economy -- wrong. A victory for Hillary Clinton likely would diminish any political-risk premium priced into the dollar, potentially giving the greenback a lift. Based on polling, a win for Donald Trump at this point would be an even bigger surprise than Brexit.
The moves in the euro against the dollar might not be as explosive as that seen for other currencies this year. But the exchange rate could well prove more lively in the final quarter than it has for some time.
-- Richard Barley
Overheard
It seems like the good old days. The number of Americans filing unemployment claims fell last week to the lowest since November 1973 -- so long ago that 75-year-old Nobel laureate (and musician) Bob Dylan recorded "Forever Young" the same month.
It also was the month that President Richard Nixon uttered the infamous line "I am not a crook" and the year that Britain joined the European Economic Community.
But for those interested in economic parallels, the trip down memory lane may be less pleasing.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average hit a record high of 1051 points early that year -- a level it wouldn't surpass until November 1982. And, last but not least, that month marked the start of what became the worst U.S. recession since the Great Depression.
Don't think twice, it's all right.
