HONG KONG -- Bit by bit, American tech giants are shutting out users in Hong Kong, where moves by authorities to thwart online dissent are shifting the target from individuals to platforms such as Google's YouTube.
Alphabet-owned Google, San Francisco-based OpenAI and Microsoft have limited access to their artificial-intelligence chatbots in recent months in the global finance and business hub. In OpenAI's case, the restriction puts Hong Kong and mainland China alongside North Korea, Syria and Iran.
While none of the companies have given reasons, observers say they could be exposed to risk if the chatbots spew out content that violates a national-security law imposed by China nearly three years ago. The law criminalizes many types of criticism of the government and Beijing.
Google, OpenAI and Microsoft declined to comment on why they restricted use in Hong Kong, but said they are working to bring their services to new locations in the future.
A Monday hearing is scheduled for a court order sought by Hong Kong authorities to block the dissemination online of a popular pro-democracy anthem, "Glory to Hong Kong." The order cites 32 videos on YouTube of the song, which has lyrics that the government says contain a slogan that amounts to advocating secession. It is the first major legal challenge to U.S. tech companies over politically sensitive content on their platforms in the city.
The moves add to a slow creep of tech giants treating Hong Kong more like a city in mainland China. Apple joined with China's Tencent to filter suspicious websites, with users complaining it temporarily blocked access to legitimate sites such as Twitter rival Mastodon. Disney declined to offer on its streaming service two episodes of "The Simpsons" that it worried could run afoul of the national-security law, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Some fear that Hong Kong's largely unfettered internet is being nudged closer to China's, which is strictly censored by a system known as the Great Firewall and has had no access to foreign social-media services such as Twitter and Facebook since 2009.
"We don't have the Great Firewall yet, but companies aren't offering their services,"said Heatherm Huang, co-founder of Hong Kong-based tech company Measurable AI, which analyzes online shopping data for financial firms. "Overall, it's a sad story," he said.
Some Hong Kong residents have been able to access the chatbots using special third-party apps or by using virtual private networks, known as VPNs, which allow consumers to shield their location and identity online.
A Hong Kong government spokeswoman said the government respects companies' strategies for launching products and noted the chatbots could be accessed through alternative means, such as VPNs.
While Hong Kong's population of about 7.5 million means it isn't a major market in terms of its user base for U.S. tech companies, foreign companies and workers often cite the free flow of information as one reason they are based here. Tens of thousands of workers have left the city over the past three years, in part because of the crackdown on free expression.
A survey by the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong released in March found that just 38% of respondents were optimistic or very optimistic about Hong Kong maintaining free access to the global internet and information platforms in the next three years.
The court injunction to block the pro-democracy anthem, if granted at the Monday hearing, could amount to the "opening of floodgates" of legal action against U.S. tech giants, said George Chen, former head of public policy for Greater China at Facebook parent Meta Platforms.
Google could be forced to comply with Hong Kong's court order regarding the song, which would complicate its content moderation, said Chen, who is now managing director for Hong Kong and Taiwan at the Asia Group, a business advisory firm in Washington.
Complying might risk angering Washington lawmakers who could accuse the company of bowing to censorship demands, he said.
Google in 2010 withdrew its search-engine business in mainland China after refusing to agree to censor its search results in the country.
AI companies may be concerned about their chatbots violating the national-security law, said Charles Mok, a visiting scholar at Stanford University's Cyber Policy Center and former Hong Kong lawmaker. That could happen if the chatbots give unexpected answers to questions, in ways that breach the rules, he said.
Apple -- which is reliant on China for iPhone manufacturing -- has for years used a service from Google to show a warning to Safari browser users in Hong Kong and elsewhere when they clicked on links that could be malicious, such as those that might be designed for phishing scams.
The Cupertino, Calif., company updated its Safari privacy policy late last year to say it may also use Tencent's tool to do the job in Hong Kong, as it does in the mainland.
Users in Hong Kong in recent months have shared screenshots showing that Tencent's service was flagging and blocking access to legitimate websites from the West. They included U.S. coding website GitLab, U.S. cryptocurrency exchange Coinbase and social-media service Mastodon. The sites were later made accessible.
"It is hard to imagine that this was a mistake and that the list will not grow in time," said Benjamin Ismail from online censorship watchdog GreatFire.org.
Apple didn't respond to requests for comment. A Tencent spokeswoman said its system follows best practices for blocking malicious websites.
Hong Kong's move to censor the pro-democracy song on YouTube signals that U.S. tech companies should anticipate further challenges over sensitive content, Chen said.
"This time it is about the song, next time it could be something else," he said
Credit: By Newley Purnell
