Warfare is changing at a pace unseen in almost a century, as fighting in Ukraine and the Middle East shows. For military commanders, tackling that upheaval demands fast and constant adaptation. Increasingly, that entails playing games.
Wargames -- long the realm of top brass and classified plans -- let strategists test varying scenarios, using different tactics and equipment. Now they are filtering down the ranks and out among analysts. Digitization, boosted by artificial intelligence, helps yield practical lessons more safely and at a lower cost than staging military maneuvers would. Wargames can also explore hypotheticals that no exercise could address, such as nuclear warfare.
Proponents of wargames include Tim Barrick, wargaming director at Marine Corps University. The retired Marine colonel drills students using board games and computers. In one online exercise, he pushed eight Marine majors repeatedly through the same Pacific military engagement, using a program called "Command: Professional Edition."
This software is unusual in that it didn't originate with a defense contractor or institute, as most wargames do. It is a simulation program built and marketed by gamers with almost no military background -- and rooted in Tom Clancy novels. Users of all stripes have made it a surprise hit.
Over the two months that Barrick's Marine majors played Command PE, as it is known, their creativity grew.
"These are not simple problems," said Barrick, who previously ran the Marine Corps Warfighting Lab's wargaming division. "It's not like we're asking them to play checkers."
The game has become a surprise hit, for users of all stripes. The Air Force recently approved Command PE to run on its secure networks. Britain's Strategic Command just signed up to use it in training, education and analysis, calling it a tool "to test ideas." And Taiwanese defense analysts tap Command PE to analyze responses to hostility from mainland China.
Command's British publisher, Slitherine Software, stumbled into popularity. The family business got started around 2000 selling retail CD-ROM games.
When Defense Department officials in 2016 first contacted Slitherine, which is based in an old house in a leafy London suburb, its father-and-son managers were so stunned they thought the call might be a prank.
"Are you taking the piss?" J.D. McNeil, the father, recalled asking near the end of the conversation.
What drew Pentagon attention was the software's vast, precise database of planes, ships, missiles and other military equipment from around the world, which allows for exceptionally accurate modeling.
Former Air Force Air Mobility Command analyst Pete Szabo started using Command around 2017 to model military planes' fuel consumption in battle scenarios.
"It's been a very powerful tool for us," the retired Air Force lieutenant colonel said. Persuading his superiors to employ commercial, off-the-shelf gaming software, though, took some work, he recalled. "At first it was like, 'Nooooo.'"
Some officers have long derided wargames as entertainment, navel-gazing or "bogsats," short for "bunch of guys standing around talking." But the simulations -- especially digital ones -- can hone decision-making, spatial awareness and maneuvering abilities, advocates say.
"There's no doubt that skills in a game matter on the battlefield," said Arnel David, a U.S. Army colonel who advises the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's top general and helps lead an informal organization to promote wargaming of all sorts, called Fight Club International.
AI is increasingly helping users create scenarios, run games and sift through results for trends and surprises. French wargame maker MASA Group boasts that AI allows its Sword program to be run more easily than rivals' systems.
Whether AI and advanced software actually improve wargaming and preparations for war is a question sparking battles of its own. Warfare is so complex that modeling all the inputs entails parsing an almost infinite number of variables. Quantifying unquantifiables such as military morale requires arbitrary decisions.
Skeptics say digital wargaming, in an unintended twist, may actually reduce understanding of scenarios because software's underlying algorithms aren't accessible to users.
"It takes some of the human decision-making element away," said Becca Wasser, who leads the Gaming Lab at the Center for a New American Security, a think tank in Washington.
Advocates say computerization expands enormously both the usefulness of wargames and their range of potential users, often complementing manual games.
"It's a tool in a tool kit," said David, who served in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Credit: By Daniel Michaels and Juanje Gomez
