U.S. stocks held their ground Friday, capping a week of strong gains on a cautious note.
The Nasdaq Composite rose 0.1% to a fresh high, bringing its weekly gain to 3.2%. The S&P 500 slipped from its record, but logged a weekly gain of 1.6%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average also declined, shedding 0.5% for the week.
A steady trickle of recent economic data has continued to suggest the economy is cooling, but at a gradual pace and without any signs of serious deterioration. Inflation slowed in May, even while the U.S. economy added a surprisingly strong 272,000 jobs for the month. The Federal Reserve held interest rates steady at its policy meeting this week but most officials at the central bank expect to cut rates before the year ends.
Though the Fed indicated it isn't in a hurry to cut interest rates, investors stepped up their bets that the central bank will lower them. They have been buying U.S. government bonds and pushing their yields lower. The benchmark 10-year Treasury note settled at 4.212% Friday, falling for the 10th time in 12 trading sessions.
"There's some mixed data here and there, but this far into the cycle, we're still at 4% unemployment, so that's pretty healthy," said Arun Bharath, chief investment officer at Bel Air Investment Advisors. Bharath is still bullish on stocks, partially due to forecasts for strong earnings growth.
Wall Street analysts expect S&P 500 companies' second-quarter earnings to jump 9% from a year earlier, according to FactSet, which would mark the biggest increase since the first quarter of 2022. Companies are racing to spend to build out artificial-intelligence programs, boosting the profit outlook for semiconductor companies and utilities.
"That growth and inflation mix is pretty favorable, and the other leg of the stool is the AI investment surge, which is tremendous," said David Lefkowitz, head of U.S. equities at UBS Global Wealth Management.
For the year, the S&P 500 is up 14%.
Among individual stocks Friday, Tesla fell 2.4% after shareholders voted to reinstate Elon Musk's compensation package. Adobe rose 15%, its best day since 2020, after the design software maker reported earnings that topped expectations.
Travel and leisure stocks were among the day's biggest decliners. Carnival shares fell 7.1% after analysts at Bank of America said the industry's pricing power softened in June. Caesars Entertainment dropped 4.9%, while United Airlines Holdings shed 4.6%.
Overseas, investors dumped European stocks and snapped up safer government bonds, after political turmoil in France raised concerns about the European Union's cohesion. The CAC 40 in Paris fell 6.2% for the week, its worst since 2022. The Stoxx Europe 600 index fell 2.4% on the week, its weakest performance since October.
Gold futures rose 1.4% Friday to settle at $2331.40 per troy ounce. U.S. crude oil futures settled Friday at $78.45 per barrel, up 3.9% for the week.
Generate image description

Credit: By Charley Grant
