A massive tech outage swept the globe on Friday, knocking out operations for banks, companies and emergency services and forcing airlines to ground flights, exposing the fragility and interdependence of global digital technology.
A single update from CrowdStrike, a major provider of cybersecurity software, caused outages for millions of users of Microsoft Windows devices worldwide. Major airlines including Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and American Airlines halted departures overnight.
Windows computers and tablets crashed in countries from the U.S. to China and Australia, with reports of forced device restarts spreading across social media. Many affected machines were unable to restart, instead showing a blue error screen sometimes called the "blue screen of death."
The outage touched almost every industry. Multiple financial institutions, government entities and corporations reported tech issues. Some hospitals and school districts said computers were down, and courthouses around the U.S. either closed or delayed trial proceedings. Still, financial markets were largely operating as normal, and many companies said systems were starting to be restored.
That one update from a single provider could plunge so many companies into a digital dark age serves as a fresh warning of the world's technological dependence. While past outages, like a Google failure in 2020, have also locked millions out of tools they need, companies' and individuals' increasing reliance on automated tools powered by artificial intelligence makes each new disruption feel more ominous.
Friday's outage also highlights the tension in relying heavily on centralized tools like those offered by CrowdStrike. On one hand, the fact that so many companies use the tools help make them more effective at detecting and blocking the latest attacks.
But it also shows how one bug in one update can just as easily grind parts of the global economy to a halt.
CrowdStrike Chief Executive George Kurtz said in a post on X that the issue had been identified and a fix had been deployed, adding that "this is not a security incident or cyberattack."
Kurtz told NBC's "Today" show that the company is always pushing out updates to stay ahead of adversaries and its recent update had a bug in it. "We're deeply sorry for the impact that we've caused to customers, to travelers, to anyone affected by this," he said. "It could be some time for some systems that just won't automatically recover."
One of CrowdStrike's main services is called Falcon, which monitors a company's machines for hacking attempts, viruses and other threats. The Austin-based company has about 29,000 customers and went public in 2019.
CrowdStrike told customers in a status update seen by The Wall Street Journal that the problem was with a software change it had pushed via Falcon out to clients' computers. The company said its engineers had undone the change but clients would need to use a workaround to download a fix to affected computers.
Some affected users may be back up and running soon, but for others it could take weeks depending on the system in use, said Simo Kohonen, founder of Finland-based network security company Defused. "The fix CrowdStrike has given is quite manual and may be difficult, in some cases, to deploy at large scale," he said.
Microsoft said the CrowdStrike error was separate from a problem it faced overnight with cloud services including Microsoft 365 apps.
Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella said Friday on X the company was working closely with CrowdStrike to provide customers with technical guidance to help bring their systems back online.
CrowdStrike shares closed 11% lower Friday. Microsoft's were down slightly.
In the U.S., many 911 and nonemergency call centers were disrupted. The New York City mass transit system was fully operational, but countdown clocks and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's app were disrupted, Gov. Kathy Hochul said.
Amazon.com's corporate email system also appeared to be experiencing issues Friday morning, according to employees. The company uses Microsoft Outlook for email, and many of the company's employees also use the communications platform Slack. Amazon didn't respond to a request for comment.
Starbucks had issues early Friday with app ordering and its payment and point-of-sale systems, forcing customers to order directly in stores.
The financial sector was largely running as usual, but some companies reported issues. Visa said it was aware of reports of people unable to make payments. Banks including JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Wells Fargo and TD Bank experienced varying disruptions related to the outage.
Seaports from Los Angeles to Gdansk, Poland, reported delays in handling cargo and other operations, according to risk-management firm Everstream Analytics, but most expected to resume normal business on Friday.
Freight railroad Union Pacific said the outage had varying levels of impacts across its network, while BNSF said it hadn't seen signs that its systems were affected.
United Parcel Service said its package business was "operating and delivering in all areas," but warned of possible delays in pickup and delivery.
Billionaire Elon Musk, who runs Tesla, X and SpaceX among other companies, said the outage had given the auto supply chain a "seizure," disrupting operations for parts makers and logistics partners using CrowdStrike software. In a series of posts, he said: "we just deleted Crowdstrike from all our systems" and called the episode the "biggest IT fail ever."
President Biden is receiving updates on the outage and his team has offered U.S. government support to CrowdStrike, a White House official said. Government agencies have been convened to assess the situation around the country, the official said.
More than 41,000 flights around the world were delayed and more than 4,600 were canceled by Friday evening, according to flight-tracking website FlightAware.
United and American had also asked the Federal Aviation Administration overnight to alert their pilots in the air that they were experiencing communication problems, according to public notices.
Several U.S. airlines, including American, Delta and United, said they were starting to resume some flights Friday morning. Delta had initially paused flights because the outage had affected back-end systems that ensure planes are safely dispatched, a person familiar with the matter said.
In the Columbus, Ohio, airport, agents for Spirit Airlines handed out paper boarding passes in a line that snaked across a concourse.
At Boston's Logan airport, Tom Fennell, a 47-year-old teacher from Cameron Park, Calif., remained near an outlet with his phone to wait out the delay, surrounded by a group of fellow stranded travelers.
The outage also snarled hotels, making it harder to bill guests, check out of rooms or create new reservations. At Indus Hotels, which operates roughly a dozen Hilton and Marriott hotels in Ohio and Pennsylvania, many properties had only a single computer working on Friday morning.
"On-property managers are definitely pulling their hair out," said Alan L. Assaf, chief operating officer at Indus. "I'd say they're limping along."
The outage didn't affect everyone equally. While some PC users were staring at blue screens and troubleshooting, others were able to go about their workdays as normal.
Dr. Agus De Ganzo, a molecular biologist, thought he wouldn't be able to work on his PC when he arrived at his job Friday.
"Mine was the only one working," he said. "I hate Microsoft."
De Ganzo, who lives in Chapel Hill, N.C., and is in his mid 30s, said the PC he reluctantly uses was the oldest one in the lab and was the only one that didn't go down because of the outage.
---
Sherry Qin and Jiahui Huang contributed to this article.
Credit: By Sam Schechner, Gareth Vipers and Alyssa Lukpat
