There was some good news this week for those of us who worry that the human race is descending into a technological dystopia in which our every move is tracked, cataloged and eventually used against us by vast, malevolent forces.
The Journal reported that last July the Metropolitan Transportation Authority -- the organization that runs (I use the term loosely) the subways, much of the railway network, and the toll bridges and tunnels in New York -- launched a pilot scheme to capture the identities of drivers speeding over one of the main bridges into the city. The idea was that facial-recognition software would spot drivers who might otherwise evade the cameras that read license plates.
It turns out that the MTA is about as good at deploying 21st-century technology to identify people entering this great city as it is at deploying 19th-century technology to move them around it. The "initial period for the proof of concept testing at the RFK [Bridge] for facial recognition has been completed and failed, with no faces (0%) being detected within acceptable parameters," an email seen by The Journal concluded.
That parenthetical amplification is a nice touch: zero. The absolute futility is oddly impressive. I imagine that if a monkey sat in front of a video screen for 18 hours a day with ring-binders of photos of random people open next to it, it would find at least one match eventually.
But before you rush to celebrate this small triumph for the human spirit, remember this is the MTA, the organization that took ninety years to build a two-mile long stretch of subway. In the hands of more competent and exploitative forces, such as, let's say, the People's Republic of China or Facebook, the long march toward enslavement by technology continues apace. For all its benefits, artificial intelligence of the sort that drives facial-recognition software and a million other capabilities is proving an extraordinarily useful implement in the furtherance of repression.
As Richard Fontaine and Kara Frederick documented in these pages last month, governments are using AI and other technologies in myriad ways to silence dissent, undermine opponents and promote their own ideologies. It's all a very long way from the heady days when techno-optimists assured us that the internet and the proliferating software and platforms that operated on and through it were going to be the greatest liberating force humanity has ever seen.
Remember the Arab Spring? Much was made of how social media was a vital tool in spreading the message of reform and emboldening democratic revolutionaries. There was a popular view among savants in the media that innovations in digital technology would make it impossible for authoritarian governments such as China's to suppress inconvenient facts or to extinguish the hunger for knowledge and enlightenment that supposedly feeds the democratic ideal.
That was of a piece with the comforting but fleeting fiction that historians had that the world was evolving inevitably toward liberal democracy. The Technological Enlightenment has since joined the End of History in the history books.
Of course, even during the Arab Spring, technology demonstrated it could be a double-edged sword, with autocratic governments using then-emergent technologies to track and hunt down troublemakers. And now, in less than a decade, advances have accelerated. China leads the way, but governments of an authoritarian bent are eagerly acquiring and adapting similar tools.
As Nicholas Wright argues in the latest edition of Foreign Affairs, digital authoritarianism is a profound threat to liberal democracy. The possibilities are chilling. Just as Facebook can spot whether you'll like a particular type of advertising based on a million pieces of information it has on you, so governments will be able to identify which of us will be troublemakers based on knowledge of the books we read and the friends we have.
And unlike even the giant Facebook, this all-seeing government will be able to draw on information from every conceivable source -- tax records, bank accounts, hospitals. When this Pandora's box is opened, will there be any room for hope?
Kai-Fu Lee's enormously influential recent book "AI Superpowers" ends on an optimistic note: For all its uses and dangers, he says, artificial intelligence can't supplant, in the end, basic human needs, desires and passions.
And we'll always have the MTA.

Credit: By Gerard Baker
