An eager young crowd of 700 people packed New York City's Webster Hall nightclub recently -- not to catch the latest indie band, but to watch pitches from a bunch of technology start-ups.
It wasn't just a gaggle of gawkers. The standing-room-only audience was thick with A-list venture capitalists, including Twitter investor Fred Wilson from New York's Union Square Ventures, venture pioneer Alan Patricof of Greycroft Partners, and Roelof Botha of Sequoia Capital, the powerful Silicon Valley firm that backed Google.
They were joined by executives from Hewlett-Packard Co., Microsoft Corp. and Amazon.com Inc., as well as local businessmen, including real-estate developer Teddy Schiff, who is scouting for more early-stage investment opportunities.
"A watershed moment for NYC," Mr. Wilson tweeted at the start of the event.
Carin Maio, who runs a company called Nestio, kicked off the show. "We are here today because moving sucks," she said. Nestio aims to ease the pain with a website that pulls real-estate listings from various sites and lets a house hunter discuss them with friends. The service launched in New York and plans to expand.
Later, serial entrepreneur Jason Sosa introduced his company, Immersive Labs. Mr. Sosa founded Mind Spin Research in 2001 to provide analytics to radio stations, and Magna Case in 2002 to make custom camera bags. Now, he's using artificial intelligence to create display ads that can adapt to their audience.
The 11 start-ups at this debutante ball for geeks were products of TechStars NYC, one of a number of incubators to pop up in New York over the past year, making it a start-up itself. TechStars' three-month program gives new companies a little money and a lot of mentoring. More than 600 applied for a slot. The ones that made the cut got eight minutes each on Demo Day to woo investors, customers and business partners.
Jason Baptiste, a 25-year-old who grew up in New Jersey idolizing Bill Gates, runs a company called OnSwipe. "Apps are bull-- -- ," he told the TechStars gathering, taking a swing at what has become a big selling point for smartphones and tablets.
OnSwipe helps developers of games and other widgets use the Web to get their content to mobile devices instead of going to the expense of designing apps for different operating systems. The company has already raised $1 million from investors including Spark Capital, Betaworks and ENIAC Ventures, allowing it to hire some world-class engineers.
"We have somebody up there who has a masters in multitouch interfaces," Mr. Baptiste said. "I didn't even know you could get a degree in that, but you can."
A few weeks after the show, eight of the 11 companies are close to raising money, a person familiar with matter said.
Credit: By Spencer E. Ante
