Reid Hoffman, one of Silicon Valley's most prominent investors, is scaling back his involvement in new deals at leading venture firm Greylock Partners as he spends more time pursuing artificial-intelligence efforts.
Hoffman won't be a general partner for the $1 billion fund Greylock is currently raising, the firm told prospective investors, meaning that he won't be required to make new investments for the fund or vote on the firm's other deals.
The fund is smaller than the $1.5 billion fund it raised in 2020 and 2021, reflecting themore modest ambitions of venture firmsas they deal with plummeting startup valuations and slowing deal-making.
Hoffman is a member of the famed "PayPal Mafia," the early leaders of the payments company that include tech luminaries such as Elon Musk and Peter Thiel. He later co-founded and led LinkedIn, which Microsoft bought in 2016 for $26 billion.
He joined Greylock, one of the country's oldest venture firms, in 2009 and has since become the public face of the firm, where he led a successful early investment in Airbnb. His departure as general partner comes during a period ofgenerational changeat several leading Silicon Valley venture firms.
Sequoia Capital partner Michael Moritz left the venture-capital firm in July after nearly 38 years, marking the departure of one of the firm's earliest and most successful investors. In May, Jeff Jordan stepped back from investing at Andreessen Horowitz after 12 years at the firm, where he was seen as a key leader. In 2020, Bill Gurley didn't join a new fund that his firm, Benchmark, was raising, and subsequently confirmed he was stepping back.
Succession can be difficult for venture firms given how the business is built around personal networks and individual acumen finding promising young companies.
In recent years, Hoffman has emerged as one of Silicon Valley's most influential proponents of artificial intelligence. He was a founding investor in OpenAI, the creator of viral chatbot ChatGPT, and last year co-founded another startup called Inflection AI that is also creating a personal chatbot.
In March, he released a book called "Impromptu," co-written by the AI language model powering ChatGPT, and stepped down from the OpenAI board to avoid potential conflicts with other investments.
"Reid continues to be closely engaged within Greylock as a strategic partner and colleague," said a spokeswoman for the firm. She said he might continue to make occasional new investments for Greylock.
Hoffman's changed role comes at a delicate time in Silicon Valley. Venture firms that once raised massive funds are scaling back as valuations dip and limited partners -- the university endowments, pension funds, and family offices that invest in these funds -- pull back their commitments. Sequoia Capital and Founders Fund have each cut back the size of some existing funds this year.
The $1 billion fund Greylock is raising, which would be its 17th, is a return to the size of most of its prior funds. The firm initially raised $1 billion for its 16th fund in 2020, but then added $500 million the following year as startup valuations swelled and a glut of cheap money made it easier to fundraise. Greylock's funds have focused on backing early-stage startups, and the firm opted not to raise growth funds for later-stage startups even as the strategy became more popular during the recent startup bubble.
At Greylock, the new fund will be run by six general partners: Saam Motamedi, Asheem Chandna, Jerry Chen, Jacob Andreou, Seth Rosenberg, and Mike Duboe.
Hoffman made just one investment out of Greylock's previous fund, its 16th, in an artificial-intelligence startup called Tome, and two out of its 15th fund, raised in 2016.
Hoffman nurtured an early interest in AI as a student at Stanford University and has served as a close adviser to OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman. He has said the recent progress in AI could boost productivity and lead to more human flourishing, an optimism that hasn't been shared by some leading AI researchers, who have warned that advanced AI models could contribute to misinformation, increased polarization, and an unhealthy dependence on technology.
"I haven't been this excited since I first started understanding the power of online social platforms," Hoffman wrote in a March LinkedIn post, where he explained why he was leaving the OpenAI board.
Credit: By Berber Jin
