GlaxoSmithKline PLC, under pressure to raise its game in research and development, said it would take a stake in a genetics startup and cut costs to spend more on developing new drugs.
The British pharmaceuticals giant said Wednesday it would take a new direction in research, focusing on science related to the immune system, the use of genetics and investments in advanced technologies.
As part of that strategy, Glaxo said it was taking a $300 million stake in genetic-testing company 23andMe and signed a four-year collaboration agreement under which the companies will work together to discover drugs. Mountain View, Calif.-based 23andMe also sells direct-to-consumer test kits.
The reorganization of Glaxo's R&D operations is Chief Executive Emma Walmsley's latest move to reshape the company since taking the helm last year. Wednesday's move, in particular, is aimed at reviving the company's prescription-drugs business.
Ms. Walmsley has installed new executives, including outsiders such as Chief Scientific Officer Hal Barron, who will lead the research effort. The CEO has made plans to close manufacturing plants, cut drug-research programs and lay off some researchers to focus the company on areas with high growth potential.
Mr. Barron said the company wanted to leverage genetic data, using techniques such as machine learning, to discover new medicines, with Parkinson's disease research one area in which 23andMe's customer genetic data could be useful.
Glaxo also said it was initiating what it described as a major restructuring program aimed at delivering annual cost savings of GBP 400 million ($525.8 million) by 2021. It said the savings, from optimizing its supply chain and reducing administrative costs, would be fully reinvested in R&D.
News of the R&D overhaul came as Glaxo reported upbeat second-quarter results and raised its full-year earnings guidance. Glaxo said second-quarter net profit was GBP 441 million, compared with a GBP 180 million loss in the year-earlier period. Revenue fell slightly to GBP 7.31 billion from GBP 7.32 billion.

Credit: By Carlo Martuscelli
