Can a computer program make humans more human?
That's the goal of new software aimed at making call-center agents better at their jobs by assessing performance on phone etiquette and social skills like empathy and patience.
"It's a way to augment our abilities," says Skyler Place, chief behavioral science officer at Boston-based Cogito Corp., by identifying "patterns that lead to good rapport and engagement."
Cogito is one of several companies developing analytics tools that give agents feedback about how conversations with customers are going. Its software measures in real time the tone of an agent's voice, their speech rate, and how much each person is talking, according to Dr. Place. "We measure the conversational dance," he says.
That dance is sometimes out of sync, such as when an agent speaks too quickly or too much, cuts a customer off, has extended periods of silence or sounds tired.
When the software detects these mistakes, a notification pops up on a window on an agent's screen to coax them to change their strategy. The alerts are useful not just for the agents, but also for their supervisors, Cogito says.
When insurer MetLife Inc. started testing the software about nine months ago, Emily Baker, a 39-year-old supervisor at a call center in Warwick, R.I., thought: "Why do I need this artificial intelligence to allow me to be more human? How much more human can I be?"
But the program has come in handy when coaching new agents, she says, especially those with little experience. One of her 14 agents said the software noticed he wasn't speaking with enough energy, so it prompted him with a message to pep up.
These tools don't understand every nuance of what a person says -- which, for now, might assuage privacy concerns about companies listening in on conversations and analyzing that data.
There "can be such richness in an interaction moment to moment" in things like sighs and laughter, says Shrikanth Narayanan, an engineering professor at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles and co-founder of Behavioral Signal Technologies Inc., another maker of call-center tools that analyze voice interactions.
He says the industry needs to balance questions of privacy and trust with the benefits of a machine that "can shed light on things" humans may fail to pick up on without a face-to-face interaction.

Credit: By Daniela Hernandez and Jennifer Strong
