[Hallucination]
If you've played around with any of the latest artificial-intelligence chatbots, such as OpenAI's ChatGPT or Google's Bard, you may have noticed that they can confidently and authoritatively generate statements that are flat-out wrong.
For instance, I asked Bard about "argumentative diphthongization," a phrase that I just made up. Not only did it produce five paragraphs elucidating this spurious phenomenon, the chatbot told me the term was "first coined by the linguist Hans Jakobsen in 1922." Needless to say, there has never been a prominent linguist named Hans Jakobsen (although a Danish gymnast with that name did compete in the 1920 Olympics).
When the text generated by chatbots goes off the rails and becomes unmoored from reality, AI researchers call the results "hallucinations." In an interview last weekend on CBS's "60 Minutes," Google CEO Sundar Pichai recognized the perils of AI hallucinations in developing language models like the one that powers Bard. "No one in the field has yet solved the hallucination problems," Mr. Pichai said. "All models do have this as an issue."
But how did a word used for illusory human perceptions get applied to computer-synthesized responses? And is this "hallucination" talk counterproductive, encouraging the notion that such responses are coming from a conscious (if disordered) mind?
"Hallucination" and the verb "hallucinate" have their origins in the Latin word "alucinari," which can mean "to wander in the mind," "to dream" or "to be deceived." In English, starting in the mid-17th century, "hallucination" could refer to the apparent perception of an object when no such object is actually present.
The term appeared in a widely read scientific work published by Thomas Browne in 1646, "Pseudodoxia Epidemica." (Browne's work helped popularize science andalso featured early appearances of "medical," "pathology" and "computer.") Hallucination occurs when a person's vision is "depraved" and "receives its objects erroneously," Browne wrote.
Psychologists would go on to catalog hallucinations affecting other senses as well. Hallucinationsare attributed to causes including sleep deprivation, mental disorders and drug use. In the 1950s, when researchers studied the effects of psychedelic drugs like LSD, they called them "hallucinogens," or producers of hallucinations.
In the field of AI, computer scientists seized on "hallucination" as a metaphor as language models grew more sophisticated. In a 2015 blog post, Andrej Karpathy, a founding member of OpenAI, wrote about how models can "hallucinate" text responses, like making up plausible URLs and mathematical proofs. The term was picked up in a 2018 conference paper by AI researchers working with Google, "Hallucinations in Neural Machine Translation," which analyzed how automatic translations can produce results utterly divorced from their inputs.
I spoke to the paper's lead author, Cornell University research scientist Katherine Lee, who acknowledged that while "hallucination" is handy shorthand for "untethered" text generation, its widespread use in AI discussions has been problematic. "The word itself has gotten different critiques," she said, primarily that "we are anthropomorphizing the models by saying that they hallucinate." Ms. Lee says that she now feels that "hallucination" is "not the best word" and would be happy for someone to coin a better alternative.
University of Washington computational linguist Emily M. Bender agrees, noting that the term "suggests that the language model is having perceptions and experiences." While alternatives like "synthesized ungrounded text" might be a mouthful, they avoid the pitfalls of imagining that AI systems have human perceptions, hallucinatory or otherwise.
Credit: By Ben Zimmer
