Artificial intelligence has the potential to transform government, from how it spends taxpayer money and delivers services to how it protects the public and fights wars.
But it can't do that without a key ingredient: talent.
The problem is that the government isn't on the cutting edge of tech talent, in part because it has to compete with the private sector, where the payoff is so much greater.
So, how does Washington attract -- and keep -- the people it needs to develop this new technology?
The Wall Street Journal asked three experts to debate the issue. Yll Bajraktari is executive director of the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, a group of industry executives and academics that has studied the government's AI needs. Martial Hebert is dean of the Carnegie Mellon University School of Computer Science. Megan McConnell is a McKinsey & Co. partner who advises public-sector organizations on human-capital management, with a focus on AI.
Here is an edited transcript of the discussion.
WSJ: Why does the government need talent in the area of artificial intelligence?
MS. MCCONNELL: We have to do it if we want to remain a world superpower capable of delivering high-quality critical services to the public effectively and efficiently. I think it's as big and as simple as that.
MR. HEBERT: There used to be this view that AI is this separate thing over there, this separate specialty issue that one can deal with separately. That is definitely not the case. This is a set of skills and knowledge that is necessary across all the applications of government and all functions.
MR. BAJRAKTARI: If our government doesn't have the right AI talent, it won't know what to buy. It won't know how to buy it intelligently. It wouldn't know how to build the systems it needs to build. Lack of AI talent has led to a waste of money, lost time, lost opportunities for our agencies to move out in this critical technology. If we allow the status quo to endure, most of the government's efforts to integrate AI will continue to struggle.
WSJ: What kind of deficit is the government facing right now?
MS. MCCONNELL: When you think about the functions and the positions that you need, right now most of that is being outsourced to contractors. We don't have that much of that talent inside the federal government, and that's a real problem.
MR. HEBERT: In addition to the developers of technology deployment, there is a need for AI literacy -- being able to understand the AI. That goes at all levels, not just those who are close to the technology, but the decision makers.
MS. MCCONNELL: The thing is that for our competitors, there's a lot fuzzier of a line between the private sector and government. For better or worse, we have to compete in the employer marketplace for this talent. The competition is fierce. With demand outstripping supply by four times, at least, we have to take really direct action.
WSJ: Dean Hebert, give us the view from your students. What do they want when they're looking for a job, and how does the government become part of that?
MR. HEBERT: They want an interesting and exciting career. A lot of emphasis has been put on AI as a way to develop new, interesting products. We need to put more emphasis on AI as a way to improve people's lives [and how they can do that in a government job]. There are a lot of stories that are not known enough. For example, this idea of AI as enabling communities that do not have access to a number of technological resources to now have access to those resources -- in healthcare, infrastructure monitoring and many other topics.
WSJ: How does the government make jobs attractive to young people?
MR. BAJRAKTARI: A lot of people think that compensation is the key thing that drives young people to go to the private sector. Honestly, we've talked to hundreds of companies in the last two years, and a lot of people are still motivated by an opportunity to work on solving real-world problems, whether on climate, healthcare, disaster-related activities, there's so many.
One student said to us that by the time they will get the first job interview with the government, they would already pass through several steps of getting hired in the private sector and receive an offer. It usually takes 12 to 18 months for anybody to be cleared by the government and have access to tools and software systems. For young people, this is unacceptable.
MS. MCCONNELL: Purpose and meaning. The government has done a really poor job of communicating that.
If we're just waiting for someone to find a job on [government-job website] USAJobs, there's a couple of issues with that. First, only 30% roughly of Americans are looking for a new job at any given time. Of those, not all have considered public service. The second thing is we know that women and, to a large extent, minorities will only put themselves forward for a job when they're 100% confident in their qualifications, versus 60% for a man. You have seven-page job descriptions on USAJobs. These groups may never even raise their hand.
WSJ: To what extent do they have concerns about ethics -- about it being used for surveillance or war -- when they think about a government job?
MR. HEBERT: This is foremost in the mind of students. We are embedding now ethics and questions about bias and fairness explicitly in our curriculum. This is something that is going to become fundamental to what we call AI.
WSJ: Mr. Bajraktari, can you tell us about the commission's recommendation for a new U.S. Digital Service Academy?
MR. BAJRAKTARI: We have three big, bold ideas in our final report. One is how you create Digital Corps within agencies [to recruit, train and place personnel].
The second big idea is you need to create a National Reserve Digital Corps. The military has a reserve corps, but there's nothing similar for civilians who don't want to quit their full-time job, and they want to contribute something for the mission.
The one that you mentioned is a degree-granting university where students would attend tuition-free, have a highly technical education and graduate with a five-year service obligation.
WSJ: Dean Hebert, what do you think of this idea of a new Academy? Would you be concerned about competing with the government for these students?
MR. HEBERT: I think we are very far from a situation where we are actually competing. In fact, by having the academy define what this "AI in government" curriculum looks like, we all benefit from that. And we now attract more students in that space.
MS. MCCONNELL: If there's an opportunity to have students committed to public service early and reward them with financial support for their education and some service due back, not only could you bring more in, but we also know that that's often the best way to get more women and minorities into these fields.
WSJ: Once you've got these talented individuals in government, how do you get them to stay?
MR. HEBERT: First, pay attention to the fast cycle of change in that technology, then have tools and procedures in place to continue education and training of these people.
Second, it's kind of the elephant in the room: The differential in compensation.
MS. MCCONNELL: The question that government should be asking is, "How can I be a launching pad or a major stop along this person's career path?"
MR. BAJRAKTARI: After 9/11, our government used to incentivize people that spoke different languages, specifically people that spoke Middle Eastern languages. You can have those kinds of programs where people with computing skills are incentivized to stay.
And then, you need to reskill the current workforce through online training, recertification.
---
Mr. Tracy is a Wall Street Journal reporter in Washington, D.C. Email him at ryan.tracy@wsj.com.
Credit: By Ryan Tracy

ERIC Subject: Human Capital; World Problems; Young Adults; Technical Education; Employment Interviews; Educational Technology; Ethics; Talent; Artificial Intelligence; Private Sector; Deans; Public Service; Government (Administrative Body)
