BRUSSELS -- Silicon Valley executives and lobbyists like to say they embrace regulation. Now they are weighing in heavily on what they want that regulation to be -- and Europe is set to be an early battleground.
On Monday, Sundar Pichai, the new chief executive of Google parent Alphabet Inc., gave a policy speech in Brussels, which is poised to release new regulatory proposals for the tech business, including a white paper due next month on possible rules for artificial intelligence.
Mr. Pichai's message to policy makers: Sensible regulation must take a "proportionate approach" to artificial intelligence, "balancing potential harms with social opportunities."
"There is no question in my mind that artificial intelligence needs to be regulated. The question is how best to approach this," Mr. Pichai said.
Silicon Valley companies face a growing backlash against their vast market power and their perceived abuses of it. Some complain the companies have created an ecosystem designed to vacuum up consumers' personal information. Other say they snuff out competition by buying or railroading would-be rivals.
Hauled before legislatures and policy makers in the U.S. and Europe, tech companies' general response has been to call for some regulation. The question, of course, is what they would be willing to accept in practice. Proposals from the European Commission, the European Union's executive arm, will likely provide an early test of how these debates will play out.
"This new commission is very focused on technology and asks a lot of important and legitimate questions," said Christian Borggreen, vice president for Europe at the Computer & Communications Industry Association, a U.S.-based lobby group that represents Amazon.com Inc., Facebook Inc. and Google, among other tech companies. "We believe in a targeted regulatory intervention, rather than a one size fits all."
Under the commission's new president, Ursula von der Leyen, the EU is set to consider new digital-competition rules and restrictions on the free flow of data inside the bloc. Margrethe Vestager, the EU's competition chief, has taken on an expanded portfolio that puts her in charge of proposing new digital regulations -- giving her added influence.
Multiple executives were in Brussels on Monday before heading to Davos, Switzerland, for the annual World Economic Forum.
Brad Smith, Microsoft Corp.'s president, was slated to meet with Ms. Vestager before giving a speech of his own about "the promise and perils of the digital age."
Mr. Pichai, for his part, was scheduled to meet with both Ms. Vestager and Frans Timmermans, the commission vice president in charge of the Green Deal, a set of policies aimed at transforming the continent's economy, including digital services such as cloud computing, to curb greenhouse gas emissions.
One EU proposal due by year-end is the Digital Services Act. It would update -- or perhaps abolish -- decades-old protections for digital intermediaries against liability for harmful activity on their platforms. The idea is already gaining traction in several countries, with the U.K. pursuing its own legislation on so-called Online Harms, and France debating a new law to combat hate speech.
EDiMA, a lobby group that represents Apple Inc., Amazon, Facebook, Google and Microsoft, is proposing that new online liability be coupled with a broader framework that encourages companies to take action against content deemed inappropriate. "We get that it's a concern. We're willing to take our responsibility, but there has to be a balance," said Siada El Ramly, the group's director general.
Artificial intelligence could be among the thorniest topics. Businesses like Google see opportunities to profit through the use of deep learning and neural networks that can spot subtle patterns much more quickly than humans. The technology could allow businesses to save resources and time, with applications ranging from lowering factories' power consumption to allowing executive headhunters to scan resumes automatically.
Researchers and activists say such systems pose dangers, for example, by codifying human biases, such as racism or sexism. By automating processes like facial recognition, they also could enable mass surveillance.
Google and other companies have adopted their own principles to tackle these threats. But the EU is pushing ahead with potential regulations.
An early draft of a commission white paper, leaked last week, suggests multiple options for regulating AI, including a temporary ban on using facial recognition technology in public spaces. It isn't clear which, if any, measures will be included in the final white paper.
Tech companies are engaging on the topic. The CCIA sent a letter on Monday to Ms. Vestager and other officials, urging a "risk-based" approach on AI rules. Facebook, for its part, is organizing a panel at a privacy conference this week on what would constitute good AI governance.
Mr. Pichai said the EU should start in part by building on existing rules, such as the General Data Protection Regulation, which already puts restrictions on the use of automated decision-making about individuals. He also urged the EU and U.S. to align their regulatory approaches, recognizing that may raise more fundamental issues.
"To get there, we need agreement on core values," he said, according to the transcript.

Credit: By Sam Schechner and Valentina Pop
