Virtual reality can help people see their favorite band perform, hang out with friends or relax on a beach without leaving home. It is also pushing some people to speak in front of crowds or revisit war zones, processing fears or traumatic memories for the sake of their health.
Hospital and university clinics for years have helped people with post-traumatic stress disorder and phobias by using virtual reality to immerse them in simulations that help them reckon with the problem. It is a virtual version of the longstanding technique called exposure therapy, in which people confront memories or fears, such as seeing spiders or getting into an elevator, with a therapist to overcome the feeling of being under threat.
A limited number of virtual-reality scenarios are available, and many patients must go to a specialized clinic for such care. Now researchers are aiming to make immersive VR-based therapy more personal and bring it into people's homes. "It is a tool that in the hands of therapists can be very powerful," said Deborah Beidel, director of a research clinic for post-traumatic stress disorder at the University of Central Florida.
Dr. Beidel's clinic uses a VR-based program called Bravemind that includes 14 scenarios set in Iraq and Afghanistan to treat veterans who spent time during U.S. wars there. Clinicians can adjust the time of day and the surrounding streetscape based on patient guidance and send manufactured smells such as diesel fuel and burning rubber wafting over to a patient with a fan.
"We have to retrain your brain that every time you smell diesel fuel or see someone who looks such as your perpetrator, that dangerous thing isn't going to happen to you again," said Dr. Beidel, who is a clinical psychologist.
Over the years, patients also requested scenarios that Dr. Beidel didn't have, from a swimming pool to the halls of a high school in Parkland, Fla., where a shooter killed 17 people in 2018. "We were being pushed," she said.
Dr. Beidel and her colleagues pulled images of objects including buildings, people or cars from the internet and took their own photos for programmers to replicate in new simulations. She and her team plan to develop a service that would create VR scenarios for other clinicians.
Interest in virtual reality to treat psychological disorders dates to the 1990s, when researchers found that exposure therapy using a simulation could help college students who were afraid of heights. Psychologists in New York used it to help patients with PTSD after the 9/11 attack on the World Trade Center.
Virtual-reality therapy for phobias, anxieties and PTSD can help alleviate symptoms and works about as well as other techniques including traditional exposure therapy, studies suggest. Virtual reality could have advantages including treating patients in a safer environment and helping some manage their own care, advocates said.
"It is a lot easier to multiply headsets than mental-health providers," said Anne Bailey, director of clinical technology innovation for the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Dr. Bailey's VA Immersive team is starting a pilot to send a virtual-reality headset home with veterans for an eight-week course to address chronic pain. Companies including XRHealth Inc. and BehaVR Inc. offer virtual-reality treatment at home and in clinics to patients with problems including stress, anxiety and pain.
In 2022, the Food and Drug Administration granted a breakthrough-device designation to a BehaVR-owned product called gameChange, the company said, which provides automated therapy for patients with agoraphobia.
Artificial intelligence could help more quickly and cheaply create a range of scenarios and better graphics, companies and researchers said. At some point, clinicians or researchers could ask for an alteration in a simulation, and AI will be able to update it on the spot, said Eran Orr, founder and chief executive officer at XRHealth. "In therapeutic settings, that will be very powerful."
Scenarios for PTSD where clinicians change details with a computer are getting closer to home, said Albert "Skip" Rizzo, director for medical virtual reality at the University of Southern California, who developed Bravemind around 2003. The headsets, which used to be big and cost some $20,000, are getting lighter and less expensive.
Dr. Rizzo said he is designing a system for the VA for patients to practice visiting places such as a crowded restaurant or marketplace, aiming to provide the headsets for use at home. Researchers in Ukraine are updating the Bravemind software to make it relevant to fighters and civilians there, he said.
When a patient confronts a traumatic event, a clinician should still be present at least virtually, Dr. Rizzo said.
Paula Edwards, 58, said she has PTSD after three decades as a public affairs officer in the U.S. Army, a job that included meeting grieving families and sometimes sending people on missions from which they didn't return. She said sheuses a meditation app to help calm down. She tried virtual reality as a part of her volunteer work testing projects at the Orlando VA and said that she would prefer it to her meditation app if she could use it at home.
"I thought it was a great option that many people could benefit from," said Ms. Edwards, who is retired and lives in Orlando.
At Queen's University Belfast in the U.K., Paul Best is creating more personal virtual-reality scenarios at low cost. His team is taking photographs of everyday places and re-creating them virtually. They plan to pull archival news footage to re-create historical events that took place in Ireland to treat people who developed PTSD after violence there.
Virtual reality is excellent at sounds and locations but worse at animating motion, researchers said. Dr. Best and others said that the graphics are getting better and don't need to be perfect to elicit an emotional response. "If you see someone who has a fear of spiders and something that looks such as a spider, they'll jump. It is kind of the same with trauma," Dr. Best said. "It just needs to be close enough."
Others want to get more imaginative. If a person has problems making eye contact, for instance, clinicians could develop eye-based scenarios that aren't possible in reality, said Daniel Freeman, a professor of clinical psychology at the University of Oxford and a founder of Oxford VR, a VR mental-health company that combined with BehaVR.
"Let's put a thousand eyes in there looking at you," he said.
Credit: By Brianna Abbott
