Recruiting the best talent and empowering staff to expedite tech projects are top agenda items in 2020 for chief information officers and other technology executives, who expect to wear multiple hats as motivators, negotiators and strategists.
"As our people are our most important asset, we will continue to place an acute focus on attracting, retaining and developing top technology talent," said Lori Beer, CIO at JPMorgan Chase & Co., who is leading a technology transformation aimed at improving product delivery and operational efficiency.
Ms. Beer was among 30 IT executives who responded via email to CIO Journal's annual end-of-year questionnaire.
Atlassian Corp. CIO Archana Rao agrees that talent is key. "I believe that without making it your top priority, you're going to struggle to deliver any of your other priorities," she said. The Sydney-based software company in 2019 formed a cross-functional team designed to explore ways to improve collaboration within the IT group.
Recruiting tech talent was a challenge for about 80% of about 2,800 U.S. employers surveyed in 2019 by Robert Half International Inc. Demand is particularly high for data science and analytics workers as CIOs draw more insights from data. Just ask Tim Nall, CIO at Jack Daniel's maker Brown-Forman Corp. "Data and analytics continue to be my top priority," he said.
CIOs are prioritizing the use of hot technologies including artificial intelligence in 2020. Technology cycles are shortening, and many are taking a page from Silicon Valley to move fast.
"At a high level, we are taking a fresh look at our approach to IT delivery," said Jamie Holcomb, CIO at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. "Part of my mission is to stabilize mission-critical systems and take our agile and DevSecOps practices to the next level while we move assets into the cloud."
Much of the conversation is around harnessing data, but preparing people for changing roles is important to Carol Juel, CIO of Synchrony Financial. "Technology is raising the bar for how we grow talent in the AI era and equip people for jobs of the future," she said.
Michael McNamara, CIO at Target Corp., pointed to the value of keeping employees up to speed on technical skills. "We'll continue to invest in learning and development and diversity and inclusion," Mr. McNamara said.
Augmenting workers with automation tools also boosts productivity.
Mario Harik, CIO of supply-chain company XPO Logistics Inc. is prioritizing the use of collaborative robots -- which the company calls "cobots" -- to do tasks employees prefer not to do, like fetching inventory from warehouses.
"We've found that employees who work alongside cobots are two times more productive on average, and employees supported by intelligent goods-to-person systems are four times more productive," Mr. Harik said.
Closing out a year that brought a number of high-profile hacks, several CIOs made sure to include cybersecurity on their 2020 agendas.
"Cybersecurity and business continuity continue to be high priorities," said Elizabeth Hackenson, CIO of Schneider Electric SE.

Credit: By Agam Shah
