Investors are about to see whether the stock market has more fuel in the tank.
A group of tech stocks known as the Magnificent Seven has powered the S&P 500's 2023 rally. Most of those companies will open their books in the coming days, allowing investors to gauge whether big tech and the broader market have room to run.
The S&P 500 has risen 11% on a total-return basis, including dividends, this year through Friday. Without Google parent Alphabet, Amazon.com, Apple, Facebook parent Meta Platforms, Microsoft, Nvidia and Tesla, that return would be 0.6%, according to S&P Dow Jones Indices.
Big tech has long been a winning trade for U.S. stock investors, though one punctuated by pullbacks such as the one in 2022. This year, excitement about artificial intelligence helped spark another rush into tech shares. Investors bracing for economic uncertainty also have been drawn to the perceived safety of some of the market's largest businesses.
Technology is often seen as a bet on growth, but the megacap tech names are already delivering big profits. The seven companies accounted for 17% of S&P 500 per-share earnings in 2022, a portion that analysts expect to grow to 24% by 2025, according to Goldman Sachs Group.
"The growth rates that these companies deliver is incredibly important to the perception of the health of the overall equity market," said Bryant VanCronkhite, senior portfolio manager at Allspring Global Investments.
Microsoft and Alphabet are expected to report on Tuesday, followed by Meta Platforms on Wednesday and Amazon on Thursday. Apple is slated to share its results the following week, followed by Nvidia on Nov. 21.
Some money managers think weak results from big tech would prompt investors to reconsider what they are willing to pay for stocks generally.
A selloff in Tesla's stock last week showed the market is ready to punish tech heavyweights whose results disappoint. The electric-car maker's shares slumped 9.3% Thursday after it missed analysts' sales and earnings estimates and Chief Executive Elon Musk warned of problems producing the long-delayed Cybertruck.
"When you have names like Tesla come in with disappointing margins, disappointing revenue growth and disappointing asset efficiency it will bleed into valuations not just for Tesla but for the entire market," said James Abate, chief investment officer at Centre Asset Management.
The S&P 500 traded late last week at 17.8 times projected earnings, in line with its 10-year average. Still, many observers think the stock market looks expensive considering that government-bond yields have jumped to levels not seen in more than a decade, offering investors a lower-risk alternative to equities. The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note rose Thursday to 4.987%, its highest 3 p.m. yield since July 2007.
Wall Street isn't expecting much from the earnings season that kicked off in earnest in recent days. Analysts are forecasting that profits from S&P 500 companies slipped 0.4% in the third quarter, according to FactSet.
Projections for most of the big tech companies are higher, by varying degrees. Analysts think Apple will report 4.8% earnings growth and Microsoft will report 13% growth. For Meta Platforms and Nvidia, those forecasts are 116% and 468%, respectively.
Investors will be looking for signs that the tech titans can turn enthusiasm about artificial intelligence into profits. Generative AI tools are expensive to operate, and companies including Microsoft and Google have been experimenting with approaches to the products.
Some of the big tech names are grappling with high-profile challenges. Last month the Federal Trade Commission and 17 states sued Amazon, claiming the retailer illegally uses monopoly power to keep prices high and harm its rivals.
Lawyers for Google are defending the search giant in an antitrust case brought by the Justice Department. Apple is confronting restrictions on its business in China, an important market.
The Magnificent Seven stocks account for 30% of the S&P 500's market value, up from 22% at the end of last year, according to Dow Jones Market Data. That means swings in their share prices, up or down, can sway the index.
Many investors think the stocks look expensive relative to company earnings, leaving them vulnerable to a pullback.
Tesla traded late last week at about 55 times its projected earnings over the next 12 months, according to FactSet, giving it the richest valuation of the big tech stocks. Apple was priced at 26 times forward earnings and Microsoft at 28 times, higher than 10-year averages of about 18 and 23, respectively.
"These stocks are currently trading at high valuations that don't leave much room for disappointment," Carin Pai, head of portfolio management and equity strategy at Fiduciary Trust International, said.
Credit: By Karen Langley
