New virtual-reality headsets, like the one Apple announced Monday, are sparking uncertainty for some companies after a broad pullback in augmented and virtual-reality investments over the last several months.
"It's been hard to judge. Because you've seen big steps forward and big pullbacks," said Todd Florence, chief information officer of Estes Express Lines. "For years, people were kind of making splashes and then backing off."
Apple released the Vision Pro headset, the company's first major new product in a decade, days after Meta Platforms announced the Meta Quest 3 headset. Lenovo launched its ThinkReality VRX headset, aimed at enterprise use cases, last week.
Florence said the Apple announcement definitely put the technology higher on his radar. "Let's be honest, Apple is known for creating markets," he said.
Apple showed the headset being used in work environments, including an ability to project a screen akin to a modern desktop in a way that could replace a computer monitor. The device is capable of allowing users to experience virtual reality and digital apps overlaid on the real world.
Just months ago, Microsoft shut down a social virtual-reality platform it acquired in 2017 and trimmed the team building its HoloLens augmented-reality headset. Walt Disney also shuttered the division developing strategies for the metaverse, while Meta itself struggled and pivoted more toward AI.
At the same time, the dialogue around the metaverse was almost entirely subsumed by the dialogue around generative AI, said Cliff Justice, National Leader of Enterprise Innovation at KPMG U.S., although he said investors are quietly continuing to put money into the metaverse.
"It's going to generate excitement," said Jay Ferro, executive vice president and chief information, technology and product officer at clinical research data management company Clario, of the Apple announcement, "but they still haven't solved some of the fundamental challenges."
He added, "No matter how cool the headset is, it's still bound to battery life/charging constraints. And despite advances in technology, using AR/VR devices can still be clunky and uncomfortable."
According to Thomas Phelps, senior vice president of corporate strategy and chief information officer of Laserfiche, "The metaverse isn't dead, but on life support." As a corporate initiative, it still exists, he said, but much farther in the background than it used to.
"The key thing to watch is whether Apple's headset launch will soon accelerate hardware/software development for mixed-reality glasses," said Phelps, although he added he doesn't expect CIOs to suddenly start diving in in the meantime.
Business interest in the technology remains overwhelmingly mediocre, with technology leaders still excited about training applications and augmented reality for factory workers -- but disappointed or uninterested in more corporate uses, like meetings or events in the metaverse.
Aaron Gwinner, chief information officer at Reynolds American, said that the extent to which he sees value in current mixed reality technology is using augmented reality to train factory employees on how to use machines or troubleshoot when there are issues -- something the company is testing now.
Gwinner said he tried a number of other use cases, including meetings, but didn't find any compelling.He added that businesses remain conflicted about adopting the technology because it still feels early.
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Senior Vice President of Global Operations and Chief Technology Officer Chris Helsel says that among his top 10 priorities, it is probably 10th.
"It's still on the radar. It's just -- the return on investment's got to be right," he said.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
