Employees at companies including Morningstar Inc. and Liberty Mutual Group Inc. are learning about advanced artificial-intelligence techniques by programming and racing miniature self-driving cars.
The DeepRacer league, developed by Amazon.com Inc.'s Amazon Web Services cloud business, is designed to teach a branch of AI known as reinforcement learning. In this type of machine learning, algorithms learn the correct way to perform an action based on trial and error and observations.
The technique is different from a type of AI commonly used in business called supervised learning, in which algorithms have to be fed with labeled training data to learn to recognize images or make predictions. Here, the cars supply their own data: images collected with cameras.
Anyone with an Amazon Web Services account can participate in the league. Teams or individuals can compete online in virtual races or in person at events world-wide.
Teams build and train AI algorithms using Amazon SageMaker software, deploy them to self-driving cars measuring about 10 inches, then race them around a track of roughly 17 feet by 26 feet.
"It's actually having practical applications," said James Rhodes, chief technology officer of investment research firm Morningstar. Thanks to the training, the company expects to have dozens of projects based on reinforcement learning and other machine-learning techniques in deployment by the end of 2020, he said.
Reinforcement learning can also be used to help robots walk faster or to develop security systems that automatically adapt to different environments. It's "a pretty complicated technology and there's a pretty steep learning curve," said Mike Miller, general manager of AI devices at Amazon Web Services.
AWS developed the program to teach software developers about machine learning in a more engaging way than reading scientific articles, Mr. Miller said.
The algorithms are complex because they gather data on their own, instead of being fed millions of images to learn from, said Peter Stone, professor of computer science at the University of Texas at Austin.
Mr. Stone, who is president of AI software company CogitAI Inc., isn't involved with DeepRacer.
Programmers write code to reward the algorithms when they do something right, such as winning a race or avoiding an obstacle.
In the case of algorithm-powered cars, that could include such tasks as staying close to the centerline on the track, minimizing wide steering angles and turning to avoid barriers and crashes.
At Morningstar, more than 450 software developers, equity analysts and quantitative researchers have formed nearly 100 racing teams in 10 countries since January, when Mr. Rhodes began allowing employees to use the technology.
Morningstar has invested "north of tens of thousands of dollars" on the miniature cars and training software to date, he said. "It's bringing the virtual [world] into the physical space, especially for individuals who are not necessarily computer scientists," he said.
Earlier this year, one of the Morningstar teams came up with an idea for a tool based on reinforcement learning that looks for patterns in regulatory filings.
Liberty Mutual has 270 employees, including software engineers and data scientists, participating in DeepRacer.
"It's a fun way for people to get practical exposure for what are very important algorithms in a safe environment where they're not going to mess up any core business applications," said James McGlennon, the insurer's chief information officer.

Credit: By Sara Castellanos
