Coty Inc.'s finance chief Laurent Mercier is pruning the cosmetics company's product portfolio, working to improve its forecasts and reducing inventory to increase profitability.
The New York-based company, whose executive offices are in Amsterdam, has been struggling to boost sales since its 2016 acquisition of various beauty brands just as consumers were shifting away from purchasing cosmetics at drugstores and opting for higher-end and niche brands.
Coty at the time bought CoverGirl, Max Factor and other beauty products and fragrances from Procter & Gamble Co. for roughly $12 billion. It reported net revenue of $1.03 billion for the quarter ended March 31, down 3.3% compared with the same period last year.
Mr. Mercier, who has been in the chief financial officer role since February, is focusing on finding $600 million in savings over three years -- $300 million this fiscal year alone. Coty has gone through several leadership changes in recent years, including chief executive officers and CFOs. Sue Nabi, a former L'Oreal SA executive, is the current chief executive.
"Improving the gross margin is essential," Mr. Mercier said. "It is very detailed work, a question of discipline," he said. Coty is combing through its portfolio and taking out products that don't sell frequently or that have low margins. The company over the past year reduced the number of items in its consumer beauty business by about 40%, according to Mr. Mercier. Those items generated about 5% of net revenue, but the decline has been offset by other measures, he said.
Coty is up against a multitude of competitors, including well-managed businesses such as L'Oreal or Estee Lauder Cos., said Rebecca Scheuneman, an equity research analyst at Morningstar Inc.'s research division. "It is very prudent to eliminate these products that haven't sold well," Ms. Scheuneman said.
Estee Lauder reported net sales of $3.86 billion for the quarter ended March 31, up 16% compared with the prior year period. L'Oreal posted sales of 7.61 billion euros, equivalent to $9.30 billion for the quarter, up 5.4% from last year.
Coty's Mr. Mercier said he is also taking a close look at the company's promotions and at targeted price increases. "We are not doing promotions just to gain revenue," he said. Another important piece is improving Coty's forecasting so that it doesn't produce more than is needed.
"If the forecasts are too high and sellout is not so high, the company has elevated inventories," Mr. Mercier said. Coty is using artificial intelligence to improve its forecasting capabilities and outsourcing some finance tasks to Accenture PLC, he said.
The company, which doesn't own or operate physical stores, also is looking to run its factories more efficiently. Coty in January said it plans to close a manufacturing plant in Cologne, Germany.
The efforts are starting to show results. Coty's gross margin rose to 61.9% in the first fiscal quarter, up from 56.6% in the prior-year quarter. "Sixty percent is the new base for our gross margin," Mr. Mercier said. Still, there is room for improvement. Rival Estee Lauder, for example, reported a gross margin of 75.7% for the quarter ended March 31, up from 75% a year before.
Mr. Mercier, who started out as an auditor, worked for French food-processing company Danone SA for two decades before joining Coty in 2017 as CFO of the luxury business. He became deputy finance chief last year.
U.S. sales for some of Coty's products are encouraging, said Linda Bolton Weiser, a managing director at advisory firm D.A. Davidson & Co., citing recent statistics by data-analytics firm Information Resources Inc.
Those estimates show double-digit percentage growth in sales for certain Coty products, compared with previous quarters, when sales growth was flat or negative.
"A lot of managers can cut costs and get to a certain margin level," Ms. Weiser said. "For it to be sustainable, you need top-line growth."
Credit: By Nina Trentmann
