People seeking information online will increasingly go first to TikTok, ChatGPT and other applications powered by generative artificial intelligence, instead of using traditional search engines, said Michael Wolf, co-founder and chief executive of consulting firm Activate.
Today, about 13 million U.S. adults begin their web searches by using generative AI, Activate data show. Wolf predicts that will grow to more than 90 million by 2027 because generative AI is capable of providing results with far greater precision and customization.
"Generative AI fundamentally changes the model for search because the results are no longer links," said Wolf, who gave a presentation of Activate's findings at The Wall Street Journal's Tech Live conference on Tuesday. "It serves up your information totally packaged and ready to use."
Applications rife with customer data will benefit the most from this shift, Wolf said, as they will be better equipped to serve their users with personalized information. He expects TikTok to lead in this area because Activate estimates that its users already spend an average of more than 54 minutes a day on it, compared with 49 minutes daily on YouTube, 33 on Instagram and 31 on Facebook.
Amazon and other major e-commerce platforms have also embraced generative AI to better recommend products for users based on their past behavior, along with many music- and video-streaming apps, Wolf said.
For example, Spotify earlier this year introduced AI DJ, a feature that offers a curated lineup of music alongside commentary around the tracks and artists that the app thinks users will like. "Choices are being made for you," Wolf said.
Google and other search engines are also taking advantage of generative AI, yet Wolf said they might not remain the first stop or default option for most people. People are devoting more of their time to social media, entertainment platforms, online videogames and other utility apps that are also embracing the technology.
According to Wolf, domination within the $100 billion search industry is "up for grabs" and large, established companies aren't necessarily going to outmuscle startups. The rise of open-source AI models is paving a pathway for smaller entrants to potentially make a big impact, he said.
Adoption of generative AI is being driven by a significant increase in the amount of time people spend online -- behavior boosted by the pandemic, Activate data show. With people spending more time online, they are becoming adept at using multiple applications at once, enabling them to accomplish more in a single day than would otherwise be possible. Today, the average U.S. adult spends 13 hours daily multitasking among video, audio, games, social media and various technology and media activities.
"AI is making everybody into a metaverse creator," Wolf said, referring to extensive online worlds where people interact via digital avatars.
Generative AI is poised to disrupt the internet in other ways besides search, such as content creation, Wolf said. By typing simple text prompts into applications featuring the technology, anyone -- not just tech-savvy folks who know how to write code -- will be able to make videogames, artwork, music and even entire virtual worlds on their own.
More predictions from Wolf's presentation:
-- Nearly all U.S. households, more than 120 million, will be able to access the internet through their television sets by 2027. Whether people own a smart TV or have a device like Roku, the TV screen will play a bigger role than ever, driving subscriptions for streaming services and capturing valuable viewing data.
-- By 2027, the average video-streaming subscriber will have 5.8 subscriptions, up from 4.9 today. With many such applications now offering the option to see ads in exchange for lower monthly fees, Activate predicts ad revenue across the major video streaming services will grow 25% annually through 2027.
-- Spatial computing -- the ability to interact with virtual imagery displayed without obstructing a user's view of the real world -- won't be limited to pricey virtual- and augmented-reality headsets. The technology will be prevalent on almost any internet-connected device with a screen, from car navigation systems and kitchen appliances to digital door locks and mall kiosks.
-- Online sports betting will continue to grow and evolve. The activity became legal five years ago, and it is now available in 35 states. Activate forecasts that U.S. adults will collectively wager $186 billion annually by 2027, up from about $123 billion today. Another change: Sportsbooks today rely on extensive sign-up and referral bonuses to attract new customers, but going forward retention will be driven by improved betting options and user experiences.
Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
