Everybody's talking about artificial intelligence. Some people even argue that AI will lead, quite literally, to either immortality or the end of the world. Neither of those possibilities seems terribly likely, at least in the near future. But there is still a remarkable amount of debate about just what AI can do and what it means for all of us human intelligences.
A new book called "Possible Minds: 25 Ways of Looking at AI," edited by John Brockman, includes a range of big-picture essays about what AI can do and what it might mean for the future. The authors include people who are working in the trenches of computer science, like Anca Dragan, who designs new kinds of AI-directed robots, and Rodney Brooks, who invented the Roomba, a robot vacuum cleaner. But it also includes philosophers like Daniel Dennett, psychologists like Steven Pinker and even art experts like the famous curator Hans Ulrich Obrist.
I wrote a chapter about why AI still can't solve problems that every 4-year-old can easily master. Although Deep Mind's Alpha Zero can beat a grand master at computer chess, it would still bomb at Attie Chess -- the version of the game played by my 3-year-old grandson Atticus. In Attie Chess, you throw all of the pieces into the wastebasket, pick each one up, try to put them on the board and then throw them all in the wastebasket again. This apparently simple physical task is remarkably challenging even for the most sophisticated robots.
But reading through all the chapters, I began to sense that there's a more profound way in which human intelligence is different from artificial intelligence, and there's another reason why Attie Chess may be important.
The trick behind the recent advances in AI is that a human specifies a particular objective for the machine. It might be winning a chess game or distinguishing between pictures of cats and dogs on the internet. But it might also be something more important, like judging whether a work of art deserves to be in a museum or a defendant deserves to be in prison.
The basic technique is to give the computer millions of examples of games, images or previous judgments and to provide feedback. Which moves led to a high score? Which pictures did people label as dogs? What did the curators or judges decide in particular cases? The computer can then use machine learning techniques to try to figure out how to achieve the same objectives. In fact, machines have gotten better and better at learning how to win games or match human judgments. They often detect subtle statistical cues in the data that humans can't even understand.
But people also can decide to change their objectives. A great judge can argue that slavery should be outlawed or that homosexuality should no longer be illegal. A great curator can make the case for an unprecedented new kind of art, like Cubism or Abstract Expressionism, that is very different from anything in the past. We invent brand new games and play them in new ways. In fact, when children play, they practice setting themselves new objectives, even when, as in Attie Chess, those goals look pretty silly from the adult perspective.
Indeed, the point of each new generation is to create new objectives -- new games, new categories and new judgments. And yet, somehow, in a way that we don't understand at all, we don't merely slide into relativism. We can decide what is worth doing in a way that AI can't.
Any new technology, from fire to Facebook, from internal combustion to the internet, brings unforeseen dangers and unintended consequences. Regulating and controlling those technologies is one of the great tasks of each generation, and there are no guarantees of success. In that regard, we have more to fear from natural human stupidity than artificial intelligence. But, so far at least, we are the only creatures who can decide not only what we want but whether we should want it.

Credit: By Alison Gopnik
