How will politics change in the coming years? In one important way, it won't.
The most important ingredient of electoral success in the past 125 years will remain so in the next 125: Strong candidates with a compelling message and the right timing will still matter more than anything else. But the campaigns around them will continue to change rapidly.
Here's a look at how.
Demographics. The statistics and projections of the nation's growing diversity are well known. The Electoral College implications, perhaps less so. Most Americans can tell you which states are the key battlegrounds of the moment. But that list isn't static.
States like Georgia, Arizona and yes, even Texas, will be purple states very soon. Good for the Democrats. And some current battlegrounds could become solid blue, like Nevada. But a careful eye must be kept on Pennsylvania and the upper Midwest. These solid Obama states are getting older and experiencing slower Latino growth.
History tells us this much: The map on election night in 2032 will not look like 2012.
Technology. This is like throwing a dart at the side of the barn, especially in the long run. But we know that data and its smart use will only improve campaigns' understanding of the electorate.
Campaigns will increasingly be fought out on mobile devices as much as television and computers. In India, Prime Minister Narendra Modi broke new ground by using holograms throughout the country to extend his reach. These were just presentations of his speeches. With advancements in artificial intelligence, you could soon have holograms of presidential candidates at your door, interacting with you and asking and answering questions.
More states will inevitably move to online voter registration and perhaps digital voting. There will be resistance, especially by some in the GOP, but our voting system won't remain disconnected forever from the way we are leading the rest of our lives.
Personalization. Connected to technological and data advances, campaigns will increasingly be personalized to the individual. From the television to the smartphone to the doorstep, campaigns will target you. Perhaps eventually as you walk through a store or through a subway station. Not you as a member of a voter cohort. But you, the individual.
Campaigns cannot have a million different messages, however; these personalized messages still must be connected to an overall message architecture. The ability to deliver the right message to the right voter and measure its effectiveness will continue to take more of the guesswork out of politics.
Corruption. We are entering the age of the billionaire political arms race. Like missiles soaring over the Earth in space, these big spenders will fire back and forth at one another, attempting to control more of our politics.
In some races, the candidates will be mere bystanders to the super PAC main event. But this inevitably will lead to positions being taken, votes being cast, and legislation being sponsored to please political benefactors -- or to court them.
This super PAC era is in its infancy -- but it could rival the Robber Baron and Watergate years in terms of its insidious effect on government.
Changing issues. The state of the economy and the big foreign-policy challenges of the moment always have dominated and always will dominate political campaigns. But as we get deeper into the 21st century, new factors will impact, if not help shape, our politics, including: more concrete changes brought on by global warming, more sophisticated and frequent cyberwarfare and cyberattacks, technology companies that claim to know more about you than you do (and the attendant privacy issues), baby boomers moving fully into retirement, increasing urbanization, and the rise and fall of competitor nations.
This is far from a complete list and surely, in some cases, will prove to be inaccurate. All we can know for sure is that politics won't be immune to the breathtaking changes happening in every sector of our economy.
There are disrupters in every industry, and political campaigns will be no different. The good ones won't just apply the best practices of the private sector, but will also innovate and create on their own to meet their unique needs.
---
Mr. Plouffe is a corporate and political strategist who served as campaign manager and White House senior adviser for President Barack Obama
Generate image description

Credit: By David Plouffe
