Yahoo Inc. continued its streak of small acquisitions by purchasing the maker of a news-reading mobile application called Summly, launched late last year and run by a teenager from London.
Adam Cahan, a senior vice president at Yahoo, said on the company's blog that the app would be shut down so that its three-person team, including founder Nick D'Aloisio, can incorporate its features into existing Yahoo products.
Terms of the deal weren't disclosed. A person familiar with the matter said the purchase price was greater than $10 million. A Yahoo spokeswoman declined to comment.
Summly, which didn't generate revenue, summarizes news articles, "giving you a simple and elegant way to find the news you want" while helping publishers "drive interest in stories and reach a generation of mobile users that want information on the go," Mr. Cahan said.
Yahoo Chief Executive Marissa Mayer has said the company is looking to create services for mobile devices that fit into people's "daily habits." She said she is focused on increasing the amount of time people spend on Yahoo, which in time will lead to greater revenue.
Yahoo has made a handful of other acquisitions in recent months, including the teams behind mobile app Stamped and news-reading site Snip.it. The company also is in talks to buy a controlling stake in France Telecom SA's online-video site Dailymotion, according to people familiar with the talks, in what would be Ms. Mayer's first major acquisition since taking over the Internet pioneer last year.
In an interview on Monday, Mr. D'Aloisio, who is 17 years old, said the Summly app was downloaded more than 750,000 times and showed that providing people with "snippets" about news articles can increase the rate at which people view full articles. He said he was attracted to Yahoo because of its "scale" and Ms. Mayer's "real focus to beautify content when you're on a mobile device."
Mr. D'Aloisio founded his company when he was 15 and created Trimit, a predecessor to Summly, in 2011. He redesigned the app and relaunched it as Summly in late 2012 with funding from Zynga Inc. CEO Mark Pincus and the investment firm owned by Hong Kong business mogul Li Ka-shing, which "contacted me out of the blue" after Trimit began to receive accolades. He said he raised a total of $1.5 million.
Yahoo's Mr. Cahan said in an interview Monday that Mr. D'Aloisio was an "exceptional" talent and that Yahoo did "extensive" testing of Summly's algorithm, or mathematical formula, for condensing news articles.
The app's technology was developed with the aid of SRI International, an artificial-intelligence lab in Silicon Valley that also worked on Siri, a voice assistant that was acquired by Apple Inc. Mr. Cahan said SRI had an ownership stake in Mr. D'Aloisio's company.
The move by Yahoo into news-reading technology for mobile devices comes less than a year after the company shut down its Livestand app, which it created in 2011 to compete with companies such as Flipboard Inc. and Alphonso Labs Inc., the maker of the Pulse app.
Credit: By Amir Efrati
