Financial-technology startups are stepping into a void increasingly left by credit-card-issuing banks: lending to customers with poor credit histories.
LendUp Global Inc. and Fair Square Financial LLC, which focus more heavily on riskier borrowers, mailed out roughly 35 million credit-card offers during the first half of the year, according to market-research firm Competiscan, up from 7 million during the same period last year.
CreditShop LLC, a specialist in personal loans to risky borrowers that was acquired last year by investment firm Varde Partners, rolled out a credit card this year. Elevate Credit Inc., which specializes in high-cost installment loans, launched one in July.
Subprime lending can be lucrative. Most of these cards carry interest rates north of 20%, significantly higher than the average credit card interest rate of 14.1%, according to the Federal Reserve. Rewards programs, one of the biggest costs for large card issuers chasing creditworthy customers, are rare.
But risks abound: Facing rising loan losses, especially among the riskiest borrowers, banks are reining in their growth in this sector. Subprime credit-card balances at seven large U.S. banks rose 3% in the first half of the year from a year prior, down from a 13% increase in the year-earlier period, according to Autonomous Research. Capital One Financial Corp.'s subprime balances accounted for 32% of its domestic credit-card balances in the first half of 2018 compared with 36% in the same period a year earlier
The new lenders are getting help from some industry stalwarts. Orogen Group, an investment firm headed by former Citigroup Inc. chief Vikram Pandit, said in May it was committing $100 million in equity to Fair Square, which distributes cards to borrowers with less-than-pristine credit scores. LendUp recently announced that Capital One co-founder Nigel Morris and former Capital One chief credit officer Frank Rotman were joining its board.
The population of subprime borrowers "is nigh on half of America, and there's enormous opportunity for others to be able to offer a great product with great sophistication to compete in this space," Mr. Morris said in an interview.
Fintech startups still account for a relatively small slice of the subprime-card market. At the end of 2017, Fair Square had 124,000 open accounts, more than half of which went to customers who had prime credit scores at the time they were opened, and just shy of $95 million in balances for its Ollo card holders, according to people familiar with the matter.
Capital One has around $32 billion in subprime credit-card balances on its books.
The new entrants say their use of machine learning and artificial intelligence for underwriting helps them manage the risk. They also mostly extend small credit lines, often ranging between $500 and $2,000, limiting the scale of potential losses.
Around 60 million U.S. adults have credit scores lower than 650, according to Fair Isaac Corp., roughly the threshold where banks focused on prime borrowers stop lending. Some 53 million U.S. adults don't have credit scores at all because they have little or no borrowing history.
Fintech lenders have targeted both groups, often using data not included in applicants' credit reports, such as how often they change addresses and whether they pay utility bills on time, to determine whether to approve them.
Fintech startups looking to enter the credit-card business have a few challenges that banks don't. They typically must partner with banks to issue the cards on their behalf to comply with rules set by card networks Visa Inc. and Mastercard Inc., and they need a source of funding to lend against. LendUp, for example, uses Transportation Alliance Bank to issue its Arrow Card and has a $100 million line of credit from Victory Park Capital Advisors LLC, a Chicago-based investment firm.

Credit: By AnnaMaria Andriotis and Peter Rudegeair
