Continued strength in Nvidia stock helped drive the S&P 500 to a fresh record to kick off the week.
The gains were broad-based, though tech shares led the pack in trading, with the S&P 500's information-technology sector gaining 1.4%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average crossed the 43000 milestone for the first time and also closed at a high.
It has been just over two years since the S&P 500 hit its low on Oct. 12, 2022. The stock-market gauge has staged a big rally since, gaining around 63% and setting a series of records. Monday's 0.8% gain in the S&P 500 pushed the index to its 46th record close this year.
Investors have received a slate of good news recently. The latest read on jobs earlier in the month showed that the labor market is healthy, while inflation data last week pointed to moderating price pressures.
And on Monday, excitement about artificial intelligence once again powered major indexes higher. Shares of Nvidia, which dominates the AI-chip market, increased 2.4% on Monday.
"Another wave of euphoria by some would not be surprising given the macro data last week," said Ramon Verastegui, founder and chief investment officer at Kairos Investment Advisors.
All eyes will turn to corporate earnings the rest of the week, and some traders are betting on fireworks in the stock market after the results. Bank of America, Goldman Sachs and Citigroup report on Tuesday. Last Friday, strong earnings from JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo helped send the S&P 500 and Dow industrials to new highs.
The Dow continued its momentum Monday, gaining 0.5% to 43065.22 despite a 2% decline in Caterpillar shares. The Dow's 1.4% rise over the past two trading days was its best two-day stretch since August, and the record was the blue-chip average's 37th of the year.
The rally could have more room to run. Historically, it has taken the S&P 500 an average of 709 trading sessions to reach the highs of a bull market, according to Dow Jones Market Data going back to 1928. The current run since the bear-market low has lasted 502 trading days.
Elsewhere, the Nasdaq added 0.9%, the best of the major indexes on the day. The tech-heavy benchmark is up 23% for the year but remains below its July record.
Overseas, China's finance minister gave a much-hyped briefing on Beijing's economic plans over the weekend, but investors were left unclear as to the scale of the stimulus to come, and how much will be hosed on consumers.
Stocks in mainland China ended a choppy day of trading higher. The Shanghai Composite Index rose 2.1%.
However, Hong Kong stocks fell, and oil prices -- sensitive to the pace of growth in China's gas-guzzling economy -- retreated.
Benchmark Brent crude-oil prices declined 2%. Analysts at DNB Markets said China's economic briefing lacked incentives for more petroleum consumption, though Citi analysts warned that volatility in the Middle East could make a surge in oil prices more likely in coming months. Citi research analysts said in a report on Monday that crude-oil prices could go into triple digits if supplies are disrupted by conflict in the Middle East.
The bank's analysts said their base case is still that Brent crude oil will average $74 a barrel in the fourth quarter and $65 a barrel in the first quarter of 2025, "owing to weak underlying oil market fundamentals."
The bond market was closed for the Columbus Day holiday.
Generate image description

Credit: By Gunjan Banerji and Joe Wallace
