Alibaba Group Holding Ltd.'s profit more than doubled in a blockbuster second quarter, as the Chinese e-commerce company leveraged its trove of consumer data to drive spending and attract more online advertising.
The company, whose Taobao and Tmall websites are China's most popular e-commerce sites, said revenue in the fiscal quarter ended Sept. 30 surged 61% from a year earlier to 55.1 billion yuan ($8.3 billion).
Higher consumer spending and online advertising on the company's internet retail platforms helped drive revenue higher, Alibaba said. Revenue from the core commerce unit rose 63% to 46.5 billion yuan, as Alibaba used its consumer databank to personalize buyer home pages to encourage purchases.
Having started as an internet marketplace 18 years ago to connect buyers and sellers, Alibaba has since moved beyond its traditional e-commerce business into areas such as digital content, cloud computing and logistics as it taps into rising incomes among China's consumers.
The company also expanded further into consumer categories such as groceries in the past year, helping the firm's sales growth outstrip an overall e-commerce sales boom in China.
Alibaba said net income rose 132% to 17.7 billion yuan, compared with 7.6 billion yuan a year earlier.
"I'm very optimistic that China will continue to experience real income growth for years to come," said Joe Tsai, vice chairman, in a call with investors Thursday. "This long-term secular trend bodes well for Alibaba."
Alibaba, which owns stakes in several brick-and-mortar store chains, is seeking to expand its physical store business in China at the same time American retailers have been closing stores at a record pace. It has introduced franchised convenience stores and supermarkets that allow customers to order through their mobile phones and receive deliveries within the hour.
"Our goal is to help the whole retail world be upgraded into a whole digital operation," said Daniel Zhang, the chief executive.
Alibaba said last month it would spend more than $15 billion on research and development in areas such as data analytics, quantum computing and machine learning.
On Thursday, Alibaba raised its revenue-growth guidance for the fiscal year to between 49% and 53%. The increase, up from a previous forecast of 45% to 49%, takes into account sales by former affiliate Cainiao Smart Logistics Network Ltd., of which Alibaba gained majority control at the end of September.
Alibaba said its cloud-computing business revenue increased 99% to three billion yuan. The unit, which is expanding its presence this year in international markets such as Malaysia and India, is currently unprofitable.
Sales from Alibaba's digital-media and entertainment division, which includes mobile browser UCWeb, video-streaming site Youku Tudou and Alibaba Pictures Group, rose 33% to 4.8 billion yuan. Still, the unit might experience wider losses in the near term as Tencent Holdings Ltd. and Baidu Inc. intensify competition for viewers, according to analysts at Morgan Stanley.
In a separate statement Thursday, game developer The9 Ltd. said Alibaba would exclusively publish its mobile version of online shooting game "CrossFire" in China, marking Alibaba's first significant entry into Tencent's games stronghold.

Credit: By Liza Lin and Maria Armental
