Financial firms nudged the S&P 500 to a record, a rare day lately when a sector other than technology led the broad stock index higher.
Shares of Goldman Sachs Group and Intercontinental Exchange ended the session at records, while an additional six banks and finance companies in the S&P 500 closed at their highest prices in at least a year. JPMorgan, Citigroup, and Bank of America are among the big firms scheduled to disclose spring-quarter earnings on Friday.
The S&P 500 gained less than 0.1% to set its 36th record this year. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite added a little more than 0.1% to also notch a record. The Dow Jones Industrial Average declined 0.1%, or about 53 points.
Tuesday started out as another day with chip makers and other firms with an angle on the artificial-intelligence boom leading the way. Technology stocks turned lower, while Treasury yields and shares of banks rose following Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell's midmorning remarks to Congress.
Powell told the Senate Banking Committee that recent employment data suggest the labor market has "cooled considerably." He said the central bank is weighing the potential that high rates wreck the economy and cause excessive unemployment against the risk of reigniting inflation with rates cut too soon.
Lindsay Rosner, head of multisector investing at Goldman Sachs Asset Management, said the Fed has successfully brought inflation down toward its targeted levels without too much damage to the economy. She said the central bank will likely cut rates in September, as the market has priced in.
"It is absolutely a soft landing," she said. "That may not have been something thought possible by many market participants in the beginning of the year, but as the data has come through that is absolutely what we're seeing."
Treasury yields rose following Powell's remarks but eased in afternoon trading. The yield on benchmark 10-year notes ended at 4.297%, up from 4.267% on Monday. Yields rise as prices fall.
Investors and central bankers will get the next read on inflation Thursday when the Labor Department is scheduled to publish consumer prices for June.
U.S.-listed shares of BP shed 4.8% after the U.K. energy giant warned that weak oil trading and lower refining margins would hurt earnings. CSX lost 2.7% after Wall Street analysts trimmed earnings estimates.
Overseas, Japan's Nikkei 225 closed 2% higher at a record Tuesday and added an additional 0.1% at midday Wednesday. France's CAC and Germany's Dax shed 1.6% and 1.3%, respectively, on Tuesday. S&P 500 futures were up 0.1% early Wednesday.
Credit: By Ryan Dezember
