JETBLUE AIRWAYS
JBLU +7.2%
JetBlue is flying higher after its third-quarter guidance boost. The airline bumped up its capacity and revenue outlook, crediting favorable fuel prices and strength in its July bookings as tech outages caused cancellations for other carriers. JetBlue said revenue and in-month bookings in the current quarter also improved, thanks in part to the windfall from other airlines' disruptions. Still, carriers face a slowdown in travel demand as consumers cut back on spending, and executives told the Journal they would discount fares to fill domestic flights and curtail fall flying capacity. JetBlue shares rose 7.2% Thursday.
FRONTIER COMMUNICATIONS
FYBR +38%
Verizon Communications on Thursday struck a $9.6 billion all-cash deal for fiber-internet provider Frontier. The companies said the purchase was valued at $20 billion including acquired debt. The Journal reported Wednesday that the two were in advanced talks. Verizon would get back some of the fiber-optic lines it sold to Frontier, which has more than two million connections across 25 states. Frontier shares rocketed 38% higher Wednesday.
DOLLAR TREE
DLTR -22%
Weaker demand is spreading from Family Dollar to Dollar Tree. The discount retailer, which operates both chains, on Wednesday posted worse-than-expected quarterly results and cut its outlook. Dollar Tree's namesake stores cater to suburban middle- and higher-income consumers. The company said that households with more than $125,000 in annual income started shifting to "buying for need" from "buying for want." Dollar Tree shares tumbled 22% Wednesday.
U.S. STEEL
X -17%
President Biden is poised to block the $14.1 billion takeover of U.S. Steel by Japan's Nippon Steel using his executive powers, The Wall Street Journal reported. Biden earlier this year said that the steelmaker should remain domestically owned and operated. U.S. Steel Chief Executive David Burritt on Wednesday told the Journal that the company would close steel mills and potentially move its headquarters if the planned sale collapsed. U.S. Steel shares plunged 17% Wednesday.
HORMEL FOODS
HRL -6.4%
The maker of foods including Jennie-O, Spam and Planters reported quarterly sales that missed analysts' expectations, and lowered its forecasts. Hormel said both volumes and prices of whole-bird turkeys fell significantly, and Chief Executive Jim Snee said the company expects whole-bird turkey prices to remain under pressure through the end of the year. Meanwhile, production disruptions at its Suffolk, Va., facility weighed on Planters sales. Hormel shares fell 6.4% Wednesday.
BROADCOM
AVGO -10%
Broadcom on Thursday posted its quarterly results, beating earnings and revenue expectations. However, it gave revenue guidance that fell short of analysts' expectations, sending the stock lower. Semiconductor stocks, like artificial-intelligence darling Nvidia, had a volatile week, as investors weigh the durability of the AI craze. On Tuesday, Nvidia shares dropped 9.5% and erased $278.9 billion of market value. Broadcom shares lost 10% Friday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
