You don't need an Apple Watch.
Saying you need one is like saying you need lobster for dinner tonight. Unlike the iPhone, the watch isn't a necessity. It's a luxury for those who want some freedom from their smartphones. That much we've learned in the past two years.
But the new Watch Series 2 finally gives you a better reason to want one: It can help you on your path to becoming a healthier human. In my year-and-1/2 of wearing Apple's wrist computer, I've used it 95% of the time as a workout companion . . . and as a watch, with a lowercase "w."
The new Watch Series 2, available Friday starting at $369, adds key enhancements for people who would rather do a triathlon than sit on the couch -- or maybe enjoy doing both. GPS makes it a far better running partner, a faster processor saves a lot of time and improved water-resistance for swimming could turn Michael Phelps's frown upside down. Even the old watch, now dubbed Series 1 and priced at $269, gets the new dual-core processor.
It's a rule: Apple's version twos are always significantly better. (See the iPhone and iPad.) It's also true of the Apple Watch, even if the Series 2 has the identical potbellied design, need for nightly charging and, often, a nearby smartphone. Even though the watch still doesn't have its own cellular connection (the way Samsung's chunkiest watches do), after a week of wearing it I've stopped asking, "What's Apple been doing for the past two years?!"
The Series 2 is what the first Apple Watch should have been -- a more advanced Fitbit with the good looks and features to justify wearing it all day, every day. It's speedy, helpful and able to go where you can't -- or won't -- take your smartphone.
On Saturday morning, I went for a 2-mile run, just me, my Apple Watch and two alien-looking AirPods. Yes, I left my iPhone, and my dignity, at home.
Thanks to the GPS, as soon as I started the Outdoor Run in the Activity app, the Watch locked on my location and began telling me how many feet I'd jogged. By comparison, Polar's M400 running watch, which could be confused with astronaut equipment, struggled to lock in on a GPS signal in midtown Manhattan.
During the run, the gear faded away, leaving me only with my deep thoughts about love, life and Lady Gaga's new single. The AirPods stayed in fairly well when I was jogging, and they certainly beat the annoying process of pairing my PowerBeats.
Toggling through songs on my watch was far easier than getting them on there in the first place. Even after an hour on the phone with an AppleCare rep, I'm not entirely sure how I got the Apple Music playlist to wirelessly sync. Apple says it is actively working to fix this issue, but it illustrates the bigger problem of relying on a device with no cellular connectivity.
My Saturday morning run concluded with a stop at Walgreens to pick up some water. A double-tap on the watch's side button brought up my credit card and Walgreens rewards. Apple Pay worked fine.
This new wireless freedom is the Apple Watch's greatest strength and greatest downfall. A 20-minute run with music playing knocked out 20% of my watch battery's juice. While there is a bigger battery inside this slightly thicker watch, those who plan to use GPS for a daily jog won't get longer battery life. (Apple says it designed the GPS on the Apple Watch to last through a marathon.)
On days where I didn't use GPS, I went to bed with nearly 40% of the battery left. That's strong, though the Fitbit Blaze lasts four days, so you can even wear it to track sleep.
For me, the Series 2's up-to-50-meter water-resistance means I can finally read my emails in the bathtub, and keep it on during my next beach vacation. For swimmers, it means easily seeing how many laps you've done.
When I headed to the pool, the watch was fairly accurate. After selecting "Pool Swim" from the Activity list and inputting the pool length, it calculated my four laps correctly. Watch out, U.S. Olympic team. (During another test, however, it gave me credit for an extra lap.) When you're done, you'll see a summary of your swim, including average heart rate, total calories burned and primary stroke.
The coolest part? Ejecting the water from the speaker hole when you're done. Yes, the Apple Watch has its very own blowhole. Just spin the Digital Crown wheel, wait for the alarm sound, and the water is pushed out.
Swimming is just one of the additions to Apple's workout and activity functionality. But will the Watch continue to motivate you after a few months?
For me, the answer is yes . . . and no. I prefer Apple's activity rings, which fill up as you move, exercise and stand during the day, over Fitbit's step counting. And the new leader board, where you compete with your friends, imitates the best Fitbit feature, although Apple still trails Fitbit on social tools.
But after more than a year, Apple isn't using my information to push me further. Should I be varying my workouts? Should my heart rate be lower? The future of health tracking is machine learning, and Apple isn't leading the way.
If you bought an Apple Watch last year, I feel bad for you. Not because you'll miss out on the new watch's GPS or waterproofing, but because on the old one, it often feels like it takes less time to play a round of Monopoly than to launch an app. The new dual-core processor combined with the new WatchOS 3 operating system is a huge improvement.
Apps launch quicker and keep running, instead of giving up and crashing. And scrolling through them is swift. WatchOS 3 itself has some speed improvements that enable the original Watch to run faster, but still not fast enough.
So should you buy one? For such a personal device, a simple answer is tough. The faster speed would be tempting for people who own the original -- but upgrading a watch isn't something you should do every year or two. If you held off, you'll be happy you waited. For general workouts, the $269 Series 1 is faster and more affordable than before. If you're a runner or a swimmer, the Series 2 is where it's at.
What about a Fitbit instead? If you just want a basic fitness tracker -- thin design, days of battery life -- the new $150 Fitbit Charge 2 is my top pick. But I still prefer the Apple Watch to the Fitbit Blaze smartwatch. Apple's design is sleeker and its selection of third-party apps is stronger.
Credit: By Joanna Stern
