Indonesian President Joko Widodo's visit to the U.S. this week was cut short because of a haze crisis back home, which has seen vast parts of his country dangerously polluted by illegal fires from forest-clearing activities. But the brief trip still yielded benefits for Southeast Asia's largest economy.
Mr. Widodo signed investment deals worth around $20 billion and pushed for greater foreign direct investment. Most important, he announced that Indonesia intends to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade accord.
The decision signals Mr. Widodo's seriousness in increasing Indonesia's links to the global economy through foreign trade and investment. Even though the president has frequently declared that the country welcomes foreign businesses, his words have often rung hollow amid a string of insular policy measures.
His government slapped hefty import tariffs on vehicles, furniture, alcohol and ice cream. Any foreigner wishing to work in Indonesia had to prove his or her ability to speak Bahasa Indonesia, the national language. Companies were required to employ as many as 10 Indonesians for every foreigner they hired. Firms had to apply for onerous work permits when directors flew in for short board meetings or staffers conducted ad hoc training sessions in the country.
Recently the government rolled out reform packages aimed at reducing investors' misgivings. It cut the approval time for investment permits for some companies to three hours from more than a year. It rescinded hindrances to the hiring of foreigners. But these improvements simply reversed bad moves the government had made in the first place.
More is needed to transform how foreign companies view Indonesia. Investors can be forgiven for staying guarded given the frequency of policy U-turns.
The TPP would help by imposing certainty where it has been lacking. It would act as an external constraint, keeping Indonesia's protectionist tendencies from producing damaging policies.
Even if Mr. Widodo is bound to ask for special provisions to shield sectors such as agriculture and fisheries from foreign competition, TPP member states must spell out such accommodations and not make them more discriminatory later. This would at least give investors more certainty. Better to have strictures that investors can count on before making decisions than make unfavorable and unpredictable policy shifts when financiers are already deep into an investment cycle.
With a mechanism to resolve investment disputes in an independent tribunal, the TPP would give Indonesia policy credibility that should help secure more foreign investment. Indonesia would have to live with the pressure of competition once import tariffs are slashed, but its companies would enjoy access to important export markets, including the U.S. and Japan.
Given its labor-force advantages, Indonesia should be pleased at the inclusion of the textile-manufacturing sector in the pact. In this regard, staying outside the TPP would have left Indonesia much less competitive than Vietnam.
The TPP's focus on collaboration in service sectors such as e-commerce and finance is also crucial in preparing Indonesia for a move beyond goods manufacturing. Labor-intensive manufacturing is undergoing tremendous change because of breakthroughs in robotics technology. The Asian Development Bank recently noted that Indonesia ranks high among regional economies most vulnerable to automation. More than 20% of jobs in Indonesia are simple and routine enough to be done by robots.
Mr. Widodo should bear this in mind as he steels himself to fight domestic opposition to TPP participation and other economic reforms. Indonesia needs labor-intensive industries so that it can get on the value-added ladder and stay ahead of any massive job destruction caused by automation. If the country fails to do that when it still has labor-force advantages, it will be more difficult when such edges come to naught.
For the current slate of TPP members, welcoming Indonesia makes a lot of sense too. It offers a ready market of 250 million people, second largest after America's. For the U.S., it would be helpful to claim Indonesia as an anchor member in a U.S.-initiated trade pact. China has been flexing its economic muscle in the region by zeroing in on infrastructure development. It outfoxed the U.S. in its creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, of which Indonesia is a founding member.
Against this backdrop, the U.S. needs to secure a spot for Indonesia at the TPP table and help Mr. Widodo overcome vested interests opposing the pact. Even if China has proved adept at providing hard infrastructure, the U.S. shouldn't forget its strengths in soft diplomacy. Indonesia needs help reforming its education system, without which its workforce will remain ill-equipped in the increasingly technology-based global economy. Being at the forefront of automation and artificial intelligence, the U.S. could offer more scholarships to budding Indonesian scientists to attend American universities.
Mr. Widodo had to skip his visit to Silicon Valley this time around. Perhaps in the future, an Indonesian leader won't have to venture abroad at all to witness how industry is pushing the frontiers of technology. But until then, the current president has his work cut out in overcoming nationalistic policy making that has held Indonesia back from achieving its potential.
---
Mr. Wiranto is an economist at OCBC Bank.
Credit: By Wellian Wiranto
