Bob Barker hosted "The Price Is Right" for 35 years. Contestants -- come on down! -- would bid on featured items, trying to guess their retail prices without going over. The show's conceit for vendors promoting appliances and cars was to focus viewers on the manufacturer's suggested retail price, not the actual price in stores. The winning strategy for a final "Showcase" round, Jon Hartley noted in the Journal, involved "people behaving 'irrationally' by not following optimal decision rules." Viewers were being trained that the MSRP was right, even though it was wrong, and to be irrational shoppers. It was brilliant, actually.
Capitalism is based on free markets and price discovery. It doesn't always work. New York Attorney General Letitia James won a civil fraud case against Donald Trump for his overvaluing properties on financial statements to secure bank loans. Ms. James accused Mr. Trump of overstating the value of Trump Tower by up to $250 million. Never mind that bankers took these numbers with a grain of salt and did their own due diligence. Judge Arthur Engoron hit Mr. Trump with a $454 million penalty, including interest, for "ill-gotten gains." This case is dripping in politics. Randomly select any real-estate developer or homeowner in the country, and you'll find he overstates -- or, to save taxes, understates -- the value of his properties.
Mr. Trump is appealing, saying his prices were right, but he still needs to pay the penalty or come up with a bond backed by his properties. At the original $454 million, Mr. Trump said he had "insurmountable difficulties" coming up with a bond backed by his real-estate empire, and 30 different underwriters passed before an appeals court reduced the bond to $175 million last week. Either Mr. Trump is toxic or -- hmmm, the value of his properties really isn't high enough to justify the risk of providing a bond.
Truth Social and Mr. Trump's $5 billion stake to the rescue, right? Not so fast. Mr. Trump owns 80 million shares, or 60%, of the hardly used social network formed via a merger with the special-purpose acquisition company Digital World Acquisition Corp. Truth Social's current value is almost $8.4 billion. But the price isn't real.
First, Truth Social has generated some $5 million since its inception, and it's losing millions. The stock closed last week at $61.96 a share, but a sober analysis would probably have a tough time justifying a $5 price. And like initial public offerings, SPAC insiders aren't allowed, with a few exceptions, to sell shares for a 180-day lockup period after listing. Short sellers have been kept on the sidelines by limited shares to borrow, and borrowing costs are 200 times normal, according to S3 Partners. It's a one-way, buy-only market, for now.
When insiders can sell, unless the company's business booms, look out below. Richard Branson's Virgin Orbit Holdings was worth $3.7 billion when it listed in 2021. In 2023 it delisted with a value near zero. Faraday Future's stock reached $4,400 in 2021; it now trades at 10 cents. I can go on -- Lordstown Motors, Clover Health, QuantumScape. Lesson: Don't trust SPAC prices.
A few weeks ago, on the BitMEX crypto exchange, an order to sell more than 850 bitcoins, worth $55 million, crashed the price from more than $60,000 to $8,900. While the price rebounded and other exchanges weren't affected, perhaps it was like a visit from the ghost of bitcoin future -- a warning that thinly traded markets, especially for assets with no intrinsic value, are dangerous.
Markets can be messy. Remember when oil prices went negative at the start of the pandemic? They're now $83 a barrel. Current markets are crazy for cocoa's puffed prices, taking off like a SpaceX Falcon Heavy rocket. Don't expect a soft landing.
I wonder how Bob Barker would handle this suggested retail mess: Ford's electric trucks, the F-150 Lightning, are selling for up to $15,000 below MSRP with 150 days of inventory. Will Ms. James now sue Ford for overvaluing their trucks? Who is irrational here, consumers or President Biden's EV-subsidizing central planners?
For real markets to work they need to be deep and liquid -- meaning lots of participants with lots of capital -- and provide real-time price discovery. I should say that most markets work, but I find it disturbing that some seemingly functional markets can be victims of illiquidity, bad prices and the mass delusion of crowds. Dot-com anyone? Market prices get stuck, like subprime mortgage prices in 2007, but not forever. GameStop could never sustain its peak $33 billion in value (it's under $4 billion now), as Roaring Kitty and others were bidding up an illiquid stock. Artificial Intelligence is creating many new screaming memes.
In the 1996 movie "Happy Gilmore," Bob Barker had a cameo as golf partner to Adam Sandler's title character. During an unexpected fight scene, Happy Gilmore tells Barker, "The price is wrong, b----!" Ain't that the social truth.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
