A week away from the March 16 launch of Baidu Inc.'s ChatGPT equivalent, employees at China's biggest search-engine operator said they are racing to meet the deadline with the chatbot still struggling to perform some basic functions.
To develop the artificial-intelligence-powered chatbot, dubbed Ernie Bot, hundreds of people have been working around the clock, people familiar with the project said. Other teams have been asked to lend their staff and their powerful computer chips, which Chinese companies can no longer buy because of U.S. sanctions, they said.
The AI model that is the basis of the chatbot is still being trained with data ahead of the scheduled launch, a highly anticipated event in China's technology industry, some of the people said. Some employees said they haven't had sufficient time to build a well-functioning product.
Baidu plans to roll out the product in stages, first opening it up for public testing to a restricted pool of users, people briefed about the plan said. Last month, Baidu said it will embed Ernie Bot into its search engine first and will open it to the public in March.
The rush reflects how Baidu is taking a calculated gamble to get ahead of Chinese rivals that have recently unveiled similar plans. The company said it signed agreements with more than 400 Chinese companies, which will be able to use Ernie Bot in their products and services. In return, the chatbot will gain experience running under different scenarios to help improve its performance, Baidu has said.
A successful launch could help catapult the company, which has fallen out of investor favor in recent years, back into the ranks of China's most prominent tech companies. Failure could lead it to suffer a similar fate as Google, which stuck to its relatively cautious approach to AI until recently, then lost $100 billion in its market capitalization after its AI-powered chatbot search produced factual errors in a demo.
Baidu declined to comment.
Either outcome could have implications for Baidu's relationship with the Chinese government as well as the government's views on generative AI technologies, which can produce content from text to images.
Baidu received encouragement on its plans to build the chatbot from city officials in Beijing, where the company is based, people briefed about the matter said. Ernie Bot will likely be the first in China to rival ChatGPT, developed by San Francisco AI research company OpenAI.
The Beijing city officials reminded Baidu to make sure its service will comply with Chinese laws and regulations, including for data collection and processing, as well as the state's strict internet censorship rules, the people said.
This week, Wang Zhigang, China's minister of science and technology, said developing a ChatGPT-like product would be difficult. "Playing soccer is just a matter of dribbling and shooting, but it's not easy to be as good as Messi," Mr. Wang said, referring to the Argentine athlete Lionel Messi.
China has long been researching this area, he added, but "we will have to wait and see whether we can attain results like OpenAI's."
For years, Baidu invested heavily in developing large language models -- the technology underpinning ChatGPT -- adapting English-language versions from Google and OpenAI for Chinese language. It released its first one in 2019, calling it Ernie, after Google named its model Bert -- both referencing "Sesame Street" characters.
In late December, as buzz grew over ChatGPT, Baidu Chief Executive Robin Li spoke to employees about the new advancement. "We have such cool technology, but can we turn it into a product that everyone needs?" he said, according to an internal transcript seen by The Wall Street Journal. "This is actually the hardest step, but also the greatest and most influential."
In early January, Baidu's executives told its natural-language processing team to start pulling together a ChatGPT-like product with the Ernie models, said people familiar with the project. But the project faced challenges, they said, many of which were shared by other AI developers working on ChatGPT-like technology.
One has been to make the model respond more precisely to user requests, by teaching it to disambiguate between phrases that have a number of meanings or names that can refer to several people. Another has been to make the chatbot generate language that is more like a human's.
A third has been to improve its factual accuracy -- a technical limitation of large language models, which string together sentences based on the probabilities that different words might appear together rather than on pieces of information. This limitation makes such models difficult to control to avoid sensitive topics, a hurdle for censorship.
Baidu hired contractors to help review and improve the chatbot's answers, the people said. Each step takes time, the people said. Properly training a model of such scale -- with thousands of chips -- can take weeks or months, AI researchers said.
This week, engineers and product managers were rushing to improve Ernie Bot's basic functions such as how quickly it responds to user requests and how it summarizes search results, people familiar with the matter said.
The development team has been working nonstop, including through the weeklong Lunar New Year holiday at the end of January, the people said. The project has been scaled back for now from creating a bilingual chatbot capable of conversing in Chinese and English to one focused on Chinese, they said.
Credit: By Raffaele Huang and Karen Hao
