LEMONT, Ill. -- Inside a vast data center on the outskirts of Chicago, the most powerful supercomputer in the world is coming to life. The machine will be able to analyze connections inside the brain and help design batteries that charge faster and last longer.
The high-performance capabilities of the new supercomputer, called Aurora, will be matched with the latest advances in artificial intelligence. Together they will be used by scientists researching cancer, nuclear fusion, vaccines, climate change, encryption, cosmology and other complex sciences and technologies.
Housed at the Energy Department's Argonne National Laboratory, Aurora is among a new breed of machines known as "exascale" supercomputers. In a second, an exascale computer can do one quintillion operations -- a billion billion, or a one followed by 18 zeros.
Aurora is the size of two tennis courts, weighs 600 tons and is expected to be the world's first supercomputer capable of two quintillion operations a second at peak performance, Argonne scientists said.
Aurora, built by Intel and Hewlett Packard Enterprise, is slowly being turned on, rack by rack. Unlike regular computers, these high-powered machines take months to bring online as technicians look for flaws. Aurora is expected to become fully operational in 2024, Argonne said.
On Monday, the Top500, a ranking of supercomputers, said tests showed Aurora, only partly functional, was already the second-most-powerful supercomputer in the world. Oak Ridge National Laboratory's Frontier, which came online last year and was the first operational exascale computer, retained its title as the world's No. 1 computer. Aurora will likely "exceed Frontier. . .when finished," the Top500 said.
There are more of these powerful machines coming soon. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California is building a $600 million exascale supercomputer. It is expected to be deployed next year and could eventually surpass Aurora in computational firepower, a spokesman for the lab said.
Behind Aurora's computing muscle are more than 60,000 graphics processing units, or GPUs, technology developed for advanced videogaming systems that has become the powerhouse of supercomputers.
The added capacity helps provide Aurora with roughly 70% more memory than Frontier, said Olivier Franza, Intel's chief architect of the project. The extra memory will allow the computer to "tackle problems that no other machine can approach," he said. Researchers recently used Aurora to screen 22 billion drug molecules an hour, accelerating potential drug discovery.
Credit: By Scott Patterson
