Today, the U.S. electric grid connects more than 9,000 electricity producers to millions of consumers through 6 million miles of transmission lines managed by more than 3,000 different private and public organizations. In the coming years, these numbers are set to expand, while the demand for renewable energy grows.
To meet the surge in demand projected by 2050, innovative engineers, utility operators and grid architects are planning for a future that blurs the distinctions between energy consumers and producers. Homeowners, businesses and other traditional utility customers are beginning to take on a new role as energy producers, through small-scale solar arrays, wind turbines and other new affordable technologies.
To coordinate so many different power sources and demands, the future power grid will depend on artificial intelligence, automated two-way communications and computer control systems to continuously collect and synthesize data from millions of smart sensors.
Cities have signed increasingly large power purchase agreements to buy electricity from renewable energy developers. One such developer in Cincinnati plans to build the largest municipal solar array in the country. This array of 310,000 solar panels will cover about 1,000 acres and is expected to generate enough electricity to power 25,000 homes every day. Over the next 15 years, energy is expected to account for nearly $25 trillion in infrastructure investment, according to the World Resources Institute.
New demands, such as the growing popularity of electric cars, are already altering the national appetite for power. Moreover, sensors linked through the Internet of Things are offering unprecedented amounts of data documenting the moment-to-moment fluctuations in supply and demand.
But that's just the beginning. Here, The Wall Street Journal outlines the energy grid of the future, based on research by scientists at federal and university laboratories, utility planners and energy analysts. Some technologies, such as wind and solar power, are already on the market but are set to expand vastly in scale in the decades ahead. Others, such as generating power from the movement of ocean tides, are pilot projects, while a few possibilities, such as microbe-powered energy cells and orbital solar power, are still experimental.
As electricity needs fluctuate across the globe, utility engineers will have to make the grid smarter, more interactive, resilient and resistant to the threat of cyberattacks.
(See accompanying graphic -- WSJ Feb. 14, 2020)

Credit: By Lee Hotz and Kevin Hand
