One year ago today, many companies in the U.S. emptied offices, shut down workplaces and sent employees home, after the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus a pandemic and brought economies around the world to a grinding halt.
Most businesses scrapped earlier plans and shifted into survival mode, turning primarily to cloud computing and remote-work software to weather lockdowns, travel bans and other disruptions, chief information officers and industry analysts say.
Overall, global IT spending declined 3.2% last year from 2019 levels, to $3.69 trillion, as companies "prioritized spending on technology and services that were deemed mission-critical during the initial stages of the pandemic," tech research and consulting firm Gartner Inc. said in a January report.
That's a sharp contrast to January last year, when Gartner forecast a 3.4% increase in world-wide IT spending by December in 2020.
Here is a look at the enterprise IT market under Covid-19.
Year of the Cloud
When the pandemic struck, companies quickly learned that transplanting IT systems from in-house servers to cloud providers made it easier to manage them from afar. It also gave employees readier access to business applications from home, in the form of cloud-based software.
"The race to digital business, enabled by cloud tech, was certainly at the heart of nearly everything done in 2020," said John-David Lovelock, vice president of research at Gartner.
While sales of computer servers to businesses across the economy dropped 3.1%, sales to cloud providers, such as Amazon.com Inc.'s Amazon Web Services and Microsoft Corp.'s Azure, grew 8.5%, Mr. Lovelock said.
Companies world-wide spent a record $34.6 billion on cloud services in the second quarter, up roughly 11% from the previous quarter and 30% from the same period in 2019, according to research firm Canalys.
"Within just the few weeks of stay-at-home advisories last spring, our sales volume increased rapidly across two continents," as more consumers began shopping at home, said Jim Miller, chief technology officer at Wayfair Inc. The online home-decorating retailer had shifted IT systems to Google Cloud in January.
Mr. Miller said the cloud enabled the company to handle the surge in demand. "We were able to take more or less a business-as-usual approach, even during prolonged periods of peak demand that would have lasted only a few days at a time pre-Covid," Mr. Miller said.
The Home Office
"Ultimately, the Covid year was all about making sure that employees could get their work done," said J.P. Gownder, vice president and principal analyst at Forrester Inc., an IT research firm. Yet data compiled by Forrester in May 2020 found only about 40% of global companies felt their IT infrastructure was prepared to handle remote work.
That prompted a run on videoconferencing software, among other remote-work and collaboration tools, with most deployments conducted in "fire-drill fashion," Mr. Gownder said. Videoconferencing platforms, like Zoom Video Communications Inc., Microsoft Teams and Cisco Systems Inc.'s Webex, saw a surge in business, he said.
Gartner estimates that more than 1.1 billion workers around the world worked remotely last year, up from 350 million in 2019.
In the last week of April, Zoom reported that the number of daily users on its platform grew to more than 300 million, up from 10 million at the end of 2019.
"The adoption of technology is the highest I've ever seen, and the rate is faster than I've ever seen," said Cisco's Chief Information Officer, Jacqui Guichelaar.
What the crisis taught companies, she said, is that work is "a thing you do, not a place you go." More than half of the employers she has met with over the past few months say they expect employees to work from home at least eight days every month, Ms. Guichelaar said.
Wayne Kurtzman, a research director at International Data Corp., said the crisis has accelerated the adoption of videoconferencing and other collaboration tools by roughly five years.
It has also driven innovation. New features expected in the year ahead include the use of artificial intelligence to enable real-time transcription and translation, informing people when they were mentioned in a meeting and why, and creating a short "greatest hits" version of meetings they may have missed, Mr. Kurtzman said.
Many businesses also ramped up their use of software bots, among other forms of automation, to handle routine workplace tasks like data entry and invoice processing.
Holding Pattern
The attention focused on keeping operations running saw many companies pull back on some long-running IT modernization efforts, or plans to build out ambitious data analytics and business intelligence systems.
Bob Parker, a senior vice president for industry research at IDC, said many companies were simply channeling funds to more urgent needs. But another key obstacle was an inability to access on-site resources to continue pre-Covid initiatives, he said, "especially for projects requiring significant process re-engineering," such as enterprise resource planning implementations and upgrades.
That is likely to change in the months ahead, as the economy opens up and companies play catch-up with IT spending plans, analysts said. Gartner expects world-wide IT spending to jump 6.2% from 2020, reaching $3.9 trillion by the end of the year.
Credit: By Angus Loten
