The clash between the San Francisco 49ers and the Kansas City Chiefs in Super Bowl LVIII won't be the only battle taking place in Las Vegas this Sunday. Away from Allegiant Stadium, cybersecurity experts will be countering threats from hackers they expect to be particularly challenging.
Preparations for defending computer networks in Las Vegas have been under way for some time. Concerns about the potential for politicized attacks -- stemming from the presidential election and geopolitical tensions owing to the conflict in Gaza and the war in Ukraine -- have added to existing cybersecurity threats from criminals and nation-states.
"It doesn't just start with the day of the event. It's months ahead prior, doing lots of different types of scenario testing, and training and role-playing exercises, and it won't end when the Super Bowl ends," said Mike Sherwood, the city's chief information security officer.
Cybersecurity has been a difficult issue for Las Vegas recently. In September, cyberattacks against casino and hotel operators, including Caesars Entertainment and MGM Resorts International, crippled gambling operations and guest services for days.
Allegiant Stadium, home to the Las Vegas Raiders, was chosen in 2021 to host this year's Super Bowl, and events are taking place this week in the buildup to the game. Planning for the events has included an array of government agencies, local authorities and companies, Sherwood said.
The National Football League, Allegiant Stadium, commercial partners and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency held joint cybersecurity exercises in September. They discussed scenarios including phishing, ransomware, data breaches and insider threats. Casino operators and the broader hospitality industry have been involved. The Federal Aviation Administration has banned drones from airspace around the stadium and other locations in Las Vegas.
Securing any major sporting event can be a nightmare. Almost every aspect of game day, including ticketing, on-site sales, operating scoreboards, interactive fan experiences and gaming, involves some form of internet access, meaning it can all potentially be attacked.
"It's all connected through operational technology and Internet-of-Things devices, and then you also have the city of Las Vegas, which is one of the leading smart cities in the world," said Nicole Eagan, chief strategy and artificial intelligence officer for Darktrace, a cybersecurity company working with the city.
Two additional factors are contributing to the threat environment, Eagan said. The romance between Taylor Swift and Chiefs' tight end Travis Kelce has boosted game viewership from her fans hoping to catch a glimpse of the singer. It has also spawned conspiracy theories about the Super Bowl being rigged and Swift acting as an operative for the Democratic Party.
Additional concerns stem from the rapid growth of AI tools, which are being used in Las Vegas to help sift through vast amounts of information generated by cybersecurity systems, and direct resources to where they are needed.
But AI can also be used to launch relatively sophisticated attacks. Generative AI tools, for instance, can create convincing phishing emails to target individuals and companies, while simulated audio and video deepfakes have become extremely lifelike. Micki Boland, a cybersecurity specialist in the office of the chief technology officer at Check Point Software Technologies, said stopping content isn't easy.
"There are some things we can't protect, and that's people consuming this media, which is not real, and then disseminating this information as though it is legitimate," she said.
The stakes are also high beyond Las Vegas. Last year's Super Bowl was the most-watched television program of all time, averaging 115.1 million viewers, according to media ratings giant Nielsen. This year's event could be bigger, as regular-season NFL games this season averaged 17.9 million viewers on television and streaming, up 7% from the previous season.
This means cybersecurity, physical security and information technology teams must work in lockstep during the Super Bowl to ensure systems remain available.
"Cyber's important, but in my world, you've got to make sure the regular business apps and all that stuff are working as well," said Russ Trainor, senior vice president of information technology for the Denver Broncos. "It takes a village sometimes, especially for the Super Bowl, to pull that off."
Sherwood said Las Vegas is no stranger to securing major events. In November, the city hosted its first Formula One Grand Prix, and it hosted the world's largest technology conference, CES, in January.
Credit: By James Rundle
