DISCOVER FINANCIAL SERVICES
DFS +13%
Capital One Financial is taking over Discover. The bank said it will acquire Discover for more than $35 billion in a deal that would combine two of the largest U.S. credit-card companies. Discover is one of the few companies in the U.S., aside from Visa and Mastercard, that operates a payments network, a system that allows businesses to process credit-card purchases. Discover shares gained 13% Tuesday, while Capital One shares edged 0.1% higher.
NVIDIA
NVDA +16%
Nvidia posted another quarter of blockbuster results, driven by the artificial-intelligence frenzy. Nvidia's fiscal fourth-quarter earnings surged more than eightfold from a year earlier. Sales more than tripled, and the company expects them to do so again in the current period. As businesses spend massive amounts to build AI systems, demand for the chips that power those systems has soared beyond Nvidia's manufacturing capacity. Nvidia shares jumped 16% Thursday, hitting an all-time high.
INTUITIVE MACHINES
LUNR +16%
The uncrewed Odysseus spacecraft landed on the moon Thursday, the first time a U.S. vehicle has touched down there since 1972. Odysseus was built by Houston-based Intuitive Machines, and its landing marked the first time a private company has completed a moon landing. Intuitive Machines is working under contract for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Intuitive Machines shares rocketed 16% higher Friday.
RIVIAN AUTOMOTIVE
RIVN -26%
Rivian's stock lost its charge on Thursday. The electric-vehicle startup reported weaker-than-expected results, and said it would lay off 10% of its salaried workforce. Rivian also said it expects vehicle output to be flat this year, missing analysts' forecasts. Executives cited tougher market conditions, including higher interest rates that make monthly vehicle payments pricier. U.S. EV sales rose 47% last year, down from about 70% growth in the previous year. Rivian shares plummeted 26% Thursday.
AT&T
T -2.4%
A nationwide cellular outage left thousands of people without bars on Thursday. There were nearly 75,000 reports of AT&T outages Thursday morning, according to internet-outage tracker Downdetector. Some AT&T users said their phones were stuck in SOS mode, meaning they had no service but could make emergency calls. AT&T said three-quarters of its network had been restored as of late morning. AT&T shares lost 2.4% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
