WASHINGTON -- The emerging deal to make China's TikTok app a U.S.-based company, while still facing questions over security and ownership issues, seems poised to reshape the social-media landscape.
The deal -- approved in concept by President Trump this weekend, but pending final approval by the companies involved -- would create an online power that could challenge Facebook Inc.'s dominance in social media and become a template for partnerships with other Chinese-owned apps.
The plan calls for Oracle Corp. and Walmart Inc. to form partnerships with TikTok's owner, ByteDance Ltd. of Beijing, to become a new U.S.-based company called TikTok Global. The Commerce Department said it would delay for one week a ban on U.S. downloads and updates for the TikTok app that was set to take effect at 11:59 p.m. Sunday while the new deal for TikTok is finalized by the companies and investors involved.
The deal is expected to be valued at about $60 billion, according to one person familiar with the situation.
Oracle said it would host the data for TikTok Global, to eliminate the potential of it falling into the hands of the Chinese government -- a plan that didn't fully satisfy China hawks, including Sen. Marco Rubio (R., Fla.).
"No matter where the actual data is housed, there can be something in that code that sends it the other way," Mr. Rubio said on Fox News. "I think we have to be very careful in looking at that provision, because if there's any opportunity whatsoever for China to continue to collect personal data on Americans, then we can't be supportive of that deal."
Other questions swirled around the ownership. Mr. Trump had called for creation of a U.S. company to take control of TikTok, but the deal as described by backers wasn't the full-scale acquisition that was originally envisioned.
"There's an issue of credibility here," said Harry Broadman, who worked for the U.S. Trade Representative during the Clinton administration. "When you have uncertainty in policy regimes that international parties see, that makes people very nervous."
As initially described by people familiar with the deal, ByteDance would retain roughly 80% ownership of the company. But because ByteDance is about 40%-owned by U.S. investors, the new company with equity stakes for Oracle and Walmart can be described as having majority American ownership, they said.
One of the people elaborated further on Sunday, saying ByteDance wouldn't technically be an owner of the new TikTok Global entity. Instead, shares in the new entity would be distributed proportionally to ByteDance's current owners, which include Chinese and American investors.
With the addition of Oracle and Walmart taking a combined 20% equity stake, TikTok Global would be 53%-owned by U.S. companies or investors, this person said. After an expected initial public offering the Chinese stake in TikTok could fall to about 31%, depending on exact details of the size of the IPO, the person said.
A TikTok spokesman said ByteDance would directly hold an 80% share of the new entity before the IPO.
The deal is "deftly structured to thread the eye of the needle," said Eswar Prasad, an economics professor at Cornell University and the former head of the International Monetary Fund's China division.
"The TikTok deal allows Trump to claim victory and portray it as a validation of his tough, take-no-prisoners approach in dealing with China, even if the final deal represents a compromise relative to the administration's initial set of demands," Mr. Prasad said.
Oracle said it would have a 12.5% stake in the new entity called TikTok Global, and would provide secure cloud service for data on the app. Walmart said it agreed to purchase 7.5% of TikTok Global as well as enter into commercial agreements to provide e-commerce, fulfillment and other services to the new company.
Walmart said its chief executive, Doug McMillon, would serve as one of five board members of the new company. ByteDance founder Zhang Yiming and some U.S. investors would likely be on the board, the people familiar with the deal said.
In a statement, Oracle and Walmart said TikTok Global would create more than 25,000 jobs in the U.S. and lead to more than $5 billion in new tax dollars to the U.S. Treasury.
That statement appeared to address Mr. Trump's initial demand that the buyers should pay "key money" for the deal to be approved. He later said such a payment had been blocked by White House lawyers as illegal.
The companies said the new entity would also foster "an educational initiative to develop and deliver an [artificial-intelligence]-driven online video curriculum to teach children from inner cities to the suburbs," without citing a financial commitment. Mr. Trump had said late Saturday that would be a $5 billion fund. A person familiar with the deal said the education initiative would be funded through the IPO.
The Chinese government hasn't commented on the deal or Mr. Trump's endorsement of it. China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Commerce didn't respond to requests for comment. ByteDance has been in communication with China's internet regulator and the Ministry of Commerce on the sale, according to people familiar with the discussions.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin played a key role shepherding a deal that would overcome last-minute hurdles from the Chinese government, and satisfy China hawks who saw a full sale as the only way to ensure data security.
As the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S., Mr. Mnuchin led the government's review of the proposed transaction. But he sought to keep a deal together, working with U.S. investors and ByteDance executives to help find a solution that would safeguard U.S. data and avoid an outright ban of the app in the event a sale fell through.
"It doesn't go as far in terms of acquiring the company outright," said Stephen Pavlick, a policy analyst at research firm Renaissance Macro, and a former Treasury aide who worked on Cfius issues. "But Cfius never said that they needed to acquire the company outright."
Speaking on Fox News, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said the ownership arrangement satisfies the president's demand that data not be accessible to the Chinese government.
TikTok has quickly become a social-media force, a point its lobbyists made to the Trump campaign, a senior campaign official said. TikTok has about 100 million monthly users in the U.S., up from about 11 million in early 2018, and is mostly popular with teens, including many of voting age in battleground states such as Florida, lobbyists told the campaign.
The White House and campaign didn't respond to requests for comment on whether TikTok's popularity factored into decision-making.
---
Georgia Wells and Liza Lin contributed to this article.

Credit: By John D. McKinnon, Alex Leary and Kate Davidson
