With her $33 billion deal for Red Hat Inc., Chief Executive Ginni Rometty is placing the biggest bet of her career on something International Business Machines Corp. has never done: a massive acquisition.
IBM is paying an amount for Red Hat that roughly equals the combined value of all the deals it has done in the past 15 years, as tracked by Dealogic. IBM said unreported deals push the tally of previous acquisitions higher. The deal's value represents about 30% of IBM's current stock-market capitalization. IBM's next biggest deal was a $5 billion purchase of Cognos Inc. in 2007.
IBM Shares were down 4.1% to $119.64 Thursday amid a broad market selloff.
For most of her nearly seven-year tenure as CEO, Ms. Rometty has tried to shake the rust off the aging tech giant with bets on emerging opportunities such as artificial intelligence and the blockchain, some of which have yet to pay out. With the Red Hat deal, IBM is making a significant gamble on a longtime pillar of its turnaround plans, the business of renting out computing power and software in the cloud.
"This is a bet-the-company move by IBM," said Matt McIlwain, managing director of Madrona Venture Group LLC, a venture firm that focuses on cloud computing. The firm isn't an investor in either IBM or Red Hat.
On Monday, the companies said in a securities filing that Red Hat would pay IBM a $975 million termination fee if the deal doesn't close in a year.
Massive acquisitions have a long history of not working out. And there are reasons to be skeptical of IBM's record, said Craig Lowery, an analyst at Gartner Inc.
IBM paid roughly $2 billion to buy SoftLayer Technologies Inc. in 2013, hoping to make a dent in Amazon.com Inc.'s leadership in the market for renting computing power and software, called infrastructure as a service.
But SoftLayer never became a service that threatened Amazon or others, or served as a platform from which IBM could significantly boost its other applications, Mr. Lowery said. "They've made a lot of deals," he said. "None of them have been particularly successful."
An IBM spokesman disputed that sentiment, noting the company has done well integrating services businesses, such as with its $3.5 billion acquisition of the consulting arm of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in 2002.
IBM and Red Hat expect the deal to close in the second half of next year.
Whether or not successful, the deal likely will provide a bookend to Ms. Rometty's continuing struggle to breathe new life into the 107-year-old company. Her efforts to shrink IBM's older, slower-growth lines of business while focusing on what she refers to as high-value businesses remain a work in progress.

Credit: By Jay Greene
