It's easy to spot robots on screen these days: They're the beautiful ones getting assaulted by humans. In HBO's new series "Westworld," the ingenue robot Dolores is raped and brutalized off-camera in a repeated loop. In "Humans," a British TV show that returns this winter for a second season in the U.S., a lifelike machine named Anita is pressed into sex with her married human owner, whose version of pillow talk includes the command: "Delete this from your records."
While robots have long been a staple of film and television, their once-outlandish future has never felt so close. Storylines routinely incorporate aspects of artificial intelligence. In the hope and anxiety of the moment, writers are asking viewers: Are robots heroes, villains or just appliances?
Hollywood is seizing on the intimate ways technology has entwined itself in real life. An episode of the British dystopian series "Black Mirror" on Netflix explored a service that let people communicate with dead loved ones by re-creating their voices and thoughts using their lifetime output on social media. That isn't so far from actual businesses like Eternime, which aims to mine a user's digital footprint for stories and memories with the goal of creating an "intelligent avatar" that could interact with friends and family for generations. "Black Mirror" takes a leap further, naturally, when a grieving woman purchases a walking, talking double of her dead beloved and then struggles to part with him.
Female robots offer a particularly provocative window into the current cultural mood. And they're everywhere, including sprawling alongside naked men in a huge orgy on Sunday's episode of "Westworld." Margaret Atwood, whose 2015 book "The Heart Goes Last" features sexbots of both genders, calls female machines emblems of the discomfort that women stir in some men. "They'd rather have a simulacrum that doesn't talk back, resist, or despise them," Ms. Atwood observed in an email.
In recent movies such as "Her" and "Ex Machina," an artificially intelligent female is an almost-living presence engaging with men who are alone. "Do you think about me when we aren't together?" the robot Ava asks a potential human love interest in "Ex Machina." "Sometimes at night, I'm wondering if you're watching me on the cameras, and I hope you are." Her eyes well up with tears.
Yet these characters are much more than they seem -- vulnerable beings seeking human connection one minute, cold circuitry the next. In AMC's "Humans," actors playing "synths" limit their blinking, since robots would be designed to save on battery life. When Gemma Chan auditioned for the synth Anita, she put her hands palms-down on a table and stayed put, projecting an unusual stillness that distinguished her from fidgety humans.
The "Humans" writers were struck by the empathy fans felt even for blank-faced synth characters like Odi, a broken model whose nose leaks blue fluid. Odi can still recall his owner's dead wife, one of the last on earth to be able to do so. Watching Odi, audiences enter an emotional bind: The android doesn't have feelings, but the actor playing him has plenty of them. "You connect with the actor -- none of us can help but do that," says "Humans" co-creator Sam Vincent. "It's a very complicated thing happening."
The new season of "Humans" features robots exploring deeper relationships and delving into their identities. Mr. Vincent and co-creator Jonathan Brackley met with tech experts who are fans, including Demis Hassabis, founder and chief executive of Google's artificial intelligence team DeepMind, which this year marked a stunning defeat of a human master at the complex game Go.
The boom in robot entertainment comes as artificial intelligence enables everything from killer drones to self-driving cars to talking nonhumans named Siri and Alexa. Films on the subject range from big-budget hits -- last year's "Avengers: Age of Ultron," featuring a robotic supervillain, grossed $1.4 billion world-wide -- to smaller projects with rising stars, like "Ex Machina," with a breakout performance by Alicia Vikander.
David Levy, an artificial-intelligence expert and author of "Love and Sex with Robots," believes humans will be having sex with interactive robots within the next year or so, falling in love with them after that and marrying them by 2050. He even speculates that Massachusetts will be the first state to legalize human-robot marriages. "Once you have a story like 'I had sex with a robot and it was great!' appear someplace like Cosmo magazine, I'd expect many people to jump on the bandwagon," Mr. Levy told the publication Live Science in 2007.
In the social-media buzzy "Westworld," co-creators Jonathan Nolan and Lisa Joy chose to make female robots the first to move toward consciousness. As these so-called hosts awaken to their enslavement in the Wild West theme park where humans enact fantasies of sex and slaughter, rebellion begins. In one scene, frontier-madam android Maeve Millay, played by Thandie Newton, is seducing a guest when a gory memory grips her. The guest loses interest. As Maeve's inner life emerges, park workers complain that fewer visitors want to sleep with her. "If we don't get her numbers back up," a worker says, "she'll be decommissioned."
Such dialogue runs counter to the visuals of "Westworld," where robot hosts are all but indistinguishable from guests. Angela Sarafyan, who plays the prostitute Clementine Pennyfeather, says she and other actors were encouraged to consider the hosts "more human than the humans."
Science-fiction writer Madeline Ashby, whose 2012 novel "vN" is a feminist robot revenge story, finds it telling that female robots insisting on their humanity are popular at a moment when a woman could occupy the White House and the culture is grappling with questions of privilege and discrimination. Some oppose the idea of female robots altogether: Kathleen Richardson, senior research fellow in the ethics of robotics at England's De Montfort University, started the Campaign Against Sex Robots last year, arguing that the machines reinforce ideas that women can be treated like property.
Artificial intelligence on screen concerns some couples counselors, who say such characters can promote troubling ideas of the opposite sex in a way that's similar to pornography. "It sets up in society an unrealistic expectation -- like somebody out there can be that robot for me," says psychologist Peter Pearson, co-founder of the Couples Institute in Menlo Park, Calif.
Still, interactive sex robots are on the horizon. Next year, RealDoll plans to release a roughly $10,000 animated, robotic head that attaches to its female and male "love dolls." The head will be equipped with speech recognition and enough artificial intelligence to ask questions without being prompted, says Matt McMullen, founder of the San Diego area company. "If someone is drawn to it in a mental and emotional way in addition to the physical, that's really what we're after," he says, adding that owners will be able to decide how smart or naive their dolls sound.
SoftBank Robotics, a Japanese company that soon will hit the U.S. market with a four-foot-tall, gender-neutral, business-information robot named Pepper, included a clause in its 2015 user contract to prevent the use of the robot for sex and immoral acts. The intent was to prevent people from building custom applications that would allow Pepper to, say, use facial recognition to stalk someone.
On screen, robots expose the human capacity for good and evil. "As long as there is technological progress in the real world, people will continue to look to science fiction and its metaphors to help understand progress, its moral conundrums and its effect on humanity," says screenwriter Jack Paglen, whose artificial-intelligence film credits include the coming "Alien: Covenant." "I don't think we're done with stories about robots."
Credit: By Ellen Gamerman
