When it comes to customer experience at the nation's largest retail pharmacy chains, there is plenty of room for improvement, according to Tilak Mandadi, the chief digital, data, analytics and technology officer at CVS Health.
Among other things, customers can be caught off guard by the price of their prescriptions when they go to pay, they might face never-ending menu options when calling customer service, and if they want to quickly pick up toiletries, they often find them locked up in cases. A shortage of pharmacists isn't helping matters, either.
And although technology has revolutionized the consumer experience for ordering pizza and calling taxis, complex legacy systems and strict regulations around health data have made it slower to transform pharmacy and healthcare.
Mandadi, who also is executive vice president of ventures at CVS Health and previously held roles at experience-focused businesses such as MGM Resorts and Disney's Disney Parks, is hoping his team can help the industry catch up by targeting some of these problems.
The stakes are high. Pharmacy chains have struggled to boost profits in recent years, squeezed by drug pricing and lower foot traffic as the pandemic waned. Last year CVS Health said it would cut costs and thousands of jobs -- mostly corporate positions -- as it remakes its business as a healthcare-service company. It says it also is committed to ensuring there are appropriate levels of staffing and resources at pharmacies after a pharmacist shortage led to reports of overworked staff and dangerous mistakes.
CVS Health operates more than 9,000 retail locations and about 1,000 walk-in clinics nationwide. The Woonsocket, R.I.-based firm also owns Aetna, one of the country's biggest health insurers, and Caremark, the nation's largest pharmacy-benefit manager.
Mandadi says he views technology -- including a new CVS app slated to launch this year -- as key to enabling a better customer experience and transforming the business.
He spoke with The Wall Street Journal about planned customer-experience improvements, the role that artificial intelligence should and shouldn't play in healthcare and why he's still bullish on the metaverse.
Edited excerpts follow.
WSJ: What gaps do you see in customer experience today in the pharmacy?
TILAK MANDADI: What our customers are telling us is they want accurate real-time status of their order. Where's my prescription? When is it going to be filled? And equally important, they want to have cost transparency and no surprises at the pharmacy counter when it comes to what do I owe.
They also want flexibility. I'll give you an example. They want to have flexibility to get refills in a different geographical location, a different city. They want to change the frequency of refills. They want more control over this. And last but not least, they want their questions answered quickly because waiting for answers is stressful.
WSJ: What are you doing to address these issues?
MANDADI: Customer experience is going to be improved with the new app with self service. If members can get most of their questions answered without having to reach a pharmacist or someone at a call center, they can do it at their own pace and at the time of their choosing.
We will never stop somebody from calling us, but conversational AI using natural language -- whether voice-based or text-based -- can answer most of their questions from within the app.
WSJ: What about when people do want to call a customer-service line?
MANDADI: For calls, we want to move away from the traditional, incredibly annoying menu-based options -- such as press 1 for this, press 2 for this, etc. Instead, you will just say what you are calling about, and AI will respond if it can answer the question. If it can't, AI will immediately put you through to a live agent.
WSJ: You said earlier that what customers want is accurate, real-time status of their order and no surprises in terms of costs. You are a company that owns parts of the healthcare-delivery system, as well as the pharmacy. Is better integration with insurance and providers the answer?
MANDADI: That's exactly right. There is room to improve specifically when it comes to providing that integrated experience, eliminating all these different stakeholders and different moving parts.
Consider cost transparency. A much better integration between our pharmacy and all of the drug-benefit companies, whether it is OptumRx, Caremark, Express Scripts or others, would allow us to compute what is covered and what the actual cost of a prescription is in real time. So we can communicate that before somebody comes to the pharmacy counter.
Interoperability, or how these different players exchange data in an automated fashion, is a pretty significant focus for the healthcare industry now. There's some government regulation that has accelerated this interoperability and some industry push for interoperability is helping.
WSJ: How do you ensure you aren't violating patients' privacy with integrating these processes and sharing this data?
MANDADI: I think nothing should be shared without a specific opt-in by the patient or the member.
For example, members could consent in their profile to share all of the prescriptions they have with different pharmacies. That way, we would have a complete profile of what drugs this patient is taking. That would allow us to make sure as we are filling their prescriptions to give a more comprehensive view of what they should be careful about and what could be the potential side effects.
WSJ: How are you using technology to solve the pharmacist shortage?
MANDADI: By taking over the administrative aspects of pharmacists' work, technology will allow pharmacists to spend more time with patients. Pill counting is one example. We don't need pharmacists to count the pills. This can be done with technology, with simple robotics.
We also did something really cool called Smart DUR, or drug utilization review. There are certain types of drugs that the pharmacist needs to talk with patients about. Using AI and generative AI, we augment our pharmacists with [patient-specific alerts and information] so they can get to the patient a lot faster.
WSJ: When you think about the role of AI in the healthcare-delivery space, how do you know when you're pushing it too far?
MANDADI: AI should focus on enhancing human touch and minimizing human error. AI should never provide a diagnosis. That is for the doctor. AI can provide all kinds of information to the doctor. It can say, hey, here's additional information or it can summarize information from a vast amount of literature. But diagnosing a condition is for the doctor not for AI.
WSJ: You talked a lot about the metaverse during your time at Disney. Do you see a role for it at CVS?
MANDADI: I'm kind of in the minority, but I am actually bullish about the metaverse. I think it received a lot of negative reaction because of the initial use cases and the hype cycle. To me, it isn't the silly-looking characters walking around on the screen. It's more of: How do you create an immersive experience for somebody where they are at?
I'll give you an example. There are certain types of merchandise behind lock and key in retail stores including CVS. We haven't done this yet, but one option might be to use metaverse capabilities to allow known loyal members to open locks in the physical store [by clicking a button in the app]. A lot of basic things like that can become part of the overarching metaverse for health.
---
Isabelle Bousquette is a reporter for The Wall Street Journal in New York. Email her at isabelle.bousquette@wsj.com.
---
Tilak Mandadi
Current job: CVS Health
Executive vice president, ventures and chief digital, data, analytics and technology officer
Before this:
-- MGM Resorts
Chief strategy officer
-- Walt Disney
Executive vice president of digital, and global chief technology officer
-- American Express
Led digital transformation, including cards, consumer travel and banking
Education: Master's in computer science from the University of Oregon
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
