Technology shares slipped as investors awaited earnings from industry heavyweights that have pushed the S&P 500 to records.
The benchmark index lost 0.1%, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average added 0.3%, or 133.86 points, to a record 38467.31. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite fell 0.8%, its worst day in almost four weeks.
Investors parsed a fresh spate of earnings for signs of how consumers are holding up and companies' expectations for future quarters. Slightly more than 100 firms report earnings this week. By the end of Friday, nearly half of the S&P 500 will have posted results.
Among the biggest gainers was General Motors, which saw its shares climb 7.8% after it provided Wall Street with a surprisingly optimistic profit outlook for the year. MSCI rose 9.3% after the investment-support tool provider raised its quarterly dividend by 16% and logged fourth-quarter earnings and revenue that topped analysts' expectations.
United Parcel Service tumbled 8.2% after the delivery giant said revenue declined in the last quarter of 2023 and that it would cut 12,000 jobs this year. Whirlpool shed 6.6% after the appliance maker posted higher quarterly revenue but gave downbeat sales guidance.
"I'm still trying to parse through what's going on with earnings, but it's been kind of a mixed trend," said Matt Dmytryszyn, chief investment officer at Telemus Capital. "We're seeing some mixed messages."
Big-tech stocks have propelled indexes so far this year. Investors are waiting to see whether earnings and guidance for future quarters are enough to drive them even higher.
Shares of Alphabet, Google's parent company, fell in aftermarket trading after it reported fourth-quarter results. Microsoft shares were muted after its net income beat Wall Street expectations, with the company calling out momentum in the cloud business and traction with artificial intelligence.
The Conference Board's consumer-confidence index rose to 114.8 in January, fresh data showed, roughly in line with economists' expectations. The reading marked the highest since December 2021.
Alex McGrath, chief investment officer for NorthEnd Private Wealth, said he is focusing on earnings for signs of whether consumer spending can continue to hold up. While inflation has slowed, Americans are still paying elevated prices, he said.
"The consumer is still being squeezed," he said. "The most important thing we can be looking at this point is the health of the consumer."
The Federal Reserve is expected to hold interest rates steady on Wednesday. But, at an afternoon press conference, traders will be parsing Fed Chair Jerome Powell's remarks for guidance on future rate cuts.
In bond markets, the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note ticked down to 4.056% from 4.089% Monday. Bond yields and prices move inversely.
In commodities, Brent crude for March delivery gained 47 cents, or 0.6%, to $82.87 a barrel.
Overseas, the pan-continental Stoxx Europe 600 edged 0.2% higher. Chinese stocks remained under pressure from concerns over China's economy and Evergrande's liquidation order. At midday Wednesday, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 1.2% and the Shanghai Composite was down 0.9%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.4%.
Credit: By Caitlin Ostroff
