To support his rebottling of secular stagnation, Jason Furman says: "The theory that today's high price/earnings ratios are justified -- meaning it simply has become more expensive to buy a given return -- implies lower earnings going forward." It implies exactly the opposite ("As Boomers Go Gray, Even 2% Growth Will Be Hard to Sustain," op-ed, Feb. 15).
In the real world, investors are not buying "a given return." They are buying an expected return. They will settle for a low current return -- a high price/earnings ratio -- if they expect higher earnings going forward, not lower earnings. Growth stocks, with higher expected earnings growth, command higher price/earnings ratios. When corporate earnings as a whole are expected to grow faster, price/earnings ratios for the market as a whole will also grow. Higher price/earnings ratios imply higher, not lower, expected growth rates. Correct or not, the market's expectations are not the same as Mr. Furman's.
S. Paul Posner
New York
---
The factor that offsets demographics is immigration. If we are not producing enough young people ourselves, we can easily import them from the rest of the world.
Em. Prof. Tony Lima
CSU East Bay
Hayward, Calif.
---
We may very well be on the cusp of miraculous technological breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, medicine, transportation, etc., that generate productivity-growth rates that are impossible to predict. Few economists a century ago could predict the productivity benefits of electricity, automobiles, airplanes and telephones. For more than two centuries, the U.S. economy has exceeded expectations. Why not have Washington do whatever it can to encourage private-sector research and development and capital investments which offer the only hope of determining a high-growth rate (rather than accepting a low-growth fate)?
If policies based on unrealistic optimism fail, the worst that happens is a little less than 2% trendline growth (because of a little more volatility and inflation) and "dashed expectations."
Paul Douglas
Jacksonville, Fla.
---
When I read Mr. Furman's prediction, my first response was panic. We are doomed. Then I remembered the John Kenneth Galbraith quote: "The only function of economic forecasting is to make astrology look respectable." So I relaxed, took a sip of scotch and finished the article. Then I panicked again because I realized he didn't mention Congress's uncontrollable spending and the rapidly rising debt-to-GDP ratio. A bigger sip of scotch solved that.
Michael P. Carter
Savannah, Ga.
