Private-equity firm Warburg Pincus is leading a $125 million growth investment in software adoption technology startup Whatfix as the company expands its product line.
The investment also includes money from SoftBank Group in Tokyo, which led a $90 million growth investment in Whatfix in 2021. That deal valued the company in the ballpark of around $600 million, Chief Executive Khadim Batti told The Wall Street Journal at the time. The company's value before the latest capital infusion had grown to nearly $800 million, according to people familiar with the transaction.
In 2014, Batti and Vara Kumar, now head of R&D and solutions, co-founded the technology provider in India to help companies improve the adoption and implementation of enterprise software, such as products from SAP or Salesforce, and mobile applications across their own organizations. Corporations use software adoption technology to ease the integration of new programs, monitor their use and train new workers.
Previous investment rounds have pumped at least $140 million into Whatfix from venture and growth investors. The latest investment included new private shares issued by the company and those acquired from other backers or employees.
It is unclear how many of the earlier venture backers, if any, are selling down their stakes as part of the latest deal.
Since 2021, Whatfix has more than quadrupled its annual recurring revenue, according to Batti. It has also expanded beyond its software adoption technology to add product analytics that help enterprises better understand user behavior when engaging with applications.
More recently, the company is rolling out a group of products called Mirror that lets customers simulate applications for training and bringing on new workers without the risks posed by using live programs for those purposes.
The latest investment will help Whatfix increase its research and development capabilities, particularly around applying artificial intelligence technology, as well as geographic expansion, Batti said. In recent years, the company has added personnel in Australia, Singapore and the Middle East, he added.
Whatfix's dominant position in the market for software-adoption technology and the fact that Fortune 500 companies account for a significant chunk of its annual revenue helped make it an attractive bet, said Managing Director Narendra Ostawal of New York-based Warburg Pincus.
"At this scale, how many [Indian software] companies are there which are a No. 1 or No. 2 player in its niche globally and where a substantial part of the revenue base comes from Fortune 500 [companies]?" Ostawal said. "If you [use] these two criteria, and nothing else, I don't think any other business shows up."
He added the deal also reflects Warburg's bet on the steady growth in use of software adoption platforms among corporations.
"The real call that we have taken is that the category has legs," Ostawal said. Systems designed to help large organizations apply new technology "will remain a very important overlay for enterprises as they implement transformational digital applications, be they Salesforce, Workday or SAP."
Credit: By Laura Kreutzer
