The road to driverless vehicles is a patchwork of highways and byways leading in many directions. It promises everything from cars that allow people to enjoy a living-room experience as they travel around town to a road train where motorists traveling long distances can turn over the driving to someone else by latching onto a bus or truck heading the same way.
Here's a peek at some of the most recent work now being done in autonomous driving:
Google it
The biggest attention getter is the Google Self-Driving Car. Researchers have outfitted more than a dozen cars with a Google system that uses artificial-intelligence software to collect data from video cameras inside the car, radar sensors on the front of the vehicle, and a light detection and ranging, or Lidar, remote sensor. The Lidar measures distance to obstacles with a pulse of light from a laser. One design drawback is the need for the placement of the Lidar sensor atop the car. Last month, Google said its modified autonomous Toyota Prius had completed more than 300,000 miles accident-free. The company has no immediate plans to develop self-driving cars commercially, but it could sell the software and systems to companies eager to take on such a project. Earlier this year, Nevada gave Google the first U.S. license for a driverless vehicle, allowing the company to test-drive its cars on the state's roadways.
Pilot project
Volkswagen AG is developing a Temporary Auto Pilot system that can allow a vehicle to travel on its own at speeds as high as 80 miles an hour. The system, built around the car's cruise-control mode, uses sensors and cameras on the vehicle's exterior to monitor the car's position on the road and make sure it doesn't stray into other traffic. The Temporary Auto Pilot is meant to act only as a co-pilot helping instead of replacing the driver. VW hasn't said when or if the system will be produced.
Basic training
The Swedish auto maker Volvo AB is working on an intriguing offering as part of the European Union's Safe Road Trains for the Environment project. Volvo's system works by stringing together a group of cars traveling in the same direction behind a vehicle driven by a professional. For example, a driver going to New York uses the car's navigation system to find a bus heading the same way and offering the train service. As drivers queue behind the lead vehicle, a wireless system from the bus takes over the following cars. Drivers take back control of their cars and jump out of line when they reach their destination. The system has been tested in Spain with three vehicles following a truck for 124 miles at 53 miles per hour.
Interiors
Unlike Google and VW, Continental AG puts all the pieces of its highly automated driving system within the car. The technology uses a stereo camera equipped with sensors that can measure the distance and size of potential obstacles, while electronics control the braking and power steering and respond to signals for the car to slow or turn. The driver can take over the car at any time. The system is being tested in a modified Volkswagen Passat that has driven more than 6,000 miles without incident; Continental is aiming for 10,000 miles.
Salon on wheels
One vision of the future is the AC-X plug-in hybrid electric concept vehicle that Honda Motor Co. showed off at the Tokyo Auto Show last year. The car would be driven by dual joysticks in conventional mode. But with a switch to autopilot, the joysticks would stow away and the front seat would recline, allowing for a living-room feel in the car.
Pod for two
General Motors Co. is working on a a podlike concept car that would have an autonomous mode. The EN-V, unveiled at the 2010 Shanghai World Expo, is a zero-emission vehicle powered by lithium batteries. GM has said it will brand the two-seater a Chevrolet if it comes to market.
Slow-jamming the road
Congested roads are stressful, but Ford Motor Co. hopes to make them easier on drivers. The company is developing Traffic Jam Assist, which uses a combination of radar and cameras to keep the vehicle in step with other vehicles around it. The system would manage the vehicle's speed through a jam, avoiding the need for frequent sudden stops and starts -- and if all goes well, eliminating the fender bender as a staple of the daily commute.
It's academic
Griffith University in Australia is researching the possibility of linking a smartphone's satellite navigation with cameras to steer a vehicle autonomously down roads and highways. Sensors and cameras installed on the car would interact with a smartphone plugged into a docking station on the dashboard. The University of Oxford has created a robot car by connecting the controls, including braking and steering, to a host of sensors and computers. A 3-D laser spins atop the vehicle to provide data.
---
Mr. Bennett is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Detroit bureau. He can be reached at jeff.bennett@wsj.com.
Subscribe to WSJ:
Credit: By Jeff Bennett
