Asset managers are paying up to hire data scientists and engineers as part of an effort to help portfolio managers with investment decisions and devise new trading strategies.
Many of these traditional stock- and bond-picking firms want these mathematical and computer experts to dive into pools of data -- and the machine-learning tools that harness that data and other information -- in search of fresh perspectives and blind spots.
At Neuberger Berman Group LLC, its data-science team began this year with big plans, if limited resources.
"Just me and an intern," group head Michael Recce said.
Six months later, the group has added a fifth member to its team of data scientists and engineers as it works through a backlog of projects for the firm's portfolio managers. Neuberger's investment managers have already poached some of Mr. Recce's staff, leading him to recruit replacements.
"Each town needs one," he said, paraphrasing Alexander Graham Bell's famous line predicting the telephone's widespread use.
Data scientists, who have already helped usher media companies, retailers and other old-line industries into the digital age, first arrived at Wall Street banks decades ago as computing power and the complexity of derivatives surged.
They built computer models that traded securities, giving rise to the quantitative-investing field that has changed how markets function.
At asset managers, these data scientists aren't about to outnumber the phones found on the trading floors. But many of these traditional stock- and bond-picking firms are spending millions of dollars to beef up their data-analysis capabilities.
"Most of it is at an early stage, and I don't think it's matured yet," said Onur Erzan, a senior partner at consultant McKinsey & Co. "There will be new sources of data and it will help with investment decisions, but the real question is can an asset manager sustain an edge on those kinds of insights."
Data scientists with advanced degrees from top universities can expect to earn as much as $280,000 a year in an entry-level job at an investment firm, according to Options Group, a Wall Street recruiter. Asset managers aren't just competing with other financial firms for talent, but with "the whole economy," said Michael Karp, Options Group's chief executive. "It's a whole new world."
The push into data arrives at a tenuous period for investment firms as trillions of dollars have flowed into low-cost, index-tracking investments and out of funds in which managers actively buy and sell securities and whose uneven performance could no longer justify the higher fees.
Petter Stensland's foray into data began in late 2012 when, as a junk-bond analyst at AllianceBernstein Holding LP, he needed to analyze the prospects of the many oil-and-gas companies emerging in the nation's energy boom.
For many of these producers, their value -- and their ability to repay their debts -- hinged on how much oil or gas they could pull from the land they owned. The problem was there were no reporting standards on energy reserves, and the producers' own views were subjective, Mr. Stensland said.
Mr. Stensland said he and his team began to compile data from the states' oil-and-gas commissions, stitching together decades of history on oil wells' output in each parcel of land (typically about 640 acres). Building Bertha, the database's chosen name, took 15,000 man-hours. The analyst traveled to industry towns such as Midland, Texas, and Roswell, N.M., where he could copy older data preserved in oil-and-gas libraries' microfilm. By mid-2014, Bertha had persuaded the high-yield investment team that certain producers were at greater risk of defaulting on their debt. The firm sold the shakiest bonds.

Credit: By Justin Baer
