Data scientists at Coatue Management LLC spent the past few years digging into new data sets to gain an edge in investing. Now, the firm is betting on data science itself as hedge funds across Wall Street push into "big data" analysis to find trading opportunities.
The hedge fund led a $27 million funding round for a company called Domino Data Lab Inc., a San Francisco startup founded by Bridgewater Associates LP alumni, the companies announced Wednesday. Other investors in the round include Bloomberg Beta, Zetta Venture Partners and Sequoia Capital, all three of which invested in earlier rounds.
Coatue, which has $10.5 billion of assets under management, according to a person familiar with the company, is investing in Domino through a new fund dedicated to investments in private companies.
As more hedge funds dig into growing amounts of data available that can give indications on revenues at companies ahead of quarterly announcements and hints at economic growth before government numbers are published, they are hiring more data scientists to do more intensive analysis than hedge funds are used to doing.
For example, a firm could dip into location data collected by a mobile phone app to find out if more people are visiting Nordstrom Inc. than in previous quarters. Getting the data into the right condition and running statistical analysis on it to find significant changes requires new skills. The app likely only collects a small sample of overall visitors to the store, so without proper care a novice could find signals that aren't reliable for investing.
"The biggest challenge for hedge funds getting into these alternative data sets is analyzing the data," said Rado Lipus, founder of Neudata Ltd., which helps financial firms find new data sets to drive investments. "It's taken some firms years to get right."
Domino's software allows data scientists to run experiments and analyze data in a collaborative program, which helps analysts at Coatue discover new trends and hand them to portfolio managers to act on.
Coatue is betting Domino can beat competitors such as Cloudera Inc. and Ufora Inc. to be for data science what Microsoft Excel is for financial analysts.
"Data science and artificial intelligence are the most important trends in technology today," said Thomas Laffont, senior managing director at Coatue. "But we realized in our own internal work that doing data science is very time consuming."
Mr. Laffont sees quantitative hedge funds such as Renaissance Technologies LLC and D.E. Shaw & Co. as the first wave of using data science to drive profits by finding hidden patterns in the markets. Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Facebook Inc. followed next, using data to drive ad sales and engagement with their web offerings. The third wave, he said, is the rest of the corporate and financial world using the tool to drive their businesses.
Financial clients are a big and growing driver of Domino's business, as more investment firms delve into "alternative data," said Nick Elprin, the CEO and co-founder of Domino who previously spent seven years designing technology at Bridgewater -- the largest hedge fund in the world. Everything from credit-card receipts to satellite images of corn crops are increasingly driving Wall Street investments in a major trend that is still in an early stage, industry observers say.
"At Bridgewater, I learned that the key to faster quantitative research and data science was to iterate on ideas more quickly," Mr. Elprin said. "Technology can allow for faster experimentation and move ideas from development into production quickly."
The other co-founders of Domino are Christopher Yang, a former Bridgewater software developer, and Matthew Granade, former head of research at Bridgewater. Mr. Granade is now leading a data-focused transformation as chief market intelligence officer at Point72 Asset Management LP, which manages Steven A. Cohen's fortune.
Venture-capital firms backed by Mr. Cohen and other quantitative investment firms have been plowing money into data and quantitative startups recently. Point72 Ventures last year bought a stake in Quantopian Inc., a Boston-based firm that lets anyone try their hand at developing trading algorithms and selects the best ones to run in actual trading. Mr. Cohen also pledged up to $250 million to Quantopian's own hedge fund that runs those crowdsourced algorithms.
WorldQuant Ventures LLC, whose founder Igor Tulchinsky runs the $5 billion quantitative investment firm WorldQuant LLC, has invested in data-focused companies such as PsychSignal -- which analyzes social media for "mood" and other signals -- and Estimize -- which creates crowdsourced earnings estimates for public companies. Two Sigma Ventures, an arm of Two Sigma Investments, has a stake in Domino competitor Ufora.
Domino's other clients include companies involved in manufacturing, insurance, life sciences and media, Mr. Elprin said. Canadian debt-ratings company DBRS Ltd. is a client.
Credit: By Bradley Hope
