Nvidia's earnings last week showed strong demand will likely carry the chip maker's business to new heights in the coming quarters -- but concerns persist about how long the boom will last.
Nvidia eased worries of a short-lived AI rally by handily beating estimates and giving a glowing outlook, citing an expected boost in supplies. The company isn't shipping close to demand, Chief Executive Jensen Huang said, suggesting there is more upside even after a pair of record quarters.
Analysts have raised questions about the supply chain and the long-term strength of the current boom, while tech executives said they might cut back on the purchases of AI chips if they aren't translating into new business.
"All major tech companies are going to plow money into this -- not just big tech, but also software and services companies and of course the venture [capital] world," said Dylan Patel of SemiAnalysis, an industry research firm. "The question is, how long will they continue to plow money in?"
In the near term, demand for Nvidia's products could hardly be hotter. Customers are racing to install chips that underlie artificial-intelligence systems such as OpenAI's ChatGPT. Companies are increasingly convinced that AI is indispensable for their growth, and analysts estimate that Nvidia has a market share of more than 70% in AI chips.
Like its chips, Nvidia's shares have been sought-after by investors, having more than tripled this year, propelling it to a valuation north of $1 trillion. The stock finished higher last week despite falling later in the week following its earnings report Wednesday.
Analysts at UBS forecast Thursday that Nvidia's current supply agreements could take its revenue to as much as $25 billion a quarter, not factoring in the expectation that supply will grow. The path to get to around that amount in fairly short order "seems pretty clear to us," UBS said in a note.
That figure would be a large leap from the $13.5 billion of revenue for its recently completed quarter and the $16 billion it forecast for its current quarter. Three years ago, Nvidia was averaging around $3 billion in revenue a quarter.
Some analysts see potential problems in Nvidia's supply chain. It designs chips but relies on contract manufacturers -- primarily Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. -- to produce them. That makes Nvidia dependent on others' ability to boost production at times of high demand. TSMC has been expanding its capacity, including with a $2.9 billion investment unveiled in July to expand advanced manufacturing that knits together numerous chips in one package. Nvidia uses that packaging in many of its advanced AI chips, and the company reassured investors Wednesday that it secured more of it.
As its supplies grow, Nvidia might have to fend off companies ordering more than they need, which could mask weaker long-term demand. "For the time being, demand seems unbounded," Susquehanna International Group analysts said in a note. "However, we worry about double-ordering and rationalization into 2024."
China, which historically accounts for 20% to 25% of Nvidia's sales in its data center division, is a wild card. Intent on curtailing Chinese access to advanced AI, the Biden administration last year blocked exports of Nvidia's most advanced chips without a license. Further restrictions are under consideration, and Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress told analysts Wednesday that a ban on sales of AI chips to China would cost the U.S. industry a permanent loss of opportunities in one of the world's biggest markets.
---
Dan Gallagher contributed to this article.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
