Microsoft on Thursday became the second company ever to end the trading day valued at more than $3 trillion, a milestone reflecting investor optimism that one of the oldest tech companies is leading an artificial-intelligence revolution.
In the past decade, Microsoft's success has come from smart bets by Chief Executive Satya Nadella. One of his biggest gambles in recent years has been partnering with an untested nonprofit startup -- generative AI pioneer OpenAI -- and quickly folding its technology into Microsoft's bestselling products. That move made Microsoft a de facto leader in a burgeoning AI field many believe will retool the tech industry.
Because of the OpenAI relationship "Microsoft to me is ahead of Alphabet and Meta and has a great shot of being a software leader in AI," said Synovus Trust portfolio manager Daniel Morgan, who owns Microsoft shares.
Microsoft's capitalization first rose to about $3 trillion in midday trading Wednesday but closed below the mark. On Thursday, Microsoft shares rose 0.6% to $404.87.
Microsoft's ascendance on the back of AI excitement may signal a changing guard atop tech.
Apple became the first company to close above the $3 trillion mark in June, reflecting the lasting impact and resilience of the iPhone. Earlier this month, Microsoft briefly dethroned Apple as the most highly valued publicly listed company in the world.
Apple had regained the top spot, but Microsoft surpassed it again at the close Thursday. Microsoft is now valued at $3.009 trillion, vs. Apple's $3.002 trillion. Apple shares have underperformed other tech giants so far this year, amid concerns about the company's sales and its position in the AI race.
The AI boom unofficially kicked off in November 2022 with the release of ChatGPT, a chatbot built by Silicon Valley nonprofit startup OpenAI that uses "large language models" to write poems, craft emails and generate computer code.
Microsoft is the largest investor in OpenAI. In multiple rounds over the past five years, it has agreed to invest $13 billion in OpenAI in exchange for what is essentially a 49% stake in the earnings of its for-profit arm. The relationship has also given Microsoft early access to OpenAI's latest models, which are trained and hosted on the company's cloud-computing service, Azure.
Microsoft's aggressive adoption and expansion of the technology have helped it leapfrog rivals in investors' minds. Since Microsoft's multibillion-dollar investment in OpenAI in January 2023, the stock has gained nearly 70%, adding more than $1.2 trillion to Microsoft's market value.
Nadella has forged a close relationship with OpenAI's CEO, Sam Altman, and incorporated his startup's technology into top Microsoft products. Investors have been bullish on the prospect that these AI tools -- including an assistant Copilot that plugs into key Microsoft software like Word, Outlook and Teams -- will become a major new revenue stream for the company.
"They have a huge head start owing to OpenAI and innovating quickly and moving faster than other enterprise software companies have been able to," said Rishi Jaluria, an analyst at RBC Capital.
While the AI hype has boosted stocks across the tech sector, Microsoft has ridden the wave better than the rest. In 2023, Microsoft's stock rose more than 55%, outpacing the Nasdaq Composite Index, which rose less than 45%.
Some investors worry there could be a bubble forming around the soaring prices of AI-driven stocks. It is still unclear how much new revenue the AI boom will add to any of the companies. Even for some of the biggest beneficiaries, it could take years before enterprises and individuals embrace AI tools at the scale the technology's biggest proponents expect.
Microsoft's early attempt to integrate AI into its products has been hit or miss. The AI chat added to its Bing search engine hasn't done much to boost its market share against Google's. Its GitHub Copilot product, which uses AI to speed up coding, has been popular.
Credit: By Tom Dotan and Charley Grant
