In 2009, former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker quipped that "the most important financial innovation that I have seen the past 20 years is the automatic teller machine." While that may have been good for a laugh, in part because it had a ring of truth, it isn't the case any longer.
Several banks and consumer-finance companies, led by Wells Fargo & Co. and Capital One Financial Corp., more than hold their own in innovation, as gauged by the Drucker Institute's measure of corporate effectiveness. In fact, their innovation scores put them in the top 30 among all 846 firms that we tracked in 2021, ahead of chip maker Nvidia Corp., pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly & Co. and wireless company Verizon Communications Inc.
This showing reflects how innovation among big banks and certain other financial-services companies has been "rocketing" over the past decade, says Ed White, chief analyst and vice president of intellectual property and innovation research at Clarivate, which provides data on patent and trademark activity for our statistical model.
Our framework, which rests on the teachings of the late management scholar Peter Drucker, serves as the basis of the Management Top 250, an annual ranking produced in partnership with The Wall Street Journal. The 2021 list was published in December.
In all, we examined those 846 large publicly traded firms last year through the lens of 34 indicators in five categories: customer satisfaction, employee engagement and development, innovation, social responsibility and financial strength.
To create our ranking, companies are compared in each of the five areas, in addition to their overall effectiveness -- defined by Mr. Drucker as "doing the right things well" -- through standardized scores with a typical range of 0 to 100 and a mean of 50.
In the innovation category, we adjust our model slightly to look at every company's performance relative to its industry peers. This way, we aren't comparing Apples to Lululemons on R&D expenditures or any of our other innovation indicators.
But for our latest research, we wanted to remove that constraint and see how the 101 companies in the financial sector stack up against all of the companies we cover in absolute, not relative, terms.
As a whole, the sector is weak, with an average innovation score of 48.2. This puts it eighth out of 11 broad industry groups -- a result of some segments, such as thrifts and reinsurance companies, that are quite a bit below average. But there are pockets of excellence.
Wells Fargo led the pack in 2021, with an absolute innovation score of 68.3. The biggest driver of this number was the extremely high rate at which the bank abandoned prior patent applications -- a metric that gives insight into whether a company has a culture of letting go what isn't working and focusing on what's next. Wells Fargo also had a high rate of new patent applications last year.
This combination of shedding the old and embracing the new comes as the company is moving beyond older technologies, such as mobile wallet (where you can digitally store and access credit and debit cards on your smartphone) to concentrate on fresh ways to use blockchain and artificial intelligence.
"The innovation strategy is layered over the business strategy," says Chad Bement, lead counsel in Wells Fargo's intellectual property department.
So far, this hasn't translated into more delighted customers. Wells Fargo's customer satisfaction score was just 39.8 in 2021.
"I think Wells is at a pivot point," says Bob Neuhaus, executive managing director of financial services at JD Power, which supplies the Drucker Institute with customer satisfaction data. In early 2021, he notes, Wells Fargo brought in an experienced executive team from Bank of America Corp. to oversee the revamping of its consumer-facing digital platform.
Capital One, with an absolute innovation score of 62.0 last year, scored particularly high on patent applications, patent abandonment and its number of R&D-related job listings. It has been positioning itself as a technology leader for years and has been hiring thousands of software engineers as it shifts its data, applications and IT systems to the cloud.
JPMorgan Chase & Co. notched the next-highest absolute innovation score in the sector, 57.0. It was propelled by its level of patent abandonment but also by generating a lot of patent value -- a metric, developed by Northwestern University's Dimitris Papanikolaou and Stanford's Amit Seru, that assesses the stock market's reaction to announcements of approved patent applications.
Mr. White of Clarivate doesn't expect any of this to slow down. U.S. banks, he says, are pouring resources into technology that can support security and authentication, speech recognition, and app-based transactions. All the while, he adds, they are keeping a close eye on a host of nontraditional rivals -- whether it's PayPal Holdings Inc. or a Chinese company such as Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. -- as well as potential disrupters now on the horizon.
The next frontier, Mr. White says, will be the metaverse. "That is a real vector of innovation," he says, adding that technology used to purchase tokens as part of a fantasy game today could well be the foundation for money in the bank tomorrow.
(See accompanying illustration -- WSJ Feb. 22, 2022)
---
Mr. Wartzman is the head of the KH Moon Center for a Functioning Society, a part of the Drucker Institute, and Ms. Tang is the institute's senior director of research. Email them at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Rick Wartzman and Kelly Tang
