APPLE
Company Acquires
AI Startup VocalIQ
Apple Inc. has purchased an artificial-intelligence startup that could help make iPhone users' interactions with the virtual assistant Siri more natural.
Apple bought VocalIQ Ltd., a U.K.-based software maker working on ways to improve computers' ability to understand human speech, and to "speak" more naturally. The terms of the deal weren't disclosed.
An Apple spokesman said the deal with the company's standard statement after an acquisition, saying Apple "buys smaller technology companies from time to time, and we generally do not discuss our purpose or plans." VocalIQ didn't respond to a request for comment.
The acquisition could help Apple's efforts to bolster Siri, which is controlled by voice commands and sometimes struggles to understand users.
VocalIQ says on its website that its software helps computers speak more naturally by learning from each interaction with a human, employing an artificial-intelligence technique called deep learning.
VocalIQ software also seeks to help computers better understand commands and their context.
-- Jack Nicas
---
GOODYEAR
Tire Firm Dissolves
Sumitomo Alliance
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. announced Thursday it has dissolved its 16-year global alliance with Sumitomo Rubber Industries Ltd. clearing the way for the U.S. tire maker to finally begin selling its namesake brand in Japan.
Goodyear -- the world's third-biggest tire maker in terms of revenue -- reached an agreement with Sumitomo in June to end the partnership after months of arbitration. Goodyear contends it no longer needs the partnership to grow in Japan and elsewhere.
The move to dissolve the alliance also means Sumitomo can expand its Falken Tires brand both in the U.S. and around the world. Falken recently landed an agreement to serve as the official tire of Major League Baseball.
As part of the deal, Sumitomo will receive $271 million from Goodyear which will spend an additional $55 million to extinguish a pre-existing debt.
-- Jeff Bennett
---
ORIGIN ENERGY
Capital Raising
Gets Strong Support
Origin Energy Ltd. said it received strong support from institutional investors for its capital raising, collecting 1.35 billion Australian dollars (US$949.1 million).
The balance of the A$2.5 billion the energy producer and retailer plans to raise to pay down its debt burden will come from a 4-for-7 share offer to retail shareholders that is set to open Tuesday.
About 92% of Origin's institutional shareholders took up their right to the offer, which was priced at A$4 a share, and the shortfall was made up through an institutional bookbuild at A$5.20 a share, the company said Friday.
Origin's shares, which have been halted since it launched the equity raising Wednesday, are set to resume trading on Tuesday.
-- Robb M. Stewart
---
SAMSONITE
Luggage Maker Buys
Italian Retail Firm
Samsonite International SA, a large luggage maker, said Friday that it has acquired Italian retail stores chain Chic Accent for 8.5 million euros (US$9.52 million), in a bid to expand its presence in non-travel categories.
The Hong Kong-listed company said the acquisition provides the firm with a significant retail footprint in attractive mall locations in Italy, which will enable it to further expand its direct-to-consumer business there.
Chic Accent operates 31 shops located in attractive shopping malls in Italy, it added.
The deal closed on Sept. 30, the company said.
-- Chester Yung
---
MONDE NISSIN
Philippine Company
Buys U.K.'s Quorn
Consumer-goods company Monde Nissin bought the U.K.'s Quorn Foods for GBP 550 million ($832 million), in the latest overseas foray by firms based in the Philippines.
The sale was announced on Thursday by Quorn's British owners, Exponent Private Equity and Intermediate Capital Group, who said the deal would be completed by the end of the month. Monde Nissin, which makes noodles and snack foods, said in a statement the meat-alternative products that Quorn specializes in would broaden its range of offerings as it looks to expand in the region.
-- Trefor Moss
---
CEBU AIR
Flights Canceled
On Systems Upgrade
Cebu Air Inc., operator of the Philippines' largest budget carrier Cebu Pacific, said Friday technical issues encountered after it migrated to a new operations system forced it to cancel around two dozen flights, stranding thousands of passengers.
The Manila International Airport Authority suspended its daily early-morning closure of the Manila airport's runways to allow Cebu Pacific to operate its flights. This gave the budget carrier an extra two hours to fly stranded passengers and ease the backlog caused by the systems glitch. It is still unclear how much the problem will cost Cebu Air financially.
-- Cris Larano
---
LIPPO
Loss on Investments
To Affect Results
Lippo Ltd. said Friday that its fair-value loss on investments for the six months ended September was 186 million Hong Kong dollars (US$23.4 million) because of a global equity-market downturn, which will have an impact on the company's interim results.
In a separate filing, the Indonesia-based property company said its unit Lippo China Resources Ltd. expects to record a fair-value loss of HK$164 million for the same period. Both Hong Kong-listed companies posted deepened losses compared with a year ago. In the earlier period, Lippo had a fair-value loss of HK$14 million and Lippo China Resources posted a fair-value loss of HK$12 million.
Both companies said the latest losses were due to a "substantial downturn" in global stock markets in the third quarter of 2015.
-- Anjie Zheng
