Richmond, Va. -- When she started getting serious about basketball last year, it was very clear very quickly that Lanie Grant was a natural. This 11-year-old girl who plays in braided pigtails loved almost everything about the sport. Except for shooting. Lanie was scared to shoot.
"I was awful at it," she said.
She had no idea how much she was about to improve. Lanie spent the summer before sixth grade in the driveway of her home in the Richmond suburbs taking hundreds and even thousands of shots per day. By the first day of middle school, Lanie was no longer hesitant to shoot.
It was the only thing she wanted to do. And she does it a lot.
Lanie Grant has taken nearly 65,000 shots since last summer. She's on pace to shoot the ball 100,000 times in one year.
What makes that even more astonishing is that she can watch every single one of her shots. Lanie has a comprehensive history of her own basketball development in the palm of her hand. She is young enough that her parents monitor her Instagram account, but she already has access to shot-tracking technology worthy of NBA teams.
The greatest basketball players have always spent their childhoods taking countless number of shots. The difference now is that number can be counted. The notion of the next Stephen Curry having a detailed record of every shot he or she has ever taken sounds almost impossibly futuristic. It sounds perfectly normal to a generation of Lanie Grants.
This fearless, 5-foot-nothing point guard is a perfect example of how the latest basketball technology is beginning to make players better faster than ever before.
Lanie is a bubbly kid with a big smile and killer basketball skills. She breaks opponents' ankles when she dribbles between the legs and behind the back, and she beats her older brother's friends when they challenge her in one-on-one. Her parents can't believe she was intimidated by the idea of shooting less than a year ago.
But there is something wonderful about being an 11-year-old basketball player today. Her ascent began when her mother, Adriane Grant, a kindergarten teacher at the school where Lanie shoots in the afternoon, stumbled upon an iPhone app called HomeCourt, which has captured the attention of basketball players, coaches and teams at every level since it was invented by former Apple engineers last year using mobile artificial intelligence and computer vision. The app has recorded millions of shots from players in NBA, top colleges, high schools, middle schools and even the odd elementary school in 6,800 cities and 150 countries.
But few players anywhere in the world have logged as many shots this year as Lanie Grant.
"It helped me be more confident about myself," she said last weekend over chocolate milk at Starbucks.
There is no other way to put it: Lanie got really, really good.
Lanie took nearly 5,000 shots in her first three weeks using the app and made 65%. Lanie has taken about the same number of shots over the last month. Now she's an 85% shooter.
The first time he learned of this app that promised real-time shot analytics, her father was skeptical. "There's no way this works like it says," Jeff Grant, a restaurateur, remembers thinking. He purchased a tripod and tilted his phone toward Lanie shooting in the driveway one day last summer. To his surprise, the free version of the app worked exactly as it said, and he upgraded to a $60 yearly subscription.
Lanie was soon reviewing her shot charts and rewatching her workouts to analyze her mechanics in such granular detail that she's now familiar with her ideal leg angle. Her friends watch "Fortnite" streams. Lanie watches ball-handling videos on YouTube. "And then I put them in slow motion, break down the moves and mimic them in the driveway," she said.
When the word about Lanie got around the sixth-grade basketball scene, she went to a camp for elite players and left with her name listed as No. 3 in a national ranking of Class of 2025 recruits.
Lanie is now awake by 5:50 a.m. every weekday and running to the bus stop at 7 a.m. because middle school is still the worst. She's busy with homework for a few hours after school. And then it's finally time for basketball. She packs a few hundred shots into her hour in the gym before she's off to another gym for skills training. She goes home, ices her ankles and knees, eats dinner and spends the rest of the night watching basketball. She's asleep by about 8:30 p.m., depending on how long she ignores her bedtime.
"There's not many people like you, Lanie," Adriane Grant told her daughter recently after Lanie asked to sneak in a few more shots after three games on a Saturday.
They walked into the gym, positioned the iPad running HomeCourt on a tripod and pressed the record button. Lanie had advanced shot analytics in the time it took for her dad to fetch a rebound. A crowd of boys stared at her, pointed at the contraption and listened to a portable speaker count Lanie's makes.
So what comes next for Lanie Grant? Well, first, there is seventh grade. She also dreams about playing college basketball one day -- she's heard that college is fun -- and maybe even making the WNBA.
"I just want to be the best, honestly," she says.
She's only a few hundred thousand shots away.

Credit: By Ben Cohen

ERIC Subject: Middle Schools; Grade 6; Team Sports; Elementary Schools; Intermediate Grades; Grade 7; Preschool Teachers; Elementary Education
