[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Broadcom Chief Executive Hock Tan isn't someone who finds blowing money appetizing. But that $40,000 dinner seems to have gone down well.
That was the reported cost for Tan to sit at the table of Chinese President Xi Jinping during a dinner at last month's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation conference in San Francisco. It is a notable sum for an executive known for running one of the most tightfisted chip companies in the business. Broadcom spends just 4% of its annual revenue on sales and marketing -- compared with 11% on average by companies on the PHLX Semiconductor Index.
It appears to have been money well spent. China was the remaining holdout in clearing Broadcom's $61 billion acquisition of VMware, which had spent 18 months in regulatory limbo. The deal suddenly got the nod from Chinese authorities and closed just a week later -- which was less than a month into Broadcom's new fiscal year that ends in October 2024. That allowed Broadcom to work VMware into its forecast for the year, during which the chip maker said late Thursday that it will generate $50 billion in revenue and about $30 billion in adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.
Broadcom's business was half that size three years ago. Indeed, $50 billion in annual sales would make it the fourth-largest company on the PHLX index by projected annual revenue, according to FactSet. But calling Broadcom a chip company is getting to be a stretch, as 40% of its revenue in the current fiscal year will come from software, thanks to a string of acquisitions designed to diversify away from the cyclical semiconductor business. That will also shift the company's profit engine; Stacy Rasgon of Bernstein predicts Broadcom's gross margins could get close to 80% after it works through the VMware integration. Chip companies on the PHLX index averaged gross margins of 49% for the trailing 12-month period, according to data from S&P Global Market Intelligence.
Still, that won't totally free Broadcom from the chip industry's sometimes brutal cycles. Revenue from its semiconductor segment grew only 3% year over year to $7.3 billion in the fiscal fourth quarter, slightly missing Wall Street's target and marking the slowest growth for that segment in more than three years. And that is with strong demand for Broadcom's chips used for generative artificial intelligence systems in data centers. Those generated $1.5 billion in revenue for the quarter and are expected to account for 25% of the company's total chip revenue in the new fiscal year, compared with 15% last year.
Broadcom's more traditional chip businesses are in a rough patch. The wireless segment that is mostly driven by radio-frequency chips used by Apple's iPhone saw revenue slip 3% year over year in the just-ended quarter. Tan also said on Thursday's earnings call that wireless revenue will "again remain stable" in fiscal 2024 -- suggesting the company isn't expecting next year's iPhone to be a major hit.
Growing both the AI chip business and its software operations will wean Broadcom further from its historic reliance on Apple, which has typically accounted for about 20% of its annual revenue.
VMware also adds a new element, in the form of an enterprise software business that plays a key role in corporate data centers that is also transitioning to a subscription-based business model. That will give Broadcom a strong dose of recurring and relatively stable revenue -- provided the company can aptly manage the high-touch sales practices of the software industry while maintaining its historic strength in boosting the bottom line. Companies on the BVP Nasdaq Emerging Cloud Index currently spend an average 40% of their annual revenue on sales and marketing. Tan might not want to close out that wining-and-dining tab just yet.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
