A collective cry is breaking out as authors, artists and internet publishers realize that the generative-AI phenomenon is built partly on the back of their work.
The emerging awareness has set up a war between the forces behind the inputs and the outputs of these new artificial-intelligence tools, over whether and how content originators should be compensated. The disputes threaten to throw sand into the gears of the AI boom as it seems poised to revolutionize the global economy.
Artificial-intelligence companies including OpenAI, its backer Microsoft, and Google built generative-AI systems such as ChatGPT by scraping oceans of information from the internet and feeding it into training algorithms that teach the systems to imitate human language. The companies generally say their data use without compensation is permitted, but they have left the door open to discussing the issue with content creators.
Earlier in July, thousands of authors including Margaret Atwood and James Patterson signed an open letter demanding that top AI companies obtain permission and pay writers for the use of their works to train generative-AI models. Comedian Sarah Silverman and other authors also filed lawsuits against OpenAI and Facebook parent Meta Platforms for allegedly training their AI models on illegal copies of their books that were captured and left on the internet.
News publishers have called the unlicensed use of their content a copyright violation. Some -- including Wall Street Journal parent News Corp, Dotdash Meredith owner IAC and publishers of the New Yorker, Rolling Stone and Politico -- have discussed with tech companies exploring ways they might be paid for the use of their content in AI training, according to people familiar with the matter.
The Associated Press and OpenAI announced a deal this month for the tech company to license stories in AP's archive.
Elon Musk has blamed AI companies scraping "vast amounts of data" for a recent decision by X, then called Twitter, to limit the number of tweets some users could view. And striking actors and writers have cited concerns that Hollywood studios could use AI to copy their likenesses or eliminate their jobs.
The escalating tensions reflect a broader rethinking of the value of writing and other online content, and how freely it should be swept up by large tech companies investing heavily in AI technologies that they expect to power future profits.
Patterson, one of the country's most popular writers, said he found the idea that all of his novels -- more than 200 of them -- were likely ingested without his permission to train generative-AI software to do his job "frightening."
"This will not end well for creatives," he said in an interview.
The complaints filed by Silverman and other authors allege that the companies trained their systems on illegal "shadow libraries" containing books under copyright.
OpenAI and Google have both said they train their AI models on "publicly available" information, a phrase that experts say encompasses a spectrum of content, including from paywalled and pirated sites. OpenAI also said in a statement that it respects the rights of creators and authors, and that many creative professionals use ChatGPT.
The fights hold the potential to put new limits or add considerable cost to accessing data that would radically change the business equation for these new AI tools.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman and Keach Hagey
