Cisco Systems has struck a $28 billion deal to buy analytics and security-software company Splunk as the networking-equipment giant looks to tap further into the rise of artificial intelligence.
The deal will create one of the world's largest software companies, Cisco said, and will immediately boost its cash flow in the first year after closing, which is expected by the end of September 2024. The combination will expand Cisco's software portfolio and produce more recurring revenue, it said, along with enabling Cisco to provide customers with AI and other tools to analyze their data and detect security threats.
Splunk, founded in 2003, makes software used by companies' information-technology and security operations to monitor and analyze data. Cisco sells network equipment such as routers and switches, and provides security services as well as software products.
"With hyper connectivity, AI and increasing cyber threats, the value of data only increases, and that's why this deal makes sense," Cisco Chief Executive Chuck Robbins told analysts on a conference call.
Cisco said Thursday it has agreed to pay $157 a share in cash for Splunk, a 31% premium to Wednesday's closing price of $119.59 for the San Francisco company. Shares of Cisco dropped about 4% to $53.34 on Thursday while Splunk's stock closed up 21% to $144.43.
The companies expect the deal to close in nine to 12 months, after a required regulatory review, but played down any hurdles to closing the deal and specified that the combination won't need approval from the Chinese government.
"There is not any overlap in our portfolio," Robbins said. Cisco said the acquisition won't impact its stock-buyback program or its dividend.
For fiscal 2023, Cisco reported about $20 billion in cash flow from operations and held more than $26 billion in cash. Cisco has a market value of about $225 billion compared with about $20 billion for Splunk before the deal.
Cisco previously tried to acquire Splunk for more than $20 billion, the Journal reported early last year, and has placed increasing importance on its software business. The deal eclipses Cisco's roughly $7 billion acquisition of Scientific Atlanta in 2005 and its nearly $5 billion purchase of Acacia Communications Inc. in 2021.
The deal, one of the biggest of the year, could be a sign that the mergers and acquisitions market is picking up after a slow stretch partly driven by higher interest rates.
With the buyout, Cisco is looking to improve its ability to mine its trove of customer data, Robbins said in a blog post on the company's website. Generative AI is transforming industries, he said, and Cisco is well-positioned to help its customers build new tools to make sense of their data.
"We view this as a fair multiple for this strategic asset with now investors laser-focused on who is next," Wedbush analyst Daniel Ives wrote in a note to clients Thursday. He said the deal was well timed and would help ensure that rivals such as Google, Oracle, Adobe, IBM and others don't own the next wave of AI-driven software and cybersecurity. "We do not see any other bidders or regulatory issues blocking this deal," he said.
Cisco in recent years has moved its business away from the network routers, switchers and other hardware that the company was built on. Software has become a bigger part of the company's revenue, and Cisco has been buying up smaller companies to boost growth.
In the fiscal fourth quarter, Cisco bought three privately held software companies.
Various technology heavyweights including Microsoft and Amazon are working on building out their generative AI offerings after the release of ChatGPT by OpenAI helped stoke public interest in the space. This year, various consumer companies and businesses have said they are experimenting with generative AI to see how it fits into their industries.
---
Colin Kellaher and Dana Cimilluca contributed to this article.
Credit: By Will Feuer and Thomas Gryta
