Amazon.com Inc. is masterful at changing our habits. Not long ago, it seemed unthinkable to buy clothes online. Or buy anything on your phone. Or talk to a speaker.
The $230 Echo Show is Amazon's most audacious product yet. Now it wants to colonize your countertop with a 7-inch touch screen and a camera. You can even use it to randomly peer through the always-on camera of loved ones' Shows and into their homes, if they list you as persona grata.
Amazon is onto a good idea: the casual kitchen computer that doesn't require a mouse, keyboard or even meatloaf-kneading fingers to operate. This first version has limited skills that take advantage of the new screen -- yet it is so intrusive, I was ready to yank the plug after a week.
The Show, which shipped Wednesday, has all the functions of Amazon's original Echo speaker. You call out the wake word "Alexa," then command Amazon's AI assistant to play Beyonce, turn on the lights or tell a joke. The Show's boxy design and wide bezels aren't as cool as the cylindrical original. But it could hear me just as well, and its speaker sounded slightly better.
In the Show's first week, the screen "skills" -- Alexa's term for apps -- suggest where things are headed:
It's a senior-friendly video-call station to use with people who also have a Show or the Alexa smartphone app.
It pulls up recipes and scans items to buy from Amazon.com.
It plays Amazon and YouTube videos. (There are no TV channels yet, but "Jeopardy" live streams surely can't be far off.)
It shows lyrics while playing music, prompting spontaneous singalongs.
I wouldn't bet against the Show getting more screen skills fast. One of its first partnerships pairs it with the Ring video doorbell. Just say, "Alexa, show me the front door." It'll also work with cameras from Nest, August and others.
I can wait for more skills. My problem is more fundamental: Living with a Show is often perturbing and occasionally creepy.
The first time I turned the Show on, the screen asked me if I'd like to subscribe to Amazon's Audible service. I couldn't proceed until I'd replied. ("No.") It was my first reminder that the Echo Show is as much an Amazon sales kiosk as a kitchen helper.
Once up and running, it started flashing calendar events, headlines and usage tips. One read: "Video: Baseball Mascot Outruns Fan. Try 'Alexa, play the mascot video.' " That's one way to teach owners about Alexa's ever-growing capabilities. I assumed the tips would eventually fade.
But they didn't. They keep refreshing every seven seconds. In the span of one minute, the Show nagged me to play Katy Perry and told me about a Batman-costumed policeman. It felt like one of those elevator displays took up residence next to my toaster. An Amazon spokeswoman tells me the company has "no plans or future intentions to advertise products on Echo Show."
Eventually I found settings that let me remove the "trending topics" messages, but not the tips. A Do Not Disturb mode stops incoming calls and dims the screen. Using another setting, for the clock, you can turn off the screen completely in Do Not Disturb mode until you call Alexa. This should be the default, not hidden in settings.
An always-on screen can disrupt family life in other ways. It's catnip for children. Unlike using a regular TV, they can operate it whenever they want without a remote. It's cute when tykes ask Alexa for songs, weather and information but not when they beg for videos. Now that Alexa can do so much, it's urgent for her to be able to recognize voices -- or faces -- of different family members.
The biggest head scratcher is that 5-megapixel camera. "Drop in" mode lets approved friends turn on your camera and say hi, without requiring you to pick up the call. The nominal privacy protection is a 10-second countdown, in which the view into Lord-knows-what happening in your house is obscured by digital frosting. During that time, you can disable the camera or reject the call.
That function is optional, but another isn't: To figure out when to activate the screen, the Show's camera stays on, watching for people in the room. Amazon says it isn't storing or sending that video over the internet, yet it feels like a needless risk because so few functions actually require the camera. You can cut off the camera using Do Not Disturb or the same button that cuts off the Show's microphone -- but that means the whole thing stops working.
I understand that Amazon is doing everything it can to keep the Show from becoming a portal for hackers. So it's unfortunate the Show isn't compatible with the oldest safety trick of all: You can't just put tape over the camera and take it off as needed. When you try that on the Echo Show, it gets confused and dims the screen, becoming unusable.
The Show is a promising talking home computer and may appeal to people already heavily invested in Alexa's world. But it's a shame Amazon's strange design choices muddy its potential. Walking the line between futuristic and creepy, the Show landed in the worst place of all: annoying.

Credit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler
