[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
As in the eponymous 1960s Western, the so-called "Magnificent Seven" stocks keep on winning. This also means investors are betting the farm on just a handful of bullets hitting their targets.
The S&P 500 is in a bull market, fueled by soft inflation data in the U.S. and Europe and the widespread belief that interest rates will start coming down early next year. Yet the stock market has become so top-heavy that speaking of a bull market carries less meaning than before. Without Apple, Microsoft, Alphabet, Amazon.com, Nvidia, Tesla and Meta Platforms -- the high-growth, technology-related companies that analysts have dubbed the "Magnificent Seven" -- the S&P 500 would be up only 8% this year, rather than 19%. Some 44% of stocks in the index are down this year.
That poses a conundrum for investors, who increasingly use index funds. Right now, buying an S&P 500 tracker means investing 30% of the money in just seven stocks. Historically, the top seven have accounted for 21% of the benchmark, taking the end-of-year average of the past decade.
This not only runs counter to the principle of diversification, but it also means the most important stocks investors own are pricey. The seven companies have posted strong profits lately, but they are still trading at an average of 32 times forward earnings, compared with 19 times for the broader index.
Is the market turning? Cheap or "value" stocks have surged over the past week, while the Magnificent Seven have struggled. But look back to the end of October, when the current rally started, and value has had a mediocre run. If a big stock rotation is at hand, the market isn't providing strong clues.
Academic research has consistently found that small-caps offer a "size premium" -- that is, they tend to provide extra returns over the long term with no additional risk. The theory goes that markets undervalue companies that are less well known and get less attention from brokers. This hasn't prevented them from vastly underperforming the market this past decade, as the S&P 500 became ever more concentrated at the top.
Still, a working paper by Logan Emery and Joren Koeter confirms the historical existence of the "size premium," and finds that it grows larger as market concentration increases. This evidence suggests today's savers should start diversifying, Emery said.
However, the paper also finds a countervailing force that reduces the size premium: The very fear of having a portfolio that is increasingly exposed to the ups and downs of a few companies sometimes leads investors to place a lower value on them, paving the way for outperformance. So far, this factor has tended to lose out to the small-cap effect, but it doesn't mean it always will.
With so much market value concentrated in those seven stocks, the benefits of diversifying into small caps can be severely reduced when a few of their company-specific investments pay off, the research also suggests. The artificial-intelligence boom sparked by OpenAI's ChatGPT, which has already helped chip maker Nvidia to triple its revenue relative to a year earlier, could be just such a payoff.
But who will benefit most from AI is still an open question. And other megatrends are underpinning the value of the Magnificent Seven, such as Meta's metaverse or Tesla's self-driving cars, that are showing less promise.
With valuations working against the giants of the stock market, investors are ultimately placing bets on a few massive, unpredictable technological developments. In the film's end, only three gunmen survive.
Credit: By Jon Sindreu
