Companies face an uncertain future in fighting cyber threats to their systems, and it's going to cost them.
Cybersecurity spending, mostly by companies and governments, is forecast to grow about 9% a year from 2021 to 2024, when it is projected to hit $207 billion, according to one measure from research firm Gartner Inc., which updated its estimates in July. Though growth is projected at only 5% in 2020, reflecting disruption from the pandemic, the longer-term rate is high, considering that many companies have already invested heavily in cybersecurity and the market is saturated with security providers, says Ruggero Contu, senior research director at Gartner.
"The growth comes from the need to keep updating security to the newest requirements, given that the threats out there are constantly evolving," Mr. Contu says. Certain sectors, such as big banks, have traditionally invested more in cybersecurity, but companies in industries such as manufacturing are now trying to catch up, he says. The increasing reliance on cloud networks, the proliferation of internet-connected devices and new technologies such as artificial intelligence all pose thorny challenges.
Some companies are considering significant increases, which could mean millions of dollars more in spending at big firms. At Telstra Corp., Australia's biggest communications provider, Chief Executive Andrew Penn says the company could boost its cybersecurity spending by a double-digit percentage in the coming years. One new effort, which could be expanded, involves filtering out scam text messages that purport to be from government agencies before they reach Telstra's cellphone customers.
"It's an arms race between the malicious actors on the one hand, who've become increasingly sophisticated -- and there's more of them -- and the good guys, who are trying to build the capabilities and the defenses to keep them out," says Mr. Penn, noting that Telstra already employs more than 500 cybersecurity professionals.
Not all companies are planning a large increase. Before the new coronavirus spread, a survey of cybersecurity workers conducted late last year by Isaca, an association for IT professionals, found that 58% of respondents anticipated an increase in their organization's cybersecurity budget over the next 12 months. Now there is some evidence that spending may have been cut at some struggling companies, at least in the short term. In the Australian state of New South Wales, about 20% of cybersecurity workers were laid off, had their salary reduced or hours cut, while about 5% saw an increase in salary or paid work, according to a government-funded survey from the Australian Information Security Association.
Looking ahead, however, the shift to remote work has underscored the importance of allowing workers to easily access corporate networks from home. The fastest-growing segment, albeit from a low base, is expected to be cloud security, where spending is forecast to increase by more than 30% a year, according to Gartner.
The cloud can be difficult to secure because the tech companies that provide cloud-based services each configure their servers differently, and companies may need to use multiple vendors for different tasks, says Damien Manuel, chairman of the Australian security association and director of the Centre for Cyber Security Research and Innovation at Deakin University.
Many companies were cautiously moving to the cloud before the pandemic, but now they are learning they should move as much into the cloud as possible, says Kelly Bissell, senior managing director at Accenture Security, which provides cybersecurity services around the globe. "Which means they're going to have to think a little differently about security," he says.
Cloud security is one main focus for Seattle-area health insurer Premera Blue Cross, which agreed to pay about $90 million in legal settlements stemming from a large data breach that occurred in 2014. Adrian Mayers, vice president and chief information security officer, who joined after the data breach, says the company recently invested in what's known as adaptive multifactor authentication to ensure that only authorized users log onto its network.
Such a system asks the user for additional information if it detects anything unusual about a sign on, and will analyze variables such as the location, the time of day and the device, Mr. Mayers says.
"The ability to ramp up -- what I like to call turn up the volume -- gives us a lot of flexibility," says Mr. Mayers. "We have elements of that capability, but we have invested over the last 60 days in the new capability to take that even farther."
Other companies plan to continue modeling their cybersecurity strategy on so-called zero-trust principles, which is the idea that every user and device must be rigorously authenticated each time they log on. That is particularly important for a company such as Becton Dickinson & Co., which makes some medical devices that transmit data through the cloud.
"To use the analogy of protecting your home, it's like locking your front door, but zero-trust means you're guarding your valuables as if the thief has already broken into the house," says Rob Suarez, vice president and chief information security officer at BD.
Cybersecurity chiefs are also focused on navigating the increasingly blurred lines between the digital and physical worlds, often called the Internet of Things. Each connected device is a potential entry point for a would-be hacker, and many lack sufficient security.
New Jersey-based Covanta runs about 40 power plants world-wide that burn trash to generate electricity. One long-term goal is to further develop its use of network-connected devices to gather data so its power plants can operate more autonomously and be monitored remotely.
For Tammy Klotz, the company's chief information security officer, one key consideration is making sure that any devices inside the power plants are separated from the company's back-office network. That way, if an office worker does fall for a phishing email and the office network is compromised, the power-plant operations won't be affected.
Looking further ahead, Mr. Manuel says companies will also have to protect AI systems from unique threats. One potential danger, Mr. Manuel says, is that a hacker could begin feeding erroneous data to an AI that then creates undesired outcomes. A company's online customer-service chatbot, for example, could be trained to recommend a competitor's products.
But there could be more dire results.
"Imagine you have AI systems used in health care where they can look at X-rays, and they could diagnose tumors," Mr. Manuel says. "Those systems could be manipulated to make mistakes or errors which could then be catastrophic."

Credit: By Mike Cherney
