NEWS ITEM, Aug. 4, 2033
Amid a raucous session, the Institute of Advanced Obamalogy voted to disband itself today. The latest techniques in textual analysis conclusively prove that Obama speeches were mostly empty bombast . . . .
The nation's 44th president wasn't the modern, transformative liberal he claimed (and institute members long had believed). In a simulation that brought down the house, Prof. Angelides of Cal Tech used artificial intelligence to inject actual intelligence into Obama's June 25, 2013, speech on climate change, dramatically revamping its tone and content. An excerpt:
Any Hoyas in the house? Yeah, I thought so.
Look, potentially no greater challenge faces us than mankind's role in altering the composition of the atmosphere.
Science, to be useful to policy makers, though, has to make valid predictions. Why, despite a nearly 10% rise in atmospheric carbon over the past 15 years, is global average temperature unchanged?
I believe the increase in carbon is worrisome and the net effect is warming, but that doesn't mean I subscribe to every unfounded, dire scenario.
"Do no harm" is good a prescription. So is "do some good."
My environmentalist friends want a war on coal, but U.S. coal accounts for just 6% of global emissions -- less than China adds in three years.
The effect would be nil. Keystone? Canada would just export the oil to world markets and nothing would change.
Now, I understand. "Keystone" is a symbol to our environmentalist groups so they spin our wheels on Keystone. They spin our wheels demanding a higher "social cost of carbon" to justify regulating microwave ovens and ceiling fans. The effect on climate would be nil. We could cut our emissions in half overnight and the impact would be just three-tenths of a degree a century from now.
I won't kid you. These things appeal to some in my administration. They like the idea of an expanding bureaucracy (with its own giant carbon footprint) to regulate ceiling fans. But I said we could do some good.
When I call on congress today to implement a carbon tax and use the proceeds to cut payroll taxes and flatten the income tax, I know congress may not act right away. But tax reform is coming, and tax reform would be good -- giving us faster growth.
Shifting some of the tax burden from work and capital to carbon would be good -- aiding the emergence of non-carbon sources of energy that ultimately justify themselves because they are cheaper and more convenient, not just lower in carbon.
Let me take a little detour. There is no democratic appetite for giving up prosperity or our energy rich-lifestyles. Put that idea out of your heads.
Let us also appreciate how little we can know about how people will live a century from now, what energy sources they will use, and the strong likelihood that any sacrifices we make on their behalf today will be of zero value to them.
We're beyond the edge of forecastability and that's the point.
Fracking was well understood a decade ago and yet nobody foresaw that fracking would lead to a decade-long decline -- yes, decline -- in U.S. greenhouse emissions.
If we are serious about climate change, we must seriously factor in the accelerating rate of technological change already in our society. I'm personally impressed with what I read about the progress of nanobatteries, which may soon turn solar into a real contributor rather than a sinkhole for taxpayer charity. I'm impressed with the prospects for cheaper, inherently safe nuclear power, like in the new documentary, "Pandora's Promise" (go see it!).
So here's what we can really do to help future generations and ourselves. We can maintain the dynamism of our economy, from which new technology emerges. We can broadly favor low-carbon energy without prejudging (probably wrongly) which technologies will succeed. Carbon capture, for instance, may well be the sort of white elephant boondoggle we'll be glad we avoided.
Now I believe these new technologies will emerge or not emerge largely irrespective of what government does, though a little help can't hurt. I also believe, no matter what we do, the rest of the world will choose economic growth over reducing atmospheric carbon. So technology is our only hope.
The tax reform I envision other countries could adopt out of self-interest, not self-punishment. But it also doesn't matter what they do. If the technologies that emerge are truly superior and competitive, other countries will adopt them anyway.
Either way, we will not have impoverished ourselves with futile gestures. We will have done absolutely the best thing government can do to address the risk that human greenhouse emissions will lead to dangerous climate change. We will have resisted the temptation -- all too typical of Washington -- do foolish or cynical things in the guise of acting against global warming.
---
For an animated hologram of Obama delivering his improved 2013 climate speech, sponsored by Geico, click here.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
