Companies that make computer chips are struggling with some of the toughest times in the industry's history, due to slowing demand for certain devices and diminishing performance gains from making smaller circuitry.
Yet, the pressures are spurring a renaissance of semiconductor innovation, along with a growing band of startups aiming to exploit it, industry executives say.
Big and small companies in the $335 billion global semiconductor industry are pushing to develop new chip designs, materials and manufacturing processes. One reason is the widening use of the artificial-intelligence technique known as deep learning, in tasks such as classifying images, translating speech and autonomous driving, which benefit from new calculating techniques.
Some of the new development efforts are aimed squarely at disrupting entrenched incumbents such as Intel Corp., which has responded by modifying some of its own time-honored strategies.
"It is the best of times and the worst of times together," said Dharmendra Modha, a chief scientist at International Business Machines Corp. who is leading an effort to develop an unusual brain-like chip.
The surge in activity stems partly from the waning growth in sales of smartphones and personal computers, which has also has led to unprecedented consolidation among chip makers. Dealogic tallies 707 mergers and acquisitions totaling $246 billion during the past two years.
At the same time, the industry's standby strategy for increasing performance -- steadily shrinking the tiny transistors on each sliver of silicon -- is running into diminishing returns.
For decades, chip makers followed Moore's Law, the roughly two-year cadence for packing more transistors on chips, named after Intel co-founder Gordon Moore. Recently, the gains in calculating speed and power consumption have been less dramatic, while designing chips with more transistors costs more.
The Semiconductor Industry Association and its research affiliate have enlisted 22 tech companies to launch a broad study of technologies that might bring computing advances. Alternatives range from stacking circuitry in space-saving layers to making chips from biological materials such as proteins.
Development is particularly intense in deep learning. The technique involves training systems by exposing them to immense quantities of data rather than programming them with explicit instructions, which can take a long time and tends to produce less-reliable results.
Web companies using deep learning have taken a particular interest in spurring the creation of hardware that can get faster results.
Deep-learning systems often use a combination of Intel processors and Nvidia Corp. or Advanced Micro Devices Inc. chips that originally were designed to render videogame images. Those chips comprise hundreds or thousands of simple processors performing calculations simultaneously, compared with dozens of sophisticated computing cores on a high-end Intel chip.
Some companies say even more specialized hardware is needed. Alphabet Inc.'s Google unit recently took the unusual step of designing its own chip from scratch for some deep-learning tasks.
Credit: By Don Clark
