Amazon.com is slashing hundreds of jobs from its cloud-computing business, the tech giant's latest round of layoffs as it aims to cut costs.
Amazon Web Services said it planned to eliminate several hundred jobs in sales, marketing and global services. It said it would cut hundreds more from its physical stores technology team, which focuses on the systems underlying the company's cashierless checkout programs.
On Tuesday, Amazon said it would remove its "Just Walk Out" cashierless technology at Amazon Fresh grocery stores in the U.S. It will be replaced by another cashierless technology, the company said.
An Amazon Web Services spokesperson said the company identified targeted areas that needed to be streamlined. The spokesperson said the company is hiring within its core business areas. "These decisions are difficult but necessary as we continue to invest, hire, and optimize resources to deliver innovation for our customers," the spokesperson said.
The cloud-computing business has accounted for a major portion of Amazon's profit, though the company saw slowing demand last year as corporate clients limited spending. Amazon has worked to promote its efforts in artificial intelligence, which it has largely done through Amazon Web Services, including a $4 billion investment in AI startup Anthropic. The Wall Street Journal reported late last year that Anthropic committed to spend $4 billion on Amazon's cloud platform over the next five years, citing people familiar with the matter.
Several tech companies, including Alphabet, Microsoft and Salesforce, have cut staff so far this year. In January, Amazon eliminated hundreds of jobs across its film and television studio and Twitch streaming platform to cut costs.
Despite the layoffs, the ranks of many major tech companies -- including Amazon -- have grown since the pandemic. Amazon has nearly doubled its workforce since 2019, according to a Wall Street Journal analysis published in February.
Credit: By Talal Ansari and Sebastian Herrera
