Nearly a week after protests exploded across China over the country's zero-tolerance Covid-19 controls, Chinese authorities have restored a tense calm to the streets with a two-pronged strategy.
Chinese leaders have moved to address the demands of protesters by signaling an easing of the country's strict Covid policies. At the same time, police have deployed en masse to the sites of protests and hunted down activists, using the tools of the digital-surveillance state.
The carrot-and-stick approach comes from a well-worn playbook that the Communist Party has used to maintain the social stability it prizes so highly. The question now is how well it will work in the new, uncertain reality Chinese leaders face.
For now, it appears to be holding, with protesters again staying off the streets on Friday as organizers discussed how to proceed in chat rooms. The area along the Liangma River in eastern Beijing, where hundreds if not thousands of protesters gathered Sunday, was largely empty Friday afternoon, with police vehicles stationed in the vicinity. As the city continues to battle its worst Covid outbreak to date, many businesses are closed and residents are working from home.
Chinese officials announced new easing measures this week, even as the country battled its worst wave of Covid. China reported nearly 34,000 new local infections on Thursday, according to government figures.
Nonetheless, in Beijing, officials said they would allow certain vulnerable Covid patients, including pregnant women and the elderly, to quarantine at home instead of at government facilities. In the southern metropolis of Guangzhou, where videos had shown protesters facing off with police wearing full pandemic protective gear and carrying riot shields, authorities scrapped testing requirements to enter public places.
Protests -- even ones directed at Covid policies -- aren't new in China. Despite the country's reputation as a security state, data gathered by researchers shows that protests break out in the country on a regular basis. The recent Covid protests bear similarities to the smaller, lesser known outbursts of dissent, though they differ in significant ways, said Kevin Slaten, research lead at the China Dissent Monitor, a project of the U.S.-based nonprofit Freedom House.
Local protests against Covid controls had been going on since earlier this year, Mr. Slaten said. "What changed last week is that the local protests started connecting with each other and coalescing into a bigger collective 'us' that is frustrated with zero Covid," he said
Without independent media or the ability to vote, Chinese people with grievances often feel protest is the only way to get their voices heard. A large number of protests in China go unreported, whether because they happen in remote areas, are localized in nature or because censors smother information about them, say researchers. But those that can be documented offer a sense of how common they are.
From June to October this year, Freedom House, which is funded by the U.S. government, recorded nearly 600 instances of group protests across China involving marches, demonstrations and obstruction of roads, of which almost 80% involved more than 10 people.
The majority of documented cases were about delayed housing projects, financial disputes or fraud, and were directed either against local governments or individual companies.
The high frequency of protests dates to well before Chinese leader Xi Jinping took power. Using machine learning and keyword searches on Weibo, China's Twitter-like social-media platform, researchers at Stanford and Princeton University found more than 130,000 protests involving at least three people from 2010 to 2017. Christian Gobel, a political-science professor at the University of Vienna, counted more than 83,000 between 2009 and 2021 using a similar approach.
The protests almost all focus on narrowly local issues and rarely target the authority of the Chinese Communist Party, at least not directly, according to Mr. Gobel.
"In fact, many are addressed to the central government," he said, meaning demonstrators often appeal to Beijing for help. The central government has tolerated such protests in the past because they served as a social pressure valve, as well as an alarm system that alerted them to brewing problems.
Protests have occurred less frequently since Mr. Xi took power in 2012, researchers say, in part because the Chinese leader has responded to them more forcefully. Yet, in more than 10% of protests, the demonstrators succeeded in extracting some form of concession.
A common tactic for authorities is to first repress a protest and prevent more from happening, also by making concessions later, said Mr. Slaten.
Sometimes, protests can even force changes in national policy. Earlier this year, Beijing squeezed property developers' access to credit in an effort to deflate the country's swelling real-estate bubble, leading many to stop work on residential properties that had been purchased. After home buyers staged a mortgage protest, the central government established a special rescue fund in September to help developers finish residential projects and finalize property handovers.
In some instances, complaints about pandemic measures escalated into calls for the Communist Party and Mr. Xi to step down -- an astonishing expression of public defiance unseen in the country since the 1989 pro-democracy protests. Mr. Slaten cautioned that those calling for regime change don't likely represent the majority of protesters.
Chinese authorities have responded to the Covid protests the way they have responded to other, smaller protests under Mr. Xi. In the days following the demonstrations, police fanned out to prevent new gatherings. They used smartphone data to identify, detain and interrogate people who were at the protests.
Cyberspace regulators have clamped down on the internet, further tightening censorship and moving to curb access to virtual private networks.
At the same time, without directly acknowledging the protest, health authorities have altered their messaging around Covid controls, hinting at an acceleration of plans to ease restrictions.
For many of the young people who participated, they said, the protests crystallized broader frustrations with the strictures of life in Mr. Xi's China that could linger past the pandemic.
"Social movements don't always progress in a straight line. But livelihood grievances are often the issue that mobilizes a broad set of people," Mr. Slaten said.
Credit: By Sha Hua and Josh Chin
