MCDONALD'S CORP.
MCD +0.9%
Layoffs have arrived at the golden arches. McDonald's temporarily closed its U.S. offices and started informing corporate employees about layoffs. The Chicago-based fast-food chain previously told U.S. employees and some international staff that they should work from home from Monday through Wednesday so it could deliver staffing decisions virtually. The cuts are part of a broader restructuring, as companies across industries reduce staffing ahead of a possible recession. McDonald's sales have held up while retailers have seen slowing spending. McDonald's shares added 0.9% Monday.
WORLD WRESTLING ENTERTAINMENT INC.
WWE -2.1%
The WWE and UFC are teaming up. The World Wrestling Entertainment and Endeavor Group Holdings Inc. agreed to form a new parent company, bringing professional wrestling and mixed martial arts league Ultimate Fighting Championship under one roof. Endeavor will hold a 51% controlling interest in their newly formed entity, with WWE owning the remaining 49%. Endeavor Chief Executive Ari Emanuel will serve as chief executive, while WWE majority owner and former CEO Vince McMahon is to be named executive chairman. WWE shares lost 2.1% Monday.
CONAGRA BRANDS INC.
CAG +1.8%
Higher price tags are feeding Conagra's bottom line. The maker of Slim Jim raised its guidance for the second consecutive quarter as the food manufacturer posted a nearly 60% rise in profits. Conagra attributed its results to inflation-driven price increases. General Mills Inc. and McCormick & Co. Inc. have also said that packaged foods are benefiting from aggressive price increases. Conagra shares rose 1.8% Wednesday.
JOHNSON & JOHNSON
JNJ +4.5%
Johnson & Johnson is seeking one of the biggest product-liability settlements ever. The health-products maker has proposed paying at least $8.9 billion to thousands of people who sued the company alleging that their use of J&J's talc-containing powders caused cancer. If a bankruptcy court and a large majority of plaintiffs approve the plan to make the payments over 25 years, J&J could resolve the lawsuits. The deal would rank among the largest mass tort-litigation settlements, including a $206 billion agreement with tobacco companies over the effects of smoking. J&J shares rose 4.5% Wednesday.
WESTERN ALLIANCE BANCORP
WAL -12%
More effects of the Silicon Valley Bank collapse are coming to light. The Phoenix-based lender Western Alliance disclosed that its deposits plunged in the final weeks of March in the wake of SVB's meltdown. In a regulatory filing, the bank said that its total deposits were $47.6 billion as of March 31 -- a roughly 23% drop in a few weeks. Many smaller and midsize banks have seen deposits flee in the aftermath of SVB, which catered to business clients with deposits that exceeded the FDIC's $250,000 insurance limit. Western Alliance shares dropped 12% Wednesday.
EXXON MOBIL CORP.
XOM +5.9%
Exxon Mobil has held preliminary and informal discussions about acquiring U.S. fracking company Pioneer Natural Resources Co., The Wall Street Journal reported Friday, adding that the cash-rich oil-and-gas giant has been looking to expand and has had discussions with at least one other company. Earlier in the week, oil prices surged after OPEC+, the Saudi-led group of producers, said that it would cut more than a million barrels of output a day starting next month. The decision could boost U.S. gasoline bills and inflation as the West confronts Russia over its invasion of Ukraine. Exxon shares jumped 5.9% Monday.
ALPHABET INC.
GOOG +3.8%
The AI race is heating up. Alphabet unit Google plans to add conversational artificial-intelligence features to its flagship search engine, Chief Executive Sundar Pichai said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal. Mr. Pichai said chatbots don't pose a threat to Google's search business, which accounts for more than half of revenue at parent Alphabet. With Microsoft Corp. deploying the technology behind ChatGPT in its Bing search engine, Mr. Pichai is dealing with one of the biggest threats to Google's core business in years. Alphabet shares gained 3.8% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
