U.S.
ANTITRUST: The Justice Department is conducting a broad review of big tech platforms, including Google, and the FTC is examining complaints about Facebook and Amazon.
PRIVACY: Congress will consider potential national privacy legislation, while California starts enforcing a state law governing online privacy and gig-economy workers.
THE STATES: As in California, some other states are adopting their own tech rules, and groups of state attorneys general are examining competitive practices atGoogleandFacebook.
ELECTION: The presidential race is likely to drive further tech criticism from politicians, and to test social-media platforms' efforts to better control manipulation and misinformation.
EUROPE
PRIVACY: More decisions are expected over alleged violations of the EU's General Data Protection Regulation, including the first from Ireland, which has been probing Facebook's WhatsApp.
DATA TRANSFERS: A ruling from the EU's top court could open the door to challenges against Facebook and other U.S. tech companies' practice of storing European user data in the U.S., citing American government surveillance practices.
ANTITRUST: The EU's antitrust arm is pursuing a full probe into Amazon's treatment of third-party sellers, and continuing preliminary investigations into Apple, Facebook and Google. Some European antitrust officials, including in the U.K. are also floating the potential for new rules, such as mandating that large companies share some data with smaller ones. The U.K.'s antitrust watchdog will decide whether to block Amazon's investment in Deliveroo, a British food-delivery company.
NEW LAWS: The EU's executive arm is expected in the spring to propose legislation regulating some development and use of artificial intelligence, and by the end of the year it plans to propose a new Digital Services Act that could make tech companies more liable for content posted to and activity organized via their services -- somethingthe U.K. is considering as part of its own Online Harms bill.
GIG ECONOMY: The U.K. Supreme Court will rule on the employment status of Uber drivers, after lower courts ruled that the company should treat themas employeesrather than contractors.
ASIA
HUAWEI: Proposed regulations in Washington would almost entirely cut off Huawei's access to American technology, heating up the U.S.-China tech tensions.
TIKTOK: The Chinese video-sharing app is the subject of a U.S. national-security review after lawmakers questioned whether it censors content to appease Beijing.
INDIA ANTITRUST: The country's antitrust watchdog is probing whether Amazon and Walmart's Flipkart have violated competition laws.
Source: staff reports
