Over three days this week, the American TV gameshow "Jeopardy!" featured a showdown between a clever IBM computer system called Watson and the two greatest "Jeopardy!" champions. Watson won handily. It won the preliminary practice round, tied Monday's opening round, and won by large margins on Tuesday and Wednesday. The point has been made: Watson can compete at the championship level -- and is making it more difficult for anyone to argue that there are human tasks that computers will never achieve.
Although it is at heart a general-knowledge quiz show, "Jeopardy!" involves understanding complexities of humor, puns, metaphors, analogies, ironies and other subtleties. Elsewhere, computers are advancing on many other fronts, from driverless cars (Google's cars have driven 140,000 miles through California cities and towns without human intervention) to the diagnosis of disease.
Watson runs on 90 computer servers, although it does not go out to the Internet. When will this capability be available on your PC? The ratio of computer price to performance is now doubling in less than a year, so 90 servers would become the equivalent of one server in about seven years, and the equivalent of one personal computer within a decade. However, with the growth in cloud computing -- in which supercomputer capability is increasingly available to anyone via the Internet -- Watson-like capability will actually be available to you much sooner.
Given this, I expect Watson-like "natural language processing" (the ability to "understand" ordinary English) to show up in Google, Bing and other search engines over the next five years.
With computers demonstrating a basic ability to understand human language, it's only a matter of time before they pass the famous "Turing test," in which "chatbot" programs compete to fool human judges into believing that they are human.
If Watson's underlying technology were applied to the Turing test, it would likely do pretty well. Consider the annual Loebner Prize competition, one version of the Turing test. Last year, the best chatbot contestant fooled the human judges 25% of the time.
Perhaps counterintuitively, Watson would have to dumb itself down in order to pass a Turing test. After all, if you were talking to someone over instant messaging and they seemed to know every detail of everything, you'd realize it was an artificial intelligence (AI).
A computer passing a properly designed Turing test would be operating at human levels. I, for one, would then regard it as human.
I expect this to happen within two decades, but I also expect that when we first get reports that a computer has passed the Turing test, observers (probably including myself) will argue that the rules for the test were not stringent enough. By the time the controversy dies down and it becomes clear that nonbiological machine intelligence has become equal to biological human intelligence, the AIs will already be thousands of times smarter than us.
But keep in mind that this is not an alien invasion from Mars. We're creating these technologies to extend our reach. The fact that millions of farmers in China can access most of human knowledge with devices they carry in their pockets is a testament to the fact that we are doing this already.
Ultimately, we will vastly extend and expand our own intelligence by merging with these tools of our own creation.
---
Mr. Kurzweil, a recipient of the National Medal of Technology, invented the CCD flat bed scanner and works on artificial intelligence technologies. He is the author of the best-selling book "The Singularity is Near" (Viking, 2005).
Credit: By Ray Kurzweil
