Before last week, most people had never heard of Brian Niccol. If he walked into a Starbucks, nobody would recognize him. A barista might even spell his name wrong.
But that was before Starbucks poached him from Chipotle in the sort of move that made investors spit out their coffee. The slumping company gave its new CEO everything he could have possibly wanted: a remote office in Southern California, a corporate plane for commuting to Seattle and a venti-sized pay package worth upward of $100 million.
Then the stock market opened and suggested that he's worth more.
In fact, Brian Niccol turned out to be worth $27 billion.
That's how much the market values of the companies swung in response to Niccol's hiring. The day he was named the new chairman and chief executive officer of the coffee giant, Chipotle's stock dropped 7.5% while Starbucks gained a stunning 24.5%.
Which means the guy hasn't even started on the job and he's already responsible for the company's best day ever on the stock market.
But there are still lots of questions about the future of Starbucks -- and one that applies to other companies.
How much do CEOs actually matter?
Clearly, the market believes that the right CEO is essential to the success of an entire business. But it's hard to fathom how one single person could be so valuable to a company with 380,000 people. After all, the business of Starbucks is about as complex as a typical order at Starbucks these days.
And there are many people who see CEOs as more or less interchangeable. As it happens, some of them are CEOs.
In one survey of 800 C-suite executives last year, nearly half said most or all of the CEO role could be replaced by artificial intelligence.
The idea that leadership is overrated has been a surprisingly common view among people who study corporate management since the 1970s, when a pair of sociologists published a counterintuitive paper that showed the importance of CEOs was greatly exaggerated.
But when two management scholars recently took another look at the CEO effect -- the variance in a company's performance that can be traced back to one person -- they reached a different conclusion. They found that CEOs have become more influential.
Why? Because the job of a CEO today is really about deciding which bets to make. The frenetic pace of business and opportunities presented by technological shifts have given CEOs across a wide variety of industries the power to determine the fate of their companies -- a concept known as managerial discretion. The more discretion they have, the more of a difference they can make.
"If you're working at a utility company, maybe the CEO doesn't matter much," said Tim Quigley, a professor at the University of Georgia's business school and co-author of that 2015 paper. "If you're working for Apple, CEOs matter a lot."
And based on their exuberant response to Niccol's hiring, investors believe Starbucks is a company where the CEO really matters.
Not that investors are always right. They put a value of $10 billion on Bob Iger when he made his triumphant return to Disney two years ago, but the company's stock price is lower today than it was the day before he came back. Wall Street was skeptical when Satya Nadella took over Microsoft, and few major companies have performed better over the past decade.
But the market wasn't wrong the last time Starbucks picked a CEO. The day after Laxman Narasimhan won the job in 2022, the company lost a few billion dollars. It would soon be in the throes of an identity crisis and under pressure from activist investors and former CEO Howard Schultz.
So the board decided to fire Narasimhan -- and hire Niccol.
He would have been the obvious candidate for the job even if he were deathly allergic to coffee.
Niccol is seen as a rock star of the restaurant industry, as my colleague Heather Haddon has explained in her must-read Starbucks coverage. He developed his marketing creativity and operational expertise at Procter & Gamble and Yum Brands, where he worked on Pizza Hut, took his talents to Taco Bell and launched some of the most innovative products of our time -- like Doritos Locos Tacos.
Then he left to run Chipotle when it had all the appeal of rotten guacamole.
The company was reeling from a series of food-safety scandals when it tapped Niccol in 2018 to lead a turnaround. The most surprising thing about what he did there is what he didn't do. He tweaked marketing strategies and tinkered with the queso, but he restrained himself from making drastic changes, like switching to frozen ingredients or expanding into breakfast burritos.
"We knew not to do any of those things," Niccol wrote in Harvard Business Review. "We just needed to get even better at doing what people already loved us for."
One group of people that loved him: Chipotle's investors. They were right to be bullish on Niccol from the day he started as CEO. In his six years at the company, its stock price climbed 773%.
If anyone can revitalize a brand like Starbucks, it's someone who's already done it elsewhere. Except what he did for burritos might not work for lattes given all the problems he's inheriting.
The prices are higher. The waits are longer. The competition is stiffer. Starbucks is no longer the "third place" between home and work to sip an espresso and savor the ambience. Now it's just a place to grab that cold brew you ordered on your phone.
So it will be harder for Niccol to replicate his success when he wakes up one morning next month, makes himself a hot Americano -- the first of several coffees he drinks per day -- and starts his new job.
But if he can pull it off again, one of the world's highest-paid CEOs might just be something you can't find at Starbucks: a bargain.
Generate image description

Generate image description

Credit: By Ben Cohen
