When Rhiannon McDonald was 13, she was chatting online one night with someone she thought was a female modeling scout. In a matter of hours, from the computer in her bedroom, she was coerced into sending numerous photos of herself unclothed -- and providing her home address.
The next day, the person showed up at her house. It was a man. He sexually assaulted her.
Ms. McDonald, now 30, said she struggled for years to process what had happened to her. She recently began working with the Marie Collins Foundation, a nonprofit that assists children who have been victims of sexual abuse and exploitation on the internet.
While the platforms teens use are different now -- back then, she was on AOL Instant Messenger -- the tactics of online child predators remain largely the same, often involving the use of flattery to lure victims, followed by threats if they don't agree to share images or meet in person. Tech companies have long tried to fight against this kind of abuse, but until the arrival of artificial-intelligence tools, detecting the behavior has been nearly impossible.
Lindsey Olson, an executive director at the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, said that while tech companies are required by law to report cases of apparent child-sexual-abuse imagery on their platforms, they aren't required to report suspected online enticement. The number of these cases that tech companies and members of the public voluntarily report numbered more than 19,000 globally last year, up from nearly 12,000 in 2018 -- figures Ms. Olson said vastly understate the problem.
"Since so many teens and children have phones now, it's much easier for offenders to find victims and for children to produce sexually explicit content of themselves," said Ms. Olson. "Offenders don't necessarily need to make physical contact with a child anymore in order to do a great amount of harm."
Tech companies are working harder to stop such behavior on their platforms, before any photos are exchanged let alone any meetings take place. In late 2018, Microsoft Corp. held a hackathon involving engineers and legal experts from Facebook, Google and online game giant Roblox, among others, to create AI tools to detect the techniques predators use to establish trust with victims.
"If you think about how you address this issue, you want to be able to prevent, respond and report. We've been able to respond and report before but we didn't get to the prevention side," said Courtney Gregoire, chief digital safety officer at Microsoft.
The teams analyzed tens of thousands of sample conversations between a presumed adult and minor to understand the conversational patterns used by predators. One tip-off is when one party asks another to go off platform and into one-on-one direct messaging. They then prototyped software that can detect those patterns.
In the months since the hackathon, Microsoft collaborated further with Roblox and other companies, including the instant-messaging service Kik, to refine the AI so it can evaluate and rate conversational characteristics, assigning them a risk level. If the risk is high enough, the chats are to be sent to a human moderator for review.
If there appears to be a risk of imminent harm to a minor, the moderator is supposed to call local law enforcement. In most cases, the flagged chats are to be reported to the NCMEC, whose analysts will review the conversations.
A spokeswoman for Microsoft said the AI tool could work in any text-based environment. The company didn't provide additional details on how the tool would work with chat services that are end-to-end encrypted.
Roblox, which has its own systems for filtering chats, is incorporating the Microsoft AI as an additional layer of security, according to a spokeswoman.
When she was 13 years old, Ms. McDonald was introduced by a friend to a person the friend thought was a female modeling scout. Ms. McDonald and the purported woman exchanged pictures and the offender complimented Ms. McDonald, telling her she could be a model. "When I was 13 I had very low self-esteem, so hearing those kinds of things felt really flattering," she said.
The person asked Ms. McDonald seemingly innocuous questions about her school and other details she later realized helped identify her and where she lived. The person said she had done some topless modeling and it would be a way for Ms. McDonald to break into modeling. "I thought, 'I'm not so sure about this,' but she really convinced me it was OK, that it's not a big deal, everyone does it," she recalls.
"She wore me down and I sent a topless picture and that's when she completely changed," Ms. McDonald added. "It stopped being nice questions about my hobbies and it became very blunt. When I said I didn't want to send any more photos she threatened to send my friends the one I had already sent. As a 13-year-old girl there's nothing more horrifying. I didn't feel I had a way out. So I shared more images."
The next morning, when her father was at work and her stepmother was out, a man showed up with professional camera equipment. Ms. McDonald said he assaulted her in her bedroom, took photos of her and threatened to distribute them if she told anyone.
The "scout" and the assailant had been one and the same. When he contacted her again, she blocked the messages.
Ms. McDonald didn't tell anyone what had happened until six months later, when police appeared at her house. They had arrested the man in connection with similar crimes against other girls and had found her information on his computer. The man went to trial and was ultimately convicted.
Ms. McDonald said it's difficult for even the most engaged parents to know everything their children are doing online and that she hopes this technology will help.
---
Red Alert
Rhiannon McDonald explained some common indicators of predatory behavior that parents can discuss with their kids.
-- Questions. "Someone taking too much interest in where you live and who you live with is a red flag," said Ms. McDonald. "In my case, the predator managed to build up a very detailed picture of my life through what seemed like innocent questions."
-- Compliments. Flattery and promises, such as offers to help secure modeling or acting jobs, can be signs of predatory behavior.
-- Change of App. Predators often try to convince victims to leave moderated chat rooms or public social-media threads to talk privately via messaging app or text.
-- Photos. Once predators have photos, they have leverage over their victim, even if they are geographically distant.

Credit: By Julie Jargon
