HONG KONG -- Flush with cash, Chinese financial-technology firm Ant Financial Services Group is putting on hold plans for an initial public offering while it steps up investments in everything from startups to artificial intelligence, according to a senior company executive.
Ant, which was founded by billionaire Jack Ma and born out of a spinoff from Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., has quietly grown into one of the world's most valuable fintech companies. Its biggest asset is Alipay, a mobile-payments platform used on Alibaba's e-commerce sites and by hundreds of millions of Chinese consumers to pay for everything from meals to college tuition fees.
Investors and analysts have been expecting Ant to go public sometime in 2018. The company last raised $4.5 billion from private investors in April 2016 in a deal that gave it a $60 billion valuation -- and its business has since expanded significantly.
An IPO "is not a necessity or a priority" right now, said Douglas Feagin, Ant's president of international business, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal in Hong Kong.
Mr. Feagin, an American who was a Goldman Sachs Group Inc. investment banker for more than two decades, said he can appreciate the benefits of going public but Ant has other, more pressing, plans to implement.
Among Ant's pursuits: expanding Alipay's global footprint within and beyond the 70 countries the payments system is used in, while plumbing for new technology investments globally in things like facial-recognition and machine-learning systems.
"It is the time now to deploy artificial intelligence in ways that are much more sophisticated than we've ever done: The technology is there, the data is there, [as is] the receptivity of consumers," Mr. Feagin said.
He declined to detail exactly how much Ant plans to invest, but pointed to affiliate Alibaba's plans to spend more than $15 billion over three years on research and development.
Ant has, in the past three years, invested more than $16 billion in more than 50 startups that include online lenders, insurers and technology firms, according to database ITjuzi.
The company led a $40 million financing round announced Tuesday for DeePhi Tech, a Beijing-based startup that creates applications for "deep learning," a technology that teaches computers to differentiate data the way a human brain does.
As a closely held business, Ant doesn't disclose its financial results publicly. But data from Alibaba -- to which Ant pays fixed royalties and fees under a profit-sharing agreement -- indicate Ant's pretax profit reached $773 million in the quarter ended in June. That is close to Ant's profit for its entire previous fiscal year ended in March, which rose 86% from a year earlier to $814 million, according to Alibaba filings.
Some analysts expect the company to go public eventually. "Ant Financial's strategy is to defend share, grow into new areas and generate profits -- leading to the business becoming 'IPO-ready' in 2018," said Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. research analyst Bhavtosh Vajpayee.

Credit: By Chuin-Wei Yap
