Tesla Chief Executive Elon Musk has tapped one of his closest confidants to oversee operations in North America and Europe, two markets where the company is facing stiffer competition in the electric-car space and cooling consumer demand.
Omead Afshar, who joined Tesla in 2017, is now a vice president in charge of sales and manufacturing with senior executives in those two regions reporting to him, according to people familiar with the changes. He has assumed some responsibilities formerly held by Tom Zhu, Tesla's senior vice president for automotive, who earlier this year went back to China.
The move is a step up for the 37-year-old Afshar, who had previously worked in Tesla's office of the CEO. As in his earlier position, he will report directly to Musk.
Afshar became less visible at the electric-car maker starting in 2022 and in recent years has held roles at two of Musk's other companies, SpaceX and X, according to people with knowledge of the matter.
Afshar and Tesla didn't return requests for comment. Nor is he listed on the company's website, which only shows three senior executives -- Musk, Zhu, and Chief Financial Officer Vaibhav Taneja.
Afshar's LinkedIn page shows his title at Tesla since 2020 as an emoji wearing a cowboy hat.
Tesla's leadership team has been in flux since this spring, when Musk laid off more than 10% of the company and abruptly shifted plans for a long-promised affordable car model. Several top executives left at the time, including the heads of Tesla's energy business, its public-policy group and the supercharger team.
The world's most valuable automaker is under pressure to revive its sales momentum and reverse a slide in profitability that has some analysts and investors concerned about the state of the car business. The move comes as Musk shifts more resources to robotics and artificial intelligence, two areas that he views as critical to the company's future.
Last week, he showed off a robotaxi without a steering wheel or pedals that Tesla plans to start producing in the next two to three years and which he said could sell for under $30,000.
Tesla's stock, meanwhile, has dropped nearly 8% since the reveal with investors disappointed in the lack of specifics around his plans for autonomous-driving, which he has billed as a pivotal transition for the electric-car pioneer.
Tesla's global sales and manufacturing operations were previously overseen by Zhu, who returned to China in May as part of the internal restructuring, The Wall Street Journal has reported.
Zhu had made his mark in China, overseeing the construction of the Shanghai factory and successfully expanding the business there. Some employees internally referred to him as the "fireman" for his ability to troubleshoot problems.
He moved to the U.S. in 2023 to take over as senior vice president of automotive, which made him No. 2 at Tesla, reporting directly to Musk. His appointment was part of an effort to assuage some of Wall Street's concerns that Musk was distracted with his other companies and lacked a clear succession plan.
Before joining Tesla, Afshar, who studied biomedical engineering, had spent roughly seven years at a medical-device company, according to his LinkedIn profile.
During his time in the office of the CEO, Afshar oversaw the development of Tesla's 10 million-square-foot headquarters and factory in Austin, Texas.
While running the Tesla factory, he came under scrutiny in an internal investigation looking into a glass-materials order that was identified as suspicious, Bloomberg reported in 2022.
The specialized-glass order drew the attention from Tesla lawyers and board members, probing whether company resources had been misused and if Musk had a role, The Wall Street Journal reported last year.
Tesla employees had been working on a secret project that included plans for a glass-walled structure, described internally as a house for Musk, the Journal reported. The Justice Department and Securities and Exchange Commission opened an investigation into the events in 2023.
Afshar declined to comment to Bloomberg about its report and hasn't responded to the Journal's requests about the glass structure. Musk and his representatives haven't responded to questions about the project or the investigations. On X, Musk has said he isn't building a glass house but hasn't addressed prior plans or work on the idea.
Credit: By Becky Peterson
