[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Coca-Cola has been an unexciting stock to hold lately. That might not be such a bad thing.
The global beverage company on Tuesday reported solid results that underscored its appeal in investor portfolios as a steady performer. In the fourth quarter, the company increased organic sales -- which strip out the impact of mergers and currency fluctuations -- 12% from a year earlier. Price rises accounted for much of that but, encouragingly, underlying case volume rose 2% from a year earlier.
This suggests consumers around the world are unperturbed by the company's price increases. Unit case volumes fell 1% in North America, but were positive in all other regions. Coca-Cola stock was up slightly in early trading Tuesday, but fell 0.6% by the close, as the wider market was down sharply on a higher-than-expected reading for U.S. inflation.
Last week, PepsiCo reported less-impeccable results, causing a 3.5% selloff in its shares. Organic sales rose 4.5% from a year earlier, but underlying volumes were negative, falling 3% in "convenient foods" including Frito-Lay and 2% in beverages.
For 2024, Coca-Cola is forecasting 6% to 7% organic sales growth, while Pepsi sees organic growth of at least 4%.
"Yes there's been inflation and distractions and ups and downs, but in the end running through that is the continuous amount of volume growth," said Coca-Cola Chief Executive James Quincey on a conference call with analysts.
Before Tuesday's market open, Coca-Cola stock was down 1.5% over the past year while Pepsi was down 4%. That compares with a 21.3% increase for the S&P 500. Other consumer-staples names fared far worse, especially big food makers: Campbell Soup and General Mills are both down around 18% as consumers seem to be getting exhausted with price increases in grocery aisles. Against this backdrop, Coca-Cola's flat performance doesn't look bad at all.
Coca-Cola isn't exactly a bargain at 21.1 times forward earnings, according to a consensus of analysts polled by FactSet. But that is below its 10-year average of 22.3 times.
And investors need some hedges in their portfolios in case things go awry in the broader market. Tuesday's inflation readings serve as a reminder that a Goldilocks scenario for the U.S. economy isn't a sure thing: Should inflation prove sticky, rates could well remain higher for longer than investors now expect. And big technology stocks are pricing in a nearly perfect scenario for the development and commercialization of artificial intelligence.
In theory, consumer-staples stocks fit the bill. But investors should stick with ones that have proven their resilience. Coca-Cola is a classic for a reason.
Credit: By Aaron Back
