Rashid Johnson, 'Fly Away'
Hauser & Wirth
Sept. 8 to Oct. 22
hauserwirth.com
The yearning gospel hymn "I'll Fly Away" has inspired church choirs, country singers and even rapper Kanye West. Now, visual artist Rashid Johnson uses it as a springboard to explore themes of African-American identity and societal anxiety. The exhibit combines an ambitious suite of new paintings, sculptures and performance elements, including impromptu in-gallery piano playing. A related architectural installation fills the huge gallery space, incorporating books, video screens and plants.
Willie Nelson & Family
Ford Amphitheater at Coney Island Boardwalk
Sept. 13
fordamphitheaterconeyisland.com
At a new 5,000-seat open-air venue by the sea, Willie Nelson and his backing band will showcase his most recent album, "For the Good Times: A Tribute to Ray Price," a homage to his honky-tonk-haunting mentor. Expect Mr. Nelson, 83, to also draw on his own deep country-music songbook.
'Berlin Alexanderplatz' Remastered
Museum of Modern Art
Sept. 13 to 18
moma.org/film
A rare 35mm screening of the remastered edition of Rainer Werner Fassbinder's 15 1/2-hour magnum opus. Broadcast as a German miniseries in 1980, the film -- an adaptation of the classic novel by Alfred Doblin -- came to U.S. theaters three years later. The drama traces the downward spiral of an ex-convict Everyman in the waning days of the Weimar Era.
Taylor Mac, 'A 24-Decade History of Popular Music'
St. Ann's Warehouse
Sept. 15 to Oct. 8
stannswarehouse.org
Call it endurance theater. Or a subversive deep dive into U.S. cultural history. Over the course of nine shows, performance artist Taylor Mac -- in over-the-top costumes and elaborate headdresses -- will unveil his wildly ambitious romp through the nation's 240-year musical history. The concerts, each covering several decades, will culminate in a 24-hour, all-in-one, no-intermission performance on Oct. 8. Among the subthemes: "the queerest Civil War re-enactment in history" and "a dance-off between 12 ukulele-playing Tiny Tims and 12 Charles Dickens Tiny Tims."
Crochet Coral Reef: TOXIC SEAS
Museum of Arts and Design
Sept. 15 to Jan. 22, 2017
madmuseum.org
Australian sisters Margaret and Christine Wertheim turn colored yarn and plastic refuse into large underwater landscapes. Their crocheted corals, kelps and other reef organisms -- some beautiful, some bleached, some blighted -- warn about the damage done to the world's reefs by climate change and careless human behavior. Begun more than 10 years ago, this ongoing project has roots in mathematics, marine biology and craft; it will be shown in a new iteration here.
Carmen Herrera: Lines of Sight
Whitney Museum of American Art
Sept. 16 to Jan. 2, 2017
whitney.org
When the Whitney opened its new building in 2015, a majestic green-and-white abstraction by a little-known artist hung alongside works by art-world luminaries like Frank Stella and Ellsworth Kelly -- and more than held its own. Now, the museum cements Carmen Herrera's place in the art pantheon with a show focusing on the emergence of her razor-sharp geometric style -- still used today by the Cuban-born artist, who is actively painting at the age of 101.
New York Philharmonic 'The Art of the Score'
David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center
Sept. 13 to 17
nyphil.org
Two iconic New York films will be screened with their scores performed live: "West Side Story" (Sept. 13 to 15) and, for the first time, Woody Allen's "Manhattan" (Sept. 16 and 17). The latter's black-and-white opening montage forever linked George Gershwin's classical-jazz composition "Rhapsody in Blue" with New York City. The screening happens on the same stage where the initial recordings took place.
Kai Altoff: and then leave me to the common swifts
Museum of Modern Art
Sept. 18 to Jan. 22, 2017
moma.org
In an enigmatic, multisensory environment touted as unusual even by contemporary-art standards, this German-born artist will survey his own career in an exhibit entirely of his own design. He selected all the works: expressive, boldly colored paintings and drawings as well as ventures into collage, sculptural assemblage and sound. He also conceived everything from lighting to the pedestals and platforms used in the unconventional displays.
'High Maintenance'
HBO
Premieres Sept. 16
hbo.com
A sharp, empathetic view into the lives of a kaleidoscopic cross-section of New Yorkers -- a dog walker, a personal assistant, a cross-dressing writer, among them -- all connected by their pot dealer. Begun as a low-budget DIY-style web series, it was created by husband-and-wife team Ben Sinclair -- who stars as the show's marijuana man, delivering his wares by bike -- and Katja Blichfeld, who did casting for NBC's "30 Rock."
New York City Ballet Opening Gala
David H. Koch Theatre
Sept. 20
nycballet.com
In a fall gala brimming with world premieres, fashion shares the stage, as top designers will create costumes for all the choreographers. Narciso Rodriguez is working with principal dancer Lauren Lovette, and Jason Wu is paired with choreographer (and corps de ballet member) Peter Walker. Designer Rosie Assoulin will create looks for prolific dance maker Annabelle Lopez Ochoa, while costumes by Dries Van Noten will be onstage for resident choreographer Justin Peck's new work. The ballets will be repeated throughout the season, running through Oct 16.
New York Philharmonic Opening Gala Concert
David Geffen Hall
Sept. 21
nyphil.org
The hometown orchestra kicks off its 175th anniversary season with a New York-centric bill conducted by music director Alan Gilbert, who will step down in 2017. Jazz pianist Aaron Diehl will perform George Gershwin's Concerto in F with the ensemble. The concert also includes the New York premiere of the orchestral version of "Stomp" by John Corigliano, whose father was a former Philharmonic concertmaster, and Antonin Dvorak's Symphony No. 9, "From the New World," penned during the composer's time in New York.
'Love, Love, Love'
Laura Pels Theater
Sept. 22 to Dec. 18
roundabouttheatre.org
After last year's "King Charles III," playwright Mike Bartlett transfers his gaze from the halls of Buckingham Palace to a north London flat. The new play charts the progress of one couple over four decades, from the technicolor haze of 1967 London to a decidedly less swinging present. The Roundabout Theatre production, starring Richard Armitage and Zoe Kazan, will be directed by Tony Award-winning stage, film and opera director Michael Mayer.
Jerusalem 1000-1400: Every People Under Heaven
The Metropolitan Museum of Art
Sept. 26 to Jan. 8, 2017
metmuseum.org
It was a sacred city to Judaism, Christianity and Islam, a crossroads for trade and tourism and, at times, an ideological and actual battleground. No wonder medieval Jerusalem was a simmering, multicultural crucible that fostered the creation of works of striking complexity and stunning beauty. The exhibit gathers some 200 objects -- textiles, metalwork, ceramics, jewels, reliquaries, sacred texts and sculptures, some never before seen in the U.S.
'Tristan und Isolde'
The Metropolitan Opera
Sept. 26 to Oct. 27
metopera.org
Sir Simon Rattle will conduct his first Met opening night with Wagner's opera of desire and death, a work whose power the conductor has compared with that of a nuclear bomb. Nina Stemme, in her signature role of Isolde, sings opposite Australian tenor Stuart Skelton's Tristan, with direction by Poland's Mariusz Trelinski.
'Sing For Your Life: A Story of Race, Music, and Family' by Daniel Bergner
Lee Boudreaux Books/Little, Brown and Co.
Sept. 27
leeboudreauxbooks.com
Growing up in a Virginia trailer park, Ryan Speedo Green had an unlikely path to the international opera stage. Despite following his parents' violent example, which landed him in the state's juvenile facility of last resort, he went on to be a National Grand Finals winner of the 2011 Metropolitan Opera National Council Auditions competition. Now, at 30, he is poised to perform the role of Colline in the Met's production of "La Boheme," opening Sept. 28. New York writer Daniel Bergner tracks his rise.
New York Film Festival
The Film Society of Lincoln Center
Sept. 30 to Oct. 16
filmlinc.org
To launch its 54th edition, the city's leading film festival does something it has never done before: showcase a nonfiction film for its prestigious opening-night selection. That film, "The 13th" is a searing documentary by "Selma" director Ava DuVernay about the roots of the U.S. prison system. The lineup is packed with familiar names from past fests, with new films from Pedro Almodovar, Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne, Jim Jarmusch, Ken Loach and the ever-provocative Paul Verhoeven.
'Plenty'
The Public Theater
Previews begin Oct. 4
publictheater.org
Rachel Weisz plays a British spy with an existential crisis in this witty and unusually structured 1978 work by David Hare, the Tony and Olivier Award-winning playwright best known for "Skylight" and "The Hours." The story takes place over two decades after World War II. Corey Stoll co-stars and David Leveaux directs.
Simon Bolivar Symphony Orchestra of Venezuela
Carnegie Hall
Oct. 6 to 8
carnegiehall.org
For Carnegie's opening gala, the Venezuelan conductor Gustavo Dudamel leads this renowned ensemble through Ravel's "La valse" and Stravinsky's "Le Sacre du Printemps." The young musicians trained under Venezuela's publicly financed "El Sistema" program -- as did Mr. Dudamel, who also serves as music and artistic director for the Los Angeles Philharmonic. The orchestra returns the following two nights.
Krzysztof Kieslowski: A Complete Retrospective Museum of the Moving Image
Oct. 7 to Nov. 6
movingimage.us
In the early 1990s, Polish filmmaker Krzysztof Kieslowski made a name internationally with his final films, "The Double Life of Veronique" and the "Three Colors" trilogy, uncanny reflections on faith, chance and the complexities of modern life. This series unfurls the full spectrum of his work, including documentaries, early features and his masterpiece, "The Decalogue," in which occupants of a drab Warsaw housing complex live out existential parables inspired by the Ten Commandments and the anxieties of the Communist system.
Cecily Brown: Rehearsal
The Drawing Center
Oct. 7 to Dec. 18
drawingcenter.org
Cecily Brown, who made ripples last year after parting ways with Gagosian Gallery, is also pivoting from the oversize, demonstrative and color-drenched canvases that made her an art-world darling. Her first solo museum show in New York reveals a quieter, more intimate side to her art, focusing on drawings rendered in ink and watercolor that riff off sources that range from 18th-century British draftsman William Hogarth to Jimi Hendrix album-cover art.
Agnes Martin
Guggenheim Museum
Oct. 7 to Jan. 11, 2017
guggenheim.org
Though most closely associated with New Mexico, where she lived and painted in remote isolation, Agnes Martin began her life's work in lower Manhattan in the 1950s and '60s, when she struck upon a soft aesthetic of lines and grids that occupied her for decades of monastic creation. Her paintings, in contemplative whites and greys as well as subtle pastels, offer the promise of quietude suited for a serene stroll up the Guggenheim's rotunda.
'Guillaume Tell'
Metropolitan Opera
Oct. 18 to Nov. 12
metopera.org
Rossini's opera and its famous overture return to the Met for the first time in more than 80 years -- and this time, it will be sung in the original French. Gerald Finley stars as the rebellious Swiss marksman, handy with a crossbow, while Fabio Luisi conducts. The opera is directed by Pierre Audi, the adventurous new artistic director at Park Avenue Armory and head of the Dutch National Opera, which co-produced this staging.
'Sweat'
The Public Theater
Previews begin Oct. 18
publictheater.org
Inspired by extensive interviews conducted in Reading, Penn., one of the poorest U.S. cities, Lynn Nottage's funny, heartfelt look at the increasingly fragile lives of a group of factory workers already has strong buzz. After runs at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival and Washington, D.C.'s Arena Stage, "Sweat" won the 2016 Susan Smith Blackburn Prize for women playwrights. Kate Whoriskey, who deftly staged Ms. Nottage's Pulitzer Prize-winning play "Ruined," directs.
Beverly Buchanan -- Ruins and Rituals
The Brooklyn Museum
Oct. 21 to Mar. 5, 2017
brooklynmuseum.org
Born in North Carolina in 1940, Beverly Buchanan earned master's degrees in parasitology and public health at Columbia University then worked in the public-health sector before pivoting to an art career that is still hard to categorize. The African-American artist, who died in 2015, is getting a long-overdue retrospective that assembles more than 200 works from four decades of work, featuring paintings, photographs, mixed-media sculptures and more exploring land art, gender, race and identity.
'Never Built New York' by Greg Goldin and Sam Lubell
Metropolis Books
Oct. 25
artbook.com
New York has inspired more than its share of dreamers, and this book showcases their flights of fancy: nearly 200 architectural and urban-planning proposals spanning about as many years. They include Buckminster Fuller's design for Brooklyn's Dodger stadium (with a giant geodesic dome, of course), Frank Lloyd Wright's vision for car-free urban living on Ellis Island, a system of airtight subway cars propelled by atmospheric pressure and a West Side "rooftop airport" spanning from 24th to 71st streets.
Kerry James Marshall: Mastry
Met Breuer
Oct. 25 to Jan. 29, 2017
metmuseum.org
Known for history paintings, landscapes and portraits exploring the African-American experience, the Chicago artist gets his largest museum retrospective to date. The nearly 80 works will include Mr. Marshall's Garden Project series from the 1990s, intended to challenge assumptions about public housing, and pages from his graphic-novel project, "Rythm Mastr." A concurrent exhibition will show objects the artist hand-picked from the Met's collection.
Pipilotti Rist: Pixel Forest
New Museum
Oct. 26 to Jan. 15, 2017
newmuseum.org
Sensual. Kaleidoscopic. Dreamlike. These are some of words used to describe the latest project by the Swiss-born artist, renowned as a pioneer of video and multimedia art. Here, in her most comprehensive U.S. retrospective, occupying three floors of the museum, she has created an immersive visual and aural landscape of ever-changing light and color that celebrates, and fuses, the natural and technological worlds.
Dreamlands: Immersive Cinema and Art, 1905-2016
Whitney Museum of American Art
Oct. 28 to Feb. 5, 2017
whitney.org
For a long line of artists and visionaries, the standard movie-watching experience -- one screen, one projector, a film, a dark room -- was never enough. Now, their explorations take over the museum's fifth floor, where "Dreamlands" traces this experimental history to the present day, in all its dazzlingly optical, spatially immersive glory. Work ranges from a hallucinogenic 1905 trip through Coney Island to a mind-bending, 1926 three-screen projection by Oskar Fischinger to DiNA, an artificial-intelligence bot taking the form of Tilda Swinton.
Rokia Traore
Symphony Space
Oct. 30
symphonyspace.org
Malian singer-songwriter Rokia Traore mixes traditional rhythms with modern innovation, celebrating and lamenting her troubled West African homeland while looking to the broader contemporary world. She visits with socially aware themes from her recent album "Ne So," on which her nimble vocals bring a delicate urgency. The show is part of the World Music Institute's "Desert Blues" series, featuring masters of Saharan music.
'Food City' by Joy Santlofer
W.W. Norton & Co.
Nov. 1
books.wwnorton.com
This labor-of-love project -- begun by Joy Santlofer, a food historian, and completed by her family after her unexpected death -- offers an epic romp through four centuries of food-making in New York, spotlighting a parade of immigrant cultures, their culinary contributions and related innovations. The sweep ranges from early colonial Dutch breweries to megabrands such as Ronzoni macaroni to contemporary artisanal fare.
Steve Reich 80th Birthday
Carnegie Hall
Nov. 1
carnegiehall.org
The hugely influential composer, one of the founding fathers of minimalism in the 1960s, turns 80 on Oct. 3. Steve Reich marks the occasion with the world premiere of "Pulse," with David Robertson conducting ICE (the International Contemporary Ensemble). The all-Reich program also features a rare presentation of "Three Tales," a video opera that explores the rise of technology through historic instances, such as the 1937 explosion of the Hindenburg airship and the breakthrough cloning of a sheep.
New York Comedy Festival
Various venues
Nov. 1 to 6
nycomedyfestival.com
Over the course of six days, the biggest stars in comedy convene on Gotham to make us laugh. (We are bound to need it the week before the presidential election.) This year's festival features big names like Dane Cook, Bill Maher and Marc Maron, as well as revered underground acts like Eric Andre, Bridget Everett and Tig Notaro. Expect an emotional homecoming for Tracy Morgan at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 5.
'Kings of War'
Brooklyn Academy of Music
Nov. 3 to 6
bam.org
After helming two major revivals on Broadway last season, director Ivo van Hove is bringing a mashup of Shakespearean history plays to BAM. By melding "Henry V," "Henry VI Parts I, II & III" and "Richard III," this production creates one behind-the-scenes look at leaders on the brink of war. Stretching more than four hours, the play is updated to the present, with media coverage and kings in crisp suits.
Elvis Costello & The Imposters
Beacon Theatre
Nov. 6 and 7
beacontheatre.com
The second-greatest Elvis in rock history will revisit one of his major accomplishments: "Imperial Bedroom," the beloved album from 1982. Intricate and ornate in ways that ran counter to Mr. Costello's scrappy beginnings, the record aligned him with Tin Pan Alley pop as much as punk and new wave, and his writing elevated a tick in terms of craft and sophistication. The Imposters' lineup features two original members of his first group, the Attractions; energy and dexterity should be in high supply.
'The Band's Visit'
Linda Gross Theater
Nov. 11 to Dec. 23
atlantictheater.org
David Yazbek of "The Full Monty" wrote the music and lyrics for this new musical about a traveling police band, inspired by the screenplay of the award-winning 2007 Israeli film of the same name. David Cromer, who last directed Ethan Coen's "Women or Nothing" with Atlantic Theater Company, helms this world premiere.
Morton Feldman: Calder Quartet
Met Cloisters
Nov. 12
metmuseum.org
Described by its own composer as both a "nightmare" and "a [expletive] masterpiece," Morton Feldman's 1983 "String Quartet No. 2" can also rightly be considered a bucket-list experience for fans of the composer and the steady-handed musicians devoted to his intricately patterned work. The piece runs five hours, an endurance test that has humbled ensembles as prominent as the Kronos Quartet. In a rare performance of the piece, the Calder Quartet takes up the challenge, aided by the natural acoustic charms of the Cloisters' Fuentiduena Chapel.
The Philadelphia Orchestra
Carnegie Hall
Nov. 15
carnegiehall.org
Get a preview of the Metropolitan Opera's next music director, Yannick Nezet-Seguin, during the Philadelphia Orchestra's second visit to Carnegie Hall this autumn. The charismatic Mr. Nezet-Seguin, who will continue to serve as Philadelphia's music director after joining the Met, leads a mixed program of Ravel and Prokofiev.
The Blues Project
The Joyce Theater
Nov. 15 to 27
joyce.org
Dorrance Dance and Toshi Reagon explore the blues in this evening-length piece which returns for a two-week engagement after its sold-out 2015 run. The "it" girl of contemporary tap dance, Michelle Dorrance recently received the MacArthur "genius" grant for "reinvigorating a uniquely American dance form." She and her company members, including Derick Grant and Dormeshia Sumbry-Edwards, credited as co-choreographers, will perform to Ms. Reagon's quintet, Big Lovely, playing live at each performance.
New York at Its Core
The Museum of the City of New York
Nov. 18
mcny.org
Freshly renovated and now under new leadership, the City Museum unveils an ambitious long-term exhibition that aims to show the sweep of New York City's history and its future in three interactive galleries. The installation examines four themes that have shaped the city -- money, density, diversity and creativity -- and incorporates some 400 objects from the collection as well as 21st-century technology.
'The Tree of Life'
Brooklyn Academy of Music
Nov. 18 and 19
bam.org
With a hundred or so musicians, New York's Wordless Music Orchestra continues its tradition of honoring memorable cinematic scores. The ensemble, backed by a choir, provides live accompaniment to Terrence Malick's 2011 cosmic-minded family drama "The Tree of Life." The soundtrack features a hit parade of great composers, including Mozart, Mahler, Berlioz, Brahms, Gorecki and Tavener, among others, buoying Mr. Malick's rapturous images.
Francis Picabia: Our Heads Are Round so Our Thoughts Can Change Direction
Museum of Modern Art
Nov. 21 to March 19, 2017
moma.org
The art-world equivalent of a human blur, Francis Picabia moved from one style to the next -- and back -- with a speed and dexterity that made him impossible to pin down. "Our Heads Are Round" is the first U.S. museum show to tackle his career from start to finish. That means not only his provocative 1920s work with the dada movement, but early impressionist landscapes, monumental abstractions, photo-based paintings (controversial nude pinups included), plus filmmaking, publishing, performance and more.
Cuba!
American Museum of Natural History
Nov. 21 to Aug. 13, 2017
amnh.org
The world's tiniest bird, smaller than some bees. Orchids gone extinct elsewhere. An estimated half of the plant life in Cuba and more than a third of its animal life are found nowhere else on the planet -- except at AMNH, where "Cuba!" explores both the island's biodiversity and the richness of its culture. The bilingual exhibition features re-created natural settings -- caves, wetlands, marine reefs -- and live animals, along with the chance to enjoy everything from art and music to domino games and those famed cigars.
'Othello'
New York Theatre Workshop
Previews begin Nov. 22
nytw.org
James Bond to Iago is the path for actor Daniel Craig, who will star with David Oyelowo in Sam Gold's production of Shakespeare's classic this fall at this intimate and esteemed East Village nonprofit. Mr. Gold, who won a best-directing Tony in 2015 for "Fun Home," has had uncommon success with contemporary playwrights like Annie Baker and Lisa Kron. This is his first professional Shakespearean outing.
Hendrix in Harlem
The Apollo Theater
Nov. 26
apollotheater.org
Before he was the rock icon who defined '60s psychedelic culture, Jimi Hendrix was a star in Harlem. He triumphed at Apollo's legendary Amateur Night back in 1964 and returned often to wow the crowd as a side man for the Isley Brothers, Little Richard and Wilson Pickett. On the eve of what would have been his 74th birthday, the Apollo pays tribute to Hendrix with an all-star cast celebrating both his R&B roots and his rock classics.
Pedro Almodovar
Museum of Modern Art
Nov. 29 to Dec. 17
moma.org/film
The subversive auteur, whose transgressive, melodramatic comedies first erupted in the post-Franco Spain of the 1980s, is feted with a retrospective of his four-decade career. The program opens with "Julieta," the director's 20th and latest film, and offers rare screenings of early efforts such as "Matador," "Dark Habits" and "Law of Desire," which introduced star Antonio Banderas to an international audience. Mr. Almodovar will be on hand for an evening of conversation about his films.
'L'Amour de Loin'
Metropolitan Opera
Dec. 1 to 29
metopera.org
Inspired by the tale of a medieval French troubadour, this three-character opera by Finnish composer Kaija Saariaho is only the second work by a woman to be mounted in the Met's history. It features an unusual staging by Robert Lepage: Large moveable bands of LED lights represent the sea that separates the Countess of Tripoli and the troubadour Jaufre Rudel, sung by Susanna Phillips and Eric Owens, respectively.
---
CONTRIBUTORS: Andy Battaglia, Andy Beta, Pia Catton, Susan Delson, Judith H. Dobrzynski, Steve Dollar, Lucy Feldman, Darryn King, Lizzie Simon, Jennifer Smith, Missy Sullivan
