I'll bet [Buzz! Julie just posted to Facebook for the first time in a while] you can't make it through [Ding! Notafriend123 just started a live video!] this column [Buzz! Sunday Runday!] without being annoyed by a [Ding! A brunch spot for you] push notifications on your smartphone.
Here's another bet: You've tried to silence unimportant push alerts but couldn't figure out the complicated settings. Or you thought you mastered the settings, but trivial messages still manage to sneak through like a mouse in an air vent.
Our attention is such a precious commodity that apps, social networks and, yes, news outlets have deployed infuriating numbers of pop-ups to conquer it.
"Silence all the notifications!" isn't the answer, however. Do I want Facebook to ding me to update my profile? Never. But I sure as heck want to be buzzed by the babysitter watching my newborn.
I polled readers on which apps they find are the worst notification offenders -- I'm looking at you, Facebook and Instagram. After digging deep into app and system settings, I discovered tricks to reclaim some power. I also reached out to 10 companies to express my frustration.
Most of them directed me to buried, unclear settings. There seems to be an industrywide belief that this is enough. But our time and attention deserve more respect. With that, I propose the Notification Bill of Rights.
Article I: The right to easier controls
Whether you have an Android or iPhone, there are two places to control your notifications:
In the operating system's settings menu, you decide, app by app, if you will permit notifications at all. If you allow an app to send alerts, you can control when and how they appear -- on your lock screen, in your notification center, etc. Go through this list and turn off apps you don't care about.
In an app's own settings menu, you usually get the ability to control notification content -- friend requests, breaking news, music releases, new game levels. If you have enabled notifications for an app, be sure to comb through these options.
Article II: The right to not be manipulated
Tristan Harris, a former Google design ethicist who runs the nonprofit Time Well Spent, which fights to keep us from "being hijacked by technology platforms," thinks Facebook and Instagram notifications are manipulative. Facebook reminds you to post something ("You haven't updated your profile in 52 weeks") then taps all your friends to look at it, Mr. Harris says. "They are orchestrating social interactions between people -- like tapping two people on the shoulder and then running away -- to keep people coming back to the app."
A Facebook spokeswoman says, "We sometimes alert people to new content from their friends that they might find interesting. They don't have to click on that post if they choose not to." You can disable alerts in Facebook's often perplexing and unnecessarily personalized notification controls, and in Instagram settings under "First Posts and Stories." I've turned off all Facebook, Instagram and Twitter push notifications, period.
Article III: The right to smarter tools
Do Not Disturb is one of the best features in iOS and in Android. Flip the switch before a meeting, movie or going to sleep and it silences almost all notifications and keeps the lock screen from lighting up. (As the ancient philosophers once pondered: If a notification doesn't ding, is it a notification at all?)
In Android you'll find the setting in the pull-down panel at the top of the screen. In iOS, it's that moon icon in the Control Center. You can also set specific Do Not Disturb hours.
What's missing yet again are simple and functional customization controls. Android's Priority Mode allows you to fairly easily allow calls and text notifications from favorites. In iOS, Do Not Disturb allows calls from favorites to ring through but it doesn't work for texts. A buried setting called Emergency Bypass makes every text chime audible. Your babysitter could reach you in a movie, but you'd probably get kicked out.
The real solution is artificial-intelligence systems to pick and choose what's important to us. If there are 25 email and text notifications on my lock screen after dinner, why can't it rank them by importance based on my everyday patterns?

Credit: By Joanna Stern
