CAMP SOUMAGAHARA, Japan -- The Marine Corps is stepping up training in Japan for island-based conflict in the Western Pacific, putting it at the leading edge of a pivot by the U.S. to face the military challenge from China.
The Marines are preparing for a far larger and more sophisticated adversary than extremists in the Middle East and Afghanistan, the focus of their operations in recent years. China's military satellites, cyberwarfare capabilities, use of artificial intelligence and narrowing gap with U.S. firepower make it what the Pentagon calls a "near-peer" rival.
At one of a series of recent exercises, a few dozen Marines faded into long grass after touching down in two CH-47 Chinook helicopters, followed by Japanese soldiers arriving in two Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft. Their simulated mission: avoiding detection and recapturing a port on an island within range of much of the enemy's missiles and artillery.
The exercise reflected a new emphasis on small, dispersed troop units and command centers, which are intended to be harder to locate and destroy. The simulation was one of the first to be directed from a command hub consisting of three armored vehicles that can be set up or moved in minutes and emit fewer traceable signals.
"We're trying to get away from tents, from computer screens, because, one, it's very stationary and, two, it has a huge electromagnetic signature," said Lt. Col. Neil Berry, commander of the third battalion of the Eighth Marine Regiment, based in Camp Lejeune, N.C.
China's emergence as a military force has brought a new focus at the Pentagon on updating strategies and training plans. Gen. Mark Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said recently that China's rise is the single most important security challenge to the U.S., and that the Chinese military was on a path to parity with the U.S.
Beijing says its military rise is peaceful. It hasn't commented on the recent series of Marine Corps exercises in Japan but has previously called U.S. and Japanese drills in the region provocations.
"I don't think China has any intention to occupy islands," said Zhu Feng, an international relations and security scholar at Nanjing University in China. "How can China achieve development? It's not by military adventurism."
The U.S. and its allies worry about possible challenges to the "first island chain," a string of territory from the Japanese archipelago through Taiwan and the Philippines to the South China Sea. Armed Chinese coast guard ships sailed near a group of Japanese-held islets in the chain more than 1,100 times in 2020, the highest frequency since a dispute over ownership flared in 2012. Under a security treaty, the U.S. is committed to help defend Japan.

Credit: By Alastair Gale
