It's hard to pick the scariest part: the phones and teddy bears dropping from the sky, the shirt getting ripped off a teenager's body or the massive hole in the side of the plane.
The harrowing story of the Alaska Airlines flight that narrowly avoided disaster at 16,000 feet is petrifying enough to make you never set foot on a plane again.
But there's another way to look at one of the most dangerous aviation events in recent American history: How did hurtling through the sky in a giant metal tube become this safe?
The biggest U.S. commercial airlines have now gone nearly 15 years without a fatal crash, which is something of a miracle itself, as there have been more than 100 million flights and 10 billion passengers since then.
These days, we barely think about safety when we board a plane. Instead we think about whether the Wi-Fi will be good enough to check our email. And that's because flying across the sky is safer than walking across the street. Airplanes produce fewer deaths per mile than cars, ferries, trains, subways or buses -- and the chances of dying in a crash are roughly the same as getting struck by lightning while reading this sentence.
The country's safety record would have sounded not just incredible or inconceivable 15 years ago, but completely insane.
"I never would've believed it," said William Voss, the former head of the Flight Safety Foundation, a nonprofit advocacy group.
This revolution in the sky that has saved countless lives began nearly three decades ago with a surprisingly innovative strategy for improving air safety. It depended on pilots, flight attendants and dispatchers voluntarily reporting safety issues and admitting their own errors. But first it demanded the entire industry agree to a profound shift in risk tolerance.
The old system explained accidents after they happened. This new system was designed to prevent those accidents from ever happening.
And it worked. The Federal Aviation Administration's self-reporting programs that encourage airline operators to come forward without fear of retribution helped slash the rate of fatal accidents on U.S. airlines by such large percentages that the industry had to figure out new ways to measure safety. The U.S. aviation system has become so amazingly, unexpectedly safe that other industries in the business of fatal risk, from healthcare to artificial intelligence, are hoping to bring lessons of the sky back to hospitals and research labs on the ground.
It still might not seem that way when you can't stop looking at photos of a brand-new airplane with a blown-out door plug. Or when you read about how passengers escaped a blazing fireball after a runway collision in Japan. Or when the world's most valuable aircraft manufacturer is such a mess that you hear Boeing's CEO admit to bone-shaking mistakes.
It's also worrisome that aviation officials are warning about the untenable stress and pressures on the nation's air-traffic-control system.
The last fatal accident involving a U.S. carrier was in February 2009, when a Colgan Air commuter flight crashed outside Buffalo and killed all 49 people on board. The close calls suggest it's only a matter of time before our luck runs out and there's another tragedy.
But these nearly catastrophic failures also happen to be a reminder that air safety has been a remarkable American success.
"It's something I think the traveling public does not fully recognize and appreciate," said Kenneth Quinn, a former senior U.S. aviation regulator and partner at the law firm Clyde & Co.
The anomalies are chilling. They should also be oddly comforting.
Since that crash 15 years ago next month, large U.S. airlines have suffered two fatal accidents that killed two people. Not two fatal accidents a year, like the 2000s, or two per million flights, like the 1960s. Just two.
Of course, the planes themselves have gotten better, at least when their bolts aren't loose and their door plugs aren't landing in backyards. But this tale of progress isn't merely about jet engines and cockpit technology.
The other reason that flying has never been safer is that an industry built around technology and engineering made the audacious decision a few decades ago to dramatically alter human behavior.
The reckoning began after a series of accidents in the 1990s, when aviation officials found themselves staring at disturbing math. This is how my former colleague Andy Pasztor described it: "If accident rates remained the same while global passenger traffic continued growing at projected rates," he wrote in an essential 2021 article, "on average there would be at least one major jet crash a week by 2015."
This was such a terrifying possibility that it couldn't become reality. One major jet crash a week was not just unimaginable. With each one amounting to roughly $1 billion in losses, it was unaffordable.
That's when regulators and industry officials set about designing a system so radically different that it sounded a bit like asking pilots to fly blindfolded.
It relied on everybody doing something that nobody wants to do: voluntarily admitting when they get things wrong.
Pilots weren't exactly in the habit of disclosing errors that didn't lead to accidents or serious incidents. In fact, they had an incentive to conceal trivial mistakes: If nobody knew about them, nobody could be punished for them. It's clear in retrospect that the only way to make the self-reporting program work was to make it nonpunitive.
But that idea was both counterintuitive and controversial at the time. Trust didn't come easily to people accustomed to confrontation, not cooperation. Randy Babbitt was president of the world's largest pilots union in 1995, when he worked with the head of the FAA on this collaborative program. Babbitt, who would later run the FAA himself, told me it was a tough sell.
"You want me to tell 50,000 pilots that they're going to be able to rat themselves out and not be in trouble -- and you think they're going to buy that?" he said.
Well, yes. So he did. And they did.
The fatal accident rate of U.S. commercial aviation would drop by 83% over the next decade alone and make the American system a model for the rest of the world.
Soon the industry would combine its qualitative data with quantitative data by measuring basically anything that can be captured on a plane. Once again, airlines had to be persuaded to share proprietary data and pool sensitive information. Once again, it made us safer.
Which is worth remembering the next time a pilot tells you to sit back, relax and enjoy your flight. But maybe keep that seat belt fastened. Just in case.
Credit: By Ben Cohen
