[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
It's going to be a tough summer for semiconductor companies.
Intel's new chief financial officer hinted at this, telling an investor conference in early June that "circumstances at this point are much worse than what we had anticipated." Memory-chip maker Micron closed the month with a similar sentiment, telling analysts Thursday that it saw a "significant reduction" in demand near the close of the quarter that ended June 2.
The company projected about $7.2 billion in revenue for the quarter ending in August. That was 21% below what Wall Street had been expecting and the company's first year-over-year decline in more than two years. Micron pointed to the weakening PC and smartphone markets as the main culprits.
That portends a rough second half of the year for many other chip and tech companies. While growing use of cloud services keeps demand for data-center chips high, PCs and smartphones are two of the chip industry's largest end markets. Micron's share price fell nearly 3% by Friday's close. Intel and Advanced Micro Devices, which still derive the majority of their revenue from PC processors, dropped 3% and 4% respectively. Shares in wireless-device chip makers Broadcom, Qualcomm, Qorvo and Skyworks also declined 2%, on average, by Friday's close.
The question now is how much further the pain might spread. The chip industry has enjoyed a strong run as demand has soared for everything from cars to phones to cloud services that rely on artificial-intelligence processors packed into state-of-the-art data centers. The production shortage sparked by the pandemic has also buoyed the sector as chip buyers have kept orders high for fear of coming up short for their own products.
But the triple whammy of soaring inflation, the war in Ukraine and the lingering effects of harsh Covid-19 lockdowns in China is finally catching up to the tech sector broadly, and chip companies in particular. A slump in online advertising could affect the capital-spending plans of the parent companies of Google and Facebook -- major chip buyers due to their extensive data-center networks.
As for Micron itself, the company is well accustomed to cycles given that memory demand can be highly volatile as buyers manage their own inventories. And, unlike past sales downturns that have tipped Micron into losses, the company now manages itself tightly enough to stay in the black during weaker sales periods.
That has a cost for others, though: Micron said Thursday that capital spending on production equipment for its fiscal year ending in August 2023 will now be lower than the current year. Chip-equipment makers Applied Materials, ASML, KLA and Lam Research saw their stocks sink an average 6% by Friday's close. Robert Maire of Semiconductor Advisors noted that "when chip companies catch a cold, the equipment companies get pneumonia." Chip investors may need to bundle up even in the summer heat.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
