If it were up to my laptop's webcam, I'd look like a potato on video calls. To make sure I don't, I often spend the better part of an hour setting up for a 15-minute check-in. I'll use floor lamps to offset harsh fluorescents and stack my laptop on books to meet my colleague's gaze. In dire straits, I've even set my laptop on the narrow windowsill in my bedroom. It isn't comfortable, but the light is great.
Yet, I still never look really sharp. It is a classic hardware problem -- manufacturers usually outfit a laptop's slim lid with mediocre, low-res webcams. Some, like Apple, let you use your phone as your computer's webcam. (If both your devices are on the same iCloud account, your iPhone will automatically show up as a webcam option.) But that can be unreliable and a battery drain.
Instead, get an external webcam that you can clip over the one at the top of your laptop screen and plug in separately. Even a cheap option will improve on what you have, but to look truly excellent on Zoom, try one of the latest premium options. These have, among other features, sensors that make you look crisp, and software that lets the camera pivot to keep your face in frame at all times -- ideal for people who can't sit still through mandatory two-hour "trainings."
1. Trusty Follower
The Insta360 Link asks the question: If artificial intelligence powers everything from email to fitness mirrors, why not your webcam? This option, reminiscent of WALL-E with its square bracing mechanism and oblong camera, features a 4K-capable, half-inch sensor on a motorized gimbal. That lets it swivel and keep you in frame, even if you have to get up to use a white board. Bonus: The AI engine allows the camera to respond to hand gestures. For example, you can control how far you're zoomed in by making an "L" with your hand. $300, Store.Insta360.com
2. On-the-go Video
Though the Opal Tadpole weighs no more than two AA batteries, its half-inch, 48-megapixel sensor delivers bright, vibrant and detailed image quality. Also impressive: the Tadpole's clever design and software. You can mute yourself instantly by tapping on the USB-C connector. And its directional, built-in mic only picks up what the webcam sees. This comes in handy if you're taking calls from your local coffee shop -- it will automatically mute any loudmouths at the table next to you. $175, OpalCamera.com
3. Point and Shoot
The Dell UltraSharp webcam will make your colleagues wonder if you have a DSLR mounted on your computer. Its 8.3-megapixel lens captures clear, 4K video no matter the lighting and produces a smooth, natural bokeh (a slight blur that makes your image look more realistic). It keeps facial gestures in focus, even when you're near a bright light source. The sleek, cylindrical UltraSharp magnetically latches onto its adjustable mount. Two small caveats. One, it lacks a built-in microphone, so you'll need to use the one on your laptop or headphones. Two, it comes with a USB-C to USB-A cable that won't connect to most modern laptops. Thankfully, you can cheaply replace it with a USB-C to USB-C cable from a company like Anker -- if you don't already have one lying around. $250, Dell.com
Credit: By Shubham Agarwal
