Film
"Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga" (May 24)
Director George Miller returns us to the post-apocalyptic badlands of his widely praised "Mad Max: Fury Road" with this prequel that sees the title character, played here by Anya Taylor-Joy (and in the earlier film by Charlize Theron), kidnapped by a warlord (Chris Hemsworth) and struggling to survive and find her way back home.
"The Garfield Movie" (May 24)
Lovers of lasagna and haters of Mondays will eagerly open the cat door for this animated film based on Jim Davis's famed feline. This latest take on the orange tabby is voiced by Chris Pratt and the story follows the kitty as he joins with his father (Samuel L. Jackson) and dopey dog frenemy Odie (Harvey Guillen) for a high-stakes heist.
TV
"Tires" (Netflix, May 23)
Raunchy comedian Shane Gillis co-stars in this show he co-created about the marketing antics of a small auto shop where business is sputtering and the employees rarely stay in gear.
"Atlas" (Netflix, May 24)
Jennifer Lopez stars as a counterterrorism analyst alongside Sterling K. Brown and Simu Liu in this dystopian sci-fi story about a renegade AI robot that's out to destroy humanity. Here's hoping you've been nice to ChatGPT.
Music
Twenty One Pilots, "Clancy" (May 24)
For nearly a decade the alt/rap-rock duo has pursued a series of concept records set in the dystopian city of Dema on the world of Trench. This album, the last in that project, follows the title character as he returns to Trench after escaping and gaining special abilities.
Opera
Spoleto Festival (Various Locations, Charleston, S.C., May 22-June 9)
The annual performing-arts festival returns. Among the highlights this year: the world premiere of Layale Chaker's opera "Ruinous Gods," based loosely on the myth of Demeter and Persephone; the world premiere of "The Song of Rome," Denis O'Hare and Lisa Peterson's theatrical spin on "The Aeneid"; and a new cello concerto by composer Nathalie Joachim with guest soloist Seth Parker Woods.
Exhibitions
"Hollywoodland: Jewish Founders and the Making of a Movie Capital" (Academy Museum, Los Angeles)
This immersive show explores the origins of Hollywood filmmaking in the early 20th century through the story of the predominantly Jewish families that crafted the studio system and turned the city into the international heart of cinema.
Art
"Larry Bell: Improvisations" (Phoenix Art Museum, May 22-Jan. 5, 2025)
A titan of the Light and Space movement gets a retrospective that spans the six decades of his career and includes his instantly recognizable glass cubes, sculptures and standing walls as well as his lesser-known mixed-media collages. It will also debut a newly commissioned large-scale work.
Videogames
"Senua's Saga: Hellblade II" (Windows, Xbox Series X|S, May 21)
The long-awaited sequel to the boundary-pushing 2017 release continues to explore the varied thematic terrain of that game -- Celtic culture, Norse mythology, psychosis, death and destiny -- in an action-adventure story that incorporates fighting and puzzle-solving as players try to stay alive and save their friends in Viking Iceland.
Last Call
"The Lost Mirror: Jews and Conversos in the Middle Ages" (Museu Nacional d'Art de Catalunya, Barcelona, through May 26)
An illuminating exhibition examines how medieval Spanish art helped fuel prejudice against Jews prior to their expulsion in 1492. Praising the show, our critic noted that "The artworks gathered together for 'The Lost Mirror' bear silent witness to the cultural vicissitudes and the dogmatic zealotry that turned a pluralistic society into a bastion of intolerance."
---
For additional Arts Calendar listings visit wsj.com. Write to brian.kelly@wsj.com.
Credit: By WSJ Arts in Review Staff
