Why do people so easily treat machines, and especially AI systems like ChatGPT, as if they had intentions, emotions and even morals? A new study suggests that this tendency may run deep: Young children think a Roomba or an Alexa can have thoughts and feelings and deserve to be treated like a fellow human.
"Intelligent" machines that would once have seemed magical are now ubiquitous. Millions of children have grown up with a Roomba robot vacuum cleaner that scurries around the house, avoiding obstacles and wiggling into corners. Millions more have grown up politely asking a small box called Alexa to play their favorite song or turn on their favorite TV show. How do children view these sophisticated computers in their homes? (Of course, once they're in the house we tend to forget that they're sophisticated computers. Rodney Brooks, the computer scientist who invented the Roomba, likes to say he started out small as the director of artificial intelligence at MIT but then moved up to become a vacuum cleaner salesman.)
Roomba and Amazon's Alexa are especially interesting because they don't look at all like people -- they don't have faces or bodies -- and while they do act sort of like people, they do so in opposite ways. Roombas can move by themselves and accomplish physical goals, but they don't talk. Alexa chatters away but can't move.
Tamar Kushnir at Duke University and her students Teresa Flanagan and Gavin Wong looked at what children think about these technologies, and they report the results in a new paper in the journal Developmental Psychology. They showed 127 children, ranging in age from 4 to 11, different kinds of technologies in action, including a Roomba and Alexa. Then they gave the children a list of questions about the machines' thoughts, feelings and moral status.
Most of the children were already familiar with Alexa and Roomba. They told the researchers that both were more like computers than like people. But the younger children, in particular, thought that even these apparently simple machines -- a round vacuum and a black box -- could have thoughts and feelings: They might get hungry or feel a tickle or think for themselves.
How the machines interact made a difference, especially when it comes to higher mental functions. The children said that the loquacious Alexa was more likely to have a thought or know right from wrong than the mute Roomba. But they thought that both could be hungry or ticklish. Younger children also thought that both types of machines could choose to do harm: Roomba could run over your toe on purpose, or Alexa could say something that hurt your feelings.
Older children were less likely to say that the machines had feelings or experiences, or that they acted on purpose. That might be because children become more sophisticated in thinking about agency, or because they had more experience of the machines' limitations. But even the older children thought that the machines might have some thoughts and feelings. Strikingly, both older and younger children thought that hitting or yelling at the machines was wrong. One 10-year-old said, "then the robot would feel really sad."
The study may help to explain why people so readily treat AI systems as if they had minds -- it is an early, natural intuition. And we seem especially likely to feel this way about systems that use language, though accomplishing goals in the real world, like a Roomba, may actually be a better mark of intelligence. Perhaps the best news about people and technology in the study is that children think that treating a machine as if it had a mind means treating them kindly.
Credit: By Alison Gopnik
