New York City -- As afternoon gave way to evening this Wednesday, the glitterati converged on Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts. Through the glazed walls of the atrium, onlookers from the street could make out the tall profile of John Lithgow. Other celebrities streamed in as two burly guards screened them with a seemingly incongruous question: "You here for the science festival?"
The World Science Festival, now in its third year, was founded by the physicist Brian Greene and his wife, journalist Tracy Day. The idea of a science festival is not a new one; the term dates back to 19th century England. But while early gatherings were pitched at specialists, the new brand of festival aims to make science exciting to laymen. That's where Mr. Greene comes in. His bestselling books and TV appearances have rendered him the heir to Carl Sagan of "Cosmos" fame.
Less than half of Americans know that atoms are larger than electrons, according to a survey last year by the Pew Research Center and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. The festival's goal is to change that, and one strategy is to simply to make science sexier.
Broadway veterans performed songs about galaxies and calculus ("What the limit gives us if the work all checks, is what we call dy/dx . . . "). The Orchestra of St. Luke's played an intricate new composition by Philip Glass, atop which Mr. Lithgow narrated a dramatic adaptation of Brian Greene's 2008 children's book about a boy who flies to a black hole, "Icarus at the Edge of Time." But the greatest applause went to the guest of honor, physicist Stephen Hawking, who expressed his gratitude through his famous synthesized voice.
A reception with fine French cheeses followed, and artists and scientists mingled, with the former slightly intimidated ("I always feel I belong in the slow group whenever science comes up," Mr. Lithgow confessed to me) and the latter fairly giddy ("We don't have enough of this," said James Watson, co-discoverer of DNA's structure. "Seeing nothing but scientists is really boring.")
But wandering through the crowd, I wondered to what extent the gala had succeeded in bringing science to the public. Amid the glamour, precious little science had actually been communicated. "All that stuff is 10,000 times more complicated," a tipsy lawyer and apparent physics buff muttered to me. He was not the first to observe that popularizing science too often entails a certain dumbing down. A review in Slate of Mr. Greene's 2004 book, "The Fabric of the Cosmos," criticized his work for offering science in neat but woefully imprecise "metaphorical packages" -- the universe is like a string symphony, for instance.
I nudged my way toward Mr. Greene to ask about the night's event. "I think it's a powerful way of experiencing science, and I think the audience felt that," he said. But had the evening's science been muted in deference to the arts? "That's a real issue we're attuned to," he acknowledged, assuring me that the 40 other events wouldn't water down the science.
On Friday, neurologist Oliver Sacks joined artist Chuck Close to discuss a condition they share called prosopagnosia, an impaired ability to recognize faces. Tonight, filmmaker Charlie Kaufman will discuss consciousness with neuroscientist Giulio Tononi. There were talks on extraterrestrial life, the neural basis of brutality and artificial intelligence.
At least one part of the festival has been free, and open to all comers. Downtown at Battery Park, workers erected a full-scale replica of NASA's forthcoming James Webb Space Telescope -- dubbed the successor to the Hubble -- which will be launched a million miles into space in 2014. There, NASA engineer Paul Geithner informed me, it will gather infrared light from the farthest reaches of the infant universe, peering through clouds of space-dust into what he called "stellar nurseries" -- birthplaces of stars. The towering telescope, 21 feet in diameter, looks something like a giant honeycomb riding atop a catamaran.
On Wednesday, Jude Packer, 8, and her friend, Logan Lalonde, had come with their families. "I know where the sun is in," said Logan. "It's in -- what is it called?" "Outer space," interjected Jude. "How are they gonna put it in space?" she asked Mr. Geithner of the telescope. "They're going to send it up in a rocket," he said. "It's going to unfold like a butterfly in its cocoon."
Here, a few miles away from the glamour at Lincoln Center, was the festival prompting a different sort of stargazing.
---
Mr. Zax is a writer living in New York.
Credit: By David Zax
