The New York Times sued Microsoft and OpenAI for alleged copyright infringement, touching off a legal fight over generative-AI technologies with far-reaching implications for the future of the news publishing business.
In a complaint filed Wednesday, the Times said the technology companies exploited its content without permission to create their artificial-intelligence products, including OpenAI's humanlike chatbot ChatGPT and Microsoft's Copilot. The tools were trained on millions of pieces of Times content, the suit said, and draw on that material to serve up answers to users' prompts.
The suit opens a new front in a yearslong battle between tech and media companies over the economics of the internet, pitting one of the news industry's biggest players against pioneers of new AI technologies. It comes after months of commercial negotiations between the companies failed to produce a deal, according to the Times.
In its complaint, the Times said it believes it is among the largest sources of proprietary information for OpenAI and Microsoft's AI products. Their AI tools divert traffic that would otherwise go to the Times' web properties, depriving the company of advertising, licensing and subscription revenue, the suit said.
The Times is seeking damages, in addition to asking the court to stop the tech companies from using its content and to destroy data sets that include the Times' work.
"Times journalism is the work of thousands of journalists, whose employment costs hundreds of millions of dollars per year," the Times said in its complaint. "Defendants have effectively avoided spending the billions of dollars that The Times invested in creating that work by taking it without permission or compensation."
The Times has asked for a jury trial in the suit, which was filed in U.S. federal court in the Southern District of New York.
"We respect the rights of content creators and owners and are committed to working with them to ensure they benefit from AI technology and new revenue models," an OpenAI spokeswoman said in a statement. "Our ongoing conversations with the New York Times have been productive and moving forward constructively, so we are surprised and disappointed with this development. We're hopeful that we will find a mutually beneficial way to work together, as we are doing with many other publishers."
A Microsoft spokesman had no comment.
Tech companies building generative-AI tools have generally argued that content available on the open internet can be used to train their technologies under a legal provision called fair use, which allows for copyright material to be used without permission in certain circumstances.
In its suit, the Times said the fair-use argument shouldn't apply because the AI tools can serve up, almost verbatim, large chunks of text from Times news articles.
"The New York Times put a very strong stake in the ground that demonstrates the value and importance of protecting news content," said Danielle Coffey, chief executive of News/Media Alliance, a trade group for news publishers. "Quality journalism and these new technologies, especially those that compete for the very same audience, can complement each other if approached as a collaboration."
The legal landscape surrounding generative-AI is unsettled. Other lawsuits could test the rights of AI companies to scrape content from the web to train AI tools, including one by several prominent book authors against OpenAI.
The U.S. Copyright Office said it launched an initiative to study issues raised by AI, including "the use of copyrighted materials in AI training." In August, it issued a notice to seek comment on the issue and is assessing whether legislative or regulatory steps are warranted, according to its website.
Previous cases, including one in which book authors sued Google for copyright infringement and lost, suggest the Times could face an uphill climb with its AI suit, said Rebecca Tushnet, a professor at Harvard Law School focused on intellectual property. "Existing principles point in one direction, but principles can always be changed," she said.
While lawsuits against Google came after the search engine was already a fixture in the internet economy, "the lawsuits here are coming very much at the beginning" of the generative-AI wave, Tushnet said. "We don't know what the tech is going to ultimately be used for."
The Times suit raises the prospect of a fissure in the publishing world -- if some major outlets follow the Times in pursuing legal action, while others negotiate for compensation from OpenAI, Microsoft and Google, which is developing its own AI efforts.
Already, a few publishers, including the Associated Press and Axel Springer, have reached commercial agreements to license their content to OpenAI.
Robert Thomson, chief executive of Wall Street Journal parent News Corp, has been vocal about his concerns about AI, including the potential for tools to use publishers' content without permission. News Corp has had commercial discussions with AI companies but hasn't announced any licensing agreements.
Many news-media executives look at tech companies with a jaundiced eye after their experiences over the past decade. Google and Facebook helped publishers reach audiences and build up their web traffic, but the tech companies became fearsome competitors for online-ad dollars and had the power to grow or shrink news traffic with algorithmic changes.
Several news organizations are exploring how the technology can be harnessed -- from automating publishing to writing headlines or entire articles. But media companies also see a gathering threat. AI tools such as ChatGPT, Copilot and Google's nascent search-AI tool provide detailed answers to questions that could reduce the need for users to click on links to news sources.
The Times supplied several examples of output from OpenAI's ChatGPT that closely resembled passages in Times articles. For example, OpenAI recited large portions of a 2019 report based on an 18-month investigation of predatory lending in New York City's taxi industry, the complaint said.
Credit: By Alexandra Bruell
