The moment Noam Bardin, former chief executive of navigation app Waze, knew that life at a big company would be profoundly different from running a startup came soon after he sold his company to Google.
"The first few weeks after the acquisition, we began dealing with the bewildering corporate bureaucracy," says Mr. Bardin. "What seems natural at a corporation -- multiple approvers and meetings for each decision -- is completely alien in the startup environment: make quick decisions, change them quickly if you are wrong."
Mr. Bardin lasted seven more years at Google before leaving in 2021. (He has since founded another startup, the Twitter-like news app Post.news). What he learned along the way tracks with what researchers who study business have found: that big companies of every sort tend to give their employees incentives to be cautious rather than bold, to pursue overly complicated solutions rather than simple ones, and to seek promotions over serving the customer.
Google didn't respond to requests for comment.
A massive new study bolsters the narrative that some version of what happened to Mr. Bardin is happening to many of America's most sought-after and skilled workers. Economists say it's part of a broader, worrisome story about the pace of innovation that in the past has kept the fires of America's economic engine burning.
The findings, published this past week in a paper from researchers at the University of Chicago and the U.S. Census Bureau, show that when inventors join large firms, they get a pay bump, but they also produce fewer new innovations, relative to inventors hired by young firms. The research is based on a gigantic data set, including 760,000 U.S. inventors and their patent-filing histories.
This research and related studies bear on everything from the slowing pace of productivity growth in the U.S. to why it is that a startup that currently has fewer than 400 employees, OpenAI, was able to release a useful artificial-intelligence chatbot before any of the tech behemoths that have many multiples of that number of people working on AI.
Mr. Bardin joined Waze in 2009, not long after it was founded in Israel, moved to the Bay Area, and guided the rapid expansion and innovation that made Waze a competitor to Google Maps. Google bought it in 2013 for about $1 billion. Mr. Bardin stayed on as the head of Waze, and became a vice president at Google.
Before the sale, Mr. Bardin observed, everyone's financial interest was aligned with the performance of the company's products. Once Waze was a subsidiary, getting ahead was all about getting promoted.
Authors of the new study found similar issues for inventors who joined big firms. After being hired by a big company, inventors produced 6% to 11% fewer innovations, as measured by their output of patents.
At the same time, these inventors earned on average 12.6% more than those who were hired by smaller, newer companies. It's easy to see why talented people would trade the stress and risk of life at a startup for a gig at a big company.
This wooing of inventors by big firms has a number of effects that are likely to be bad for innovation overall, says Ufuk Akcigit, economics professor at the University of Chicago and co-author of this latest study.
One such effect is that inventors have become less likely to become entrepreneurs in recent decades, and more likely to work for large companies, something the researchers were able to determine by examining census data. The proportion employed by the biggest companies grew to around 58% by the end of the 2010s from less than 50% in the year 2000.
At big companies, people generate new ideas and get them in front of customers more slowly because of misaligned incentives, bureaucracy and institutional risk aversion, says Mr. Bardin. "The people who stay at a big company have to play the same games as everyone else, which means their innovative side doesn't help them," he adds. "Their political side is what gets them promoted."
People at big companies tend to have plenty of good ideas, he adds. The difficulty is with bringing them to fruition.
"When you are small, you know what's happening in the firm, so you put together some new tech or product, and it sees the sunlight relatively quickly," says Dr. Akcigit.
Similar effects have been observed at the level of companies, rather than individuals. In a 2021 paper called "Killer Acquisitions," Colleen Cunningham, an economist at the University of Utah, and her colleagues found that companies sometimes buy a startup not to incorporate its technology but to neutralize a potentially disruptive competitor.
Big companies aren't deliberately trying to make America's innovators less likely to spawn the next great thing, says James Bessen, an economist at Boston University who has written a book on the subject. But this has been one effect of their tendency to over-hire and hoard talent.
Not everyone agrees that this concentration of power and innovators in the hands of big companies is bad for competition or America's economy. For one thing, it doesn't seem to be hurting the formation of the kinds of startups that matter most to America's ability to innovate, says Robert Atkinson, founder of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a Washington, D.C.-based think tank backed by big tech companies.
A 2020 analysis by Mr. Atkinson and a colleague found that America is still creating high-growth, high-tech startups, and that the more concentrated an industry is, the more of these kinds of startups are born in it. As for innovators producing fewer patents when they join a big firm, he says this is probably not representative of their actual productivity.
Big firms are able to use any given innovation in more areas of their sprawling businesses, which means that they get much more out of every dollar they spend on research and development, he adds.
As technology becomes more complicated, and companies hold on to it more tightly, it takes much longer to spread to other companies than it did before, says Mr. Bessen.
The total number of inventors in the U.S., and the total amount of money invested in R&D in the U.S., continue to grow. Yet business dynamism -- the rate at which new firms arise, grow, and fail -- is down, according to a large body of research, and economic growth is slowing, says Dr. Akcigit.
"The idea that if you allocate more resources to R&D, you'll grow faster," he adds, "that's now broken in the U.S."
Credit: By Christopher Mims
