From the Apple Watch to eagle-eyed sensors, digital technology is going ever further to embed itself into your health club.
These advances promise exercisers everything from smoother workout starts to better data to increased gym attendance. However, tech-savvy gym rats concerned about privacy should remember that they can always opt out.
This fall, an update to Apple Watch's operating system launches a feature called GymKit, which will allow the watch to link to most major cardio-equipment brands available at gyms by tapping the watch to an enabled machine, says Jeff Williams, Apple's chief operating officer.
On a treadmill, for instance, the machine will track speed, workout duration, incline and distance covered. The watch will track heart rate, and use a combination of treadmill data and its knowledge of user age, sex and body type to calculate calorie count. All data from the workout will beam to the Apple Watch, but the watch won't share any user data with the cardio equipment, Apple officials say.
For the past few years, gym-goers have been able to connect to cardio equipment through various smartphone apps. But it is a patchwork system, and many people skip it and leave their data locked in machines.
A spokeswoman from equipment maker Life Fitness says she anticipates the Apple Watch's new connectivity will boost the number of tracked workouts.
A simpler connection to cardio machines will remove a step or two from groggy morning routines and could give Apple Watch an edge in the wearables market, where it is playing catch-up two years after its launch. About 7% of adult consumers own a smartwatch, compared with 18% who own a wearable fitness tracker, according to the NPD Group. Another perk: not having to use the cardio console. "Who wants to punch in your weight before you do your workout?" says Jay Blahnik, Apple's director of fitness for health technologies.
Bryan O'Rourke, a fitness-industry consultant specializing in technology, says Apple Watch's move is part of a larger push to integrate easy-to-use technology into health club members' lives at the gym and elsewhere. Traditional health clubs are facing more competition from specialty fitness boutiques and online-streaming workout services.
New York-based health club chain Equinox is testing a smartphone-based chatbot -- a computer program that uses artificial intelligence to simulate human conversation -- to talk to new members via instant messaging. Equinox's chatbot reaches out to new members weekly for the first month, encouraging them to set goals and nudging them when they fall short. It also responds when they send a message.
In a recent monthlong test at all 88 Equinox clubs, new members who used the chatbot visited the club 40% more often than new members who opted out, according to Samir Desai, Equinox chief information officer. The chatbot's first goal is to get people coming to the gym, since people who don't form that habit in the first few months are likely to drop their membership.
At four clubs in New York, Equinox has also installed sensors to track members through their smartphones while they're in the club. The sensors can tell when a member regularly runs on a treadmill, for instance, and prompt a message suggesting the person try one of Equinox's Precision Running classes.
Nadine Kerstan, a 45-year-old holistic health coach in South Orange, N.J., joined Equinox about a year ago. She enjoys the guided meditations she listens to through Equinox's smartphone app. But the concept of sensor-tracking is "a little creepy," she says. "I don't want to feel like Big Brother is watching me at the gym."
Niki Leondakis, CEO of Equinox Fitness Clubs, says the information from sensors will help the club help members achieve their goals. The more engaged members are with the club, the more often they show up and exercise, she says.
"I would say that everyone today understands that they're being tracked," Ms. Leondakis says, citing a shopper browsing for shoes on a website.
The aim is to install the sensor system at all clubs, Mr. Desai says. Equinox says its members are asked if they want to allow the app to track their location and can opt out.
Bay Area-based Active Wellness is going further. It manages about 60 fitness locations across the U.S., mostly in corporate settings. In its Oakland, Calif., club, Active Wellness is testing a facial-recognition system designed to let members breeze in without a card or digital swipe, and track members in most places except locker rooms and bathrooms.
Mike Rucker, Active Wellness's vice president of technology, acknowledged some members' reservations about the system. Members can opt out, he says, but facial recognition could create more seamless gym experiences in the near future.
"Imagine a world where you step on a treadmill that automatically adjusts to all your favorite settings," Mr. Rucker says. "And literally without touching a button, you're ready to go."
Credit: By Rachel Bachman
