You can't buy razors at CVS these days without enduring a certain indignity, in that you need to ask for help. So rife has shoplifting apparently become that the stores lock their shaving supplies in cabinets. You must press a big red button that might as well say, "I need an adult." An employee eventually wanders over with a key, and you find yourself questioning why you're going through all this for a flimsy, not-even-that-cheap piece of plastic.
After one such recent experience, I wondered, "Is it time to graduate from drugstore razors?" Department stores and trendy e-commerce sites sell handsome models by startups and luxury players that cost hundreds of dollars. Are these just nicely branded rip-offs -- or might they hold the key to a better shave? Over several weeks I tested six manual razors ranging from $59 to $520, each lent by brands. My mission: To determine whether any justify their price tag.
High-end models can be divided into safety razors, which hold a single flat, double-edged blade, and ones with multi-blade cartridges where you swap out the whole head. I started with the latter. Many expensive models use generic Gillette cartridges, relying on special handles to distinguish themselves. Take Acqua di Parma's Barbiere Yellow Shaving Razor ($435), a canary-hued beauty that found ways to impress beyond its standard blades. Its streamlined, made-in-Italy resin handle felt totally balanced, substantial but not heavy. I loved shaving with it. Not so the even-pricier Bolin Webb X1 Carbon Razor and Stand ($520). Despite its carbon-fiber paneling and newfangled magnetic stand, it felt awkwardly thin and uninspired in its futurism. This is a razor for people who are really into ChatGPT.
Onto the safety razors. Popularized in the early 1900s, these razors encase a disposable blade within an open-ended metal shell. That shell adds a barrier between blade and skin, in theory letting only hairs get through. Lately, these antique-looking tools, which can cost over $100 and supposedly provide a cleaner shave, have enjoyed a resurgence. "People started getting tired of over-engineered razors, and went back to the old way of shaving," explained Leon Tarasenko, a proprietor of New York's Pasteur Pharmacy, who says safety-razor sales have significantly increased over the past five years.
From unwrapping the blade (packaged in tight-wrapped paper, like adult bubble gum) to placing it in the razor head, a safety razor turns shaving into a ceremony, a hobby, a pursuit. And though these razors can require quite a cash outlay, their stainless-steel blades tend to cost far less than drugstore cartridges, so you save some money in the long run.
The Leaf Single Edge Razor ($59) immediately impressed. Its "open comb" design exposes more blade than usual, which means you need to be careful, but it delivers highly effective results. Though I found its flared handle annoying to hold, the razor was agreeably light and easy to maneuver.
By contrast, the top-heavy, stainless-steel Rockwell T2 ($250, or $270 with stand) was like wielding Thor's hammer. That will appeal to some. But I found its adjustable settings that let you decide how much blade to expose a bigger draw. I used a 6 (the highest exposure) on my sideburns and a 3 on the trickier-to-navigate chin, with satisfying results.
The OneBlade Hybrid ($125) had me sitting on the fence. Its handle is marked with recessions that make it hard to grip. But, thanks to an ideal guard thickness, it felt super safe -- I could shave quickly without fear of nicks.
Though most of the high-end razors I tried were a pleasure to use, not everyone will see their value. Some experts actually prefer cheap drugstore varieties. Thom Priano, a grooming legend and the co-founder of Miami haircare company R+Co, favors a Gillette Fusion, while Jordan Blackmore, groomer to stars like Leonardo DiCaprio, swears by a simple two-blade disposable, calling it nimble.
But for me, neither of those options come close to the Henson AL 13 ($70), the last safety razor I tried. Sleek and light, this ruthlessly efficient model rivaled Leaf's in delivering the smoothest, most-consistent results -- with minimal fuss. I'm afraid it has ruined drugstore razors for me forever.
---
BACK TO BASICS
Drugstore Razor Test-Drive
Our writer brought five popular budget models to trial too
Bulldog Bamboo: Its bamboo handle has more heft than its plastic peers. $11.80 incl. 2 cartridge refills, CVS.com
Blade 2-Blade: So light and barely-there that it delivers lackluster results. 3-Pack for $3, CVS.com
Gillette Mach3 3-Blade: A standout for a close shave and comfy rubberized handle. $11 incl. 1 cartridge refill, CVS.com
Schick Xtreme: Chunky and sporty, this orange razor is, sadly, Xtremely ugly. 4-Pack for $9, CVS.com
Harry's 5-Blade: The hyped hinge is meh, unlike its solid, grippy handle. $12.50 incl. 2 cartridge refills, Walgreens.com
Credit: By John Ortved
