LAS VEGAS -- For some innovators, the next frontier is the room in your house most likely to have a lock on the door: the bathroom.
Showcasing their goods at this year's CES tech show, these companies acknowledge a need for privacy in that inner sanctum -- then proceed to show off cameras, microphones and other sensors they would like you to install there.
The bathroom would seem to be the most boring possible spot smart-home technology could be applied, except maybe a closet. But consider a mirror that turns on motion-activated lights when you get up in the middle of the night, or tells you the weather in the morning. Or consider setting the shower to the perfect temperature just by asking, before you climb in.
At an opening press event for CES Sunday, Kohler Co. introduced a voice-enabled lighted mirror with dual-microphones and Amazon.com Inc.'s virtual assistant Alexa built in. Set for a launch in March, it will allow people to control the mirror's lighting, start showers, adjust water temperature, even cue up music, with just their voice. Kohler also is planning to eventually incorporate Alphabet Inc.'s Google Assistant.
"The idea is to take these everyday moments and make them simpler, more efficient," said Shane Judd, a Kohler vice president of marketing. As an example, Mr. Judd said it is possible to ask Alexa to fill a tub that is set to a specific temperature and level -- a potential benefit to parents who are juggling evening routines with their children.
A perhaps not-as-practical function? Flushing the toilet with your voice.
"What we're doing right now is working with Amazon and Google to build these skills because they don't exist today," he said. "Part of what we're trying to do is show what the bathroom of the future could look like."
Moen, another bathroom-fixture brand, showed off a voice-activated shower that also makes use of virtual assistants. It is backed by an app that remembers your favorite settings: A post-workout shower, for example, might be set a few degrees cooler than your regular one. Moen has partnerships with Amazon and Apple Inc., which can control appliances via its HomeKit software.
Tracking water consumption is popular among smart shower systems. Elmer, a French company, pairs its new shower with an app to track the amount of water used. It promises an "environmentally friendly flow" and can be set to turn off after a fixed time, if someone in the house likes to take extra-long showers.
CareOS -- a subsidiary of a French firm that also owns connected-toothbrush maker Kolibree -- designed an entire health-and-beauty hub.
The centerpiece is a so-called smart mirror. It features facial-recognition and touchless gestures -- a user swipes up or down in the air to move through menu options, so as not to smudge the mirror itself. To illustrate some of the mirror's artificial-intelligence capabilities, CareOS used a Lancome lipstick. The mirror scanned the tube, recognized it, then played a beauty tutorial on lipstick application.
The mirror even dabbles in dermatology: If you take pictures of a mole with the mirror's built-in camera, it will notify you of changes in the mole's size and color.

Credit: By Katherine Bindley
