Amazon.com named company veteran Matt Garman to succeed the head of its cloud-computing division, shaking up the leadership of its main profit engine as it vies for position in an artificial intelligence boom that is reshaping its industry.
Garman, 48 years old, is succeeding Adam Selipsky, another longtime Amazon executive who has been chief executive of the unit, Amazon Web Services. The company gave limited explanation for the change in its announcement Tuesday, with Selipsky, 57 years old, indicating he wanted to spend more time with his family and recharge.
Tuesday's announcement, a surprise to many close Amazon observers, follows a rebound in the cloud unit, which accounts for the majority of the company's profits, after a stretch of turbulence.
AWS is at the heart of Amazon's efforts to transform itself and to put AI at the center of its growth since falling behind Microsoft, Google and other peers in the space. Amazon CEO Andy Jassy has said generative AI could be a critical element of Amazon's next pillar of growth in addition to its online retail business, Amazon Prime and AWS.
The company has said that tens of thousands of businesses are using its AI app development platform, named Bedrock, which runs through AWS. The company's cloud business is also a primary vehicle for making money from the AI boom as cloud sales are expected to soar in the coming years, due largely to the intensive computing resources required to train AI models.
"There's a very large opportunity in front of us," Jassy said on a conference call with analysts in April. AI capabilities are reaccelerating that business's growth rate, he said. "I don't know if any of us has seen a possibility like this in technology in a really long time, for sure since the cloud, perhaps since the internet."
AWS sales had decelerated last year after years of rapid expansion. Lower enterprise demand hurt the unit, though Amazon indicated it expected growth to pick up again as businesses responded positively to the company's latest cloud offerings. In the first quarter, AWS sales increased more than 17% to about $25 billion. The division's operating profit rose nearly 84%.
Last month, Amazon said it was slashing hundreds of AWS jobs in sales, marketing and global services. The company also said it would cut hundreds more from its physical stores technology team, which focuses on the systems underlying the company's cashierless checkout programs.
Garman has spent his entire career at Amazon, moving up the ranks over the years. He started as an M.B.A. intern in 2005 and joined the company full-time the following year as one of the first AWS product managers. Garman became the general manager of all AWS compute services in 2016 and moved to lead sales and marketing in 2020.
Garman, who starts the new role June 3, said he would make "some organizational adjustments" as part of the transition in coming weeks.
Generate image description

Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
