Amazon.com projected weaker-than-expected revenue growth and said it would continue to ratchet up spending to meet anticipated demand for artificial intelligence services.
The company's total sales rose 10% from a year earlier to $148 billion during the three-month period ended in June. Its profit was $13.5 billion. Its sales were in line with analyst expectations, while its profit was higher than predicted.
Revenue from Amazon's cloud computing unit, Amazon Web Services, grew by about 19% to a higher-than-expected $26.28 billion. The business has shown renewed strength after experiencing a slowdown in 2023.
Shares of Amazon -- which had risen more than 20% so far this year -- fell more than 7% in aftermarket trading Thursday.
Like many of the top companies in technology, Amazon has been ramping up its spending on the data centers, real estate and chips needed to meet the surging demand for computer power that has come with the rise of artificial intelligence. Amazon's purchases of property and equipment, a measurement of its capital spending, was $17.62 billion in the second quarter, its highest figure since 2021.
Chief Financial Officer Brian Olsavsky said the company's strong capital spending will continue in the near term.
"There's a lot of money at stake here," Olsavsky said in a call with reporters. "It's a high-stakes business. It's a revolutionary shift in a lot of industries. We think we can participate in that in a very high-class way based on our existing position in cloud computing." Amazon has sought to ignite faster growth in the cloud business, which is the leading cloud provider and the company's profit center. The unit slowed down last year as corporate customers looked to curtail their spending, and Amazon faced renewed competition from Microsoft, which has been attracting customers through its budding AI business.
Amazon has been promoting its own AI capabilities, adding new services for AWS customers. The company has said AI offerings such as its Bedrock applications builder have been well received by customers.
Chief Executive Andy Jassy wants to make Amazon a leader in artificial intelligence. The company has created special teams to tackle AI innovation and large language models, and Amazon has released a flurry of services, including an AI shopping assistant on its app named Rufus.
Jassy said Thursday that he believes it is still the early days of AI and Amazon needs to be well-positioned to meet the cloud demand that will come from it.
"Most companies deliver more capacity than they need," Jassy said.
The company said it expects its sales to be between $154.0 billion and $158.5 billion during the current quarter, a range falling on the low end of Wall Street predictions. The company projected it would record an operating income between $11.5 billion and $15 billion this quarter.
Olsavsky said predictions for the current quarter are more difficult due to events like the Olympics and the presidential election, which can distract customers' attention. Customers have recently been more likely to look for deals and lower-priced essential items, and Amazon is looking to match those expectations. That can also affect revenue, he said.
The year-on-year growth of the company's online stores segment -- a measurement for its first-party e-commerce performance -- slowed down compared with the previous quarter.
Credit: By Sebastian Herrera
