The Detroit auto show aims to bring a fresh start to the industry after a bumpy 2018.
The event, officially known as the North American International Auto Show, will spend the next two weeks doing what it has done for more than a century: Show off the latest car models. Among the new vehicles in the spotlight this year are a Toyota Supra sports car and a large Cadillac crossover, called the XT6.
Still, this year's auto show is a little quieter than in previous years. BMW AG, Daimler AG's Mercedes-Benz and Audi AG aren't making appearances, and two legends are missing. Sergio Marchionne, the former chief executive of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV, died in July, and Nissan Motor Co.'s former Chairman Carlos Ghosn remains in jail on charges of underreporting his compensation.
The show -- which is the last one to be held in January, before moving to a new date in June 2020 -- also comes as the industry looks to move on from 2018, when consumers increasingly turned to the used-car lot as new vehicle prices rose, and auto makers like Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Co. revealed job cuts and other restructuring plans.
Here are some highlights from this year's show:
Toyota Supra's Comeback
The Toyota Supra, a two-seater sports car that President Akio Toyoda refers to as "his friend," is making a comeback after a 17-year hiatus as a global production vehicle. Mr. Toyoda on Monday showed off the all-new 2020 Supra, which hits showrooms this summer. The return of the company's flagship sports car has been long rumored and comes amid a broader trend in the auto industry to revive old but memorable nameplates.
Toyota's U.S. sales could use a little revving, with its sedan sales down 12% in 2018 over the prior year. With a starting price of $50,000, the Supra isn't expected to be a big volume seller, but it could help generate some buzz for the brand as it struggles with slower small-car and sedan sales.
-- Adrienne Roberts
Electric Cars -- Someday
GM executives made a splash Sunday, designating Cadillac as the company's lead electric brand and showing off a sketch of a prototype for an all-electric crossover now in development. And yet, the new electric model isn't due out for three years.
Once again, electric cars were the talk of the show, but the lengthy timelines put forth illustrate that for many car makers their arrival en masse at showrooms could still be a ways off.
Volkswagen AG also said Monday that it is investing $800 million to expand its plant in Chattanooga, Tenn., to build new electric cars, but production at the site isn't to start until 2022. Nissan has plans to release eight new electric models by 2022. However, at the show, the Japanese car maker showed off only an electric-vehicle concept, suggesting the production model isn't ready yet for public consumption.
-- Mike Colias
Big Models Featured
The big debuts at the show were mostly big SUVs and high-performance models -- top moneymakers for many car makers. Ford showed off a 700-plus horsepower Mustang Shelby GT500. Subaru took the wraps off a new WRX STI, and Lexus unveiled an LC convertible concept.
As sales of the more traditional small cars and sedans slump in the U.S., car makers are relying more on their sports cars to generate buzz around their brands.
Volkswagen was the one exception: It showed off an updated version of its Passat family sedan. Scott Keogh, Volkswagen's U.S. chief, said sedans still do have a loyal following that the company isn't ready to give up on. "We still think it is worth fighting for," he said. "With [other car makers] pulling out, we do see an opportunity to stay in."
-- Adrienne Roberts
Autonomous Cars
Not long ago, autonomous cars were all the buzz at auto shows, with executives trying to outdo each other on how quickly they could bring them to market. The hype has died down considerably as the technical challenges and regulatory hurdles of putting self-driving cars on the road have started to settle in. Talk at the show was light on autonomous vehicles, and when executives did mention it -- often in response to a reporter's question -- it was cast as a long-term endeavor with no firm timeline.
"Artificial intelligence is good but not great," said Gill Pratt, chief executive for the Toyota Research Institute. "Those limitations are being felt." Many car makers are instead promoting semiautonomous driving features that work in more limited situations, such as low speeds or carefully mapped areas, Mr. Pratt said.
-- Christina Rogers

Credit: By Adrienne Roberts, Mike Colias and Christina Rogers
