The boom in demand for high-end chips powering the rise of artificial intelligence has given new life to some of the survivors of the last tech-hype cycle: cryptocurrency miners.
During the crypto upsurge, Satoshi Spain sold and leased out hundreds of souped-up computers -- known as mining rigs -- equipped with powerful graphics chips. Then, as many of them sat idle starting last year because of the decline of mining currencies, the Spanish company began helping its customers retool the machines for AI.
Today, Satoshi Spain's machines are handling AI workloads for startups, universities and individual developers in Europe.
"You can still make money from your mining rig," Satoshi Spain founder Alejandro Ibanez de Pedro said. "It's mining 2.0."
Satoshi Spain is one of many reformed -- and opportunistic -- companies connected to the cryptocurrency business that have turned their attention to the AI boom, for which one of the most crucial assets is access to the graphics chips, known as graphics processing units, or GPUs.
Originally popularized by gamers who needed powerful graphics processing on computers, the chips are well suited for the intensive calculations needed to create new units of cryptocurrency. They are also good for the computational workloads needed to train and run AI systems that generate sophisticated text and images.
The demand for such processors has skyrocketed with the viral success of ChatGPT, a chatbot powered by generative AI and able to respond to questions in humanlike ways. The resulting shortage has sparked a competition to capture computing power and find workarounds.
Two years ago, when cryptocurrency prices were surging, miners scrambled to build and buy hardware fitted with GPUs to mint digital coins. The collapse in prices and changes in the mechanics of a top cryptocurrency left many machines switched off, creating an untapped resource.
Startups and miners are rebooting them to handle AI workloads. Some companies are reprogramming and repurposing their machines while others are pulling the GPUs out of dormant machines and reselling them for use in AI computers.
The mechanics of mining cryptocurrencies are different from training or running AI models. Mining uses GPUs to solve an increasingly complicated arithmetic problem. Training AI involves easier calculations -- but the high volume of data required to generate language or images requires many identical chips working in concert and a lot of memory.
While it isn't always easy or cheap to convert them, the refurbished mining rigs can be more affordable and accessible than the AI infrastructure offered by the top cloud companies. They are often used by startups and universities that are having trouble getting AI computing power elsewhere. AI companies typically rely on cloud giants such as Microsoft and Amazon.com to provide computing infrastructure, but the cloud titans are sometimes near full capacity or less interested in smaller orders.
The intensive requirements to train this software -- and the surge in user interest -- have left even the biggest players strapped. Sam Altman, the chief executive of the AI startup behind ChatGPT, OpenAI, recently said demand for his company's products has far exceeded its ability to handle it.
For companies looking for options, a change in how one cryptocurrency is minted created a huge supply of used chips. Tens of millions of GPUs became available after the Ethereum network -- home to the second-biggest crypto, behind bitcoin -- removed the need for these chips by ending the practice of mining for new coins and the intensive computation it required.
Around 20% of the freed-up chips can be repurposed to train AI models, said Vipul Ved Prakash, the CEO of alternative cloud provider Together.
"You're seeing more of the crypto-mining world look at participating in AI," Prakash said. "That trend has started to mature."
Together is using former crypto miners for GPUs and other hardware to build virtual server farms. It has leased thousands of GPUs to help power Together's cloud service for AI developers. In May, it raised $20 million in seed funding.
Demi Guo, the founder of an AI applications startup called Mellis AI, couldn't get the data processing pricing or capacity she needed at the leading cloud providers so she is using repurposed hardware available through Together's cloud.
"It's cheaper than places that have very mature infrastructure," she said.
Saurabh Vij has built an AI business around chips formerly used for mining. His startup, Monster, has access to more than 30,000 chips -- most of them once used for mining -- that its customers can lease.
He has made hundreds of deals with Ethereum miners as they tried to find new ways to make money from their expensive equipment. Graphics chips are among the most expensive parts in their machines and can cost tens of thousands of dollars.
"People started panicking" about what to do with their mining gear, Vij said.
Most miners don't realize how much investment they need to make in machines for them to handle AI workloads, said Mark D'Aria, an entrepreneur who buys components such as GPUs from mining rigs and resells them. A device with lower-level graphics cards needs as much as $5,000 in extra components to give it the computing muscle to do AI tasks, he said.
Without that, it is like "trying to move mountains with Honda Civics," D'Aria said.
Credit: By Tom Dotan and Berber Jin
