WASHINGTON -- The U.S., U.K. and Australia are creating a new security partnership in the Indo-Pacific region, building on a longstanding alliance to more deeply share intelligence and technology and help Australia to build nuclear-powered submarine capabilities as China's influence grows.
Administration officials described the new agreement, announced Wednesday by leaders of the three countries, as a way to line up common interests in the Asia-Pacific region.
The partnership is called AUKUS, an acronym for Australia, U.K. and the U.S., and will have a number of components, chief among them the development of the nuclear-submarine capability for Australia. Others include security cooperation in cyberspace, artificial intelligence, quantum technologies and undersea capabilities, administration officials said.
Officials declined to say the effort was intended to counter China, describing it as a bid to engage three allies together strategically in an important region. The announcement comes shortly after the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan last month, which was described as part of a broader effort by the Biden administration to focus on issues in the Indo-Pacific, including China.
"This partnership is not aimed [at], or about, any one country, it's about advancing our strategic interests, upholding the international rules based order and promoting peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific," one official said. "This is about a larger effort to sustain the fabric of engagement and deterrence in the Indo-Pacific."
A spokesman for the Chinese embassy in Washington urged the U.S. and others to "shake off their Cold War mentality and ideological prejudice."
"Exchanges and cooperation between countries should help expand mutual understanding and trust," the spokesman said. "They should not build exclusionary blocs targeting or [harming] the interests of third parties."
President Biden, U.K. Prime Minister Boris Johnson and Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison appeared virtually together to announce the partnership. "This is about investing in our greatest sources of strength, our alliances, and updating them to better meet the threats of today and tomorrow," Mr. Biden said. "It's about connecting America's existing allies and partners in new ways and amplifying our ability to collaborate."
The move would provide Australia with a new military capability at a time when its relations with China are deteriorating and Mr. Morrison's government is working to create a larger military force that includes long-range missiles.
China was angered over Mr. Morrison's call last year for an international investigation into the first outbreak of Covid-19 in China, and has imposed a series of import restrictions and tariffs on Australian products including coal, wine and barley.
All three leaders stressed that the new submarine would be nuclear-powered but not nuclear-armed, in keeping with nuclear nonproliferation measures. None of them mentioned China in their remarks.
France criticized the pact, which effectively terminated a deal it had with Australia to develop future submarines. Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian and Armed Forces Minister Florence Parly said the move shows "a lack of coherence that France can only note and regret." Mr. Biden said earlier Wednesday that France is a key ally and that the U.S. "looks forward to working closely with France."
Western countries have stepped up their military presence in the Pacific. Earlier this month, the U.K. said it was sending a carrier strike group to the Indo-Pacific region, the first such deployment in about 20 years, and the first using one of its new class of carriers.
The U.S., the U.K. and Australia already take part in common security arrangements, and all three participate in the Five Eyes alliance, an intelligence-sharing arrangement that also includes Canada and New Zealand.
The new security structure provides for the cooperation needed to share nuclear submarine technology and other common efforts in a region where China poses growing security concerns.
The U.S. and U.K. are starting an 18-month period of consultation on helping Australia develop the nuclear submarine capability. That would eventually allow Canberra to conduct faster, stealthier submarine missions of longer duration than conventional submarine technology allows.
The U.S. has shared its technology in developing such a capability only with the U.K.
The administration hasn't rolled out an economic and trade strategy to compete with China, the big economy in the region that U.S. officials have accused of coercing smaller economies.
---
William Mauldin, Tarini Parti and Courtney McBride contributed to this article.
Credit: By Gordon Lubold
