Governments everywhere are trying to build domestic clean-energy industries, from electric cars to solar panels. No company has had more recent success doing that than Tesla, and no executives are in greater demand than the automaker's alumni.
More than 30 companies led or launched by former Tesla employees have raised more than $26 billion in the past decade, most in the past few years, a Wall Street Journal analysis of data from PitchBook shows.
Much of that money went to a handful of companies in the electric-car and battery supply chain: luxury electric-vehicle company Lucid Group, European battery upstart Northvolt and battery-recycling firm Redwood Materials.
Many of these companies focus on domestic manufacturing, as Tesla has for more than a decade.
They are well positioned to take advantage of last year's U.S. climate law and Europe's response to it. A key goal for both is to whittle away at China's dominance in critical clean-energy industries.
The Tesla diaspora continues a pattern established earlier in Chief Executive Elon Musk's career. He is part of the so-called PayPal mafia, the group of technology-industry power brokers who came out of the digital-payments company.
Former Tesla executives say their experience ramping up manufacturing of Tesla's Model 3, an existential event for the company, gives them credibility with investors. Some of them say they swap notes on growth and fundraising.
Here is a look at some notable clean-energy executives who previously worked at Tesla and how much money they have raised:
Kunal Girotra
CEO of Lunar Energy: $300 million
Girotra joined Tesla in 2015 and eventually ran its energy division. He founded Lunar in 2020. The company has developed a home-energy system that combines solar panels and batteries. Girotra has hired several ex-Tesla employees, including Kevin Fine, who led the engineering team behind the Powerwall.
Arch Rao
CEO of Span: $234 million
Rao was head of product at Tesla Energy, where he helped commercialize the company's battery products. He founded Span, which sells a smart electrical panel that allows people to monitor and control their electricity use. Span expects to sell tens of thousands of its panels next year.
Mateo Jaramillo
CEO of Form Energy: $816 million
Jaramillo kick-started Tesla Energy, including development of Tesla's Powerwall battery system, and started the company's supercharger effort. He co-founded Form, which is developing iron-air batteries that can generate power for several days. The company is building a $760 million factory in West Virginia.
Peter Rawlinson
CEO of Lucid: $11 billion
Rawlinson led engineering of Tesla's Model S luxury sedan before joining Lucid. He became CEO in 2019, leading the luxury electric automaker through a deal to go public that valued it at about $24 billion. The company has struggled to scale up manufacturing and its shares have tumbled.
Enric Asuncion
CEO of Wallbox: roughly $390 million
Asuncion spent about a year at Tesla focused on charging stations before co-founding home smart charger maker Wallbox. The Barcelona-based company has sold more than 500,000 EV chargers and last year started production at its first U.S. factory in Texas.
Vivas Kumar
CEO of Mitra Chem: $67 million
Kumar worked on Tesla's battery supply chain during the chaotic 2018 ramp-up of Model 3 manufacturing. That supply-chain experience helped him launch Mitra. The startup, backed by venture capitalist Chamath Palihapitiya, is attempting to use machine learning to build battery components in the U.S.
Dorian West
Co-founder of Electric Hydrogen: $222 million
West was an early Tesla employee who became director of engineering, working on the Roadster, batteries and semi trucks. He co-founded Electric Hydrogen, which is backed by Amazon.com, Rio Tinto and Bill Gates. The company expects to start manufacturing electrolyzers that make green hydrogen in 2024.
Peter Carlsson
CEO of Northvolt: $8 billion
Carlsson co-founded Swedish battery maker Northvolt with Paolo Cerruti after the pair spent years at Tesla managing its supply chain. The company has raised roughly $8 billion from investors including Volkswagen and Goldman Sachs to make low-emissions batteries in Europe and combat China's industry dominance.
JB Straubel
CEO of Redwood Materials: $1.07 billion
Straubel co-founded Tesla and served as chief technology officer for more than 15 years. He launched battery-recycling upstart Redwood Materials. The company aims to address potential shortages in battery materials by harvesting them from discarded batteries. He now sits on Tesla's board of directors.
Gene Berdichevsky
CEO of Sila Nanotechnologies: $930 million
Berdichevsky was Tesla's seventh employee and lead engineer on the lithium-ion battery system for its first vehicle, the Roadster. He co-founded Sila more than a decade ago to make more advanced silicon anode battery materials. The company is building its first big facility in Washington state.
Credit: By Ed Ballard and Amrith Ramkumar
