Twenty years after IBM's Deep Blue supercomputer stunned the world by beating world chess champion Garry Kasparov, artificial intelligence has scored another historic victory. In March, Google's AlphaGo software trounced South Korea's Lee Se-dol, the 18-time world champion of the ancient Chinese board game Go, four games to one.
What's the big deal? Go is widely considered the most challenging and intuitive board game ever created, even more complex than chess. Artificial-intelligence gurus expected human intelligence to dominate the game for the next decade.
Stories like these have fueled concerns about technological advances. A recent Pew Research Center survey found that "65% of Americans expect that within 50 years robots and computers will 'definitely' or 'probably' do much of the work currently done by humans."
Fear not. The machines are certainly rising, but we don't need to call the Terminator just yet. Artificial intelligence and "big data" will benefit everyone by boosting productivity and creating opportunities for humans to work more creatively.
Consider data science. Until recently, employers needed large teams of analysts to perform the often tedious and highly technical work needed to turn raw data into useful intelligence. Now, automated processes -- powered by software -- are changing all of this. Tech companies are investing in business intelligence programs that will allow anyone to connect to data, create reports, and identify the trends that are driving the company in real time -- no background in data analysis, statistics or computer science required.
Such self-service tools are only the beginning. Last year MIT researchers developed a "Data Science Machine" that crunches numbers faster and more effectively than people. In competitions against human teams, it finished higher than two-thirds of its competitors. And where the human teams typically labored over their algorithms for months, the machine analyst took somewhere between two and 12 hours to produce each of its entries.
The data-science world is changing, but the wisest data scientists will adapt and work smarter, recognizing that improved software frees up analysts to do what humans do best: think critically, strategize and create. The future is not humans versus machines, but humans working alongside machines, each using their own particular strengths.
Look at ATMs. Contrary to popular belief, ATMs didn't displace bank tellers. Instead, the number of bank tellers rose even as ATMs became more prevalent. Why? Machines freed people up to take on tasks requiring more creativity and initiative, including individualized customer service across a wide variety of financial transactions.
Similarly, tomorrow's data scientists will specialize in developing analytic tools that solve business problems unamenable to off-the-shelf solutions. Engineers and consultants will need to make sure their skill sets adapt with technology so they can continue delivering value to their employers. Automation will enable investors to work smarter and faster so they can work more productively and creatively. Educators will uncover best practices more quickly than ever. Historians and journalists will uncover sources, connections and patterns made possible by big data at lightning speed.
In the future, the competitive edge will go not to the companies where machines simply replace people, but to the companies where humans and machines work together. Algorithms and software will never be able to completely replace the "human touch." But they can open up new opportunities to unleash what is uniquely human -- imagination.
---
Mr. Ingram is vice president of Adobe Analytics and Adobe Social.
Credit: By Bill Ingram
