Amazon.com said it has invested an additional $2.75 billion in the artificial-intelligence startup Anthropic, a major investment from a tech giant looking to compete with Microsoft, Google and others in the AI arms race.
Amazon has now invested a total of $4 billion in Anthropic after making a $1.25 billion initial investment in the company in September. Amazon said at the time that it could invest as much as $4 billion. Amazon said it has a minority ownership position in Anthropic.
The funding marks Amazon's largest investment in another company since the online retailer was founded nearly 30 years ago. Google agreed last October to invest up to $2 billion in Anthropic.
Tech companies and venture capitalists have been throwing money at AI startups following the success of Open AI's ChatGPT, with investors and analysts increasingly believing the latest boom in AI is sustainable. More than $29 billion was invested in generative AI companies last year, according to research firm PitchBook. Microsoft has agreed to invest $13 billion in OpenAI.
The investments also can be quite lucrative for the tech companies, which charge the AI startups to use the cloud-computing services they need to run their products. The Wall Street Journal reported late last year that Anthropic committed to spend $4 billion on Amazon's cloud platform over the next five years, citing people familiar with the matter.
Months before Google's $2 billion investment, Anthropic agreed to spend more than $3 billion on Google Cloud.
The Federal Trade Commission said in January it is probing investments and partnerships made by the biggest technology companies and how they affect the competitive landscape for AI systems.
Anthropic, which was founded in 2021, offers an AI assistant called Claude that competes with OpenAI's ChatGPT. The company is led by siblings Dario Amodei and Daniela Amodei, who both used to work at OpenAI.
Large language models, which power products like ChatGPT and Claude, are extremely expensive to build. Much of the money startups receive is spent on cloud computing.
Anthropic has been using Amazon's custom chips to build and deploy AI software. Amazon has added Anthropic's technology into its cloud business offerings.
Credit: By Joseph Pisani
