BARCELONA -- Within 30 years, artificial intelligence will be smarter than the human brain.
That is according to Masayoshi Son, chief executive of SoftBank Group Corp., who says that supersmart robots will outnumber humans and more than a trillion objects will be connected to the internet within three decades.
These beliefs underpin the wave of large deals the Japanese internet and telecommunications company has pulled off in the past year, he said Monday. These include starting a $100 billion technology-investment fund with a Saudi sovereign-wealth fund, buying British microprocessor designer ARM Holdings PLC for $32 billion and acquiring U.S. asset manager Fortress Investment Group PLC for $3.3 billion.
This 30-year forecast created urgency, Mr. Son said in a speech at the telecom industry's biggest trade show, Mobile World Congress. "That is why I'm in a hurry to aggregate cash to invest."
In a brief interview after his speech, Mr. Son said his $100 billion project with the Saudis, dubbed the SoftBank Vision Fund, was bigger than the $65 billion in combined investments from the venture-capital world. He said the SoftBank Vision Fund would be focused.
"Artificial intelligence, Internet of Things, smart robots: Those are the three main things I'm interested in," he said.
The Internet of Things is the technology world's term for connecting everyday objects, such as refrigerators and sneakers, to the web.
Mr. Son said he didn't expect oil company Saudi Aramco's planned initial public offering of stock to affect the size of Vision Fund. "They are a great partner," he said of the Saudis. "They're already rich. They have lots of money, even before the IPO."
Mr. Son said this month's acquisition of Fortress Investment would complement the Vision Fund. "SoftBank Vision Fund is more for the technology," he said. "Fortress is for everything else -- traditional private equity and so on."
Fortress has about $70 billion in assets under management.
Combined with the Vision Fund, he said, "pretty soon we will have $200 billion together. So we would help each other to identify investment opportunities."
Credit: By Stu Woo
