CHICAGO -- The live video of an assault against a teenager held hostage by four young adults last week shows how far social media has become entwined in the world of violent crime, posing challenges for law enforcement and companies alike.
Last week's attack -- in which four young African-Americans allegedly tied, beat up and cut a white mentally impaired teenager while shouting racial insults -- was streamed on Facebook Live in real time. The four, who are all at least 18 years old and being tried as adults, are being held without bail as they await trial. Lawyers for the four couldn't be reached for comment on Thursday.
Those tracking crime in major cities say it is increasingly common for violence to either be streamed on services like Facebook Inc. and Twitter Inc., or provoked by an interaction on social-media platforms, which are central to the identities of many young people, including gang members.
There have been at least 40 such broadcasts of sensitive, violent or criminal footage on live video in the past 12 months, according to a Wall Street Journal tally of events reported by news media.
In late March last year, a Chicago man was unexpectedly shot while live-streaming in front of a convenience store. In April, an Ohio teenager was accused of live-streaming her friend's rape over Twitter's Periscope. Last month, two teenagers died in a car crash in Pennsylvania after the driver fired up Facebook Live.
Facebook says videos glorifying violence are against its content guidelines, but the company largely relies on users to flag objectionable content. Facebook is in the "research stage" of using artificial intelligence to automatically detect violence in live videos.
Twitter and its Periscope app also rely on users to flag graphic, violent content, which the company says isn't allowed on its services unless it is newsworthy. Last year, Periscope started allowing randomly selected users to judge whether comments flagged by others constitute spam or abuse.
Those who track violence say social media has long been instrumental in provoking and publicizing conflict. Live video, however, added a dangerous edge to the interactions.
Angalia Bianca, who works with Cure Violence, a nonprofit that engages with gang members in several cities to try to head off violence, says it is common for a gang to go into a rival gang territory and stream its presence on Facebook Live.
"Sometimes, they'll bring their guns, sometimes they'll make their gang signs and say things to intimidate rival gang members, all to show that they are not scared," she said.
Many of these individuals have public pages, she added, and often tag their rivals to "make sure every single person they have disrespected has seen the post," which can heighten tensions and sometimes provoke a violent reaction.
Nearly a third of the more than 500 conflicts Cure Violence mediated last year in several Chicago neighborhoods were prompted by interactions online, according to the organization's records.
A spokesman for the Chicago Police Department said it was tracking this relatively new phenomenon, including when gang members take to social media to boast after a shooting directed toward a rival gang, but doesn't actively monitor social media to look for conflict that might lead to violence. Even when crimes are being streamed live, the challenge is to verify it is an instance of harmful criminal activity, rather than teens kidding around, the spokesman added.
Experts say these videos can quickly go viral and be seen by thousands even before the police are alerted to them.
The police officer who came across the victim of last week's attack in Chicago was unaware of the Facebook Live videowhen he approached the victim, police say.
Credit: By Shibani Mahtani and Deepa Seetharaman
