Long before Silicon Valley became enamored with financial-technology startups and the promise of using better data and algorithms to remake banking, Capital One Financial Corp. was already blazing that trail.
Now, the data breach affecting 106 million past, present and prospective customers threatens to upend its long-held reputation for digital prowess.
"While we didn't use the term back then, we were an original fintech," Chief Executive Richard Fairbank said on an earnings conference call in April. "It is striking that our battle cry at the founding of our company was to build a tech company that does banking."
That ethos prompted Capital One to leap into cloud computing about five years ago, making it one of the first big banks to migrate reams of customer and corporate data and applications off its own data centers and onto Amazon.com Inc.'s cloud services.
That decision could prove to be a liability. The hacker accused of breaking into Capital One's customer data, Paige Thompson, is a former employee of Amazon Web Services Inc.
She is accused of getting through a Capital One firewall to access data the bank had stored on the Amazon cloud service.
The hack is likely to put Capital One on the front line of concerns about what the trade off is for banks looking to emulate the practices of tech companies, which themselves have been criticized over their handling of consumer information.
Many big banks are following Capital One's lead to outsource more of their tech processes, but questions remain about whether new security gaps are being opened and how closely regulators should be able to watch.
Capital One said that the "vulnerability" the hacker exploited wasn't specific to the cloud. The bank also said its cloud computing model helped it with diagnosing and fixing the problem.
Startups and software companies were early adopters of the cloud, and for years, banks had resisted moving sensitive data or processes there because of security concerns.
Capital One executives were among the first to embrace the cloud, believing that such a move would enable the bank to build new financial apps and products faster.
They also thought it could provide tools for software developers at other firms interested in building their own services on top of Capital One's technology.
"Given the amount of tech investment. . .and the underlying perception of being ahead of the tech game compared to peers in the business, we are a bit surprised that a single individual could penetrate [Capital One's] defenses and gain access to so many accounts," Oppenheimer analysts wrote Monday.
These days, bank executives often view the cloud as a standard way of doing business, and as a way to save costs from building their own storage.
For Mr. Fairbank, the rise of fintech firms in the wake of the financial crisis created a sense of urgency to keep his bank ahead of the startups.
Capital One spent years building a competitive advantage in the databases and machines needed to underwrite even the riskiest borrowers and analyze data for future card solicitations and loan performance.
Cloud computing enabled small companies to leverage data in a similar way at a fraction of the price. The bank worried that fintech lenders would start to gain scale, poaching consumers who would have otherwise borrowed from Capital One.
Mr. Fairbank and a colleague, Nigel Morris, left their careers as management consultants in 1988 to lead strategy for the credit-card unit of Signet Bank, a small lender in Richmond, Va.
Signet listed Capital One on the stock market in 1994 with Mr. Fairbank as CEO.
Capital One bet on the internet being the future of banking in 2011 when it agreed to pay $9 billion to acquire the U.S. online banking business of ING Groep NV.
Since then, Capital One has acquired startups that specialize in gamifying personal finance and budgeting, applying machine-learning to different business problems and scouring the internet for lower prices and rebates for goods of interest to particular shoppers.
Its tech capabilities have positioned the company to win coveted deals in the credit-card sector.

Credit: By Peter Rudegeair, AnnaMaria Andriotis and David Benoit
