For all the problems technology solves, it seems to complicate our lives, so much so that a growing category of the industry is dedicated to simplifying it.
The biggest offender is smartphones. These pocket-computers-turned-companions have digitally connected everyone, yet disconnected us from the world. For an addict like myself -- one of those losers who reflexively thumbs through apps while in line for coffee -- the answer, ironically, is another phone. Light Phone is a game-changing gizmo, a second device -- smaller and lighter than my real phone and, at roughly credit-card size, less conspicuous -- designed to be used as little as possible.
You can't check email, text, browse the internet or swipe left with it. It harbors no seductive apps, has no color LCD screen. Tethered to your existing phone and number, it's for voice calls only. Once you've pocketed the barely noticeable device, you leave your smartphone at home (or maybe in your glovebox). It's a handset "that helps you live in the moment," said product designer Mr. Kaiwei Tang, one of the company's co-founders.
Light Phone is simple to set up, and it feels great to walk around with a device that's only 1.3 ounces -- miraculously three times lighter than my iPhone. It helped me feel more engaged all weekend. And when I needed it, the Light Phone's call quality was surprisingly good.
Relying on it, even a little, however, comes with drawbacks if you haven't planned ahead. Because it can't send or receive messages, which most would agree have simplified organizing meetups, you have to convince friends and family to call if there's a change in plans. And then you have to tell them again. And then call when they forget.
The Light Phone's hard-nosed refusal to offer navigation assistance also poses problems. If you routinely expect your phone to find the best subway route or driving directions, managing with the Light Phone alone seems like a penalty. Good news, though: It does concede to display the time, so you needn't wear a watch.
If you want to curb your smartphone reliance with less tough love and at a lower cost, try Moment. The free app effectively shames you into shrinking your smartphone usage by tracking the hours, not minutes, you spend futzing with your phone each day. It documents the time you loiter on individual apps and sends you a report each morning -- congratulating you, for instance, for spending 90 fewer minutes on your phone than you did the previous day.
Within a week, Moment ingratiatingly reformed me: I started purposely leaving my phone in the other room or in my backpack. But I can't say it's been a miracle cure. I deleted the app after being shamed for playing with my phone too much on a mind-numbing travel day.
If you're not ready to submit to such policing, you can at least let artificial intelligence help make quick work of an overloaded inbox -- the great scourge of our time.
Astro, the cleverest email client I found, is a chatbot that helps organize and eliminate email. Ask it to "zap" your inbox and it will unsubscribe you from newsletters and mailing lists you haven't opened in months. Like any good robot, Astro can talk and listen. After it reads your emails aloud, you can tell it to delete, archive, snooze and so on. Then you can feel free to look up next time you go outside.
---
LIMITED ADDITIONS// STREAMLINING TECH TO REDUCE YOUR RELIANCE ON SMARTPHONES
Astro
An email client that uses artificial intelligence to help streamline your inbox.
Best for: Anyone who hasn't developed a system to triage their glut of emails.
Cost: Free, helloastro.com
Light Phone
An ultralight handset with limited functionality; you can't text or browse with it.
Best for: Smartphone addicts looking to spend more time interacting with life.
Cost: $125, $5/month, thelightphone.com
Moment
An iOS app designed to curb your phone usage by monitoring your screentime.
Best for: People willing to be shocked by how much they use social media.
Cost: $3.99 for upgrade, inthemoment.io
---
The Gadget
Hall of Shame
Five overcomplicated contraptions
that the world never needed
CueCat, 2000
From 2000 to 2001, some magazine ads featured barcode-like images that you could scan with this feline-shaped CueCat peripheral. It would then direct your web browser to a specific URL. But you had to be reading the magazine in front of your computer. Thus: smartphones.
HidrateMe (aka Hidrate Spark), 2015
This Bluetooth-enabled, Kickstarter-backed water bottle reminds you to drink H2O -- yes, the life-sustaining liquid homo sapiens have been sipping for about 200,000 years -- by way of a glowing LED. The Hidrate Spark tracks how much you drink and sends push reminders to your phone to hydro-shame you if it's not enough.
Juicero, 2016
This wifi-enabled kitchen gadget, which initially cost $700, made fruit and vegetable juices from cartridges you could purchase from the company via its app. But buyers found out that they could just squeeze the packets by hand and get nearly the same result. The company stopped selling the machine just 16 months after its first unit shipped.
LG Digital Multimedia Side-by-Side Fridge Freezer, 2003
A few years after small-scale "connected fridge" attempts by Electrolux and Whirlpool, LG went big with this LCD-screen-bedecked icebox. It came equipped with video messaging and the ability to monitor food content and expiration dates, download MP3s and send you emails, if not ones as pointed as: "No food left. Get takeout."
Kerastase Hair Coach Powered by Withings, 2017
Loaded with a gyroscope, microphone, and an abundance of conductivity sensors, this high-tech hairbrush sends heady data to a companion app on your phone. It can tell you if your hair is frizzy, dry, if you're brushing too hard or too much, and then offers product recommendations for a fix. But it won't tell you why you're so lonely.

Credit: By Jesse Will
