The Justice Department on Thursday unveiled its long-mooted antitrust suit against Apple, and don't smile -- Apple's main alleged victims are giant tech and financial companies. The lawsuit is trying to force changes in antitrust law that Congress hasn't passed, and the alleged benefits to consumers aren't obvious.
Justice says Apple exploits a putative smart-phone monopoly to lock consumers into its closed system and undermine competing products and services. It's a plausible theory. Apple makes up roughly 55% of the U.S. smart-phone market, giving it enormous power over the app ecosystem. But Justice's evidence is far from compelling.
---
Start with its complaint that Apple's alleged monopoly is retarding tech innovation. Over the last decade the number of paid developers on its app stores has soared by 374% to 5.2 million. During this time, Apple has introduced AirPods, Vision Pro headsets and new Apple Watch health functions such as an ECG monitor and fall detector. Yet its closed system hasn't prevented other companies' products, such as Shokz bone-conduction headphones or Google's automated car service Waymo, from advancing.
Justice argues that other businesses including Apple competitors are harmed by its "tax" on app purchases. These fees help cover the cost of maintaining its app store, including security. Google and video-game app stores charge similar fees. App developers can avoid the fee by directing users to buy subscriptions on their personal computer.
Video-game developer Epic Games made a similar antitrust complaint against Apple several years ago, arguing that the smartphone maker should be required to allow other app stores or payment options on its devices. Two lower courts disagreed and rejected other arguments Justice now makes.
For instance, Justice claims that Apple makes it harder for other product developers to inter-operate with its devices in order to lock customers into its products. But the court in the Epic Games case found that Apple's dominance stemmed from "overall satisfaction with existing devices, rather [than] any 'lock-in.'"
One reason customers prefer Apple is its privacy and security protections. DOJ calls these branding ploys with a "self-serving premise." But the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in the Epic case that "improving security and privacy features" differentiate Apple products and "are plainly procompetitive rationales."
DOJ also says Apple's proprietary messaging app doesn't seamlessly inter-operate with SMS texting on Android phones. Apple last autumn said it would adopt a secure messaging system that would let users do so. In any case, iPhone and Android users can securely communicate with WhatsApp, Signal, Discord and other encrypted messaging services.
Federal law doesn't require companies to make products that seamlessly inter-operate with rivals. The Supreme Court held in Pacific Bell v. linkLine (2009) that businesses are "free to choose the parties with whom they deal, as well as the prices, terms, and conditions of that dealing."
Some in Congress want to rewrite antitrust law to require Big Tech companies to become inter-operable. This would create headaches for manufacturers and developers that would slow innovation. But Congress hasn't passed legislation, so DOJ wants courts to order inter-operability. DOJ essentially wants Apple to be open-source and inter-operable like Google's Android system. If customers want that, they can buy Android phones, which make up the other half of the U.S. market.
Read DOJ's lawsuit closely, and Apple's main alleged victims appear to be big banks, credit-card companies and Big Tech rivals. Apple's digital wallet allows "users to make in-person payments by tapping their device on a payment terminal rather than tapping or swiping a physical credit card," DOJ says. Oh no -- an Apple innovation competes with Visa.
The suit also claims Apple has "suppressed" mobile cloud-streaming video services by requiring each to be submitted "as a stand-alone app for approval." Lol, as the kids say. The Federal Trade Commission claimed the Microsoft-Activision-Blizzard acquisition would create a cloud video-game monopoly. Now DOJ complains that Apple isn't helping augment this monopoly. Antitrust cops can't keep their monopolists straight.
One risk of this suit is that the main beneficiaries might be Chinese companies, which could gain access to Apple intellectual property and face fewer security safeguards. Chinese smart-phones dominate the global market.
---
Apple has been hugely successful, but not universally so. Its investments in electric and automated vehicles didn't pay off, and it has fallen far behind in artificial intelligence. AI is moving so fast, and in such unpredictable ways, that it may upend tech companies and markets. By the time this suit is finished, Apple's dominance might look as dated as IBM's did after the dawn of the personal computer.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Government to the Rescue" -- WSJ Mar. 30, 2024)
