Kaila Mabus, an athletic teenager in the Chicago area, went to the emergency room in 2019 in renal failure.
It took another month before she was diagnosed with Castleman disease, a rare disorder that causes the immune system to attack vital organs. The Food and Drug Administration has approved just one drug to treat Castleman. It didn't help Kaila. Her parents feared she might die.
Her doctors sought help from Dr. David Fajgenbaum, an immunologist at the University of Pennsylvania and fellow Castleman patient who studies the disease. He has matched rare-disease patients with drugs that are already in pharmacies for other conditions for over 10 years, starting with himself.
"Is there anything else we can try?" Kaila's doctors asked.
Fajgenbaum said that just two weeks earlier, his lab experiments had suggested the drug ruxolitinib, approved to treat a blood cancer, might work in some Castleman patients. Kaila started taking it twice a day, and it put her in remission. Kaila, now 18, plans to study nursing at Marquette University in Milwaukee in the fall.
When Fajgenbaum was diagnosed with Castleman as a third-year medical student, he was so ill that a priest administered the sacrament of anointing the sick. Fajgenbaum studied his own blood samples for clues to a drug that could tamp down his immune system and stop relapses. He figured out that sirolimus, a drug used to prevent transplant patients from rejecting a new kidney, might keep his disease in check. Fajgenbaum, 38, takes the drug every day and has been in remission for 10 years.
Now instead of helping people like Kaila one at a time, he plans to match patients with existing drugs on a much larger scale.
Every Cure, a nonprofit Fajgenbaum helped found in 2022, received funding on Wednesday that could surpass $48 million from the federal Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health. Fajgenbaum and his team will spend the money to build a drug-repurposing database and algorithms that patients, doctors and researchers can use to find drugs for untreated diseases.
There are over 10,000 known rare diseases, and most don't have a drug approved to treat them. The FDA said it has approved over 19,000 prescription drugs.
The notion of finding new uses for existing drugs has been around for a long time. Once the FDA approves a drug, doctors can prescribe it off-label to patients with other conditions they think it will help. Ozempic, originally approved for people with Type 2 diabetes, is now used by millions of people without the disease for weight loss.
The National Institutes of Health and research institutions have invested over the years in drug repurposing, hoping it would be faster and less costly to find new uses for drugs that have already made it to market, a process that can take more than a decade and cost $2 billion. But systematically matching approved treatments to unmet needs has been hard.
Every Cure's database will use artificial intelligence to rank FDA-approved drugs that are most likely to work against every known disease. The rankings will be based on what Fajgenbaum calls "the world's biomedical knowledge": studies, case reports, clinical-trial data, health records and adverse-event reports that contain tantalizing clues but haven't been systematically mined to help many patients.
Every Cure will also use the money to identify and advance at least 25 potential treatments into clinical trials or to gather enough data to persuade doctors to prescribe them to patients. "Our end goal is not FDA approval. Our end goal is giving patients maximum access to medications," said Tracey Sikora, co-founder of Every Cure.
Drug companies sometimes look for additional diseases their approved drugs might treat, but they typically lose interest as patent expirations trim the prospect of profits. And promising evidence that some drugs might have wider uses often languish in academic papers.
Creating scores that rank every approved drug against every known disease is a different way of looking at an old problem, says Matt Might, director of the Hugh Kaul Precision Medicine Institute at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. "There are drugs sitting in plain sight that are going to help patients right now," said Might, who is working with Every Cure on the project.
It will take about two years to build the database and publish the scores, Fajgenbaum says.
Credit: By Amy Dockser Marcus
