When Raina Casbon-Kelts recently pitched a roomful of potential investors on Gilded, her cryptocurrency-accounting software, she was stumped by a seemingly simple question: How would she pay investors back?
"Um, that's a great question," she said.
No one seemed to mind. The crowd laughed and clapped, in fact, when she noted that so far, the fledgling startup had "six paying customers -- woo-hoo!"
But this wasn't a formal presentation for a venture-capital committee. Ms. Casbon-Kelts was addressing the Alternative Investments Club of New York, a lively gathering of deal seekers that is open to any entrepreneur looking for funding.
Every Tuesday night, anyone can head upstairs to the Jay-Z Lounge of the 40/40 Club, a Manhattan sports bar co-owned by the hip-hop mogul, to make a pitch or just enjoy the scene.
The crowd of 40 to 50 typically ranges from business students to VC executives -- the rough equivalent of record-label reps scouting an open-mic night for the next hot act.
Entrepreneurs seek funding for ventures ranging from blockchain startups and real-estate deals to Broadway shows. Most seek $50,000 to $500,000.
Venture-capital and private-equity deals in New York City totaled $45.8 billion last year, according to PitchBook data. But these opportunities are typically closed to all but the wealthiest (and, allegedly, sophisticated) investors. Entrepreneurs, meanwhile, typically need connections to tap such funding pools -- which can create particularly burdensome obstacles to businesses founded by women and people of color.
At the Alternative Investments Club, however, there are no barriers. "Everyone gets an opportunity," says founder Bakari Akil, a 29-year-old former software salesman who lives in Harlem and launched the club in 2016 as part of an effort to find a business to buy.
Last Tuesday, a crowd of 57, including eight women and one robot, gathered at the bar, waiting to be admitted to the upstairs lounge.
Investors said they were seeking below-the-radar opportunities at a time when everything looks overvalued.
Compliance analyst Samora Legros was looking for real estate outside New York City. "The market values here don't make sense compared to the rest of the country," he said.
Inventor Matthew Flannery was looking to raise $500,000 for the second iteration of SpongeBath, his countertop sponge-sanitizing gadget already on the market. "Hopefully I'll find a few high-net-worth investors to board the rocket ship," he said. "We're taking off!"
At 6:30 p.m., Mr. Akil opened the lounge and laid out the rules. No pitching services -- only deals. Entrepreneurs get five minutes to present and two minutes to answer questions.
"The way I decide who will present in this room is whoever puts their hand up fast," he added.
After starting the Alternative Investments Club, Mr. Akil said he found he could make enough money running it to support himself, while continuing his search for businesses to purchase. He doesn't charge admission, but he collects donations from guests and fees from sponsors who pay to make longer presentations.
The first to pitch that evening was real-estate salesman Alon Sole, dressed in a black T-shirt, gold chain and sneakers. He offered a three-family home for $625,000 that he said would generate $80,000 a year in rental income. "You can see your money grow in the Bronx!" he said.
Entrepreneur Justin Starr told his personal story in an effort to raise $1.2 million to develop a motion-capture device that uses artificial intelligence to provide corrective feedback to people performing physical-therapy routines.
He was homeless and living in a 14th Street subway station, he said, when he met a neurosurgeon at the gym where he worked as a personal trainer.
"Now we have the first patent in the world on this technology," he said, displaying a prototype.
Following presentations, a waitress brought in a bucket of beers, a big platter of fries and a bowl of ketchup. Mr. Akil encouraged guests to network and make deals.
Dentist Ekpa Eyoma, a first-time attendee looking for investment opportunities, pronounced the evening "amazing."
"There were a lot of words I didn't understand," she said. "What's blockchain? It sounds like it's something important, because a lot of people have said it. I will Google that tonight."
Ms. Casbon-Kelts said she didn't meet any investors for her accounting software, but made plenty of connections. "Tonight was a breath of fresh air," she said. "You get to talk to humans who actually make eye contact."
Mr. Akil said deals do get made. Roughly 40 a year, he estimates. One real-estate entrepreneur found a fellow investor to sink $25,000 into a $700,000 multifamily building in Allentown, Pa., for example. The founder of a health-care startup got $70,000 from an angel investor to develop a device prototype.
And while the club hasn't produced a business for him to buy, Mr. Akil said he met several co-investors with whom he plans to purchase an out-of-town company he found through a broker.
If the deal closes, Mr. Akil will be leaving New York. But he hopes the Alternative Investments Club would continue under the management of two volunteers he is grooming.
And if he has done it once, he can do it again.
"I'll probably start a similar club in the city I move to," he said.
---
anne.kadet@wsj.com

Credit: By Anne Kadet
