Nvidia Corp. claimed a big advance in the videogame graphics race along with a substantial price break.
The Silicon Valley chip company on Friday unveiled a graphics processing unit that it said is twice as fast as its current flagship chip -- now sold in a $1,000 add-in card for personal computers dubbed Titan X -- while consuming one-third of the electrical power of that product.
The new GTX 1080 chip will be available May 27 in cards with a suggested retail price of $599, the company said.
Nvidia's new offering is the consumer version of a technology that the company first disclosed in April, starting with a card for server systems aimed at artificial intelligence and other applications.
Chief Executive Jen-Hsun Huang, who unveiled the GTX 1080 at an event Friday night in Austin, Texas, called it the culmination of three years of work and "billions of dollars" of research and development. He described its technical benefits as almost unbelievable.
"The 1080 is insane," Mr. Huang said. "It is almost an irresponsible amount of performance."
Nvidia's announcement comes as longtime rival Advanced Micro Devices Inc. has also been making aggressive performance claims for its graphics systems.
It recently announced a $1,499 dual-chip graphics card called the Radeon Pro Duo that AMD rated at 16 teraflops, a measure of computing performance that stands for trillion floating point operations per second.
Mr. Huang, who put the GTX 1080's performance at nine teraflops, said it outperforms some Nvidia cards featuring two graphics chips.
Both Nvidia and AMD, besides racing for the attentions of PC gamers, are jockeying for position to power a new generation of virtual-reality goggles. Mr. Huang said his company's new product incorporates features to aid such applications, including a way to generate images for the left and right eyes simultaneously in a manner that reduces distortion.
Nvidia's announcements also included a way to capture 3-D snapshots of game play with 32 times the resolution of computer displays. Users can view the resulting images from multiple angles, Mr. Huang said. Patrick Moorhead, an analyst with Moor Insights & Strategy, said game developers would need to modify their software to exploit some of Nvidia's claimed benefits. Yet speed gains of the new technology, which comes at a lower price point than he expected, would be apparent even without those changes, he said.
"Nvidia just keeps on moving the experience forward," Mr. Moorhead said.
Nvidia also unveiled a slightly slower card, the GTX 1070, that Mr. Huang said will be available June 10 for $379.
Credit: By Don Clark
