WASHINGTON -- A skirmish between national security and trade officials in the Biden administration is hindering efforts to forge a digital-services pact with Asian countries, according to people involved in the talks.
National Security Council and State Department officials want to set rules for digital trade in Asia, which could include cross-border flows of information, digital privacy and standards for the use of artificial intelligence in Asia, the people said.
The proposed pact would be open to U.S. allies in the Asia-Pacific region. It would exclude China, similar to the approach the administration has taken on issues such as export controls on advanced technology. The U.S. has tried to put together alliances that would set standards in Asia, as a way of limiting Chinese influence.
For national-security officials, a digital pact would be a way of reasserting U.S. leadership in the region and helping convince Asian leaders that the U.S. still favors trade liberalization.
U.S. Trade Representative Katherine Tai is focusing more on the particulars of a deal. She has urged an approach that recognizes potential opposition from congressional Democrats and labor allies, said people familiar with their thinking. She is concerned about setting priorities in trade policy and maintaining what she calls a "worker-centered" approach.
A digital pact could be seen as a boon for internet giants such as Amazon.com Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google, which benefit from the unimpeded flow of data across borders. Ms. Tai has focused her efforts on issues such as union rights in Mexico and forced labor.
USTR spokesman Adam Hodge said Ms. Tai isn't trying to hinder the digital-trade initiative and has talked to trade ministers from eight countries in the Asia-Pacific region about the pact. "We are looking at a range of options to forge stronger trade relationships" in Asia, he said. "We see digital-trade rules, done right, as a potentially important tool to advance those goals."
National security adviser Jake Sullivan said there wasn't a split between the NSC and the USTR. "We are working on a range of affirmative economic initiatives in the Indo-Pacific and we are aligned at the leadership level on the key elements," he said.
Nonetheless, the people familiar with the talks said there were disagreements about how to proceed between Ms. Tai and NSC officials, including Asia coordinator Kurt Campbell. He believes there is an urgent need for the U.S. to assert leadership in Asia, the people said, and that the digital-services pact would be a step in that direction.
"We cannot be successful without a positive trade agenda in the region," Mr. Campbell told the Asia Society, a nonprofit organization, in an online forum this month. "We're looking closely at what might be possible on the digital front," he said.
Mr. Campbell's remarks were aimed to signal White House support for a deal and its dissatisfaction with the pace of the effort, several of the people said.
The skirmish over Asia trade comes as the administration tries to put together the economic portion of its China policy. Administration officials say that leaders in the Asia-Pacific region continue to press the U.S. to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership -- now known as the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership -- a regional trade pact that the Obama administration championed but the Trump administration rejected.
Credit: By Bob Davis
