International Business Machines Corp. has been working furiously to reinvent itself for the cloud computing era, but the weakening global economic climate raises the question whether 2016 will bring a much-needed turnaround.
The 104-year-old tech giant spent much of 2015 lowering investor expectations, and on Tuesday the company warned that earnings for the coming year will be lower than expected.
Noting that a strong U.S. dollar would take a $1.3 billion bite out of pretax profit, IBM said it expects earnings per share of $13.50 for 2016. Analyst had expected annual EPS in the $15 range.
The company's revenue in the fourth quarter fell 8.5%, making for 15 straight quarters of declining sales.
Still, the top line came in better than the $22.02 billion Wall Street expected. The cloud computing, data analytics, security and mobile computing products on which IBM has bet its future grew at a strong pace. Those businesses accounted for about 35% of IBM's full-year 2015 revenue, or $28.9 billion, said IBM Chief Financial Officer Martin Schroeter.
"We're transforming a big company," Mr. Schroeter said in an interview on Tuesday. "We've always said that this was going to take time."
The rise of cloud computing is the company's chief emerging threat, as Amazon.com Inc.'s Amazon Web Services division and others take market share from IBM's software, services and hardware businesses.
Chief Executive Ginni Rometty's solution to this predicament has been a grand corporate reinvention. She sold declining hardware businesses and doubled down on cloud computing and artificial intelligence software.
On Tuesday, IBM said the complexity of cloud computing helped boost by 40% the number of contracts the company signed in 2015 that were more than $100 million each.Total cloud revenue, which includes hardware and professional services revenue, jumped to $10 billion for the year, up 43%.
Overall, IBM posted earnings of $4.46 billion, or $4.59 a share, compared with $5.48 billion, or $5.51 a share, a year earlier.
Credit: By Robert McMillan and Nathan Becker
