Health plans are gathering more than just medical data on members. With the help of data-analytics companies, they are now making use of information such as how much people earn, how often they travel and even if they have a pet.
These efforts stem from two trends: the rising recognition that social factors have a big impact on health, and a shift toward value-based care in medicine, where providers are rewarded for keeping patients healthy. By melding medical data with personal information and applying analytics, insurers and health providers hope to identify patients at high risk of illness or hospitalization and intervene to prevent it.
But the use of personal data to make health predictions also is stoking concern that patients' privacy could be violated if the information is misused, mishandled or used to draw unfair or inaccurate insights.
"This information, if collected for good, can be really helpful," says Deven McGraw, chief regulatory officer for Ciitizen Corp., a startup seeking to help consumers manage their medical records digitally. "If it is put to nefarious purposes, or breached, then [it] can have consequences."
Research shows medical care exerts less influence on health than social factors such as access to housing, transportation and nutritious food. About 80% of a person's state of health is the result of socioeconomic status, physical environment, behaviors and biology, according to a 2013 report by the National Conference of State Legislatures.
By analyzing social and medical data, and harnessing advances in machine learning, health organizations aim to spot at-risk patients who would benefit from prevention programs or referral to a social worker.
Health Alliance Medical Plans, a Champaign, Ill.-based insurer that is part of the Carle Foundation integrated health system, in December began working with Carrot Health Inc., a Minneapolis software company that gathers information from data brokers, public records, government agencies and other sources to create patient risk scores.
To help Health Alliance identify people at risk for preventable diseases such as diabetes, Carrot considers hundreds of data points, including whether someone owns a dog and whether that person travels frequently -- two factors it has found to be statistically correlated with better health. Carrot shares only the scores with clients, not the data used to develop them, says co-founder Steve Sigmond.
Once high-risk patients are identified, Health Alliance and Carle aim to start outreach efforts to keep them healthy, says Robert Good, the plan's chief medical officer and an executive and physician with Carle.
In 2014, Oklahoma health plan GlobalHealth Holdings LLC turned to Plano, Texas, analytics startup VitreosHealth Inc. to help it identify members most likely to use emergency care, which accounts for more than half of the plan's total costs.
VitreosHealth used clinical and social data such as income and education levels to help GlobalHealth prioritize members based on their risk of needing this type of care, says David Thompson, the plan's chief operating officer. GlobalHealth then directed care managers to help people in the top 20% of risk with matters such as taking their medications and connecting to social services. The effort produced savings, Mr. Thompson says, adding that GlobalHealth doesn't see the personal social data VitreosHealth gathers and tells plan members it uses social information when they enroll.
Analytics led GlobalHealth to identify member Betty Perkins, 66, as a candidate for more outreach three years ago. The retired machinist in Jacktown, Okla., had her left leg amputated in 2017, and a nurse visits her home three times a week to order supplies and check on her vital signs and well-being, in an effort to prevent further illnesses that could require emergency care. "It has helped me tremendously," Ms. Perkins says.
The principal privacy law regulating health plans doesn't prohibit medical insurers from collecting public data and integrating it with protected health information, says W. Reece Hirsch, co-head of the privacy and cybersecurity law practice of Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP. But he says it is advisable for plans to disclose the practice to patients.
Health plans don't use socioeconomic data to set rates or premiums, says Cathryn Donaldson, a spokeswoman for America's Health Insurance Plans, an industry group.
Still, some people may not be comfortable with the idea that their personal data is finding its way to insurers, says Nancy Adler, director of the Center for Health and Community at the University of California, San Francisco.
Other experts worry about data sets that over- or underrepresent certain patient populations. The design of machine-learning models, as well as biases in data, could exacerbate health-care disparities, according to a paper published in Annals of Internal Medicine in December.
Others harbor doubts the efforts will lead to better patient outcomes.
"Even in the best of circumstances, my ability to really make a difference in patients' lives based on social factors is limited," says Ashish Jha, a physician and director of the Harvard Global Health Institute.
---
Mr. Gormley is a Wall Street Journal reporter in Boston. Email brian.gormley@wsj.com.

Credit: By Brian Gormley
