[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Nvidia wasn't priced for perfection. Investors expected it anyway -- and nearly got it.
The chip maker at the forefront of artificial intelligence managed to deliver a stronger-than-expected quarterly report and forecast on Wednesday. The numbers countered a worry among investors that a company whose market value boomed by more than $1 trillion in the past 12 months couldn't possibly live up to the hype. Nvidia's stock fell 9% by Wednesday's closing from the all-time high it hit last week.
The stock clawed back all of that lost ground and then some, jumping more than 16% on Thursday to a new record high. Nvidia's revenue for the fiscal fourth quarter ended in January and its revenue forecast for the current quarter both beat Wall Street's consensus estimates by 10%. Revenue for the data-center segment that includes the accelerator chips designed for generative-AI computing hit $18.4 billion -- five times its level from a year ago. Nvidia said during its conference call that it expects data-center revenue to keep growing sequentially in the April quarter, when it anticipates total revenue to triple from a year earlier.
Nvidia's practice of projecting only one quarter out could fuel questions about the longer-term trajectory of its AI business. Semiconductor markets are cyclical, and Nvidia's data-center business, which has long been selling chips for earlier forms of AI, proves to be no exception. Growth in that unit gyrated over the years as cloud-computing giants sometimes take "digestion" periods after big purchases.
But such a swing doesn't seem on the horizon anytime soon. Microsoft, Amazon.com, Google parent Alphabet and Facebook parent Meta Platforms told investors during their most recent earnings calls that they plan to boost capital spending this year directly for the type of AI components that Nvidia provides. And on Wednesday's call, Nvidia Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress said "demand far exceeds supply" for its current chips, and that next-generation products are expected to be "supply constrained." Nvidia is expected to share more about those products at its annual AI developers conference next month.
While Nvidia is facing more competition from AMD and Intel -- as well as chips designed in-house by its largest customers -- the company hardly seems to be cutting prices to move its products. Adjusted operating income of nearly $14.8 billion for the recent quarter blew past Wall Street's targets and produced an operating margin of 67% -- Nvidia's highest in at least a decade and far above the 43% margin averaged over the past eight quarters. Nvidia's cost projections indicated operating margins staying at that level in the current quarter ending in April.
Strong earnings growth tempers worries over what otherwise would be a soaring valuation multiple. Nvidia was trading at 34 times projected earnings for this year at last week's peak, which is actually 18% below the stock's three-year average, according to FactSet data. The recent selloff prior to the latest results put Nvidia's valuation below nearly half the stocks in the PHLX Semiconductor Index, according to FactSet.
Nvidia's biggest challenge in the near term might come down to managing the sort of expectations that have come with its rapid ascent. The unprecedented nature of the AI boom produced a range of guesses as to where Nvidia's business is heading. Analyst targets for the data center segment for the January quarter varied by more than $3.5 billion between the high and low end of estimates -- twice the spread of the previous quarter, according to data from Visible Alpha.
Some options traders have even been betting on the stock reaching $1,300 -- nearly double its current price. That would equate to a market value well over $3 trillion, exceeding those of both Microsoft and Apple. Nvidia's AI boom is no flash in the pan, but some speculators could end up with a lump of fool's gold.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
