SINGAPORE -- Alibaba Group named Brooklyn Nets owner Joe Tsai to be its chairman, putting the close ally of fellow co-founder Jack Ma atop the Chinese e-commerce giant as it seeks a revival from sluggish growth amid fierce competition.
Tsai, 59 years old, is seen by company insiders and analysts as being close to Ma, the company's largest shareholder who stepped down as executive chairman in 2019 and has kept a low profile after he appeared to have a fallout with Beijing amid a regulatory crackdown on the tech industry.
Their relationship could give Tsai more heft than the departing chairman Daniel Zhang to push along the company's plans to reorganize itself into multiple independent companies and get its e-commerce business back on a growth track.
Zhang will also be replaced as chief executive officer by Eddie Wu, another of Ma's co-founders who currently heads up the Taobao and Tmall domestic e-commerce business. The changes will be effective on Sept. 10.
Taiwanese-born and U.S.-educated Tsai was a practicing lawyer and private-equity investor after graduating from Yale. He co-founded Alibaba with Ma in 1999, served as its chief financial officer, and became executive vice chairman in 2013. He and Ma are the only permanent members of Alibaba Partnership, the top decision-making body for the e-commerce giant and its affiliates.
Tsai's strong U.S. ties are rare these days among captains of Chinese industry, although he has faced criticism in the U.S. for parroting Beijing's standpoint on some controversial issues. He played high-school football at the Lawrenceville School in New Jersey, played lacrosse at Yale University and bought a large stake in the Nets basketball team in 2018. He also owns the San Diego Seals, a professional lacrosse team, and the New York Liberty women's professional basketball team. He is eligible for a passport in Hong Kong and Canada, via his parents.
The shake-up could maintain the influence of Ma, who engineered the breakup of the e-commerce empire from afar while he traveled overseas for most of the year before the plan was unveiled. On Saturday, he was in his hometown of Hangzhou, where Alibaba is based, to attend an annual global mathematics competition he started in 2018 and chatted with the finalists.
Last month, Ma met executives of Alibaba's Chinese commerce division to discuss the intensified competition it is facing, people familiar with the talks said. He urged the unit to adjust business strategies and governance as he warned that the methods that Alibaba relied on to succeed in the past might not be applicable anymore, the people said.
Ma remains the biggest shareholder of Alibaba and still cares very much about the company, Michael Evans, president of Alibaba, said at a technology event in Paris last week.
The reshuffle indicates that Ma is returning "to exercise more direct control," said Charlie Chai, a tech-focused analyst at equity research firm 86Research.
Beijing might welcome Ma's continued influence, given that Alibaba's dominance is facing strong challenges from competitors and its revival could help boost the country's consumption and speed up development of artificial intelligence, he said.
In Alibaba's early days, Tsai helped it win investments from Goldman Sachs and SoftBank and built its in-house venture investment team from scratch.
Tsai is well-liked by investors and his appointment should be seen as good news, said Vey-Sern Ling, a senior adviser for Asia technology stocks at Union Bancaire Privee. But the move is unlikely to boost Alibaba's stock price, which is suffering as a result of geopolitical issues and concerns over China's economy rather than any questions about management, Ling said.
Alibaba's market capitalization topped $850 billion at its peak in late 2020, but had plummeted to about $238 billion before the leadership change was announced. The company's New York-listed American depositary receipts were down 2% in U.S. premarket trading on Tuesday.
Alibaba's incoming CEO, Wu, led the company's strategy to develop and give priority to its smartphone shopping sites as consumers shifted to using the mobile internet. A graduate in computer science, he was previously chief technology officer of several Alibaba business units including Taobao and digital-payment platform Alipay.
The emergence of Wu, who has a lower profile among Alibaba executives, could contribute to Alibaba's plans to leverage technology, including AI, to revive its stalled e-commerce business, people familiar with the plan said.
Zhang will continue to head up Alibaba's cloud-computing unit, the second-largest business by revenue after its domestic e-commerce unit, as the group bets on it for growth. Alibaba said in May that it planned to fully spin off the business and complete its public listing in the next 12 months.
A former PricewaterhouseCoopers financial consultant, Zhang joined Alibaba in 2007 to lead Taobao's finance and operations and became the group's chairman in 2019. "My appointment as CEO and chairman of Alibaba Group was beyond my imagination," Zhang said in a letter to staff, seen by The Wall Street Journal. He said the cloud unit is full speed ahead on its spinoff plans.
Alibaba's restructuring culminates a yearslong shift inside the company to make it more nimble. Alibaba's various businesses will be split up into six major areas: cloud computing, Chinese e-commerce, global e-commerce, digital mapping and food delivery, logistics, and media and entertainment.
---
Weilun Soon and Yoko Kubota contributed to this article.
Credit: By Raffaele Huang
