HONG KONG -- Would you buy a premium-priced smartphone that doesn't have 5G? Huawei Technologies Co. thinks its customers will, at least in China.
More than two years after U.S. sanctions wrecked the Chinese tech company's once-dominant global smartphone business, Huawei has stuck with a regular schedule of new flagship phone launches and is gearing up to debut its latest on Thursday.
Reflecting its reduced ambitions, Huawei will unveil the device at a Chinese-language event in Shanghai rather than with a splashy launch overseas. It will likely feature a top-end camera -- a Huawei trademark -- but won't have access to 5G networks, Google's Android operating system or a host of Western apps.
That means the new phone, the P60, which Huawei will launch alongside a new foldable phone and other gadgets, isn't likely to find many users outside Huawei's home market. In China, where a separate ecosystem of apps and other software have made the absence of Western apps on Huawei devices less of a liability, the company continues to attract sales from longtime fans.
Huawei was for a few months the world's largest seller of smartphones globally, surpassing Apple Inc. and Samsung Electronics Co. Its global market share peaked at 18% in 2019, according to market tracker Canalys.
Then, the Trump administration imposed a series of export controls that choked the company's access to foreign technologies. Sales crashed as the company carved off part of the business and its devices' appeal withered in markets around the world.
Huawei's market share stood at 2% last year, according to Canalys. Most remaining sales are in China. There the company clung to 8% of the market last year and was the country's sixth-largest smartphone seller, behind the likes of Vivo Mobile Communication Co., the formerly Huawei-owned brand Honor Device Co. and Apple.
Executives have said the company has since replaced thousands of foreign parts. In pitching its smartphones, they have said the 4G connectivity is still powerful.
In China's high-end phone sector, where Huawei's rivals have struggled to gain traction, the company is the only serious rival to Apple. Huawei still held 10% of that market last year, according to Canalys. The company has touted high-end photography and easy connectivity to other internet-connected Huawei gadgets.
Earlier this month, Richard Yu, the head of Huawei's consumer business, posted on Chinese social media a zoomed-in photo taken at night of the top of a lit-up building which he said was taken on the "P60 Pro." It showcased the device's telephoto lens and nighttime photography capabilities. In a speech launching a predecessor to the P60, Mr. Yu said Huawei's 4G connectivity was still powerful when coupled with artificial intelligence and other technology.
Ren Zhengfei, Huawei's founder, said last month that the company has substituted more than 13,000 components with domestic replacements in the last three years.
Still, the new smartphone underlines Huawei's continued reliance on American technology for key parts.
Credit: By Dan Strumpf
