As a computer-science student at Cambridge University in the early 2000s, Rana el Kaliouby was often homesick. She spent hours online, punctuating messages to her family with sad-face emoticons. It wasn't enough. "All the nuances and all the richness of my feelings disappeared in cyberspace," she recalled. "I just had this aha moment: What would it take to get our technologies and our devices to understand us, just in the same way?"
That question fueled her subsequent research and ultimately led to the 2009 launch of Affectiva, a company that builds technology to read human emotions. Affectiva is a player in the fledgling field of "affective AI," which aims to create artificial intelligence that recognizes and responds to our moods, emotions, facial expressions, vocal undertones and other nonverbal cues -- a skill inherent to the human brain but largely absent in chatbots, digital assistants and smart devices.
The goal is to make technology that interacts seamlessly with humans. Imagine a smartphone that detects when you're feeling down and suggests you get up and move around. Or a car that knows you're tired and recommends you pull over. "Basically, any field or activity where you find people, you'll find opportunities for emotionally aware and responsive systems," said Richard Yonck, founder of Intelligent Future Consulting.
Emotionally intelligent AI could be used for nefarious ends, including identifying dissent in repressive regimes. China already uses AI-powered facial-recognition technology at subway stations, airports, border crossings and on the street to track and identify people who break the law. It's not hard to imagine authorities incorporating affective AI to discern their mood or state of mind.
Ms. El Kaliouby is using it for commercial purposes. Affectiva, which said it has received $26 million in venture-capital funding, has a database of four billion images of people from around the world. The company uses machine learning to parse pictures of people's smiles, frowns and grimaces for use in different products. One is a market-research service that films consumer panelists through their webcams and analyzes their real-time reactions to ads and other digital content. More than 1,400 clients have used it, including Mars, Kellogg's and CBS, the company said.
Still, seamless mood-reading AI is a long way off -- and that's probably a good thing, Mr. Yonck said. "It will take society a while to get used to having this new, very personalized modality for interacting with our technologies."

Credit: By Benjamin Powers
