Chinese authorities have detained several employees of British-Swedish drugmaker AstraZeneca on suspicion of bringing an unapproved cancer drug into the country, people familiar with the matter said.
Chinese authorities have recently given closer scrutiny to cases where they believe people have carried unapproved medicines into the country. The latest investigation is being led by police in the southern city of Shenzhen, some of the people said.
"We are aware a small number of our employees in China are under investigation and we have no further information to share at this point," an AstraZeneca representative said.
China's Ministry of Public Security and Shenzhen police didn't respond to requests for comment.
AstraZeneca counts China as its second-largest market after the U.S. by revenue.
This summer Chinese police detained several AstraZeneca employees -- all Chinese nationals -- and summoned dozens of the drugmaker's employees in for questioning, people familiar with the matter said. Most of the employees being probed are from the marketing team, they said.
The police are investigating whether these people were involved in bringing a liver cancer drug into China and benefiting from its distribution, the people said. The drug, called Imjudo, hasn't been approved for sale in the country, they said.
The investigation also involves AstraZeneca's practices related to the collection and transfer of patient and customer data, some of the people said. Bloomberg reported earlier on the probe.
Patients in China often have to wait years to access new therapies and drugs that are available outside of the country, even though Beijing has sped up the approvals of lifesaving treatments. Many patients in China look for ways to access unapproved drugs from abroad and some of those ways may be illegal.
In July, the drug regulator in the southern province of Guangdong said it had arrested people suspected of illegally bringing in unapproved drugs to treat cancer, diabetes and other diseases that could be sold for $28 million. It said the drugs could be detrimental to human health.
In China, bringing in and selling unauthorized drugs is a serious criminal offense. Offenders can be sentenced to several years in prison or face the death penalty, depending on the value of the drugs and the harm caused.
About 13% of AstraZeneca's revenue last year came from China, the company's annual report said. China is also a key site for the drugmaker's research and development. Other Western drugmakers are also targeting growth in China.
AstraZeneca has said it would increase investment in China, describing the country as an innovation leader in artificial intelligence and biotechnology. Chief Executive Pascal Soriot visited China earlier this year to take part in government-sponsored economic and business forums.
In 2022, Chinese authorities found AstraZeneca employees had tampered with the gene-testing results of cancer patients so that their treatments would be eligible for reimbursement by China's state-run medical insurance. The healthcare regulator summoned AstraZeneca's China representative and ordered the company to rectify the issue. The company said at the time that it had taken disciplinary action against some employees.
Foreign companies have become increasingly concerned about the detention of their employees in China. Several cases came to light last year after Beijing introduced a revised anti-espionage law and clamped down on firms handling sensitive information and data.
Credit: By Yoko Kubota and Raffaele Huang
