Warner Bros. Discovery Chief Executive David Zaslav said the company has the ability to match third-party offers for NBA packages that could keep the league on its TNT cable network and Max streaming service.
Both Comcast's NBCUniversal and Amazon.com's Prime Video streaming service are aggressively pursuing National Basketball Association rights, challenging the parent of TNT, which has carried NBA games for almost four decades.
Speaking to analysts Thursday morning to discuss the company's quarterly results, Zaslav said Warner Bros. Discovery is in continuing conversations with the league now and is "hopeful we will be able to reach an agreement that makes sense for both sides."
TNT will face a significant increase in rights fees if it succeeds in keeping a package of NBA regular and postseason games. The Wall Street Journal previously reported that Comcast's NBCUniversal is prepared to pay an average fee of about $2.5 billion to carry NBA games on its NBC broadcast network and Peacock streaming service.
That is more than double TNT's current average fee of $1.2 billion a season.
In addition, Amazon's Prime Video streaming platform has the outline of a deal for a new package of games that the league is creating.
Walt Disney's ESPN is near a deal that would keep the NBA on its cable channel as well as sister broadcast network ABC at an average fee of about $2.6 billion annually, people familiar with the matter have said, up from roughly $1.5 billion a year now.
Both Disney and Warner will be paying more for fewer games as the NBA is taking some games away from its television partners to create a package for a new streaming partner.
For Warner, the NBA rights are a double-edged sword. An expensive deal to keep the sport would likely put great pressure on the company to cut costs elsewhere in a media empire that includes the Warner Bros. TV and movie studios, the streaming service Max and the cable networks HBO and CNN, as well as TNT and TBS.
Losing the NBA, though, would make it challenging to maintain the high subscriber fees TNT commands from pay-TV distributors to carry the channel. Even if TNT were to end up with the package Amazon is seeking, it would likely face pushback from distributors who pay about $3 a month per subscriber, the Journal previously reported.
TNT and Warner executives are confident that even without the NBA, its roster of sports including the NCAA March Madness college-basketball tournament, the National Hockey League and Nascar would continue to give it leverage to charge a premium to carry the network, company executives have said.
Results for the quarter were lackluster. The company said it had a net loss of $966 million and total revenue was down 6.9% to $9.96 billion. Free cash flow increased to $390 million, a $1.3 billion improvement from the same quarter a year earlier.
Warner Bros. Discovery shares closed up 3% Thursday.
Results were adversely affected by the disappointing performance of the new videogame "Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League." Advertising at the company's cable networks continued to face strong headwinds and declined 11%.
Revenue at the TV studio fell significantly as a result of last year's actor and writer strikes, which have led to a slowdown in production.
The company said revenue at its direct-to-consumer unit was essentially flat at $2.46 billion. The company launched Max in Latin America and a European rollout is starting this year.
On the call, Zaslav spoke enthusiastically about the company's just-announced partnership with Disney to bundle their entertainment streaming services into one offering to sell to consumers. The bundle of Disney+ and Hulu with Warner's Max is expected to be launched this summer.
"There is more strength together," Zaslav said.
No price details have been announced, but it is expected to be cheaper than the present stand-alone prices. Currently, Disney+ and Hulu with ads are sold together for $9.99 a month. Max with ads is also sold at $9.99 a month. The ad-free services are more expensive.
"It will be priced very attractively for the consumer," said JB Perrette, CEO and president of global streaming and games.
Zaslav also touted the company's use of artificial intelligence to both boost content creativity as well as lead to greater efficiencies.
"We intend to take full advantage to enhance the products we deliver to consumers and greater efficiencies at the company," Zaslav said. But great storytelling can "only be found in people, not systems," he added.
Generate image description

Credit: By Joe Flint
