Google, ubiquitous in internet search but long trailing in consumer hardware, on Tuesday announced new smartphones and detailed its latest efforts to infuse artificial intelligence into more of its products.
The unit of Alphabet Inc. unveiled its Pixel smartphone, touting its camera and quick charging ability. Google says the Pixel can derive seven hours of battery life from 15 minutes of charging. The phone, which will be Google's first with a digital assistant built in, will retail beginning at $649. Google also said a bigger version, the Pixel XL, would be available.
That digital assistant is part of Google's broader effort to integrate its work in artificial intelligence -- which allows software to make inferences and decisions -- to make products more useful with voice commands that may represent the next step in search.
Google also revealed details of its Home device, a personal assistant that aims to rival the Echo speaker, Amazon.com Inc.'s surprise hit that allows users to ask a virtual assistant called Alexa the answer to questions and to perform tasks. Home, a voice-controlled speaker, will be powered by what the company calls the Assistant.
Google said Home would cost $129 and be available at retailers in the U.S. beginning Nov. 4. The price undercuts Amazon's Echo speaker, which costs $180. Google is putting its Assistant into a variety of devices, similar to the way Apple Inc. has integrated its Siri personal assistant into iPhones, the Apple Watch and Apple TV. Assistant is already part of Google's new messaging app Allo, where users can text with the Assistant, and it also sometimes interrupts text-message conversations to offer help, such as movie show times or an address of a restaurant being discussed. Microsoft Corp. has adopted a similar strategy for its Cortana personal assistant.
"Google on paper is much better-positioned to do something like this" than Amazon, Jan Dawson, founder of research firm Jackdaw Research, said ahead of Tuesday's event.
Google, which can leverage the company's search engine and its so-called knowledge graph -- an index of more than a billion entities -- has touted its focus on artificial intelligence during the past year, and Assistant is the company's most prominent bet on the technology. Like Echo, Google Home will also be able to control smart-home devices. At launch, that will include Alphabet's own Nest, Samsung Electronics Co.'s SmartThings, and Royal Philips NV's Hue.
Home will be able to send music or video requests to Chromecast or Android TV devices that are on the same Wi-Fi network.
Google will start off behind Amazon in one key area: commanding third-party services. Google says it is working with Netflix Inc., Uber Technologies Inc., OpenTable Inc., Facebook's WhatsApp texting service and Ticketmaster on voice commands for those services, but the functionality will turn up only after the Home speaker goes on sale.
As a speaker, Google Home's first priority will be music. When it hears commands such as, "OK Google, play some Johnny Cash," it launches music from whatever the owner designates as its default streaming music service, including Spotify, Pandora, TuneIn and iHeartRadio.
At Tuesday's event in San Francisco, Google also offered new details about Daydream, a virtual-reality platform.
The company's Android software runs most of the world's smartphones, though its own Nexus phones and tablets have lagged behind in sales of Android devices.
Credit: By Tim Higgins and Nathan Olivarez-Giles
