Apple Inc. confirmed for the first time its interest in autonomous-vehicle technology, but it remains unlikely the company will design or build a complete car.
In a Nov. 22 letter to U.S. transportation regulators, Steve Kenner, Apple's director of product integrity, suggested Apple's focus is on the software that would control a self-driving car. He said the company is "investing heavily in machine learning and automation" for many purposes "including transportation."
The letter, which came to light late Friday, marked Apple's first public statements about its car effort, dubbed Project Titan, after years of secrecy.
Apple spokesman Tom Neumayr said the company provided comments to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration because of its investments in automation and machine learning, a type of software. "We want to work with NHTSA to help define the best practices for the industry," Mr. Neumayr said.
The emphasis on software is in line with reports during the past year that Apple's car effort has shifted its attention from building a vehicle to designing an autonomous-driving system.
Last summer, Apple eliminated some positions on the project that were focused on car development and added staff with software backgrounds. "You could interpret this as a sign that they're trying to invest where they feel like they can still make a difference," said Mike Ramsey, an analyst at Gartner Inc.
Apple's letter was one of more than 1,100 submitted to NHTSA, which is weighing new regulations for automated vehicles. Others who submitted comments include traditional auto makers such as General Motors Co. as well as Silicon Valley companies moving into the field such as Google parent Alphabet Inc.
The letter revealed potential conflicts between Apple and traditional car makers. Apple said it supports NHTSA's plan to share data on accidents and near misses in an effort to improve the software that controls autonomous vehicles.
In its own comment to NHTSA, however, the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, which represents major companies such as GM and Ford Motor Co., questioned the feasibility of sharing data, saying it was impractical, unreasonable and "unorthodox" to share information among competitors.
Richard Wallace, a director at the Center for Automotive Research, said that compared with traditional auto makers, Apple had more "to gain than lose" from sharing data because it is new to motor vehicles.
Credit: By Tim Higgins and Tripp Mickle
