SEOUL -- Samsung Electronics Co. expects fourth-quarter operating profit to decline 29%, a surprise result that fell far below analysts' estimates and the latest sign of challenges hitting the technology industry.
The world's largest maker of smartphones and semiconductors said its estimated profit decline comes "amid mounting macro uncertainties."
The South Korea-based company pointed to lackluster demand with memory chips and intensifying competition in its handsets business.
Samsung is a bellwether for the global tech industry, producing its own devices like smartphones and televisions, while supplying components that go in the products of the world's largest electronics companies.
Samsung's struggles come a week after rival Apple Inc. made a surprise cut to its revenue guidance, blaming China's slowing economy for weakened iPhone demand. Major tech stocks have slid in recent months, erasing hundreds of billions of dollars in market value amid uncertainties over the U.S.-China trade fight and slower revenue growth by some of Silicon Valley's biggest names.
On Tuesday, Samsung said it expected an operating profit of 10.8 trillion South Korean won ($9.7 billion), compared with 15.15 trillion won a year earlier. Samsung estimates revenue will decline 11% to 59 trillion won. The company reports final results later this month.
Analysts polled by S&P Global Market Intelligence had expected the company to post operating profit of 13.8 trillion won and revenue of 63.5 trillion won for the quarter ended Dec. 31.
Over the past 18 months, Samsung has delivered a string of record profits, as the proliferation of internet-connected devices and data servers drove up memory-chip prices.
But demand has leveled off for smartphones, computers, data servers and other consumer electronics in recent months.
Smartphone shipments fell world-wide by 7% for the three months ended Sept. 30 versus the prior year, their fourth straight quarter of declines, according to Canalys, a market-research firm. The PC market was hurt by production shortfalls of processing chips.
The global trade turmoil has further dimmed some investment into cloud computing and artificial intelligence -- which require vast amounts of data storage and processing power.
"There still is growth in certain areas, but it's not as big of growth as there was in the past," said Patrick Moorhead, president of Moor Insights & Strategy, an Austin, Texas, tech consultancy. "The uncertainty about China is key, and I do believe that these tariffs are starting to make a dent."
In its disclosure, Samsung said its memory business -- which has represented about three-quarters of operating profit in recent quarters -- would remain subdued during the first three months of 2019, though it anticipates results to strengthen by the second half. The company's mobile business is leaning on new technological breakthroughs.
Samsung, on its recent earnings calls, had cautioned memory-chip pricing was likely to fall at the end of 2018 and into this year.
In October, company said it planned to reduce 2018 capital expenditures by more than one-quarter, as it sought to avoid an excess inventory of memory chips.
The average price for DRAM, which devices use for multitasking, fell 7% to 10% during the final three months of 2018, from the previous quarter, according to DRAMeXchange, which tracks semiconductor prices.
Prices for another major type of memory, called NAND flash, which saves music and photos, dropped 10% to 15% over the same time period.
Samsung is the largest maker of DRAM and NAND flash.
Things could get worse. In the first three months of 2019, prices for DRAM are expected to drop around 20% from the prior quarter -- the largest pullback in eight years, according to DRAMeXchange. NAND flash is expected to see similar levels of pricing declines.
"The memory chip's down cycle is expected to be at a much deeper depth than expected," said Lee Seung-woo, an analyst at Eugene Investment & Securities, in a note last week.
Samsung, which makes about one of every smartphones shipped globally, saw weak demand last year for its two flagship devices, the Galaxy S9 and the Galaxy Note 9. Consumers viewed the two devices as incremental upgrades over prior models.
Samsung Electronics shares have declined more than 25% over the past 12 months, as investors were concerned how long the company could cash in on memory chips.

Credit: By Timothy W. Martin
