Ten years ago, International Business Machine Corp.'s artificial intelligence system Watson bested humans at the quiz show "Jeopardy!"
The feat was supposed to herald a shift in the way machines served up answers to questions big and small, opening up new revenue streams for Big Blue specifically and Big Tech more generally. A key target: healthcare, a trillion-dollar industry many say is saddled with inefficiencies that some tech advocates say AI could cure.
A decade later, reality has fallen short of that promise. IBM is now exploring the sale of Watson Health, a unit whose marquee product was supposed to help doctors diagnose and cure cancer.
IBM spent several billion dollars on acquisitions to build up Watson. Former senior IBM executive John Kelly once touted the initiative as a "bet the ranch" move. It didn't live up to the hype. Watson Health has struggled for market share in the U.S. and abroad and currently isn't profitable.
Alphabet Inc.'s Google DeepMind unit, which developed a Go-playing algorithm that vanquished a champion human player in 2016, later launched several healthcare-related initiatives focused on chronic conditions. It also has lost money in recent years and run into privacy concerns over how health data was being collected.
The stumbles highlight the challenges of attempting to apply AI to treating complex medical conditions, healthcare experts said. The hurdles include human, financial and technological barriers, they said. Having access to data that represents patient populations broadly has been a challenge, the experts say, as have gaps in knowledge about complex diseases whose outcomes often depend on many factors that may not be fully captured in clinical databases.
Tech companies also sometimes lack deep expertise in how healthcare works, adding to the challenge of implementing AI in patient settings, according to Thomas J. Fuchs, Mount Sinai Health System's dean of artificial intelligence and human health.
"You truly have to understand the clinical workflow in the trenches," he said. "You have to understand where you can insert AI and where it can be helpful" without slowing things down in the clinic.
For IBM, the retreat underscores the difficulties new CEO Arvind Krishna faces in restoring growth at the iconic tech company. Mr. Krishna has said AI, along with cloud-computing, would be pivotal for IBM's prospects.
Watson Health was one of IBM's first and the largest AI efforts, said Toni Sacconaghi, an analyst at Bernstein Research. IBM initially promoted it as an engine for growth, but more recently has given it less prominence amid mounting business struggles, leadership changes and layoffs, he said.
"Watson may be very emblematic of a broader issue at IBM of taking good science and finding a way to make it commercially relevant," Mr. Sacconaghi said.
Even as Watson Health ran into problems, the company's research arm has continued to give priority to AI and healthcare. IBM Research and Pfizer developed speech tests last year to predict the onset of Alzheimer's disease, the company said last year.
IBM wouldn't comment about the sale, but said Watson Health has had successes over the years. "This work began nearly 10 years ago, at the beginning of the AI revolution, and we explored groundbreaking space in helping physicians advance healthcare through AI," the company said. "IBM is continuing to evolve the Watson Health business, based on our decade of experience, to meet the needs of patients and physicians."
Credit: By Daniela Hernandez and Asa Fitch
