Though Tim Cook's rhetoric sometimes obscures the fact, Apple is a business, and for once the business-page superlatives were not overdone. In the fourth quarter of last year, Apple sold nearly 75 million iPhones at a profit margin of nearly 40%, making its quarter the most profitable quarter in the history of any American business.
A stupendous gold mine is the iPhone. There is no product Apple can invent or reinvent that likely can replace it. To the business-savvy mind this can only indicate one thing: If Apple were to build a car, it would be to protect the iPhone business. If Apple builds a watch, it's to protect the iPhone business.
For all the company's effort to divert attention to the design statement the new Apple Watch supposedly represents, for all the trotting out of design chief Jony Ive, one utterance puts the watch in proper context. It comes from the company's own testers who claimed, after using the watch for a few weeks, they were fishing their iPhones out of pockets and backpacks many fewer times a day.
The iPhone has a weakness! What started as an incredible convenience has become a pain in the butt, an annoying friction in our consumption of digital services. Google has been experimenting with Google Glass for four years. Samsung and Huawei are testing the market with smartwatches of their own. If Apple doesn't find an answer and someone else does, Apple's $700 billion market cap could be in trouble. Indeed, when so much of the value resides not in the device but in the services that it delivers, many analysts already wonder how much longer Apple can keep charging princely prices for an iPhone not very different from hundreds of devices running Google's and Microsoft's operating systems.
So the Apple watch is not about Mr. Ive indulging his fetish for high-end timepieces. It's not about Apple reinventing the watch because it doesn't know what else to do. Not for nothing did Apple's leaked training materials emphasize using watch inquiries to upsell customers to a new iPhone. Not for nothing was the unveiling tilted toward luxurious versions encased in gold with fancy straps and selling for $17,000. Clearly Apple is looking to use rich bozos to defray the watch's development costs quickly so it can be rolled out as cheaply as possible to average iPhone buyers.
Of course, only in the hands of users will we discover if the watch truly is useful and necessary to sustain the iPhone's desirability. Does it become indispensable to early adopters tired of hauling out a phone and holding it in front of their faces? Does the watch enable new apps that become essential to daily living? Will customers be willing to throw the watch in the back of the drawer and upgrade to a new model every two years as they now do with the iPhone?
We'll see. If the watch succeeds in protecting Apple from a Google or somebody else solving the suddenly obvious and unbearable inconveniences of smartphone use, it doesn't have to be a huge money-spinner in its own right. Implantable devices with artificial intelligence ultimately will solve these problems anyway. If so, the iPhone's unseemly profits may be safe for a while longer, as will be the wealth of Apple shareholders and employees. (Anyone interested in the iPhone-margins-are-unassailable argument should consult Carl Icahn's letter to Apple management of last October.)
True, Steve Jobs was noted for the modesty of his Palo Alto home. The original Macintosh was introduced as the computer for the "rest of us." Trying to reposition itself partly as a luxury brand poses risks for Apple. Luxury brands religiously seek to avoid overexposure, and Apple has many mystique-damaging reasons for being in the news: factory conditions, antitrust complaints, malware, tax avoidance, Mr. Icahn.
Cupertino's decision to take aim at the price-is-irrelevant crowd with a $17,000 watch has already riled up some of the company's fanboys. They should curb their outrage. Despite claims that Apple is moving upmarket and into fashion as some kind of rarefied aesthetic pursuit by Mr. Ive, something else lies behind this week's commotion. The Apple watch is about defending and extending the basic, middle-class iPhone goldmine.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
