When a researcher from a Chinese military academy applied to study with celebrated Boston University physicist Eugene Stanley, he said her affiliation didn't raise red flags.
"I'm not interested at all in politics. I'm a scientist," said Mr. Stanley, whose wide-ranging research has included using artificial intelligence to decode financial markets and applying statistical physics to prevent diseases.
The recent indictment of the researcher, who is accused of lying on her U.S. visa application to conceal she is a lieutenant in the Chinese military, shows how U.S. universities' openness to international collaboration in cutting-edge research leaves them vulnerable to potential exploitation.
Mr. Stanley said that he receives droves of research requests and that he vets candidates' scientific credentials. A Boston University spokesman said the school doesn't engage in classified research and relies on the State Department to screen foreign applicants for national-security risks.
A range of U.S. agencies, from the Defense Department to the National Institutes of Health, have sounded alarms over Beijing's alleged attempts to tap U.S. university expertise to boost China's military and technological competitiveness.
Beijing has denied any systematic effort to steal U.S. scientific research, and Chinese state media have called U.S. allegations of intellectual-property theft a political tool.
Some university leaders have dismissed U.S. officials' national-security concerns as exaggerated and discriminatory and said there should be no restrictions on unclassified research. They have also said collaboration is essential to advancing scientific discovery.
Despite commitment to open exchanges, universities should consider drawing the line at working with China's People's Liberation Army, or PLA, suggests a 2018 report by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, an Australian government-backed, nonpartisan think tank.
"Helping a rival military develop its expertise and technology isn't in the national interest," says the report by researcher Alex Joske. He found China's military sponsored more than 2,500 scientists and engineers to study abroad over the prior decade, at times without their host schools' knowledge of their military affiliation.
In the Boston University case, federal prosecutors accused Yanqing Ye of acting as an agent of a foreign government. On her application for a J-1 visa used for scholarly exchanges, she said she was a student at China's National University of Defense Technology, but omitted that she was a lieutenant in the PLA, according to the indictment. It said she carried out assignments from military colleagues while at Boston University from 2017 to 2019.
Ms. Ye didn't respond to email requests for comment, nor did her university, which is one of the Chinese military's leading research institutes.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation said she is likely back in China.
Mr. Stanley, 78, is a renowned expert in statistical physics. His lab has attracted more than 200 research associates and visiting scientists, according to his resume.
The Boston University spokesman said Mr. Stanley has been on leave since March 2019 -- a move unrelated to the visiting-scholar issue -- and will retire at the end of 2020. He said the university applies the same criteria in reviewing visiting scholars, assessing their funding and academic credentials.
In the fiscal year that ended June 30, Boston University hosted 1,294 international scholars from 96 countries, with China as the top source, school data shows. Over the past year, the spokesman said, administrators have educated faculty about U.S. concerns of foreign influence.
The spokesman said the school counts on the State Department to vet visa requests "against organizations or individuals that are of concern to the U.S. government."
A State Department spokesman declined to discuss specific cases but said the Immigration and Nationality Act gives limited authority to deny visas. Currently, the spokesman said, consular officers may deny a visa if they believe the applicant might intend to export a technology on a U.S. control list. Many technologies, and basic research like that done in Mr. Stanley's lab, aren't on export-control lists.

Credit: By Kate O'Keeffe and Aruna Viswanatha
