The first time I received a vigorous pat-down at an airport it seemed outrageous. The first time my wife had a security officer poke through her purse, I remember thinking it was excessive. Now that stuff seems par for the course. Our desire to board a plane or enjoy a Broadway show remains undiminished. We all have the same experience, we all are put through it, because we accept that the balance of risk requires it.
There has been much hand-wringing about the potential loss of privacy as the economy reopens after the Covid-19 lockdown. The angst is misplaced. The reopening won't last without a nationwide commitment to the sharing of more and better personal information.
Trust in our leaders and institutions -- in short supply in recent years -- will be critical if the country is ever to escape the masks, gloves and other protective gear that define our isolating and eerie new normal. Countries and companies that foster a strong sense of social cohesion and trust are more likely to experience stronger economic recovery, sharper innovation, safer environments and improved health.
That requires, at least in part, redefining what we typically mean by the "sharing economy." Instead of sharing a car or an apartment when it isn't in use, we will need to embrace a new information-sharing economy characterized by the voluntary release of personal health data. If retailers are going to reopen their doors, theaters are going to come back to life, and baseball teams are going to play in sold-out stadiums, we are going to need more information, not less.
Americans are rightly concerned about the possibility of an Orwellian future. They have questions about privacy, security and monitoring that need answers. Nobody wants to import the Chinese model, in which officials use apps to track the health and travel history of residents, requiring them to show bar codes to gain entry to restaurants, apartment complexes and office buildings.
But even before the pandemic, social media and online banking had pushed much of society a long way toward what some call extreme transparency. The pandemic has accelerated the trend toward digitization and the machine learning that collates billions of data sets into actionable information. Rapid advances in medical discovery and artificial intelligence may help end government-imposed restrictions on crowd size, social distancing and hygiene standards.
Most Americans may already be more comfortable with the future than they realize. Take building security. Since the 1993 truck bombing of the World Trade Center, every security officer in every major city has been laser-focused on the proverbial white van. The 9/11 attacks underscored the need for even tighter security. Bag checks became standard at rock concerts, active-shooter drills mandatory at schools. We accepted it because we had to.
The odds of terrorism are pretty low. Yet, low-risk, high-impact threats force us to consider risk-mitigation tactics no matter how unlikely those threats are to materialize. The Covid-19 pandemic -- and future outbreaks of deadly disease -- changes that calculus, as the risks to productivity, mental health and even our social fabric soar.
In big cities today, hands-free, touchless visitor management using cloud-based prescreening is becoming standard in both commercial and residential buildings. The days of building owners engaging in security theater, where a few burly guards monitor the front desk, are over. Insurers now demand "trust but verify" solutions. At one large retail complex in Manhattan, visitors today must reveal whether they have tested positive for the coronavirus or are living with anyone showing symptoms of Covid-19. They must also share their mobile phone numbers. People are free to opt out but the aren't allowed to enter the building if they do.
None of this is effective without trust. Facial recognition and other security technologies can't work at scale without voluntary sharing of personal information. Policy makers will need to craft legislation that addresses data-security and privacy concerns. Communities need to trust that their personal data are being properly handled and safeguarded. Personally identifiable data will need to be anonymized and deleted after an appropriate time. Organizations will need to invest in cybersecurity against data theft.
Like these pages, I am a big believer in free markets and free people. But I cannot see how we get back to that ideal without voluntary sharing of more and better personal data. The alternative is unthinkable.
---
Mr. Friedman is CEO of Building Intelligence Inc., which provides cloud-based software for the management of visitors, vehicles and vendors.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: HIPAA May Nix Some Reopening Proposals" -- WSJ June 3, 2020)

Credit: By Jeffrey C. Friedman
