Shares of Arm surged in their highly anticipated stock-market debut Thursday, in a sign of the reviving fortunes of an IPO market that has been in the doldrums for most of the past two years.
The British chip designer's stock closed up 25% from its $51 IPO price, at $63.59.
The market reaction to the biggest offering of the year was met with a sigh of relief from investors, as well as companies waiting in the wings to go public and Wall Street firms that reap lavish fees from underwriting IPOs.
Many investors are still smarting from the poor performance of the 2020 and 2021 class of IPOs, most of which remain below their debut prices.
Arm's first-day pop also bodes well for grocery-delivery company Instacart and marketing-automation platform Klaviyo, which are preparing for stock offerings next week. If all three perform well, it could encourage others.
There have been other signs of life in the IPO market recently. Mediterranean restaurant chain Cava Group priced its offering in June above expectations and its stock went on to nearly double in its first day of trading. The next month, direct-to-consumer beauty company Oddity Tech priced its shares above its target range, and they rose in their market debut. Both companies' shares have recently retreated, showing the fragility of the market.
Arm's debut is also a win for SoftBank Group, the chip company's owner. Arm is now valued at nearly $69 billion on a fully diluted basis, well above the roughly $32 billion SoftBank acquired it for in 2016. That is also more than the $64 billion implied by the Japanese technology conglomerate's recent purchase of a 25% Arm stake held by its Vision Fund.
Raising around $5 billion for SoftBank, Arm is the biggest U.S. offering since Rivian Automotive made its debut in November 2021. SoftBank and its underwriters had targeted a price range for the IPO of $47 to $51 a share.
"The target was to be at the high end of the range," Rene Haas, the CEO of Arm, said Thursday morning. "I would call that a very good outcome."
SoftBank sold 10% of its Arm shares in the IPO. It is hoping to pocket gains assuming the stock price appreciates over time, to fund SoftBank CEO Masayoshi Son's planned investments in tech startups. The company recently said it wants to renew its push for large-scale investments in artificial intelligence.
The IPO is SoftBank's backup plan after its $40 billion plan to sell the company to Nvidia, an artificial-intelligence and graphics-chip maker, was canceled amid regulatory scrutiny.
It has been a good year for chip companies, which are getting a boost from a boom in artificial intelligence. The PHLX Semiconductor Index has risen by more than 40% this year. The value of Nvidia has more than tripled this year, surging past $1 trillion.
Arm doesn't make chips, but it supplies circuit designs that are incorporated into billions of them. The company's circuitry is in more than 99% of smartphones, it estimates, and it is aiming to generate more revenue from those phones while growing in other sectors where it is less dominant. Those areas include the automotive and cloud-computing industries.
Chip companies have been receiving renewed attention in recent years because their products are increasingly seen as critical to national security. The U.S. has moved to limit China's ability to obtain and manufacture some of the most advanced chips, concerned that its adversary could harness them to gain a military and economic edge.
---
Ben Dummett contributed to this article.
Credit: By Corrie Driebusch and Asa Fitch
