Interest in mental-health chatbots is rising, fueled by advances in AI's ability to conduct sophisticated conversations. But how much therapy can they really provide?
Chatbots are still no substitute for a human therapist, researchers say. Not only do some of these tools have trouble helping patients in crisis, they don't always offer a sufficient level of personalization or provide advice guaranteed to be accurate.
Yet researchers are homing in on some of the supporting roles that chatbots and artificial intelligence could play in mental-health care. For instance, chatbots are showing promise in helping people determine whether they need care and connecting them to the proper resources, in lifting people's moods and in practicing skills taught in cognitive-behavioral therapy.
"There's an enormous need for innovation in mental-health care," says Olga Troyanskaya, a computer-science professor and AI expert at Princeton University, who leads Princeton Precision Health, an interdisciplinary initiative that aims to use technology to improve healthcare. At the same time, she says, it's also important to balance enthusiasm with caution, especially when it comes to using artificial intelligence in mental health.
Expanding access to mental-health care is crucial. Some one in five adults in the U.S., roughly 60 million people, were estimated to be living with a mental-health condition in 2021, according to the National Institute of Mental Health. Yet in many areas there aren't enough mental-health professionals to adequately serve the population.
Efforts to increase access to mental-health care through digital tools have been under way for years. And studies have shown that digital interventions can help people with common mood and anxiety symptoms, though they tend to be more effective when a human also is involved, checking in with users.
Still, some older mental-health apps had a high abandonment rate, says David Mohr, a professor at Northwestern University and director of the Center for Behavioral Intervention Technologies, due in part to the limited and repetitive responses they provided.
Newer chatbots that use AI technology based on large-language models are capable of more humanlike conversation, opening up new possibilities for applications in mental-health care.
Yet, some experts worry about the lack of regulations, safety protections or even best practices around the use of such technology for mental-health purposes. They are particularly concerned about chatbots offering advice, saying a suggestion that may be useful for one person could actually hinder another. These tools need to be tested through high-quality research and guardrails put up where there may be concern about safety risks, according to Princeton's Troyanskaya.
One of the biggest concerns is untested technology being used by people during periods of crisis or acute distress. Some researchers say they have played with generative-AI chatbots and found that some quickly begin offering advice, not all of which is appropriate or safe.
Just adding a warning about a chatbot's limitations might not be useful either -- such as if a user asks how they should deal with thoughts of self-harm and a chatbot responds with: "I cannot help you with your question; please seek professional therapy." People in crisis often have trouble asking for help, experts say, so turning them away at that point could have dangerous consequences.
"I don't think we're near the point yet where there's just going to be an AI who acts like a therapist," says Northwestern's Mohr. "There's still too many ways it can go off the rails."
Still, chatbots are beginning to play useful roles in a number of mental-health niches. One involves steering individuals who are wary of seeking help toward available resources. Others include serving people who are waiting to be seen by a therapist or struggling between sessions.
"My goal is to reduce distress in that time while people are trying to get care, and to prepare people for therapy with tools so they get more benefit when they start," says Theresa Nguyen, chief research officer at Mental Health America, a nonprofit that offers free mental-health tools.
Nguyen has been working with Tim Althoff, an assistant professor of computer science and engineering at the University of Washington in Seattle, and his team on a digital tool to help people learn and practice a skill often used in therapy called "cognitive reframing."
The purpose of cognitive reframing is for individuals to recognize that the way in which they view a situation, not just what is objectively happening in the situation, has an impact on their emotions. Changing, or "reframing" that perspective can be helpful in improving mood, including anxiety and depressive symptoms. Yet, getting good at the technique often takes time, practice and guidance.
The tool embedded in Mental Health America's website guides people through the process, offering suggestions on how they might change negative thinking. Studies by the researchers suggest people find the tool helpful.
Becky Winegard, 39, of Grand Junction, Colo., began using the tool last year when an issue with her child led her to begin having daily panic attacks and take antianxiety medication. "I had so many spiraling thoughts and couldn't control them," says Winegard, a paralegal.
Although she was seeing a counselor, she felt that the once-weekly meetings weren't enough, so she turned to the tool on the Mental Health America website. She typed in her worry of the moment, and the program would offer prompts and suggest specific ways of helping her reframe the thought.
Winegard used the tool up to six times a day for three months.
"It was so helpful to me," says Winegard. "Now I don't need to anymore, I can walk myself through the whole thing."
In the U.K., meanwhile, a chatbot developed by AI mental-health company Limbic is being used as a triage tool for the National Health Service's Talking Therapies program, which aims to help people with anxiety and depression. The chatbot asks users questions to guide them toward the appropriate mental-health-care service.
Mona Stylianou, the principal clinical lead at Everyturn Mental Health, a nonprofit that provides care to patients through the NHS, says the tool has improved patient access to care by offering a 24/7 self-referral process and a personalized way to assess patients' needs.
"They can access the help they need quickly and easily," says Stylianou.
AI also is showing promise in helping to train mental-healthcare providers. One tool, called Lyssn, uses AI-generated algorithms to rate recordings or transcripts of clinical sessions and provide feedback to clinicians about how well they did on certain metrics, such as how closely they implemented a type of therapy strategy.
"Being able to monitor and unpack the processes in psychotherapy is really important," says Stephen Schueller, an associate professor of psychological science and informatics at the University of California, Irvine, and a licensed clinical psychologist.
---
Shirley S. Wang is a writer in Princeton, N.J. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Shirley S. Wang
