[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Google has managed to crack Wall Street's code over the past year. That should be helpful as the Internet giant looks to drastically scale up its efforts in the expensive business of cloud computing.
The Google Cloud Platform is relatively small next to rival services from Amazon.com and Microsoft. Pacific Crest estimates that it reached annualized revenue of about $1.8 billion by the end of 2015 -- less than 20% of Amazon's total.
But the company now known as Alphabet wants to close that gap. At its first cloud-user conference last week, it touted its strengths in areas such as machine learning and its huge advanced data centers that are a big driver of capital expenditures that hit nearly $10 billion last year. Diane Greene, who runs Alphabet's cloud business, emphasized that the company was "serious" about the cloud.
Wall Street already has gotten the company's message. Analysts expect Alphabet's capital expenditure to rise about 15% this year, according to FactSet.
Such spending could pose an image problem for a company once considered the epitome of Silicon Valley excess. But today's Google has improved on that view. Its restructuring last year included more clarity into investments made in noncore businesses. And its recruitment of Ruth Porat from Morgan Stanley a year ago to serve as chief financial officer was seen as an investor-friendly move.
More recently, Alphabet closed a robotics unit and appears to be scrutinizing its other "bets" more closely. Tony Fadell, who runs the Nest home-automation business Google acquired two years ago for $3.2 billion, complained of the new "fiscal discipline era" in an interview with the tech news site the Information last week.
Investors have cheered the changes, sending Alphabet's stock up 34% in the past 12 months. But with a sharp discount to many large-cap Internet peers remaining, there still is room for investors to find the silver lining in Google's cloud.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
