With help from a growing suite of tech tools, employees can both discover their dream job and map a path toward getting it.
Many companies are deploying internal "talent marketplaces" to give their employees the power to take their careers to the next level. These career-mapping portals include job postings, of course, but they also connect employees with educational, training and mentoring resources to facilitate their advancement. Especially attractive are opportunities to work on short-term projects outside of their current role or physical location, thus broadening their work experience.
Providing employees with such tech tools "democratizes career development," says Tim McGonigle, vice president at nonprofit Human Resources Research Organization, or HumRRO. The built-in transparency gives everyone a shot at job opportunities, even those that their mentor or manager may not suggest. Companies benefit as well, McGonigle adds, since "providing information about how employees can flourish is key to growth and retention."
There's no doubt that employees are hungry for such assistance. In 2022, over 72 million employees left their jobs, according to a Bureau of Labor Statistics survey. And of those, 70% quit voluntarily. In a separate survey last year by theSociety for Human Resource Management, 61% of HR professionals citedthe lack of career development and advancementas one of the main drivers of employee turnover.
Nestle USA deployed an online talent marketplace in 2020, and it now has nearly 5,000 registered users, according to a spokeswoman. From the platform, employees can apply for companywide job postings, and managers can discover potential job candidates in unexpected places, she says. That functionality is key considering the number and variety of Nestle brands, which include DiGiorno pizza, S.Pellegrino water and Purina pet food. So far, Nestle employees have used the platform to form nearly 300 networking relationships with colleagues across different teams and businesses, the spokeswoman says.
The system Nestle uses was created by Gloat, a New York-based software company. Noelle Bloomfield, Gloat's director of product marketing, explains how its career mapping works. Employees register and create a profile that details their current skills, as well as their long-term goals. Using artificial intelligence, the Gloat platform generates different "maps" for employees to consider. One is a "popular path" based on how co-workers with similar job experience and skills have advanced, such as an entry-level software engineer to a senior-level developer. The tool also creates career paths for employees interested in jobs outside of their current field, as well as paths that lead to people-management positions. Each step on these paths details the skills and work experience required to move to the next level. Available learning and mentoring resources -- including opportunities to work on short-term projects -- also are highlighted.
Ideally, career planning starts long before the career does, says Kurt Kraiger, chair of the management department at the University of Memphis's college of business. Key to that plan is choosing a college major aligned with the student's interests.
"When I'm in a job that fits my interests, that predicts both longevity and performance" in that field, says Kraiger, an organizational psychologist. But challenges arise when college students with scant work experience must choose a major -- a decision that might affect their career trajectory for decades to come.
To that end, Kraiger co-founded PathwayU, a career-planning platform with assessment tests that probe users' interests and values, which are the qualities that make work meaningful to them. Using predictive analytics, the tool then identifies viable college majors that are aligned with the student's profile. Each option includes an economic outlook outlining workforce demand and earnings potential for that specific field. Currently, 165 postsecondary schools are using the platform, a PathwayU spokesman says, including Florida International University in Miami.
"We use it for career discovery and career searches," says John P. Nykolaiszyn, director of the Office of Business Career Management at FIU. The platform is integrated into a 15-week career class required of undergraduate students in the College of Business, which has about 9,000 students.
Students use PathwayU's assessment tools to learn about careers that best match their interests and values, he says. They also can see and apply for posted jobs that would be a good fit.
The platform doesn't replace one-on-one career planning, Nykolaiszyn says, but it helps the business school's 10 career counselors have strategic conversations with students about things like resume preparation, job interviews and, most important, their job search.
"No tool is ever going to replace counseling or coaching sessions," he says.
---
Beth DeCarbo is a writer in South Carolina. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Beth DeCarbo
