Facebook parent Meta Platforms on Wednesday announced the release date of its coming Quest 3 virtual reality headset and new Ray-Ban smart glasses along with a bevy of AI chatbots for its social apps.
"The limits of your physical space are going to be able to expand," Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg said when announcing the new products. "You're going to be able to be a part of much larger worlds."
The company is hoping the devices will jump-start its push to bring users into the so-called metaverse, an effort on which it has spent billions of dollars and seen limited returns.
Apple is set to release its Vision Pro headset in 2024, years after Zuckerberg renamed the company in an attempt to focus on what he has said may be the next emerging computing platform.
The Quest 3 will begin shipping to users in October. Preorders for the $499 device started on Wednesday.
Meta also will release the second generation of its Ray-Ban smart glasses on Oct. 17 for $299. The Wall Street Journal had previously reported that the devices would arrive as soon as this fall.
The second-generation Ray-Ban smart glasses will allow users to livestream their perspective to their followers. The new smart glasses will include a 36-hour battery life and will be available in different Ray-Ban models than its predecessor.
The device also will come equipped with Meta AI, an artificial-intelligence assistant announced by Zuckerberg on Wednesday.
Meta AI is built on the company's Llama 2 large-language model and is a general purpose AI assistant that can answer user questions within Messenger, WhatsApp and Instagram. Meta AI will be able to provide users with real-time information through a partnership with Microsoft Bing, Zuckerberg said.
Meta announced that it also will release 28 other AI chatbots that users will be able to interact with. Meta joined with a number of celebrities, including Tom Brady, Paris Hilton and Snoop Dogg, whose faces provide expressions as users interact with the chatbots. The Journal had previously reported that Meta would release AI chatbots with personalities.
"This is our first effort at training a bunch of AIs that are a bit more fun," Zuckerberg said, adding that they will have a number of limitations that will become apparent to users.
Zuckerberg said the AI chatbots would be released in a limited beta mode on Wednesday.
Credit: By Salvador Rodriguez
