Invictus Growth Partners has acquired ThreatModeler Software in a $60 million deal to fuel the company's aim of integrating cybersecurity technology into new business programs during the early stages of development by applying easy-to-use, prebuilt models.
"Cybersecurity is sort of like a never-ending arms race" for organizations trying to protect their systems, said John DeLoche, a co-founder and managing partner of San Mateo, Calif.-based Invictus. He noted that cyber threats and the consequences of data breaches have become more severe.
The number of reported data breaches in the U.S. reached a record 3,205 last year, 72% more than the previous record of 1,860 set in 2021, according to the nonprofit Identity Theft Resource Center. A combination of high-profile data breaches and regulatory pressure will drive cybersecurity spending this year to roughly $215 billion worldwide, research firm Gartner projects.
Meanwhile, the average cost of a data breach for a U.S.-based organization rose to about $9.5 million last year, according to computer technology company International Business Machines. By sector, healthcare logged the highest average data breach cost at $10.9 million, followed by financial services at $5.9 million, according to an IBM report.
One way to get ahead of hackers is to identify and mitigate security threats earlier in the process of building new applications, said Archie Agarwal, Jersey City, N.J.-based ThreatModeler's founder and chief executive.
ThreatModeler offers prebuilt threat models and an artificial-intelligence-driven virtual assistant called WingMan that developers use to test and identify weaknesses in their programs, according to the company's website.
Founded in 2010, the business reached a turning point in 2016, when it released its first software-as-a-service offering to provide real-time collaboration with developers, Agarwal said.
The Invictus cash infusion marks the first institutional money invested in ThreatModeler. The transaction culminated months of courting by would-be investors before Agarwal decided to sell to the longtime technology investor, he said.
Credit: By Maria Armental
