The international gymnastics federation has voted on whether to expand the use of sophisticated new technology in major upcoming competitions, a move that could ultimately shift control over the sport's judging from humans to robots.
Unfortunately, it may take some time to learn the result. It was not available at the time of going to press, some 26 hours after the vote took place. Controversy over video assistant referee technology has become the bugbear of sports from soccer and tennis to MLB, the NBA and the NFL. It's fairer, more objective and makes it harder to yell at the referee. It's also slow, distracting and makes it harder to yell at the referee.
It's actually been an easier sell for gymnastics, where basic video replay, with the capacity to zoom in, is already available for cases where a gymnast challenges the difficulty score, contending that a particular skill didn't get credit.
There's also a full video review after a competition to judge the judges' performance, because perhaps, just perhaps, judges favor athletes from their own federations, dislike a particular athlete, or think that someone is owed a boost because it's time.
But the vote that took place Thursday at the gymnastics' global body's meeting in Managua, Nicaragua, is potentially game-changing because it would add, at the upcoming world championships, new capacity to the video system currently available to human judges. The Fujitsu Ltd. technology can measure height, body angles or the number of degrees by which a gymnast splits her legs, in three dimensions and from any direction, both parties say. The Federation Internationale de Gymnastique declined multiple requests for comment on the outcome.
If used successfully at the world championships, the technology could also be deployed at the 2020 Olympic Games. For now, it's being billed as a judging support system. Taken to its logical conclusion though, it could allow the robots to take over entirely -- and change the nature of judged sports such as gymnastics, as well as diving, synchronized swimming, figure skating, snowboard, ski jumping and freestyle skiing.
Recent decisions from the 138-year-old FIG have included a ban on the use of cat makeup in female gymnasts' performances. The International Skating Union and other federations haven't always rushed to follow suit. Still, gymnastics and skating scoring systems have evolved almost hand in hand. Skating had a judging scandal at the 2002 Salt Lake City Games that was so big that medals were re-awarded.
Two years later it scrapped the "6.0" that rewarded perfection but capped difficulty, in favor of an open-ended system. Weeks after that, judging problems plagued men's gymnastics at the 2004 Olympics in Athens and spawned gymnastics' own expansive (and yes, incomprehensible) system.
Such scandals give ammunition to naysayers who contend that anything that can't be measured isn't a real sport. The new technology might more consistently measure whether a rotation is complete or count whether a certain position is held for three seconds than a judge whose math varies based on international realpolitik, advocates enthuse.
More benignly, it could also give judges a better view than they currently get from their seats below the apparatus, allowing them to see how high a gymnast gets relative to her center of gravity on a back somersault, for example. After all, they argue, you can already see this stuff on television or YouTube, so why not give judged sports the respect they crave?
"I think it would have more credibility if it had some objective component that the audience can understand," said Mike Jacki, a former official in the Federation Internationale de Gymnastique. "If done right," he added, it would give the audience, media and sponsors a new level of confidence in the accuracy of results.
Skeptics say technology could help people manipulate results, with less transparency.
At the recent Pan American Games, judges' wrangling already resulted in waits for some gymnasts of 10 minutes or more before they were able to take their turn on the apparatus, said Al Fong, coach to three 2020 American women's gymnastics team hopefuls.
Fong also doubted a robot could properly judge dance elements, which are a technical component of gymnastics routines on floor exercise and balance beam. "One person's idea of beautiful dance is another person's idea of slow, sloppy dance."
This begged for a take from Valorie Kondos Field, who retired as UCLA head coach in May after years of creating crowd-pleasing dance-driven floor exercises. It turns out that she thought the robots would do an amazing job.
Kondos Field said artistry in gymnastics could be determined objectively through just two principles, both of which could be measured by a robot: Do you see clear pictures? And is there a common thread through the piece choreographically? Actually, she said, the robot would probably do better.
"I don't care if you like the routine. There are some people who don't like Katelyn Ohashi's routine," she said.
Those people don't include the 57,319,190 viewers of the YouTube video that made Ohashi a viral star. Many of them have been happy to simply rate her themselves as perfect, and dismiss any judge who disagrees.
Now, they will be able to choose between raging against the machine, or the man. Maybe.

Credit: By Louise Radnofsky
