LENOVO GROUP
Planned Listing
Sends Stock Soaring
Lenovo Group Ltd. is capitalizing on two booming markets, Chinese stocks and the global PC industry, to list in Shanghai.
The company is the world's largest maker of personal computers and is known for acquiring IBM's ThinkPad unit and the Motorola Mobility smartphone business. The news that Lenovo would join the STAR Market, China's answer to the Nasdaq, boosted its Hong Kong-traded shares, which on Wednesday hit their highest level since 2015.
A series of Chinese technology companies recently listed in mainland China or in Hong Kong, amid heightened tensions with the U.S.Beijing encouraged companies to join the fledgling STAR Market, also known as the Science and Technology Innovation Board, by introducing more relaxed listing rules and other requirements compared with other Chinese markets.
Lenovo and Megvii Technology Ltd., an artificial-intelligence startup specializing in facial recognition, will be among the first companies to make use of a structure known as a Chinese depositary receipt to raise funds.
In a filing late Tuesday, Lenovo said it planned to sell stock equivalent to up to 10% of its enlarged ordinary share count. Its shares jumped 9.7% on Wednesday, giving it a market value of nearly $14 billion.
Lenovo plans to use the funds for research and development, strategic investments and to replenish working capital.
-- Joanne Chiu and Yifan Wang
---
BOEING
Jet Maker to Settle
Drone Lawsuit
Boeing Co.'s drone unit has agreed to pay $25 million to settle civil-fraud allegations that it overcharged on more than half a dozen contracts signed with the U.S. Navy and special forces between 2009 and 2017.
Announced Tuesday by the Justice Department and Pentagon investigative agencies, the settlement stems from whistleblower claims by a then-official of the unit, Insitu Inc., that it knowingly charged new-part prices for "less expensive recycled, refurbished, reconditioned and/or reconfigured parts."
According to the Justice Department, the contracts with the Navy and the Pentagon's Special Operations Command required new parts and materials. Under provisions of the Federal False Claims Act, the government took over a civil suit filed by the whistleblower, who will get more than $4.6 million of the total. Boeing didn't acknowledge any wrongdoing.
-- Andy Pasztor
---
AFFIRM HOLDINGS
Shares Skyrocket
After Market Debut
Shares of Affirm Holdings Inc. surged in the company's trading debut on Wednesday.
The buy-now, pay-later fintech firm, trading on the Nasdaq under the symbol AFRM, jumped as high as $103 shortly after it began trading around midday, far above its initial offering price of $49. The shares closed at $97.24. The enthusiastic reception for Affirm shares could indicate that 2021 will be similar to 2020. That was the most lucrative year on record for public offerings in terms of money raised, driven in part by the success of companies like DoorDash Inc. that have benefited during the pandemic from the stay-at-home economy.
Affirm lets online shoppers pay for purchases in installments, and it finances products including Peloton Interactive Inc.'s stationary bikes. Merchants ranging from Walmart Inc. to Expedia Group Inc. offer customers the opportunity to finance through Affirm. It and similar companies including Afterpay Ltd. have benefited during the pandemic, with many consumers reluctant to take on credit-card debt.
-- Orla McCaffrey
