Amazon.com Inc. said it plans to start a music-streaming service that -- like at least half a dozen competitors -- offers on-demand, unlimited access to tens of millions of songs for a monthly fee.
Distinguishing Amazon Music Unlimited, which was to launch Wednesday: Customers using the retail giant's voice-activated Echo speakers will pay $3.99 a month -- less than half the $9.99 charged by most rivals -- and will stream music in a markedly different way.
Users can ask the Echo's robotic assistant Alexa to play a performer's "new song" without knowing the title or request a particular act's music from a certain decade. Users also can ask Alexa to play a song that features particular lyrics -- even if they can't recall the song title or artist.
Amazon's vice president of music, Steve Boom, said he expected the new service to expand the streaming market given its "disruptive price points" and its potential to turn music-streaming into a communal experience centered in the living room, rather than on a smartphone.
"In the digital era, [group listening is] one of the things that's been lost," said Mr. Boom, adding that his team developed several features to try to evoke the old-time feeling of listening to vinyl records with friends and studying the liner notes.
Users can ask Alexa to play a commentary by an artist introducing and commenting on a playlist of his or her songs.
Lyrics, meanwhile, automatically scroll across the screen on other devices as each song plays. (The Echo, the original version of which costs $180, doesn't have a screen.)
The service is a welcome addition for the music industry, which is counting on paid streaming services for growth as sales of CDs and downloads continue to decline.
Spotify AB counts more than 40 million paying subscribers world-wide, and Apple Inc.'s Apple Music has at least 17 million, with 18 million total streaming subscribers in the U.S. contributing to an 8% revenue increase for the first six months of 2016 during the same period a year earlier, according to the Recording Industry Association of America.
The recorded-music business has barely grown in recent years after sales fell 60% from their peak in 2000. But such paid services are still tiny compared with older, free music services that pay rightsholders far less per user, such as internet radio's Pandora Media Inc., with nearly 80 million users, and Alphabet Inc.'s YouTube, with more than one billion users.
The new service also could help Amazon in the company's race with other tech giants including Alphabet Inc., Apple and Microsoft Corp. to develop artificial-intelligence assistants, which are expected to run things as diverse as houses and automobiles in the near future.
Amazon increasingly has focused resources on its own voice-controlled devices that use artificial intelligence to summon Uber rides, dim bedroom lights, play music and place online orders, and it has sold at least five million Echo devices to date, according to research firm Consumer Intelligence Research Partners.
Amazon is now offering a $50 Echo Dot for preorder; Alphabet last week introduced its own competitor to the Echo, a wireless speaker called Home.
Amazon is selling Echo speakers and streaming subscriptions alike, primarily in hopes of keeping customers shopping and getting them to pay $99 a year to be Prime members; it sells many of its devices at close to cost.
In addition to getting free shipping, Prime members can use Amazon Music Unlimited for $7.99 a month, though they already get access for no additional charge to the company's more limited Prime Music service, which launched two years ago and includes on-demand listening to two million tracks.
Amazon Music Unlimited costs $9.99 a month for everyone else.
To address complaints that on-demand services are overly complicated and overwhelming for users faced with a choice of 40 million songs and thousands of playlists, Amazon's service will feature a single "song of the day," picked by an editorial team, in addition to personalized recommendations based on a user's listening habits and preferences.
If the company observes correlations between customers' musical tastes and their shopping habits for other products, it could incorporate that data into its music suggestions as well, said Amazon's director of product management and engineering, Kintan Brahmbhatt.
While Amazon had been planning the new streaming service for more than a year, Mr. Boom said it was no small feat to teach Alexa what users might mean by "the new song" from a certain band, for example, given that most of the songs on an album technically have the same release date.
Instead, the system is programmed to identify the latest song being promoted by the record label to radio. Amazon also tagged songs with emotions and activities, so that listeners can ask Alexa to play "happy" music of a certain genre, or tunes for workouts or dinner parties.
Credit: By Hannah Karp and Laura Stevens
