New technology is on the way to assist in a growing public-safety problem: How to get people out of the way of wildfires, floods and other natural disasters.
The need to get emergency warnings out fast is rising as many researchers predict fires and storms will become more frequent and intense, fueled by climate change and other factors. Six of the 10 most costly Atlantic hurricanes in U.S. history have hit in the last decade, while seven of the top 10 most destructive wildfires in California have broken out over the same period.
Technology is evolving to meet the challenge. New apps are being developed to provide real-time information. Some agencies are starting to use satellites to relay wireless signals in remote terrain -- a practice emergency managers expect to grow over the next decade in part because it reduces dependence on cellphone towers, also vulnerable in fires and storms.
"As we continue to see the effects of climate change affecting the severity of our disasters, they are not giving us as much time to warn people," said Deanne Criswell, administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. "The more we can advance the technology, the more quickly we can get this information out to the public."
For now, significant hurdles complicate alerts. One is the integrity of cellphone towers, which often fail in floods or fires. In Paradise, Calif., Jessamy Cartwright, 46, said she only learned of the Camp Fire bearing down in 2018 after seeing dark clouds of smoke outside the home where she was caring for her elderly mother. She said her mobile phone received no alerts because numerous cell towers were destroyed.
"Better warnings would have saved a lot of lives," said Ms. Cartwright, who managed to escape with her mother.
Emergency managers say broadcasting alerts via social-media platforms over web browsers will become more common, bypassing phone carriers and cell towers. This will happen as satellites are increasingly used to relay information, they say.
In August, the Department of Homeland Security completed a proof-of-concept test on an alert technology that would be sent directly from a satellite to the GPS navigation system of a car. That could prove life-saving, they say, because often people on the road aren't in a position to notice an alert on their phones. GPS signals are beamed from the ground up to satellites, which relay them to receivers such as those in phones and automobiles. Such alerts could work even without cellular service and internet.
"This technology would be monumental in terms of ensuring that people who can't access their phone (because they are driving) to read an alert, or aren't at home to see or hear an alert, get the alert and can take immediate action," said Mary Jo Flynn-Nevins, chief of emergency services for Sacramento County, Calif.
Artificial-intelligence technology could also help. In the Pacific Northwest, Pascal Schuback, a local advocate for faster earthquake notifications, said he has been working with some companies and organizations to develop a way for Amazon.com Inc.'s Alexa virtual assistant to process emergency alerts.
"This could be huge, because think of it -- how many Alexa services are out there?" said Mr. Schuback, executive director of the Cascadia Region Earthquake Workgroup, a nonprofit that works with FEMA on quake preparedness.
An Amazon spokeswoman said no such feature currently exists on Alexa, but that customers can have it deliver notifications on local weather alerts.
Credit: By Jim Carlton
