Los Angeles -- It has been touted by Twitter Chief Executive Dick Costolo and got Google Chairman Eric Schmidt's stamp of approval. It was celebrated at a party by Silicon Valley bigwigs including Facebook's chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg. An early version was shown to tech-industry leaders meeting in Aspen.
The hottest new app? No -- Harvey Weinstein's latest movie.
The veteran producer's chief Oscar prospect, "The Imitation Game," is looking north of Hollywood to sell the movie to audiences and voters alike.
Securing third-party endorsements for a film -- and tying the movie to a larger narrative about social injustice -- is a familiar strategy for Mr. Weinstein, known in Hollywood as an aggressive (and often successful) awards impresario. Last year, his lone best picture nominee, "Philomena," about a woman searching for the son she was forced to give up, was associated with a campaign launched by the film's subject, Philomena Lee, to raise awareness about adoption rights. Other studios have successfully employed similar strategies. Fox, which distributed last year's best picture winner, the drama "12 Years a Slave," ran an awards campaign whose tagline "It's time," seemed to imply that voting for the film also was a comment on Oscar's thin record of honoring films about black history.
"The Imitation Game," which is among the best-picture Oscar nominees, follows British mathematician Alan Turing (Benedict Cumberbatch) as he leads a team of cryptologists in cracking the "Enigma" code used by the Nazis during World War II. Much of Mr. Turing's work was kept secret for decades, owing to confidentiality rules for his wartime duty. Much of his life was secret, too. Mr. Turing was gay at a time when homosexuality was against the law and was forced to undergo chemical castration before he died in 1954.
But Mr. Turing's work in computer science and artificial intelligence has inspired admirers in today's tech community. That has given a film about 1940s cryptographers an influential band of supporters in a year when several historical dramas have been mired in fact-checking controversies. "The Imitation Game" isn't immune, with some historians saying the film oversimplifies the story and embellishes Mr. Turing's role in a protracted endeavor by many individuals.
The campaign started in September, when the film was in the final stages of editing. Mr. Weinstein took the movie to a conference thrown in Aspen by talk-show host Charlie Rose. Among those in the audience: PayPal co-founder Max Levchin, Yelp CEO Jeremy Stoppelman and Google's Mr. Schmidt.
The audience response tipped Mr. Weinstein off to enthusiasm he hadn't realized was there. "I don't want to pat myself on the back for understanding there was a fervor," he said in an interview.
"Harvey's very, very good at getting people to understand what his movies are about," Mr. Schmidt said at a recent reception for the film in Manhattan co-hosted by Michael Bloomberg, the digital-media executive and former New York mayor. Mr. Schmidt was an early supporter of "The Imitation Game," and helped bring other tech executives on board. He first learned about Mr. Turing as a young computer scientist. "It's very difficult for Hollywood to accurately portray the heroes of our world," he said. "And Alan Turing is sort of the greatest hero in many ways."
The studio has been running ads for the film with blurbs from tech executives rather than the usual snippets from reviews. The tech effort is designed to broaden the audience beyond the art-house crowd that typically gravitates to awards favorites.
"You don't think that kids know who Eric Schmidt is? Marissa Mayer?" Mr. Weinstein asked. "Millions of kids aspire to be these people someday."
The movie has been performing well for a feature of its cost. Its widest distribution has been in about 1,600 locations -- about half the number most major releases play in -- and so far it has grossed $42 million.
Since the preview in Aspen, Weinstein Co. has hosted screenings at the Google, Twitter and Yahoo campuses. Mr. Cumberbatch even walked the red carpet in November at a Silicon Valley gala for the Breakthrough Prizes in Fundamental Physics and Life Sciences. The prizes honor achievements in math, science and physics. (Another British actor collecting awards for playing a scientific genius -- Eddie Redmayne from the Stephen Hawking biopic "The Theory of Everything" -- also showed up.)
The tech experts' backing lends "The Imitation Game" credibility -- and a line of defense -- in a race against other historical dramas that have been accused of missing the mark. "Selma," an Oscar favorite about Martin Luther King, Jr.'s civil-rights march from Selma to Montgomery, Ala., has been criticized by some who say it misrepresents President Lyndon Baines Johnson's role in the movement. The distributor of "Selma," Viacom Inc.'s Paramount Pictures, said the movie "is an acknowledgment of the incredible achievements of not only Dr. King and L.B.J., but of the many heroes of their day . . . We take great pride in knowing [director Ava DuVernay] was able to put a spotlight on them all."
"The Imitation Game's" vulnerability may be its portrayal of Mr. Turing's homosexuality, which some critics say is airbrushed and not given enough attention. Director Morten Tyldum said he isn't surprised by the reaction but says it made little sense to "put random, meaningless sex scenes" in a film he calls "a gay love story at its core." To that end, Mr. Weinstein's movie studio has expanded its campaign to include members of the gay and lesbian communities speaking in support of the film, including Sarah Kate Ellis, CEO of Glaad, an advocacy group. Military leaders also have joined the cause, including former Defense Secretary Robert Gates, who said Mr. Turing's fate "should be a constant reminder of how foolish and self-defeating it is for national leaders to deny themselves the benefit of the mind of a genius."
---
Robin Kawakami contributed to this article.
Credit: By Erich Schwartzel
