Tariff-conscious consumers are stockpiling goods and rushing to upgrade old cars and appliances to get ahead of potential price increases.
A quarter of Americans surveyed said it was a good time for major purchases as they expect prices to go up next year, up from 10% a month prior and a record high, according to the University of Michigan's monthly survey of consumers. And a third of the 2,000 people surveyed recently by CreditCards.com said they were buying more now because they feared tariffs.
Some economists warn that by spending as though inflation is coming, people could already be pushing it higher. The consumer-price index of goods and services grew 2.7% year over year in November, according to the Labor Department, slightly higher than in the prior month. The boost was driven in part by a surge in durable-goods purchases that some shoppers said are related to President-elect Donald Trump's threats of tariffs on imports from countries including Canada, Mexico and China.
"People can make a judgment that, 'Well I thought I was going to buy a TV in the next 12 months. Maybe I should buy it in the next 12 weeks,'" said Robert Barbera, director of the Center for Financial Economics at Johns Hopkins University.
On the campaign trail, Trump proposed 10% to 20% tariffs on all imported products, and 60% on Chinese imports, an effort to spur domestic manufacturing and reduce the trade deficit. After the election, he said he would impose a 25% tariff on imports from Canada and Mexico and threatened 100% on the Brics countries of Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa, Iran, Egypt, Ethiopia and the United Arab Emirates.
Many economists think that tariffs, even if they boost manufacturing, are likely to lead to rising prices.
To get ahead of price increases, some consumers are spending now. Gerard Szarek is stocking his 800-square-foot basement with as many bags of coffee, bottles of olive oil and bulk packs of paper towels that will fit there.
"I am taking the man at his word," Szarek, 66 years old, of Cape Cod, Mass., said in reference to Trump and his tariff plans. He said he also fears that Trump's migrant-deportation plan could raise labor costs and lead to higher prices on domestic goods.
Szarek, a mechanical engineer, is planning trips every weekend to his local BJ's Wholesale Club to fill shopping carts with boxes of his wife's favorite Peet's dark roast coffee and cases of navy beans. Recently he said he paid $44,000 for a 2023 Toyota RAV4 hybrid to replace the 2010 Toyota Highlander that he was planning to drive "until the wheels fell off."
But by front-loading purchases en masse because of inflation fears, shoppers including Szarek could be inadvertently driving up prices.
"If the run is big enough and the shortage is big enough," a retailer will have to raise prices, said Harrison Hong, a professor of economics at Columbia University.
Furthermore, inflation expectations matter for future inflation. So it is possible that retailers and manufacturers are preparing for higher tariffs by raising prices now, in expectation of higher import prices, said Paul Ashworth, chief North America economist at Capital Economics.
"The notion that you think prices are on a particular trajectory plays elementally in your decision about how to raise your prices, or what your wage demands are," said Barbera of Johns Hopkins.
Businesses in the U.S., which imported around $3.2 trillion of goods in 2022, are making plans for the worst-case scenario. Some are stocking up on imports to get ahead. Others are urging shoppers to buy now before prices go up.
Best Buy Chief Executive Corie Barry said on a November press call that "the vast majority of that tariff will probably be passed onto the consumer as a price increase." Executives at Walmart, Lowe's and AutoZone have also spoken of potential price increases stemming from the tariffs.
The last time the U.S. levied tariffs on all other countries was in 2018, when Trump imposed a 20% to 50% tariff on all imported washing machines in response to a petition by Whirlpool, said Felix Tintelnot, an economist at Duke University.
The action resulted in a 10% across-the-board price increase on washers and dryers, according to a study by Tintelnot and others. He said it was too soon to tell whether consumers would see price increases this time around because that will depend on the scale, scope and duration of the tariffs levied.
Christopher Foote, of Vacaville, Calif., said the possibility of tariffs have driven him to "go all out" for items he has had his eye on. The 35-year-old software consultant said he has spent more than $12,000 on new devices since Election Day, including a $8,087 Samsung heat pump, a $3,214 LG television, a $1,081 Denon audio receiver and a $509 Miele vacuum cleaner.
Christina Liu, a content creator in Los Angeles, builds personal computers for gaming and shares tutorials with her social-media followers. The fingernail-size GPU and CPU chips that power her computers have been at the heart of the U.S.-China trade war for years.
In an effort to boost domestic manufacturing of the devices that power artificial intelligence, the Biden administration said it would double the tariff rate on China's semiconductors in 2025, to 50% from 25%. With those increases on the way and potential Trump tariff increases on the horizon, Liu decided it was a good time to stock up. She spent over $1,600 on new chips and other computer equipment recently.
The good news, she said, is that one of these chips usually lasts gamers at least a few years. "If you were to build a new PC now, it should last you until the next election cycle," she said.
Generate image description

Credit: By Jasmine Li and Rachel Wolfe
