Could Robots Replace
Human Jurors?
They vacuum our living-room carpets and cheerfully book us tickets on Amtrak. And pretty soon they may even drive us to the railway station. But could we ever entrust robots with the power to decide the fate of a defendant on trial?
If you're tired of being called for jury duty, you'll be pleased to know that researchers are hard at work teaching robots how to tell if someone is giving false testimony. An article published online last month by the academic journal Artificial Intelligence and Law suggests that robots are making progress on that front.
European researchers compiled transcripts of court hearings at which the defendants or witnesses were later condemned for making false or deceptive statements. Using text-analysis software, they fed the computer transcripts, telling it which statements were true or false and teaching it to pick up patterns in the testimony.
Then, they tested the model on a part of the transcripts segregated from the analysis and unfamiliar to the computer.
Phrases such as "I don't remember," or ones indicating cognitive thought and speculation -- "I suppose" or "I think," for example -- were signs of deception.
The system correctly identified false statements 53% of the time. That isn't quite as bad as it seems because only a third of the statements were false.
In other words, if the computer answered false every time, it would be right only about a third of the time. It identified true statements correctly roughly 75% of the time.
"Our system is much better with true statements than with deceptive ones," said Massimo Poesio, who co-authored the study.
Will there ever be a day when a computer could be summoned for jury duty?
"Honestly, I don't think so," said Tommaso Fornaciari, a psychologist for Italy's national police and the study's other author. He said the goal is to develop tools for investigators to help "orient them toward more probable paths."
-- Jacob Gershman
Bar Exam to Get Harder
Starting in February 2015, the bar exam will feature a new multiple-choice section on civil procedure, a topic law students love to hate.
The exam already covers constitutional law, contracts, criminal law and procedure, evidence, real property and torts.
The addition of civil procedure, which students typically study in their first year of law school, won't make the exam longer. The other sections will be clipped to make room.
The National Conference of Bar Examiners, the group that ensures uniformity in the exam, alerted law-school deans to the timing of the change in a Feb. 21 letter.
The six-hour multiple-choice portion of the test, known as the Multistate Bar Examination, is administered in all but two states, and is followed by a full day of essay questions.
Civil procedure -- the rules by which courts conduct civil trials -- is already an essay topic on the Multistate Essay Exam, which is administered in more than half the states, according to Christopher Fromm, executive director of bar review programs at the test-preparation company Kaplan Bar Review.
-- Joe Palazzolo
You Have Two 'Pokes'
And One . . . Summons?
Defendants in Texas could be served notice of a lawsuit through social-media sites under state legislation introduced last week.
Texas judges could offer that option if a defendant maintains a profile page on a social-media site, regularly accesses the account and "could reasonably be expected to receive actual notice if the electronic communication were sent to the defendant's account," according to the bill's text.
The bill is sponsored by Texas state Rep. Jeff Leach, a Republican who describes himself as an "avid proponent of tort reform."
If enacted, Texas would be the first state to offer the option of serving papers via Facebook Inc. or other social-media direct-messaging services, writes Bradley Shear, a Maryland attorney who tracks social-media privacy laws.
Federal courts have allowed defendants to be served by email since 2002, according to Mr. Shear.
-- Jacob Gershman
---
For more legal news, go to the WSJ's real-time Law Blog at blogs.wsj.com/law.
Subscribe to WSJ:
