OpenAI named Sarah Friar as its next finance chief, choosing a well-known technology executive to lead the ChatGPT maker's finances during a period of rapid growth and intensifying scrutiny of the artificial intelligence industry.
Friar was most recently chief executive at social-networking platform Nextdoor, a position she held for more than five years until stepping down this year. Before that, she served as CFO of Square and previously worked at Goldman Sachs and McKinsey. She is OpenAI's first CFO since Brad Lightcap, now the company's chief operating officer, left the role in 2022.
Friar will help the company grow in a complex operating environment, OpenAI said in a blog post Monday.
OpenAI, headed by Sam Altman, over the past year has entered into partnerships with big companies including Apple, which said Monday it would offer ChatGPT for some new functions such as answering complex queries or composing messages. Microsoft, meanwhile, has invested billions in the company as it aims to expand AI use in its products.
OpenAI also has been at the forefront of industry concerns over safety in the development of generative AI and compensation to creative industries for use of their work. The company last month said it formed a safety and security committee as it faces a legal battle over a new voice assistant in its latest AI model, which actress Scarlett Johansson said sounds similar to her own voice.
OpenAI has a peculiar corporate structure that gives oversight of its for-profit business to a nonprofit board of directors. The board's sole responsibility is to ensure that the company develops AI systems beneficial to humanity -- even if it means wiping out investors' profit.
In choosing Friar, OpenAI has tapped an executive who has overseen initial public offerings at two companies. Nextdoor went public in 2021 through a merger with a special-purpose acquisition company. She also led Square's finances during the payments company's 2015 IPO. Square in 2021 changed its name to Block.
OpenAI also hired Kevin Weil as chief product officer to lead a team focused on applying its research to products and services. He was the president of product and business at Planet Labs, the Google-backed satellite-imaging company, and has served as vice president of product at Facebook's failed digital wallet Novi and senior vice president of product Twitter.
Wall Street Journal owner News Corp has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI.
Credit: By Sabela Ojea
