Five straight months of gains for the S&P 500. A string of highs for many market benchmarks. An economy that's growing fast during the pandemic reopening.
Which fund managers did the best job of taking advantage of the situation?
Industrywide, managers did a solid job -- although not spectacular, according to The Wall Street Journal's latest Winners' Circle survey of outperforming mutual funds. While the S&P soared 38% in the 12-month period ended June 30, the universe of average actively managed U.S. equity funds fell short of that mark, while posting a more-than-respectable gain of 33% for the same period, according to data from Morningstar.
Still, our survey found that some portfolio managers, teams and strategies rewarded investors more lavishly, with 11 funds posting gains in excess of 100% for the 12 months ended June 30.
Topping the list was Morgan Stanley Inception Portfolio (MSSGX), which ended the 12-month period with a remarkable gain of 140%. This is the second quarter in a row that the fund has earned top honors. Dennis Lynch, head of the Counterpoint Global team at Morgan Stanley Investment Management, and his colleagues, manage this and other funds that make frequent appearances on our list of outperformers.
The Journal doesn't suggest that investors view this quarterly ranking of top-performing funds as a shopping list. Not all funds may be suitable for or accessible to all investors. And the 12-month time frame is much shorter than the holding period of most investors.
Still, understanding what these managers invested in and why can offer insight into what's happening in the stock market.
As of June 30, the Journal identified nearly 1,400 mutual funds that qualified for the quarter's survey -- those with a track record of at least three years and a minimum of $50 million in assets. We abide by Morningstar's definition of an actively managed U.S. equity fund, which excludes index funds and many kinds of quantitative funds. Sector funds and those using leverage to damp risk or boost returns also don't meet our criteria.
In the early stages of the post-pandemic bull market, Mr. Lynch and the Inception fund team benefited from exposure to disruptive companies: businesses that they believed most likely to profit from economic transformation. These aren't the work-from-home companies like Zoom, but e-commerce companies like Stitch Fix Inc., which uses machine learning to figure out its customers' taste in clothing. This isn't just another retail chain taking to the web to reach more shoppers, Mr. Lynch says, but a new business model.
"We're always looking for companies like this that can benefit from big changes or others that we believe are insulated from them," Mr. Lynch says. These holdings have long been at the heart of the Inception portfolio, which is dominated by smaller companies.
Michael Baron, manager of No. 3 finisher Baron Partners Fund (BPTRX), employs a similar approach to building a portfolio. Another repeat "winner" in our quarterly survey, the fund returned 119% over the trailing 12 months, thanks in part to gains earlier in that period from companies that provide new ways of connecting and working, like RingCentral Inc., a cloud-based communications provider.
"We're not going back to the ways of old -- old ways of consuming entertainment, researching the purchase of a new home," Mr. Baron says.
The shift in market leadership this year, with energy companies contributing to market gains and real estate doing well, opened the door for newer names. An example: Bridgeway Capital Management, a Houston firm that relies on data. Bridgeway Small-Cap Value Fund (BRSVX) beat out the Baron fund for the No. 2 slot, rewarding fans of its systematic approach with a 123% gain.
Bridgeway's funds aren't typical of those that Morningstar identifies as being actively managed. "Everything is rules-based," says Elena Khoziaeva, head of U.S. equity at Bridgeway. "Nothing is done on the fly, thinking that a specific company is going to be a better investment."
Ms. Khoziaeva's team blends three factors -- value foremost, then financial quality and momentum -- into a model that flags stocks like United Natural Foods Co., which has doubled in the past six months. "Our approach is designed to make sure we don't fall into behavioral-finance traps" that may cause traditional active managers to miss opportunities or incur too much risk, she says.
---
Ms. McGee is a writer in New England. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Generate image description
