Arm has become one of the world's most important chip companies by supplying essential semiconductor designs in mobile phones. Now it faces the challenge of growing beyond its dominance there without making its existing customers upset.
The British company made its market debut last week, rising 19% over its first two days of trading. To meet investors' high expectations, Arm, whose circuits are in almost all smartphones, must expand into other electronic devices where it has less of a foothold, capture surging demand for chips that process artificial-intelligence calculations and manage growing geopolitical tensions centered on China.
With its initial public offering, the largest of the year so far, Arm must perform a tricky dance for a company that has long been seen as a neutral supplier of designs for chips that doesn't itself make them. Its customers include many companies that compete with each other, such as smartphone makers Apple and Samsung and chip makers Qualcomm and Advanced Micro Devices.
"It's really hard to find an area where we do not participate, so by definition we have to figure out how to play nice with others because we're dependent on a very broad ecosystem," Arm Chief Executive Rene Haas said in an interview.
Concerns about Arm's neutrality as a supplier to the $574 billion chip industry have limited its strategy in the past. Some companies in the sector erupted in outrage three years ago in response to AI-chip giant Nvidia's deal to buy the company from SoftBank for $40 billion.
The objections gained traction, and the U.S. Federal Trade Commission sued to block the deal, claiming that Nvidia could distort Arm's neutrality and use its control to gain an upper hand on competitors.
The deal was scrapped inFebruary of last year and a drastic strategic revision was made. SoftBank named Haas to run the company and instead set a course for an IPO.
"When the conversation was Arm needs to be bought by this company [Nvidia], it's contrary to what drove the success of Arm in the first place," Cristiano Amon, Qualcomm's chief executive, told The Wall Street Journal last year. "That's why I think the future of Arm is independent."
The market's verdict on Arm as an independent company has so far been positive. Shares rose by about 25% in their first day of trading, sending its valuation to nearly $69 billion on a fully diluted basis.
Arm's tricky balance presents a hurdle to the company's ambitions as it tries to increase the revenue it gets from mobile-phone chips, where it has a market share of more than 99%, and expand in other types of chips.
Arm-based processors have only about a 10% market share in data-center chips, for example, a figure that is expected to grow significantly in the coming decade.
By Arm's accounting, cellphone chip sales are expected to grow by just 6.4% a year over the next couple of years, while data-center chips used in cloud computing are growing at 16.6%.
Arm has yet to reap big financial gains from the rise of AI, which has led Nvidia's stock to more than triple in value this year. Arm's revenue still comes largely from circuits in mobile phones and other electronic devices, not the powerful data-center chips where artificial-intelligence systems such as ChatGPT are built and deployed.
Haas pointed out in discussions with investors ahead of the IPO that Nvidia is using an Arm-based chip as part of a major coming AI system. "These customized chips are simply not possible without" Arm, Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang said in a video presentation shown to investors.
Credit: By Asa Fitch and Corrie Driebusch
