[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Tesla has run into an old-fashioned car-industry problem: the model cycle.
In its fourth-quarter results on Wednesday, the electric-vehicle maker replaced its boilerplate guidance about growing "as quickly as possible" with an admission that it is "between two major growth waves." The spurt provided by the Model 3 and Model Y ran its course. The next one will be "initiated by the global expansion of the next-generation vehicle platform."
Tesla said its growth in vehicle volumes this year might be "notably lower" than last year's -- without specifying a number, as it has before in fourth-quarter results. That uncertainty helps explain why the shares fell 12% on Thursday.
The benefit of vague guidance might be that Tesla won't spend this year cutting prices to chase a target, as it did in 2023. With its profitability now in line with the car industry, Tesla can't afford to repeat the strategy. Its operating margin came in at 8.2% in the quarter, not much higher than the 7.6% for the previous three months, when it paused production to upgrade factories.
Tesla hasn't released a prototype or image of the first vehicle it will produce on its next-generation platform, but it is expected to be a mass-market car. As for when the next wave will come, Chief Executive Elon Musk said on a call to discuss the results that the platform was due to launch in the second half of next year, while admitting "I am often optimistic regarding time."
Allowing for some slippage in the deadline, Tesla probably has at least two slow years ahead. The Cybertruck that launched in November might have been expected to fill this gap, but Tesla has done everything to reduce expectations of its impact.
That raises the question why the pickup was given priority over affordable EVs of the kind that fueled the success of Chinese EV giant BYD. Tesla's guidance will bolster Wall Street suspicions that Musk made a mistake with its product road map.
Investors have long paid attention to the model cycles created by the cadence of automakers' product launches. New cars typically generate a wave of sales that ebbs. Manufacturers have learned to manage the risk of volatile cash flows by spacing new products or product refreshes. But the simplicity of Tesla's lineup, consisting of five passenger vehicles including the Cybertruck, makes this harder. The very familiarity of the problem might dim Tesla's tech aura. "People think of Tesla as a car company when they should be thinking of Tesla as an AI/robotics company," said Musk on the call. Tesla is valued as if it were a leader in artificial intelligence. Even after a 16% fall so far this year, its stock trades at 56 times forward earnings, compared with 29 times for its AI-chip supplier Nvidia.
It is in the process of rolling out a new version of its automated-driving software that uses AI to control the car rather than code. Yet the company seems no closer to assuming legal responsibility for driving its customers' vehicles, which would be a game changer. The use case for its humanoid robot, Optimus, isn't clear. Musk said Wednesday that Tesla's supercomputer for training AI, Dojo, was a "high-risk, high-payoff" project, implying a correspondingly "low probability of success."
Tesla's energy storage is growing fast. But it is too small to move the needle much, accounting for 6% of revenue in the fourth quarter. And it is hardly the high-margin software business of investors' dreams.
With the slowdown in Tesla's car business now beyond question, its other bets have their work cut out to justify its growth-company valuation.
Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
