WASHINGTON -- Google has used unfair tactics to hobble Microsoft's Bing search engine, Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella said on the witness stand Monday in the landmark U.S. antitrust case against Google, adding there might be limits to how much new artificial-intelligence applications can reshape the market.
Testifying in a packed courtroom in Washington, Nadella endorsed the Justice Department's theory that Google, a unit of parent company Alphabet, cemented its dominance of internet search through agreements with Apple that have made Google's search engine the default on Apple's Safari web browser.
Because of these default agreements, "you get up in the morning, you brush your teeth, and you search on Google," Nadella said. "With that level of habit forming, the only way to change is by changing defaults."
Nadella said Microsoft is trapped in a "vicious cycle" in which Google uses its roughly 90% market share to continually improve its search results and bolster its bottom line, which in turn further reinforces its monopoly. The notion that there is real choice in the search engine market is "bogus," Nadella said, calling Google's agreement with Apple a "fantastic, simple oligopolistic arrangement."
Nadella was called as a witness by the Justice Department during the third week of the trial, which could last 10 weeks. Justice Department lawyer Adam Severt questioned Nadella for about an hour.
The nonjury trial is being overseen by U.S. District Judge Amit Mehta, who has the power to break up Google or order other business changes.
Last week, advocacy groups criticized Mehta, an appointee of President Barack Obama, for allowing Apple executives to testify mostly behind closed doors on the grounds that their testimony involved sensitive business information.
Lawyers for both sides said Nadella's testimony would be entirely open to the public, signaling Mehta has changed his approach to public access.
At one point, the judge jumped in to pepper Nadella with questions about whether a startup could use innovation in artificial intelligence to wrest market share from Google.
Nadella responded that Silicon Valley sees internet search as "the biggest no-fly zone of all" -- that is, the hardest market to crack, adding that there were limits to how much artificial intelligence can reshape the market as it exists today.
"The distribution advantage Google has today doesn't go away," Nadella said. "In fact, if anything, I worry a lot that -- even in spite of my enthusiasm that there is a new angle with AI -- this vicious cycle that I'm trapped in could even become even more vicious because the defaults get reinforced."
In public comments in the past year, Nadella has at times struck a hopeful tone about whether AI tools such as ChatGPT could transform the internet search market. Google also has pointed to such chatbots as examples of new competitors in the online search market. Microsoft has invested billions in OpenAI, the maker of ChatGPT, and in February used the company's technology to create a new version of Bing that can hold lengthy conversations. Nadella called the moment a "new day" in online search at the time.
In his testimony Monday, Nadella suggested he may have been overly enthusiastic in his earlier comments about ChatGPT's potential. "Yeah, I mean, look, that's called exuberance of someone who has like 3% share, that maybe I'll have 3.5% share," Nadella said.
Microsoft's share of the search market has hardly budged since it added the AI features to Bing, The Wall Street Journal reported in August, citing third-party data. The company disputed the data and called the new Bing a success.
Nadella was cross-examined by John Schmidtlein, Google's lead trial counsel at Williams & Connolly. Schmidtlein sought to portray Bing's small market share as a direct result of Microsoft's missteps in internet search.
"Microsoft was caught sleeping when Google introduced Chrome, which was a far superior browser," Schmidtlein said.
Seeming to nod to the point, Nadella responded: "Google did a good job of innovating in the browser."
Credit: By Jan Wolfe and Miles Kruppa
