The public's trust in scientists is way down this year, according to the Pew Research Center. Ya think? "Fifteen days to slow the spread" and "flatten the curve" may have something to do with it. Some airlines still hand out disinfecting wipes as you board -- to combat an airborne virus. Real scientists, like Michael Faraday (1791-1867), whose birthday is this week, would be rolling their eyes.
What did Faraday do? Well, if there was no Faraday, there would be no modern economy. A former bookbinder who studied magnetics, in 1820 he noted that electricity applied to a loop of wire could get a magnet to move through it, an insight that produced the electric motor found in every fan, vacuum cleaner, washing machine and electric car. Faraday then turned his own thinking inside out. In 1831 he invented the dynamo, an inverse motor. Moving a loop of wires around a fixed magnet can induce electricity. Place a dynamo next to running water, like Niagara Falls, and you can generate reliable electricity.
No Faraday, no communications. By running electricity down a long wire to an electromagnetic relay switch, you can ring a bell. This innovation became the telegraph, telephone and today's wireless devices, which are all based on Faraday's induction.
No Faraday, no computers. The 1945 Eniac computer used those same electromagnetic relays, open representing zero and closed representing one. While today's semiconductors are based on the quantum effect -- thank theoretical physicists Niels Bohr and Max Planck for that -- they need gobs of electricity for power, which Faraday's work helps generate.
Faraday took science seriously: "Conclusions are drawn from data, and its principles supported by evidence from facts." Facts! Imagine that.
Why is science so maligned these days? To me, the turning point came in 1984, with (fictional) Columbia professor and ghostbuster Dr. Peter Venkman, played by Bill Murray, who when questioned said, "Back off, man. I'm a scientist."
Venkman's false claim of authority surely influenced Al Gore to claim during his 2007 congressional testimony on climate change, "The science is settled." Wait, wasn't that perjury? Science is never settled. Faraday was ahead of this, saying, "A man who is certain he is right is almost sure to be wrong."
Same for Anthony Fauci, who was wrong on masks, social distancing and school closings, and who claimed his detractors were "really criticizing science, because I represent science." Back off, man.
Faraday's many great quotes are reminders of how scientists should act. He was skeptical of theories lacking real-world proof: "I could trust a fact and always cross-question an assertion." He also embodied science's constant questioning: "He is the wisest philosopher who holds his theory with some doubt."
Sadly, bad science has permeated society. My sons' high-school biology classes spent more time designing a model recycling center than teaching mitosis and meiosis. Math classes in California for six million students are being "reimagined" to focus on equity and fairness. Even though the Bureau of Labor Statistics is projecting 8% growth in STEM jobs by 2029, schools aren't teaching what is needed. Science is becoming a squishy mess.
Maybe it's because the label "science" has been so watered down. The author George Gilder once told me that anything with science after its name isn't really science. Behavioral science? Nope. It often draws its conclusions from studies that can't be replicated. Climate science? Ha, good one. It uses computer models that are too broad and can't figure out what to do with clouds that reflect sunlight, as Steven Koonin's 2021 book, "Unsettled," shows. Yet gazillions of dollars are shoveled toward green goodies to placate the goblins of global gloom. Computer science isn't really a science either; it's more engineering.
Here's the latest science hypocrisy. President Biden gave a speech last week in Boston on his "cancer moonshot" initiative, which will require lots of biology and chemistry. Yet his administration's Federal Trade Commission tried to block DNA sequencer Illumina from buying and ramping up artificial-intelligence-enabled cancer-screening company Grail to find cancer early. Unscientific policy kills scientific advancement.
Can trust in science return? Sure, trust will trickle back so long as real scientists working in obscure labs continue to turn out things seemingly too good to be true: new mRNA drugs, battery technology or energy sources. Faraday knew this: "I have far more confidence in the one man who works mentally and bodily at a matter than in the six who merely talk about it." Faraday was an eternal optimist, rightly so given his two-century track record. He said, "Nothing is too wonderful to be true, if it be consistent with the laws of nature." Disagree with that? Back off, man.
Credit: By Andy Kessler
