A group of former Apple executives is launching a consumer device that will be among the first to use a ChatGPT-powered voice assistant, one of a number of new hardware offerings seeking to free users from the ubiquity of smartphones.
On Thursday, the San Francisco-based startup Humane announced the availability of a wearable device, called the Ai Pin, which sits on a user's chest like a Star Trek badge. The company said its main function is to access an artificial-intelligence assistant that uses ChatGPT, the hugely popular chatbot created by Microsoft-backed OpenAI, primarily to understand commands.
The most novel feature of the device is a laser projection system that displays information on the user's palm instead of a screen. A depth sensor picks up hand gestures to interact with menus such as for responding to texts or changing a song. Tilting the palm in different directions can highlight menu options, and closing the hand brings the device back to a dedicated home page. Humane said that the Ai Pin will be available to order in the U.S. on Nov. 16 and will ship in early 2024.
Humane's product is one of the first devices attempting to use some of the advancements in generative AI with ChatGPT integration. Humane's device is set to test consumers' appetite for AI and the potential for a post-smartphone future, with the outlook far from certain.
"Consumer tech companies are emerging, trying to guess what kind of device will be optimized for AI," said Gene Munster, managing partner of the investment firm Deepwater Asset Management and a longtime Apple analyst.
At The Wall Street Journal's Tech Live conference in October, OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman, who is a personal investor in Humane, acknowledged that he is also putting some thought into new types of hardware built around AI. He said his thinking is still nascent.
"I think there is something great to do, but I don't know what it is yet," Altman said in response to a question about his hardware ambitions. He added: "I think most of the current thinking out there in the world is quite bad about what we can do with this new technology in terms of a new computing platform."
Rewind, another AI startup that Altman has invested in, offers a $59 device worn like a necklace that can record conversations and transfer the recordings to a phone. AI then transcribes and analyzes the recorded conversations.
In a product demonstration of the Ai Pin, Humane showed the AI assistant's capabilities: It responded to bar trivia questions such as who was the U.S. president in 1900, took a picture, translated a foreign language, played music, composed text messages and made phone calls. In one demo, it even illustrated how the user could show the device a bowl of almonds to get nutrition facts.
The AI took around five seconds to respond to most requests, slower than current voice assistants such as Amazon's Alexa and Apple's Siri, although it also was capable of additional tasks. As is typical with other assistants, it at times fumbled certain requests during the demo, such as editing a text message.
With a starting price of $699 and a $24 a month service fee, the Ai Pin will cost in the upper end of a midrange smartphone. The monthly fee includes a cellular service plan and a phone number associated with the device to send and receive text messages as well as making phone calls.
Since the introduction of Apple's iPhone in 2007, there have been a number of attempts to become the next dominant consumer tech platform: smartwatches, AI speakers and virtual-reality headsets, to name a few. But none of them have become as central to people's lives as smartphones.
Even Apple has recently announced its own device that could thrive in a post-iPhone world: the Vision Pro, a $3,499 headset that mixes virtual and augmented reality. Meta Platforms and other companies are already selling similar products that allow users to work and seek entertainment in virtual spaces or interact with digital content interspersed with the real world.
Humane President Imran Chaudhri doesn't think a device like the Ai Pin will replace the smartphone. Rather, in a way similar to how PCs stuck around as smartphones took off, the smartphone will remain, Chaudhri said.
"Many people are seeing and experiencing the power of AI, and I think they're feeling tired about what we've got," said Chaudhri. "The energy we're seeing is really about everybody feeling like they want something new."
Humane was founded by the husband-wife team of Chaudhri and Bethany Bongiorno, former Apple executives who left in 2016. The two began building a team around 2018. It has managed to recruit a number of Apple employees, including Patrick Gates, a former senior director of engineering at Apple, and Ken Kocienda, a former Apple employee on the human-interface team.
OpenAI's Altman was Humane's co-lead investor in an early investment round in 2020 and continued his investment in the company's most recent $100 million round earlier this year. In addition to Altman's investment in Rewind, he reportedly has had talks with Jony Ive, former Apple chief design officer, about a separate AI device. The tech news site The Information and other outlets earlier reported on those discussions.
"Sam and I talk a lot," Chaudhri said, referring to Altman. "We talk about some things we could be doing together."
Bongiorno added: "There's a lot of different things that could be done, and I think that's what's exciting about it."
Credit: By Aaron Tilley
