Donald Trump's election win means the almost certain end of Gary Gensler's leadership of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the ambitious agenda he forged, which garnered plaudits from some as well as resentment from many business leaders, cryptocurrency entrepreneurs and even farmers.
Gensler's push for new climate disclosure rules, strong cryptocurrency enforcement and a focus on environmental, social and corporate-governance issues could be scaled back -- or simply end -- under a new SEC leader of Trump's choosing.
Gensler's Senate-approved term runs to 2026, but SEC leaders customarily resign when a new administration is elected, and he hasn't indicated in public appearances that he would buck the norm.
"Traditionally, presidents get to decide who chairs the SEC and that's a good part of democracy," Gensler told a reporter in October.
He declined to comment for this article.
Gensler's tenure at the SEC coincided with changes in capital markets and business such as the commercial use of generative artificial intelligence, continued growth in the popularity of cryptocurrency and a sustained campaign from some activists and investors to advance environmental and social considerations, in particular climate-related concerns.
Gensler responded with new rules and enforcement pushes, but some of his work remains unfinished and may be reversed by a future chair.
A longtime Goldman Sachs employee who first turned to public service during the Clinton administration, Gensler headed the Commodity Futures Trading Commission under President Obama before getting the nod from President Biden to be SEC chair for a term that began in 2021.
In public appearances, Gensler can come across as light or even quirky -- he is fond of telling audiences of his appreciation for romantic comedies and analyzing issues with AI, for example, by comparing them to a popular movie -- but has faced criticism for what some saw as a heavy-handed agenda.
Trump elicited thunderous applause when speaking to cryptocurrency-industry players by promising to fire Gensler on his first day. Kristin Smith, the chief executive of the Blockchain Association, a trade group, said she is looking forward to that.
The price of bitcoin continues to surge to records following Trump's election, but it remains unclear how a future SEC might treat digital assets.
"That's the million-bitcoin question," said David Lynn, a former chief counsel of the SEC's division of corporate finance who now is a partner at the law firm Goodwin Procter.
Gensler's SEC went after more cryptocurrency-related targets than the commission under his predecessor, Jay Clayton, but their legal approach was quite similar, Lynn said.
Gensler also led one of the SEC's most ambitious rule-making efforts, crafting regulations that demand businesses detail carbon emissions and climate-related risks. That signature initiative has been paused amid legal challenges, and many observers expect it to be scrapped under future leadership.
"That's as good as dead," said Michael Littenberg, a partner who heads the ESG practice at law firm Ropes & Gray.
Sustainable-investment groups that say climate-related information is critical to smart investment decisions praised the rule. But it also drew criticism from a number of quarters.
Republican SEC commissioner Hester Peirce complained that "we are not the Securities and Environment Commission," and thousands of comments poured in, including from small businesses such as farmers worried they would face an onerous compliance burden if they wanted to keep supplying publicly listed companies. Even before the pause, the SEC had already trimmed down the rule.
"He certainly has had a very ambitious agenda," Littenberg said. "I think that his success in implementing that agenda is going to be viewed as mixed."
Some backers of expanded climate rules, though, are hopeful momentum is with them, and rules from Europe and California will require similar reporting from big companies.
"There are concerns," said Steven Rothstein, managing director of the Ceres Accelerator for Sustainable Capital Markets, an advocacy group. "But . . . it is unequivocal that the markets are moving in this direction."
Under Gensler, the SEC set up -- and then quietly disbanded -- an ESG enforcement task force. The SEC said afterward the expertise developed by the task force now resides elsewhere.
Though some of the ambitious signature elements of Gensler's term atop the commission could end up scrapped, the SEC performs a great deal of enforcement work that is expected to continue as usual.
The SEC has more than 1,500 active investigations, said Sanjay Wadhwa, the regulator's acting enforcement head. "We don't put pencils down and say, 'Well, let's just wait for the new folks on the 10th floor,'" Wadhwa said at a recent event, referring to the location in the SEC headquarters housing the chair's office.
Despite some high-profile disagreements, the five-member, bipartisan commission tends to take most of its actions unanimously.
"It takes a while to get an understanding of what this is: five equal votes, but a chair who has an ability to set an agenda collaboratively with the other commissioners," Gensler said at a public event in October. "It doesn't ebb and flow with the election cycle quite as [significantly] as single-headed agencies."
---
H. Claire Brown contributed to this article.
Credit: By Richard Vanderford
