NEW YORK
Weinstein Will
Remain in Rikers
Harvey Weinstein will remain locked up in New York as a court works out whether he should stay in a city jail while awaiting retrial or be sent to California to serve his prison sentence for rape there.
The fallen movie mogul didn't consent to California's extradition request during a court hearing Thursday. The 72-year-old will remain behind bars at the Rikers Island jail, where he was returned to from a city hospital just days ago.
California now needs to produce a warrant signed by the governor within 90 days, Judge Joanne Watters said.
"They are not in a position to extradite Mr. Weinstein because they have not done what they need to do," Diana Fabi Samson, Weinstein's lawyer, said outside court.
Spokespeople for the Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office didn't respond to an email seeking comment.
-- Associated Press
---
CONNECTICUT
Wrong-Way Crash
Leaves Four Dead
A driver going the wrong way on Connecticut's Merritt Parkway crashed head-on into a minivan early Thursday, killing all four people in the vehicles, state police said.
Police said an SUV was traveling northbound in the southbound lanes when it crashed into the minivan and burst into flames at about 1:45 a.m. in Stratford.
Police said all three people in the minivan were killed -- men ages 65 and 80 and an 81-year-old woman, all from Easton, Conn. The SUV is registered to a Massachusetts resident and the medical examiner's office was working to identify the driver.
There was a second accident as well. A state trooper responding to the scene hit a vehicle that was stopped in the roadway with its lights off, as its driver tried to help people in the head-on crash. The trooper had minor injuries.
-- Associated Press
---
CALIFORNIA
State Aims to Use
Generative AI Tools
California could soon deploy generative artificial intelligence tools to help reduce traffic jams, make roads safer and provide tax guidance, among other things, under agreements announced Thursday.
The state is partnering with five companies to create generative AI tools using technologies developed by tech giants such as Microsoft-backed OpenAI and Google-backed Anthropic that would ultimately help the state provide better services to the public, administration officials said.
The five companies will now start a six-month internal trial where the tools are tested and evaluated by state workers. All the tools are considered low risk, meaning they don't interact with confidential data or personal information, an administration spokesperson said.
-- Associated Press
