MADRID -- The limited-liability company was one of the great inventions of the modern era, limiting the exposure of founders to that which they put in. It is almost axiomatic that such legal protection is a necessity of modern business. After all, who would risk the life of entrepreneurship if, should their venture fail, they would become personally liable.
Against that it may come as a surprise that Spain, Europe's fifth-largest economy, has any entrepreneurs at all, for while Spain has a form of limited liability, as Gary Stewart found out, the limitations aren't all that limited. Mr. Stewart is now the director of Telefonica's Wayra incubator academy in Madrid, a project to help start-ups, but had been an entrepreneur. To his horror, his bank account was one day mysteriously emptied.
"In Spain, sometimes it's really hard to justify creating a start-up. Even if you believe in yourself and your project, it's probable that your first intent will be a failure. And the Spanish government will hold you personally liable for many of the costs of that failure. In my case, I still remember going to the bank one day and finding that the government had taken literally every cent from my account. I had invested in a real-estate agency that had employed six Spaniards. I'd honestly thought that I'd kept up with all of the company's tax and social-security obligations. But the government discovered an unpaid fine and held me personally liable. They had no problem leaving me without any resources to pay my rent or to go to the grocery store."
While many European entrepreneurs bemoan the lack of support from their respective governments, it seems that those in Spain may have had more substance to their grievances.
This matters because while the rest of the European economy flounders, the Internet sector is one glimmer of hope. Helping, or at least not impeding, that growth has to be a key government objective.
As any entrepreneur or VC will tell you, start-ups live or die by the talent they can attract. In Spain, competing against the rest of Europe, there are additional obstacles.
Take for example the matter of stock options. "Stock options in Spain are taxed at an absurd rate," says Marcel Rafart of VCs Nauta Capital. Broadly they are taxed as income, not capital gains. "Start-ups in Spain have difficulty in attracting talent because of the taxation of the stock options."
For Jose Martin Cabiedes, a partner in VCs Cabiedes & Partners, it was simple. "The single biggest issue [for entrepreneurs] is stock options."
For start-ups, labor flexibility is disproportionately important; cash-strapped start-ups often need to take on, or lay off, workers at short notice. Firing people in a country that has youth unemployment in excess of 40% is a thorny issue. Recent changes have made it less costly to shed workers, but, says Martin Varsavsky, CEO of Fon, a collaborative global Wi-Fi network, it is still too hard. "Incompetence is not grounds to fire someone," he said. "No matter how bad they are."
However, at least according to some (if not all) in the sector, the government is beginning to sit up and take notice; changes in the form of an entrepreneur law are promised, and even if they haven't yet been delivered, some are hopeful that things are moving in the right direction.
"They are reaching out to the community" said Aquilino Pena, of VCs Kibo Ventures. "Spain has taken some big steps, but there is a lot more to do." A view partially shared by Mr. Rafart. "The government is happier dealing with the big ships of the Spanish economy. There is no digital agenda so far but I am starting to perceive an awareness of entrepreneurship."
However, the health of the start-up community is not all in the hands of the politicians. Funding obstacles remain, although not, perhaps in the way that you might imagine given the parlous state of the Spanish economy. Mr. Cabiedes said that paradoxically venture, often seen as a highly risky asset class, has become a relatively more attractive investment.
"While the risk profile of classical assets has moved way up, the risk profile of VC investment has stayed the same, or even been reduced.
"[People] are frightened of putting money in equity, real rates for bonds are negative, property is not something you aren't going to look at. You either keep the money under your pillow or you invest in VCs."
But, he said, there was a funding gap between early funding, which was relatively easy to get, and later-stage growth funding which was very much harder. "Companies are being starved of growth capital."
But by no means is it all gloomy. Wayra's demonstration day this week showed an impressively diverse range of start-ups, and the program has reviewed some 12,000 business plans from around the world. AndWhile there is always more a government can do, entrepreneurs like Sindhu Joseph, CEO of Cognicor, a Barcelona artificial intelligence company, was hugely optimistic about the future. She said the lack of full liability protection had been an issue for her, but she has started up her company nonetheless.
And Mr. Pena pointed out that Spain is often seen as a bridge between low-growth western Europe, and high-growth Latin America.
Telefonica itself was a case in point; 50% of its revenue now comes from its Latin America operations.
Mr. Rafart was also greatly inspired by the success of Zara, the Spanish fashion giant. "I am 45. For the first time in my life the biggest company on the Spanish stock market is younger than me. Traditional companies, the banks, the utilities, had always dominated.
"But now you have a guy, Amancio Ortega, who started a company himself and who has created a global giant. These are the success stories we need in Spain."
Credit: By Ben Rooney
