When the pandemic hit workplaces across the world last year, it upended long-held rhythms of collaboration and communication in office parks and high-rises everywhere. Meetings went virtual, and conference rooms were replaced by colleagues assembled on laptop screens in Brady Bunch-style boxes.
Is it time to rethink how meetings are conducted in more fundamental ways? The Wall Street Journal spoke with management experts, technologists, academics and startup founders to hear their thoughts on how technology has the potential to transform meetings, far beyond video calls. Their vision is futuristic, but in some cases, the technology is already being piloted by its creators and by employers.
Proponents say that if the technology is properly applied, companies could gain greater insight into their workers, while also making meetings -- a notorious timesuck -- both more productive and more inclusive. Critics say elements of tools under discussion raise concerns about worker privacy and may face resistance as being too intrusive.
From heart-rate monitors for meeting participants to artificial intelligence that measures engagement, take a look at examples of what meetings might look like in the coming years.
Future meetings are likely to blend in-person and virtual participation. In some cases, that will mean colleagues from multiple locations -- even some sitting at their laptops in the same room -- participating in videoconferences. Doing so places everyone on the same visual footing. Such video technology can be used to better gauge worker sentiment and participation, and allow artificial intelligence to assist in moderation.
1. Who's Paying Attention? In years past, researchers trying to analyze meeting dynamics relied on human observations and copious note-taking. Here, a worker's posture and expressions are captured on video and analyzed to try to determine positivity and engagement levels through visual cues such as smiles, furrowed brows or nods of the head. Body posture can also be measured with help from 360-degree cameras, making it apparent when participants are sitting up and looking alert, or slumped and disengaged. Video calls simplify the process of such tracking and analysis because it is easier to capture participant behavior.
2. Technology companies say they have heard employers express interest in such applications, but they remain in the pilot phase. The ability to better track participant expressions and body language could help give meeting facilitators a better sense of how well their message is being received, and their audience's engagement level. Here, a simple line chart tracks the level of positive engagement among people present.
3. AI to Manage the Flow: In the future, technologists say, meetings could be aided by the presence of an AI-powered moderator that could occasionally pipe up to give feedback or facilitate flow, for example by noting who hasn't spoken up yet and inviting them to participate. It could also offer gentle reminders for when someone has gone over time, or interject if it observes that certain people are getting cut off or talked over.
4. Meeting facilitators could draw on such analysis to see when energy levels are flagging and adjust the agenda accordingly, and also see which participants seem less engaged and might benefit from a breakout session.
5. A Seat at the Table: Across the country, employers are more closely scrutinizing the demographic composition of their C-suites and employee base. With more lawmakers and institutions weighing regulations that require companies to institute greater levels of ethnic and gender diversity, future meetings will also likely include more attention to who's sitting around the table.
6. Immersive Presentations: Many meetings require the use of PowerPoint or other presentations that involve switching between numerous charts. Here, a participant views material that is being presented with the help of virtual-reality glasses. The 360-degree perspective allows participants to view material simply by turning their head to look at charts and tables, rather than flipping back and forth.
7. A Fitbit for Meetings: A smartwatch equipped with an AI-powered coaching tool could offer feedback -- either concurrently with a meeting or afterward -- on a participant's overall performance, including how engaged people seemed to be during their remarks and how much they spoke relative to their colleagues.
8. The Virtual Office Party: Many companies say work-from-home arrangements have been successful and want to continue such setups, even after the pandemic subsides. To enhance that experience, some are also experimenting with VR offices where people can show up to work in avatar form, to better replicate the feeling of casual chitchat and spontaneous meetings. To try to conjure up the in-person experience, such environments are designed so that a user only hears the voices of nearby avatars as they move around.
9. Meet the Avatars: This year, many people turned to video backgrounds that hide their messy bedrooms or children's toys. Future virtual meetings could go one step further and feature the use of avatars that would mimic a person's real-time facial expressions, so colleagues could still interact with each other, but in a way that would feel less intrusive than having a camera on in the home environment. Such technology already exists, and would enable people to preserve the feeling of speaking and interacting with each other without the strain of having colleagues stare closely at your face for extended periods.
10. Data-Driven Collaboration: Sensor-equipped badges are already being used in workplaces ranging from hospitals to offices to track employee movements, including when they enter and leave and how they use the environment. In the future, employers could draw on such data to track interpersonal interactions between employees, and use that information when considering who to include in meetings and which employees might collaborate particularly well across departments.
11. AI That Sets the Agenda: Instead of note-taking by hand, audio from meetings could be recorded, transcribed and analyzed with the help of AI. Information such as employee sentiment, action items and suggestions for follow-up meetings could subsequently be provided to participants and meeting facilitators. Employers are already using similar language processing to monitor meetings and offer feedback to staff.
12. Take a Deep Breath: Some companies have already piloted efforts to monitor employee heart rates to gauge how such indicators may correlate with performance. Companies could also use this data to coach employees to take deeper breaths during key presentations or decision-making sessions, and to better understand how employees react to high-stress situations.
(See accompanying graphics -- WSJ Jan. 15, 2021)

Credit: By Te-Ping Chen and Kevin Hand
