Tech companies, health insurers and governments are turning to artificial intelligence to predict potential coronavirus outbreaks and help guide policy decisions about social-distancing as pressure mounts to end lockdowns.
The software, they say, can learn to flag disease risk and outbreak threats based on personal data, such as medical history, real-time body-temperature readings and current symptom reports, as well as demographics.
The Trump administration said Thursday that states will establish their own time lines for reopening their economies.
Central to such efforts is broad and accurate testing for Covid-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus. Yet testing lags behind. As many as a third of test results could be inaccurate, health experts have said. And states such as Florida and Michigan have tested only about 1% of their populations, according to state-health department and U.S. Census data.
"Until we get true, widespread testing, we have to rely on any and all signals," said Nirav Shah, a senior scholar at Stanford University and former health commissioner for New York state who also advises health tech companies.
In early April, outreach nurses at CareATC Inc., a Tulsa, Okla.-based operator of employer-sponsored clinics, started calling some employees of clients to advise them on proper hygiene and basic social-distancing strategies, as well as what to do if they experience flulike symptoms.
For most, the nurses didn't have individuals' health records; rather an artificial-intelligence system had identified those at high risk of getting really sick if they were to become coronavirus-infected, according to Kimberly Hutton, CareATC's chief medical officer.
The software flagged 255 people from a group of 4,800 associated with an employer in Utah that contracts with the health-services provider. CareATC said the system was subsequently extended to an employer in Georgia and one in Arizona.
The system, developed by clinical AI company Jvion, uses a combination of lifestyle, hospitalization, emergency-room use, mortality and outcomes data. It also incorporates social determinants of health, including socioeconomic status, education and ZIP Code, according to John Frownfelter, the Atlanta-based company's chief medical information officer.
Some scientists caution that the ability of AI to predict outbreaks or identify at-risk populations hasn't been validated. Accurate testing data and large-scale contact tracing are still the gold standard for controlling outbreaks, they say.
Current tech-enabled efforts can suffer from the same limitation as previous attempts to use AI in health care: incomplete information. And, in the present crisis, unknowns abound because the virus is so new.
Decision makers are desperate for information to guide difficult policy choices that must balance public health and economic well-being.
Some Asian countries harnessed tech-enabled surveillance programs, but their strategies were bolstered by extensive testing, especially in South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore.
Developers say there are early signs that AI can work.
In Israel, AI researchers at the Weizmann Institute of Science are collaborating with local governments and health insurers to conduct surveys that ask people if they are experiencing Covid-19 symptoms, have tested positive for the new coronavirus or came in contact with someone who has.
So far, they have received more than one million responses, including several thousand from patients with confirmed Covid-19 diagnoses, said Eran Segal, the Weizmann computational biologist leading the project.
On April 5, the system, which was described in a peer-reviewed paper in the journal Nature Medicine, flagged the northern city of Umm El-Fahm as a potential coronavirus hot spot. The survey data showed a roughly 50% increase in symptoms relative to the rest of the country, Dr. Segal said.
Based on those findings, plus other available data, officials started doing more testing and found an outbreak, he said.
Facebook Inc., in partnership with researchers at Carnegie Mellon University, has announced a similar initiative among the social network's users in the U.S. The company plans to roll out symptom surveys internationally if early results are promising, according to a post by Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg earlier this month.
Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Apple Inc. are planning to launch a contact-tracing app that would let health officials reverse-engineer ill patients' whereabouts using Bluetooth signals. Participation by smartphone users would be voluntary.

Credit: By Daniela Hernandez
