New York state will convene a panel to study the impact of artificial intelligence, robotics and automation on the state and suggest areas of potential regulation, according to a bill signed by Gov. Andrew Cuomo.
The new commission will have a broad mandate to study everything from the potential effect on workers to moral questions of developing humanoids. Assemblyman Clyde Vanel, a Democrat from Queens, said technology already had advanced considerably, and fictional scenarios in which robots become self-aware could one day happen.
"These Sci-Fi movies like 'Terminator,' like 'Ex Machina' -- we're approaching this faster and faster," he said.
There is no single state agency in New York charged with regulating technology. Both Mr. Vanel and state Sen. Diane Savino chair committees overseeing legislation on the topic. They hope the new panel will help deal with issues more comprehensively.
"It's not just cyborgs and chatbots. It's every way we're using technology to do tech in the workplace that can have an effect on our economy," said Ms. Savino, a Staten Island Democrat.
Labor unions in New York are concerned about technology displacing jobs and the rise of the "gig economy," where many people work as independent contractors rather than employees entitled to full benefits.
Mr. Vanel rattled off a dozen policy considerations.
"We obviously don't want to have artificial intelligence systems that are programmed to harm humans. What else should we ban outright?" Mr. Vanel asked. "Should we be making artificially intelligent humanoids? Is it OK to have a robot dog?"
New York City has a task force to review algorithms used by the city government to make decisions, such as school placements. Julie Samuels, executive director of Tech:NYC, an industry group, said she is happy the state panel had a broader mandate.
The commission must issue a report by Dec. 1, 2020. Five of its 13 members will be appointed by Mr. Cuomo, one each by the chancellors of the state's university system and New York City's university system, and six by the conferences in the Legislature.

Credit: By Jimmy Vielkind
