A rally in technology stocks propelled the S&P 500 to an all-time high Friday.
The S&P 500 rose 1.2% to 4839.81, breaking a streak of more than 500 trading sessions without a record. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 395 points, or 1.1%, to close at 37863.80, also a record. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite climbed 1.7%.
Shares of tech companies led the charge higher. An upbeat earnings report this week from chip maker Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. spurred a resurgence in semiconductor stocks like Nvidia, Advanced Micro Devices and Broadcom. The PHLX Semiconductor Index gained 4%. Shares of Apple, which uses TSMC chips, rose 1.6%.
"That earnings report took the leash off the bull," said Jeff Kilburg, founder and CEO of KKM Financial. "All we needed was a spark to get the S&P 500 back into positive territory."
The recent comeback in shares of chip makers echoes the excitement around artificial-intelligence companies that boosted the stock market last year. Since the S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite are weighted by market capitalizations, shares of big tech companies have an outsize influence on index performance.
"We've seen a resumption of leadership in technology stocks again here over the back half of this week," Mark Luschini, chief investment strategist at Janney Montgomery Scott.
U.S. stocks stumbled at the beginning of this year after the S&P 500's 24% gain in 2023. Investor optimism about how quickly the Federal Reserve might pivot to cutting interest rates has waned. Traders are pricing in a roughly 46% probability that the Fed will reduce rates at its March policy meeting, down from 68% one month earlier, according to federal-funds futures.
The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note -- a benchmark for borrowing costs from mortgages to corporate loans -- rose to 4.145% on Friday.
Investors are watching data closely to gauge whether the economy has slowed enough for inflation to ease but stayed strong enough to avoid a recession. That "soft landing" scenario would allow the Fed to shift to cutting interest rates.
"The market is still looking for proof to justify the rally over the past three months," said Scott Duba, chief investment officer at Prime Capital Investment Advisors.
Data released Friday reflected continued pressure on the U.S. housing market. Existing home sales, which make up most of the housing market, slid 19% in 2023 from the prior year to 4.09 million, the lowest full-year level since 1995, the National Association of Realtors reported.
Meanwhile, a measure of U.S. consumer confidence reflected improving sentiment. The preliminary reading Friday of the University of Michigan's consumer-confidence index climbed to 78.8 points in January from 69.7 in December, beating consensus economist expectations. Inflation expectations for next year fell to 2.9% from 3.1% in December, the lowest since the final month of 2020.
Several companies released earnings reports this week. Results from regional banks in recent days showed steep declines in quarterly earnings. Still, shares of Huntington Bancshares, Regions Financial and Fifth Third Bancorp all rose about 3% or more Friday after the lenders released results.
Shares of Travelers jumped 6.7% after the insurance giant reported higher revenue and income last quarter, helped by increases in premiums for auto and home insurance.
Spirit Airlines surged 17% after the company raised its fourth-quarter guidance and outlined steps it is taking to shore up liquidity. The stock had been beaten down after a ruling blocking its sale to JetBlue Airways.
Shares of Wayfair gained 10% after the online retailer said it would lay off around 13% of employees. Macy's stock declined 1.7% after the department-store chain said it would lay off about 13% of corporate staff and close five stores.
Credit: By Hannah Miao
