Advertising has turned its attention to what it hopes will be the next new engine of growth for the industry: direct-to-consumer marketers.
Direct-to-consumer businesses, which offer everything from mattresses to toothbrushes to home workouts, start by cutting out middlemen such as physical retail distributors. And they relentlessly focus on measures such as the cost to acquire a new customer -- while relying on advertising, usually on social media, as the main way to grow.
Now ad executives hope that the booming DTC business can become a major new revenue source for the industry, complementing big, established categories like insurance, pharmaceuticals and tech. Unlike those standbys -- whose spending is well-defined and already baked into ad sellers' expectations -- DTC brands play in an apparently unlimited range of products and could have rapid expansion ahead.
DTC companies look especially promising to ad executives in traditional media, such as television. As DTC companies mature, often eventually opening stores or going on shelves at national retailers, they're devoting more marketing dollars to traditional venues to expand their customer base and implement longer-term strategies such as a brand building.
DTC has "been a driver for digital spending for several years, and for the last two years, it's been a driver for traditional media as well," says Vincent Letang, executive vice president of global market intelligence at Magna, which is part of Interpublic Group of Cos.
For a picture of U.S. ad spending by DTC companies, Magna tracks a basket of 13 companies that it considers disrupters, including footwear seller Allbirds Inc. and bedding marketer Casper Sleep Inc. Their spending increased 35% last year to $378 million, and is likely to grow another 30% this year and 25% next year.
And they're spreading out from their usual advertising havens such as social media. The 13 brands' national TV spending soared 42% in 2018 to $137 million, for instance, and is expected to rise 34% this year and 25% in 2020, Magna says.
For some DTC brands, diversification is partly about protection. Two years ago, for instance, Bombas LLC decided to move a big chunk of its marketing budget away from Facebook and increased it in more-traditional outlets. The online sock marketer feared its strategy could be hurt if the social network unexpectedly changed an algorithm or shifted a policy.
"Facebook is down from about 85% of our ad spend to about 30% or 35%," says Kate Huyett, chief marketing officer at Bombas.
Diversification is also a matter of taking growth to another level. DTC brands are "reaching the scale where they want to talk to the mass market, to consumers everywhere in the country, not just the trendsetters," Mr. Letang says.
After a certain point for a DTC brand, increasing spending in the same place begins to produce diminishing returns, says Heidi Zak, co-founder and co-chief executive at DTC bra company ThirdLove Inc. The company says it has sold more than four million bras since it started taking orders in 2014, and has had annualized revenue growth of 180% over the past four years. It declines to disclose its sales figures or ad budget.
"Today, when people ask me where we are, I say pretty much everywhere," Ms. Zak says, rattling off advertising channels including Facebook, Pinterest, search, podcasts, radio, direct mail, print and TV. The company ran its first national branding campaign last fall to advance a theme of "To Each, Her Own" -- with a longer-term goal rather than immediate sales.
The chase is on for DTC ad dollars, and media companies are courting clients in the sector. Comcast Corp.'s NBCUniversal last November teamed up with ad agency Giant Spoon to pursue DTC advertisers and has four salespeople working exclusively on the category.
NBCU is also trying to become more flexible, to better mirror the digital platforms where DTC brands grow up. To give them openings to experiment without having to shell out for a pricey prime-time commercial in a hit like "This Is Us," for example, the company deploys a machine-learning tool that analyzes scripts to find spots where ads could appear next to relevant scenes in more affordable programming.
It has struck partnerships with companies such as media-measurement firm iSpot.TV to provide faster feedback on what's working, so clients can make changes in the middle of their campaigns if necessary.
Social media, the traditional DTC home ground, is also making efforts to court the companies. Alphabet Inc.'s Google in April convened a daylong meeting of its new DTC Council, with 15 executives from companies including women's fashion marketer Lulu's Fashion Lounge LLC and personal styling service Stitch Fix Inc.
"What we heard from these leaders is that they are focused on performance metrics, such as driving new customer acquisitions, subscriptions and purchases," a Google spokesman said in an email. It plans a second meeting in October.
How far the DTC spending and diversification go, and for which brands, remains to be seen. Some DTC companies, for instance, will likely retain their focus on social media.
Consider Vision Path Inc., which does business as Hubble Contacts. The company, which offers prescription contact-lens subscriptions, has bought TV commercials for about two years, typically advertising at off hours such as late night, says Ben Cogan, co-founder and co-chief executive. But for Hubble and other DTC brands that essentially offer a single product online, paid social remains dominant, he says.
"This is a business that lines up best with paid social, the same way that brand marketing on TV lines up best with mass retail distribution," says Jesse Horwitz, the other co-founder and co-chief executive. "You have to be cognizant of the business you're operating."
---
Mr. Ives is editor of CMO Today at The Wall Street Journal in New York. He can be reached at nat.ives@wsj.com.

Credit: By Nat Ives
