Disillusioned by progressive politics in the world's technology epicenter, Silicon Valley's venture capitalists dug into their wallets and spent big this election to pull San Francisco toward the center, with mixed results.
Investors notched wins, such as establishing a moderate majority on the city's board of supervisors, which enacts local policies, among other functions.
They also sank money into losing causes. Venture investors made sizable contributions to the nearly $15 million raised by a former venture capitalist's mayoral campaign and a ballot measure effort to make the city more efficient, according to political-action committees and city campaign-finance records. Both of those efforts failed.
Venture capitalists say their stepped-up efforts to usher in moderate Democrats and more center-left policies will improve the city and stem what some say is a deteriorating business environment. Nationally, technology mogul Elon Musk and venture-capital elite Marc Andreessen echoed similar arguments in supporting Donald Trump's presidential victory.
Venture investors made smaller efforts to support moderate candidates and policies during the midterms in 2022.
High-profile figures in the venture world, such as Garry Tan, who leads startup accelerator Y Combinator, say a moderate shift could help curb the trend of entrepreneurs and fellow investors decamping for emerging tech hubs in other states. They say they are being pushed out by high costs of living and doing business in the Bay Area and by rising rates of crime and homelessness, which they attributed to progressive policies.
The exodus was stark during the pandemic but has lessened as the artificial intelligence boom breathes new life into the city. The region's concentration of talent is a key driver of innovation and should be protected, investors said.
After it rose during the pandemic, crime in San Francisco is down 30% so far this year from the same period last year, according to police department figures for all types of crime. Meanwhile, the number of homeless in the city has risen 21% since 2017, according to local government counts.
Tan contributed funds to GrowSF, a tech-backed San Francisco-based PAC pushing moderate causes.
Michael Moritz, a venture capitalist who spent 38 years with Sequoia Capital and roughly as many years living in San Francisco, emerged as one of the largest donors to moderate causes this election. He spent roughly $3 million supporting former venture capitalist Mark Farrell's losing bid for mayor and the failed proposal aimed at city efficiency, according to campaign-finance records.
Despite the losses, Moritz highlighted moderate wins in the board of supervisors races and said the campaigns he backed helped the moderate movement take forward steps in helping San Francisco correct its course.
"[Progressive leaders] provided one of the most hostile business environments for small businesses and big businesses in the country and have driven many of the successful companies out of town," Moritz said. "The result of it has become evident in San Francisco and that's why you have this enormous rebellion against these forces."
Progressives, meanwhile, are casting the venture-backed efforts as a failure.
Eric Jaye, a San Francisco-based political strategist who this election worked on behalf of progressive candidates, said more venture money than ever influenced this election.
"The return on their investment was minuscule," Jaye said. "If you outspend your opponents and lose most of your races, I don't call that successful."
Tech money in large part bankrolled the mayoral race in which Farrell, the former managing director of San Francisco-based Thayer Ventures, fell short. Farrell previously served as an interim mayor and was on the board of supervisors for seven years. City ethics officials hit Farrell with a $108,000 fine on the eve of the election after they found he violated campaign finance rules, an issue Farrell said was an accounting error and related to how staff time was allotted.
Despite Farrell's defeat, some tech-affiliated advocacy groups cheered the win of moderate and Levi Strauss heir Daniel Lurie. Venture capitalists and tech broadly aligned behind Farrell, Lurie and current San Francisco Mayor London Breed.
In the race, tech money went to opposing the leading progressive, Aaron Peskin, according to campaign-finance records. GrowSF, which is headed by a pair of former engineers who worked at companies including Apple, Amazon.com and Google, poured nearly $300,000 into opposing Peskin.
GrowSF candidates notched at least two wins on the city's board of supervisors. Moderate challenger Bilal Mahmood, who was the chief executive of AI startup ClearBrain, unseated progressive incumbent and Democratic Socialist party member Dean Preston. In another board race, Danny Sauter, a moderate who co-founded advertising tech startup Bamboo in 2014, beat a more progressive challenger.
Credit: By Marc Vartabedian
