[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The challenge with being Nvidia these days is that billions of dollars just isn't that cool anymore.
The chip maker used to cite its addressable markets in that denomination, which was befitting for a company generating less than $5 billion in annual revenue, mostly from graphics processors used by PC gamers.
But Nvidia's business has grown more than fivefold since those days, with its chips now being snapped up for everything from game consoles to data centers to self-driving cars. Nvidia told analysts Tuesday that it now sees a total addressable market of $1 trillion for its growing line of chips and related software.
The company has good reasons to aim high. Even with an 11% correction since the start of the year, Nvidia's market capitalization of about $655 billion is well above that of any other chip maker. A not-inconceivable 55% rally would put the company's market capitalization above the $1 trillion threshold. This is a stock that more than doubled in value in each of the last two years.
Fortunately, many things are going Nvidia's way. Tech giants such as Amazon, Microsoft and Google continue to pour billions into their networks to satisfy growing demand for their cloud computing services, while Facebook parent Meta Platforms is planning a 66% jump in capital spending this year to start building on its metaverse dreams.
Market-research firm Dell'Oro Group projects total data-center capital expenditures to rise by double digits this year, while analysts see Nvidia's data-center segment revenue growing by 52%. And that won't even include the company's first Arm-based central processor for servers, which Nvidia said that it plans to start shipping in 2023.
But Nvidia will have to go beyond its two core markets of videogaming and data centers to maintain its position at the top of the chip stack. The company raised hopes for its automotive segment Tuesday, predicting an "inflection" in the latter half of this year. This business has contributed a low single-digit to the company's overall revenue base. Analysts now expect sales to jump more than 30% annually over the next two years -- topping $1 billion for the fiscal year ending January 2024, according to FactSet.
Nvidia's long-running work in artificial intelligence also has created a vast library of software assets. The company sees a $300 billion market licensing its software to businesses building up their own AI capabilities and for its "Omniverse" technology -- Nvidia's term for the metaverse. Analyst Chris Caso of Raymond James called software a "catalyst for future gross margin expansion" for Nvidia.
Nvidia certainly has big dreams. Its record of actually delivering big makes them harder to dismiss.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
