Lime, the micro-mobility company known for bike and e-scooter programs, will launch a new electric-moped share system in New York City on Friday.
Wayne Ting, Lime's chief executive officer, said the company will start with 100 mopeds in Queens, Brooklyn and lower Manhattan, with the aim of increasing to 500 vehicles in the weeks ahead. The company expects to expand to the Bronx shortly afterward.
E-mopeds were first introduced for sharing in New York City in 2018 by Revel. As its fleet grew to 3,000 vehicles, complaints and accidents increased.
Last year three Revel riders or passengers, as well as one pedestrian, were killed in separate incidents. Revel suspended its service for a month last summer as it said it added safety features to try to ensure that riders wear a helmet and drive sensibly.
The firm has several safety features for riders, including a sensor that checks whether a helmet has been removed from its case and artificial intelligence that scans a photograph that riders take of themselves before each trip to match with a driver's license on file, Mr. Ting said.
Lime mopeds will have a top speed of 28 miles an hour.
San Francisco-based Lime, which is legally known as Neutron Holdings Inc., is one of three companies recently selected for an electric-scooter-share pilot program in New York City. The program is expected to begin this summer in the East Bronx.
E-scooters are most often used for trips of about one mile. Mr. Ting said electric-mopeds are part of Lime's plan to offer a selection of vehicles for trips of up to 5 miles.
"This is a mode that is fast, can go further, has some space for cargo and helps take the step of truly disrupting transportation," he said.
Some mopeds will be placed in outer-borough neighborhoods, some of which have limited mass-transit connections, Mr. Ting said.
A spokesman for Lime, Jacob Tugendrajch, said areas would include the Ocean Hill, Flatlands and East Flatbush sections of Brooklyn, as well as Astoria in Queens.
The mopeds will cost $1 to unlock and 39 cents a minute to ride. Lime will offer discounts to low-income riders and other groups including front-line and hospitality workers, teachers and performance artists.
Scott Gastel, a spokesman for New York City's Transportation Department, said Lime has agreed to abide by the same safety measures as those adopted by Revel last year.
"We'll watch closely to ensure they honor their commitments, and we'll work with our partners in government, including the City Council, on regulations to keep e-moped scooter riders safe," Mr. Gastel added.
Credit: By Paul Berger

Location: New York City New York; United States--US
