Tech geeks often joke about salivating over exciting new gadgets, but it's rare to find one that literally makes you drool.
One exception: the Colgate Smart Electronic Toothbrush E1 ($100, apple.com), an iPhone-linked dental tool that offers real-time guidance as you clean your teeth.
The brush syncs with the Colgate Connect app using Bluetooth. Once you indicate which hand you brush with, the app invites you to use its "smart brushing analyzer," which taps artificial intelligence to map your mouth and give feedback on how long you've brushed and which spots you've missed.
The E1's vibrating bristles were more comfortable than those of most electric toothbrushes I've tried, but on my first run I earned a scolding. It seems I only brushed for 79 seconds, rather than the recommended two-minute minimum, and skipped five teeth entirely. On later brushes, a pushy in-app coach painstakingly guided me through scrubbing both sides of the teeth in every corner of my mouth.
The coach offers an illustrated view of your teeth, tracking each section as you brush and warning if you go astray. The biggest challenge was figuring out exactly where to prop my phone; I needed to see it clearly but not risk drooling on it (as I learned the hard way) or accidentally elbowing it into the toilet.
Colgate's E1 is part of a wave of digitally enabled toothbrushes aiming to bring the Internet of Things inside the mouths of smartphone users. It's only available for purchase through Apple and only works with iOS devices.
For Android users, Philips Sonicare offers its high-end DiamondClean Smart (from $230, philips.com) with multiple brushing modes. Oral-B's PRO series includes Bluetooth-enabled models (from $80, oralb.com) that offer real-time guidance and warn you if you're brushing too hard. And the child-friendly Playbrush ($30, playbrush.com) lets kids rack up "points" in its app's games by thoroughly cleaning their teeth.
Colgate's Connect app also includes family-friendly games, like a pirate-themed quest for gold, and allows you to share brushing logs with a dentist (if you dare).
Good news, Dr. Jacobs: I'm now apparently brushing more thoroughly, and I've stopped needing to wash my phone when I'm done.

Credit: By Steven Melendez
