WASHINGTON, D.C. -- Federal agencies have pitched more than 1,000 use cases for generative artificial intelligence, but the U.S. government's cybersecurity chief wants risks associated with the technology properly addressed before they can press ahead.
Generative AI tools such as OpenAI's ChatGPT and Google's Bard piqued the interest of companies and government agencies for their ability to parse large data sets and answer conversational queries. But as with any technology on government radar, caution is in order, said Chris DeRusha, federal chief information security officer at the Office of Management and Budget, speaking at a FAIR Institute conference of cybersecurity and risk managers.
"We can't just break the rules and have use without understanding the risk," he said, adding that federal policies and parameters for assessing the cyber risks of AI are coming soon.
The Biden administration has said a federal policy governing the use of generative AI is due out this fall, along with an executive order.
"That process is being run out of the West Wing chief of staff's office, so that's everything you need to know about priority," DeRusha said.
Federal agencies drafted hundreds of proposals for generative and other forms of AI. The Energy Department wants to use AI to build intuitive interfaces between its vast databases and its employees.
The Department of Homeland Security, which houses the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, wants to use AI to manage cybersecurity alerts.
Agencies must thoroughly understand the data used to train any AI systems they roll out, as well as test the systems for security holes and develop a sound process for disclosing vulnerabilities, said Eric Goldstein, executive assistant director for cybersecurity at CISA.
"It's a journey we're in the middle of right now," Goldstein said.
Corporate cyber executives are grappling with similar challenges. The rapid proliferation of generative AI tools is creating risks faster than companies can keep up.
Many of the tools are free, so employees can experiment with them outside the purview of cybersecurity departments. Understanding risks is key to making the tools as effective as possible, technology and cyber leaders say.
Kurt John, chief security officer at Expedia Group, said he would like to use generative AI to interpret data from many sources to understand cyber trends inside and outside the online travel company.
In addition to potential vulnerabilities inside AI-built systems, companies must worry about new risks, especially hackers penetrating networks to poison AI models or the data that feeds them, John said.
Any organization using AI, he added, must consider, "What's the impact of your AI making an incorrect decision?"
DeRusha urged corporate security chiefs to stop thinking about cyber risk at their companies in isolation.
Security chiefs should be willing to disclose vulnerabilities they see, DeRusha said, because the same or similar problems could be stopped elsewhere, keeping other companies and government agencies more secure. "We together are managing the nation's risk," he said.
Credit: By Kim S. Nash
