BEIJING -- As hundreds of millions of Chinese begin traveling for the Lunar New Year holiday, police are showing off a new tool for crowd surveillance: mobile facial-recognition units mounted on eyeglasses.
China is already a global leader in deploying cutting-edge surveillance technologies based on artificial intelligence. The mobile devices could expand the reach of that surveillance, allowing authorities to peer into places that fixed cameras aren't scanning, and to respond more quickly.
The eyeglass-mounted camera is equipped with facial-recognition technology capable of "highly effective screening" of crowds for fugitives traveling under false pretenses, the official People's Daily newspaper reported Monday. The newspaper article included images of a policewoman wearing a sunglasses version of the device at a railway station in Zhengzhou, the capital of central China's Henan province.
China monitors train and air travel, and sometimes people who are facing punishment for infractions will try to get around travel restrictions by using a borrowed identity.
While the technology is probably useful in catching criminals, it could also make it easier for authorities to track political dissidents and profile ethnic minorities, said William Nee, China researcher at Amnesty International.
"The potential to give individual police officers facial-recognition technology in sunglasses could eventually make China's surveillance state all the more ubiquitous," he said.
Public-security authorities in Zhengzhou didn't immediately respond to requests for comment.
Beijing-based LLVision Technology Co. worked with police departments in Henan, the eastern province of Shandong and the northwestern region of Xinjiang for a year to develop the devices, according to LLVision Chief Executive Wu Fei.
He said the devices are based on wearable video cameras that lack facial-recognition capability that the company sells to businesses and consumers. However, the company also sells a model that companies can use for identification purposes at workplaces or corporate events, Mr. Wu said.
"It gives you the ability to check anywhere," he said.
The devices try to address a speed problem that bedevils fixed-camera facial-recognition systems at subway stations, border crossings and other places where authorities seek to identify fugitives. In many cases, by the time authorities rush to where a suspect has been identified, their target has melted back into the crowd.
"By making wearable glasses, with [artificial intelligence] on the front end, you get instant and accurate feedback," Mr. Wu said. "You can decide right away what the next interaction is going to be."
Unlike many fixed-camera facial-recognition systems that remotely connect cameras to vast facial databases stored in the cloud, the police glasses are wired directly to a hand-held device that contains an offline database -- allowing them to work more quickly.
In tests, the company said, the device has been able to identify individuals in a database of 10,000 suspects in as little as 100 milliseconds. That is faster than some fixed-camera systems, although Mr. Wu conceded that "environmental noise" in real-life situations was likely to decrease accuracy.
---
Xiao Xiao contributed to this article.

Credit: By Josh Chin
