41. For overwhelmed multitaskers glued to their smartphone screens, Amazon's Alexa voice assistant has been a game changer -- and it doesn't take much to get hooked. Once you've experienced the convenience of casually asking a computer to do your bidding ("Alexa, play 'This American Life'"), being forced to swipe and tap feels downright primitive.
But there is a hitch. Though voice assistants have become more skillful -- capable of summoning taxis, turning on lights and preheating ovens -- conveying your wishes isn't always as easy as you might expect.
To save you the tedious effort of trial and error in a brave, new voice-controlled world, we've put together this guide, complete with reality checks, to the current state of play when it comes to introducing Alexa into your life.
Smart-Home Smarts
The Promise: You'll never have to flip a light switch or fiddle with a TV remote again.
In Reality: As you configure more Alexa-connected devices to work in your home, giving Alexa precise lighting cues can get convoluted. What used to be "Alexa, turn on the lights" quickly becomes "Alexa, turn on the living-room floor lamp" or "Alexa, turn on the living-room overhead lights."
Latency can be a problem, too: There's sometimes a brief but noticeable lag between the moment you utter your command and when the light actually responds. The system leaves you hanging just long enough to make you wonder if everything is working.
Your Best Bet: Rely on Alexa for channel surfing instead. Alexa makes it especially easy to control Dish Network's set-top boxes; just say "Alexa, tune to HBO" or "Alexa, show me Christopher Nolan movies." (This works on Amazon's Fire TV, too.) There's no need to navigate arcane menus with a button-laden remote control. Expect more smart TVs and video providers to offer similar compatibility soon.
Culinary Chops
The Promise: Cooking will be a chore of the past now that you can ask Alexa to order-in everything from a Meat Lovers Pizza to pad thai.
In Reality: Although a number of eateries and delivery services (Domino's, Pizza Hut, Starbucks, Seamless) offer Alexa integration, you're currently limited to choosing items from your previous online orders or dishes you've designated as favorites.
Your Best Bet: For culinary variety, have Alexa help you cook more capably. Amazon's Alexa-enabled speakers -- Echo and its less expensive, more compact sibling, the Echo Dot -- make incredibly handy kitchen assistants. Use them to start or silence multiple timers (no more grease-streaked smartphone screens). Call on Alexa to convert measurements on the fly ("Alexa, how many ounces is nine tablespoons?") or do quick arithmetic to triple a recipe as you go.
Now Hear This
The Promise: You'll be able to integrate Alexa throughout your home, as manufacturers build Alexa microphones into thermostats (ecobee4), smoke detectors (First Alert Onelink) and table lamps (C by GE Sol).
In Reality: One of the most miraculous aspects of using the Echo or Echo Dot speakers is their ability to understand you over the din of real life. You don't have to shout or over-enunciate; you can talk to Alexa like a real person -- even if others are yapping and Bruno Mars is blasting in the same room. What makes this possible? In part, an array of seven microphones that Amazon has incorporated into the speakers.
But the third-party devices that are available now or that are coming soon use a maximum of two microphones. As a result, they may not have the same super-hearing powers as the Echo or Echo Dot. While they'll likely work fine in quiet bedrooms, they may struggle in your home's noisier areas.
Your Best Bet: At $40, an Echo Dot is the least expensive gadget you can buy with a seven-mic array. Note that Amazon has recently allowed makers of third-party devices to use four- and seven-microphone arrays; expect these products to be released down the line.
---
42. Roll Merrily Along
We used to think "e-bikes" -- with their electric motors that give riders a boost while pedaling -- were for weenies. How hard is it to ride a bicycle? But Trek's new Super Commuter+ 8S has helped us see the future. Think of the "e" in the "e-bike" as your little friend: You can pedal the Trek on your own, but any time you need a bit of help, the internal Bosch motor is there for you. The assist comes in four categories: Eco, Tour, Sport and Turbo. Yeah, you'll want to go straight to Turbo. It's a blast, and lets you keep up with weekend warriors going 25 mph. The Super Commuter+ may be a pricey ride, but consider this: An e-bike is a cheap car, with more soul. $5,000, trekbikes.com
-- Jason Gay
---
43. Stargaze Like a Slacker
If you don't know much about astronomy, using a telescope to scan the vast night sky for stars or planets can be a frustrating endeavor. For those disinclined to attempt it, this mechanized model makes stargazing much easier. A calibration process is required: Enter your location and the time into a hand-held computer, and center a star (suggested by the telescope) in the field of view. After that, you can command the telescope to point automatically at a multitude of celestial attractions, from planets to constellations to well-known stars. For example, select "Saturn" from a series of menus, and the telescope will swivel and lock in on the ringed planet. The Automatic Star Aligning Telescope, $350, hammacher.com
---
44. Chill Beer Without Breaking a Sweat
Coolers, quite thoughtfully, let you haul frosty beverages just about anywhere. There's just one problem: You need to keep refilling them with ice. This rugged option goes a long way to eliminating that tedium. With 2-inch-thick refrigerator-grade insulation injected into its walls, the Venture 45 can maintain ice for up to 14 days, according to its manufacturer. Other points in its favor: The cooler has passed bear-resistance certification and can survive being ejected from the back of a pickup truck going 45 mph should your tailgate give way. A sloped base and drain plug allow for easy emptying. Accessories that will endear it to the slothful include a clip-on bottle opener (complimentary) and a cushy seat pad (available soon). $350, otterbox.com
---
45. Play Catch the Lazy Way
If you're seeking low-effort, fling-and-catch excitement, a boomerang may seem like the obvious choice -- but most aren't that simple to master. Not so this beginner-friendly model, designed by boomerang enthusiast Kendall Davis. Made of lightweight cedar, it can be propelled with minimal oomph, and thanks to its relatively short range and bolt-weighted center, it doesn't require you to expend much effort perfecting your technique. With four wings (instead of two or three), this flyer is a relative cinch to catch upon its return. YardStick Boomerang. $10, kendalldavis.us

Credit: By Michael Hsu
