FRANKFURT -- The global economic map is rapidly transforming, with trade and investment between the U.S. and Europe booming as Russia's war in Ukraine and fraying ties between the West and China draw the trans-Atlantic allies closer.
The U.S. has imported more goods from Europe than from China this year, a big shift from the 2010s when China emerged as the U.S.'s dominant trade partner. Money and products are flooding across the Atlantic as never before. This is helping Europe's embattled manufacturers, which are wrestling with skyrocketing energy prices. And it is pushing East Coast ports ahead of their West Coast counterparts in container volumes after years of a U.S. pivot to Asia.
Germany's exports to the U.S. surged by almost 50% year-over-year in September. The weak euro is giving European companies an extra edge in the vast U.S. market. European companies are also pouring resources into North America, including Mexico, lured in part by access to cheap energy.
The U.S., meanwhile, is turning into one of Europe's biggest energy and military suppliers, replacing Russia as a natural-gas purveyor and helping Europeans to beef up their defenses. Germany plans to buy 35 U.S. F-35 jet fighters, built by Lockheed Martin Corp. U.S. services exports to the European Union are surging, up 17% in 2021 year-over-year to 305 billion euros ($314.9 billion), according to EU data.
The burgeoning trans-Atlantic relationship is part of a reorganization of the global economy along East-West lines. Russia's cutoff of European energy supplies and fears of overreliance on China have changed how companies trade. On both sides of the Atlantic, governments have encouraged firms to produce critical products locally instead of in Asia. Some German companies have started exporting to the U.S. out of plants in Germany instead of China, partly to avoid tariffs, trade groups said.
At the same time, small and midsize German companies, in particular, have been diversifying investments away from China, where they face increasing domestic competition, rising labor costs and onerous Covid-19 regulations, according to a recent study by Rhodium Group, a consulting firm.
"We like the U.S. even more in the current geopolitical context," said Ilham Kadri, chief executive of Solvay SA, a Belgium-based chemical company with about 11 billion euros of annual sales. It recently unveiled a $850 million investment to build battery-making facilities in the southern U.S., including in Georgia, aiming to benefit from booming electric-car sales.
"There are lockdowns in China as we speak. Europe is facing a major energy crisis and inflation, where we need to live with less gas than we could imagine," Ms. Kadri said. "Then you look around and you say, the U.S. has it all, right?" Key U.S. attributes include cheap oil and gas, skilled workers and government support to build clean-energy infrastructure, she said.
The U.S. received foreign direct investment of $74 billion in the three months through June, by far the highest of any country, and compared with $46 billion for China, according to an October report by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The U.S. economy still has considerable momentum despite the Federal Reserve's aggressive actions this year to cool demand, and it is on course to import goods and services of $4 trillion this year, around one-third more than in 2019, according to data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Germany's mechanical-engineering sector, which employs about one million people, increased exports to the U.S. by almost 20% year-over-year in the nine months through September, to 18 billion euros. The sector's sales to China declined by 3% during the period to 14 billion euros, according to the German Mechanical Engineering Industry Association, a trade group.
As trans-Atlantic trade booms, container volumes at East Coast ports like New York have surged ahead of West Coast counterparts like Los Angeles in recent months, said Josh Brazil of Project44, a supply-chain analysis firm. The Port of New York and New Jersey said it was the nation's busiest container port in September for the second month in a row, handling 35% more cargo than in September 2019.
U.S. tourists are also pouring into Europe, taking advantage of a strong dollar. Europe received almost three times as many international visitors in the first seven months of 2022 as in the year-earlier span, boosted by travel from the U.S., the World Tourism Organization said in September. French luxury-goods group Kering said in October that its sales in Western Europe had soared 74% in the three months through September, as U.S. tourists flocked to the region's cities.
"The EU-U.S. economic relationship is stronger than it has been in quite some time," said Margrethe Vestager, executive vice president of the European Commission, the European Union's executive body. "You see it in the numbers."
Partly as a consequence of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, European governments are boosting their military capabilities and cyber defense, seeking to build more semiconductor plants at home and pushing for local production in industries such as artificial intelligence.
European foreign direct investment in the U.S. increased by 13.5% to about $3.2 trillion last year from a year earlier, according to data published by the U.S. Commerce Department in July. U.S. FDI in Europe increased by about 10% last year to about $4 trillion. Those sums dwarf investment flows between the U.S. and China.
The rapprochement isn't without friction. Inflation, recession fears and efforts to reduce the West's economic reliance on China have resulted in some protectionist policies on both sides of the Atlantic.
The U.S.'s new tax-incentive program for electric vehicles -- designed to cut reliance on Chinese battery components while addressing climate change -- has set off strong protests from the EU and other U.S. allies who have said the policy discriminates against their manufacturers.
European firms are rushing to take advantage of the new U.S. subsidies. Italian energy giant Enel SpA said on Thursday it would build a solar-cell factory in the U.S., a project that could cost upward of a billion dollars, according to estimates by The Wall Street Journal.
---
Yuka Hayashi in Washington, D.C., contributed to this article.
Credit: By Tom Fairless
