KALAHARI DESERT, Botswana -- Crouching in the sun-scorched sand, De Beers geologist Charles Skinner picked up an ashy, white cylinder of rock and looked for shimmering evidence that an ancient volcano was sitting below his feet, containing billions of dollars' worth of diamonds.
Mr. Skinner is leading a new effort by diamond merchant De Beers to uncover the first major diamond mine in at least 20 years. De Beers last year launched an early-stage exploration push, focusing on the desert of Botswana.
De Beers's undertaking highlights the dilemma faced by diamond miners, who forecast diminishing supplies in the absence of new discoveries. Only a blockbuster find will enable them to keep long-term production at current levels, according to De Beers and analysts.
The problem: Only a fraction of the world's underground diamond deposits are large enough to justify the expense of harvesting them.
The push by De Beers, a unit of Anglo American PLC, combines old-school drilling with big-data and artificial-intelligence technology in the quest to strike it lucky.
"On the odds side, the deck is stacked against you," Mr. Skinner said. But "exploration depends more on perseverance than on luck." Other diamond miners, such as Alrosa Group, the No. 2 producer by value behind De Beers, are ramping up exploration as production plateaus.
Alrosa, whose core operations are in Russia, says its diamond reserves are sufficient to sustain stable production for 17 years. In Botswana, it is exploring four areas for diamond deposits. "We continue to replenish depleted reserves and search for new deposits," an Alrosa spokeswoman said in an email.
Global diamond production is expected to peak in 2017, when 164 million carats of diamonds are forecast to be produced, according to McKinsey & Co. After that, production is expected to go into a long-term decline, unless major new discoveries are made.
"If you look on a long-term basis, the deposits are not being found," said Phil Swinfen, mining analyst at Numis Securities. "The rock that hosts diamonds is very rare."
Diamond miners have been struggling this year. Softening demand for jewelry and other luxury goods has weighed on prices for rough diamonds. A September sale of rough diamonds by De Beers met with poor demand, and prices could fall even further, analysts said.
De Beers, which mines rough diamonds and sells on to firms that ready them for the market, has slashed production this year as sales ebb. Thursday, De Beers said third-quarter diamond-sales volume fell 59% from the previous year and production slid 27% to six million carats.
A major new diamond discovery won't solve De Beers's near-term woes, or those of its parent company, Anglo American. But it is crucial to the firm's long-term future. One of the industry's last large-scale diamond finds was Gahcho Kue in Canada, jointly developed by De Beers and Mountain Province Diamonds Inc. Discovered in 1995 and due to enter production next year, Gahcho Kue could produce 4.5 million carats a year over 11 years, based on its reserve base of 55.5 million carats.
That isn't enough to stop the bleeding. De Beers's diamond mines -- including the world's most valuable, Jwaneng, in Botswana -- are running thin. While they will continue to churn out diamonds for decades, production at many of these mines has already peaked.
De Beers is marshaling new technology, including computer algorithms that can comb through the mass of data the company gathers as it scans the Kalahari for signs of a diamond-studded kimberlite, a pipe of solidified lava containing rich veins of diamonds pushed up from the earth's mantle. Only about 15 in 100 kimberlite pipes contains even one diamond, and only a fraction of those have enough to make them worth building a mine, Mr. Skinner says.
Mr. Skinner, a nearly 30-year veteran of De Beers, also focused on sites in Canada, Angola and South Africa. But in the past year he narrowed his search to the Kalahari, which he says has good prospects without some of the political uncertainties of countries such as Angola.
The area in focus, 20 miles north of the village of Tsabong, near the South African border, was first prospected in the 1970s, Mr. Skinner says. But the miners weren't able to peer much more than 300 feet below the surface, and abandoned the hunt. He believes evidence of a trove of diamonds may be found deeper -- more than 1,000 feet down.
Earlier this year, De Beers deployed several drill rigs to start boring into the thick crust below the Kalahari. By July, they had reached about 1,000 feet.
Beyond drilling, the exploration effort employs high-tech methods such as a "Squid" -- superconductive quantum interference device -- that can measure shifts in the magnetic field that indicate the presence of a kimberlite.
While the devices have been in use for years, Mr. Skinner says De Beers is using new computer techniques in tandem with Squid, including artificial-intelligence software, in the hunt for previously undetected signs of a diamond bonanza. De Beers' systems, using data acquired over 50 years, search for signals in mineral samples that can help predict whether diamonds might be found.
The evidence so far is inconclusive, Mr. Skinner says. Even if he finds convincing evidence, he would need to persuade De Beers's board that the effort is worth sinking millions into.
The geologist likens early-stage exploration to a crime-scene investigation.
"You collect fingerprints, DNA, blood, and out of that you come up with a suspect," he says. "What comes up next is the courtroom where you go before the judge and present the evidence."
If the evidence isn't strong enough, the team will search elsewhere. "You can't find what you want in this business, you can only find what's there," he said.
---
Alex MacDonald contributed to this article.
Credit: By Scott Patterson
