Willy Loman, the beleaguered road warrior of "Death of a Salesman," wouldn't recognize the technology-dependent sales staff at GuideSpark Inc.
Employees on the sales floor of the Menlo Park, Calif., human-resources software firm lean on more than a dozen digital aids. One analyzes records of millions of transactions stored in sales databases to serve up lists of potential customers, ranking them in order of their likelihood to buy. If a prospect doesn't pick up, another program, at the click of a mouse, leaves a voice-mail message from a prerecorded template. When a salesperson closes a deal, a third program triggers a morale-boosting gong sound.
Letting a computer determine the hottest prospects may sound questionable, but GuideSpark Chief Executive Keith Kitani believes this and other data-driven features have dramatically boosted his team's productivity. His 70-person sales crew makes triple the number of calls and meetings it did two years ago. Revenue has picked up as staffers pare time spent on rote tasks, such as manual record-keeping and researching prospects, and focus on the most promising leads.
Silicon Valley startups are automating sales departments for a shot at the more than $23 billion companies spend each year on sales software. Some of these startups mine sales staff emails, calendars, social-media feeds as well as news articles and customer databases for patterns that help them predict the likelihood of a sale or the behavior of potential buyers.
Such companies have amassed roughly $400 million in venture capital in the last two years, according to data from Dow Jones VentureSource. (VentureSource is owned by News Corp, publisher of The Wall Street Journal.)
The combination of predictive smarts and automation promises to push sales into a new era of data-driven efficiency, just as it has fields as diverse as advertising and professional sports.
"Sales offers possibly the biggest opportunity today in adding [artificial] intelligence in the enterprise," said Mike Dauber, a partner with venture-capital firm Amplify Partners who has invested in the new generation of sales tools.
This emerging technology addresses a growing desperation among sales professionals, particularly those targeting businesses rather than consumers. Buyers increasingly bypass the sales middleman to research and buy directly online. This shift will cost many U.S. sales workers their jobs in the next five years, Forrester Research Inc. estimated. To stay viable, sales departments are looking for a digital leg up from companies such as Infer Inc., InsideSales.com, Hoopla Software Inc., ClearSlide Inc., Leadspace, 6Sense Insights Inc. and SalesPredict Inc.
Some of these tools can seem creepy. For instance, 6Sense uses advertising technology software known as cookies to help customers identify the job titles and companies of the people who have visited their website.
Amanda Kahlow, 6Sense's founder and CEO, said, "None of our customers see this as a privacy violation. This is about helping prospects finding the products they are looking for."
On Tuesday, sales-software titan Salesforce.com Inc. entered the fray. The company is outfitting its widely used sales tools with computerized predictions and automation from RelateIQ, a startup it acquired a year ago. The new service, called SalesforceIQ, draws on sales staff emails, calendars and Salesforce's own databases. It proffers tips on how to interact with specific customers and nudges salespeople when, for example, they haven't spoken lately to a client they tend to contact regularly. (News Corp was an investor in RelateIQ prior to its acquisition by Salesforce and an early test site for SalesforceIQ.)
Salesforce's entry in the market validates the use of data to aid sales, but it also complicates the company's role in the data-driven sales landscape. Most young sales prediction or automation companies rely in part on data stored by Salesforce and have digital hooks into Salesforce systems. Moreover, the sales-software pioneer has invested in data-driven startups including Apttus Corp., InsideSales and 6Sense.
Some of the young companies wonder whether Salesforce will try to crush or copy them. "We think of them as an ally today. Obviously it depends on what moves they make," said Vik Singh, co-founder and CEO of Infer.
For their part, Salesforce officials say they want to work with the emerging sales technology companies, which make Salesforce more useful. "You are always stronger with an ecosystem," said Alex Dayon, Salesforce's president of products. "It's important that we keep our system open to partners."
Many users of such programs become believers. Siemens PLM Software, a unit of the German conglomerate Siemens AG, conducted an experiment with SalesPredict's software. Siemens PLM blended data from about 20 existing customers with information from thousands of other companies. SalesPredict identified the 20 as high-value prospects.
The results were "astonishing," said Zvi Feuer, senior vice president of manufacturing engineering software at Siemens PLM.
But even proponents of data-driven sales software sometimes find its methods dubious. Some programs correlate purchases with seemingly unrelated factors such as local weather or the length of email subject lines.
"Any Statistics 101 class teaches that correlation is not causation." said Matthew Bellows, founder and CEO of Yesware Inc., a sales-software startup.
Credit: By Shira Ovide and Elizabeth Dwoskin
