International Business Machines Corp. is exploring a potential sale of its IBM Watson Health business, according to people familiar with the matter, as the technology giant's new chief executive moves to streamline the company and become more competitive in cloud computing.
IBM is studying alternatives for the unit that could include a sale to a private-equity firm or industry player or a merger with a blank-check company, the people said.
The unit, which employs artificial intelligence to help hospitals, insurers and drugmakers manage their data, has roughly $1 billion in annual revenue and isn't currently profitable, the people said.
Its brands include Merge Healthcare, which analyzes mammograms and MRIs; Phytel, which assists with patient communications and Truven Health Analytics, which analyzes complex healthcare data.
It isn't clear how much the business might fetch in a sale, and there may not be one.
IBM, with a market value of $108 billion, has been left behind as cloud-computing rivals Microsoft Corp. and Amazon.com Inc. soar to valuations more than 10 times greater. The Armonk, N.Y., company has said it is focused on boosting its hybrid-cloud operations while exiting from some unrelated businesses.
In October, IBM said it planned to separate a major part of its information-technology services operations, which will be the company's biggest-ever business exit. The unit manages clients' IT infrastructure and accounts for nearly a quarter of IBM's sales and staff.
Watson was one of IBM's highest-profile initiatives in recent years and a big bet on the growing healthcare sector, though results disappointed in part because physicians were hesitant to adopt artificial intelligence. The company spent billions buying up a collection of health-related businesses that are now part of IBM Watson Health, with the aim of combining them into a vast store of patient data and applying algorithms to extract useful insights.
Watson never became the cohesive business IBM envisioned and has lost key executives in recent years.
Credit: By Laura Cooper and Cara Lombardo
