WASHINGTON -- Many 2020 presidential campaigns face challenges in rebuffing cyberattacks despite taking some steps to beef up security.
Three years after John Podesta, Hillary Clinton's 2016 campaign chairman, clicked on a spear-phishing email that allowed Russian hackers to break into his account, followed by the publication of his emails by WikiLeaks, campaigns are hiring security personnel, using encrypted messaging apps and restricting access to sensitive information.
But they are falling short in important areas, according to current and former U.S. officials, cybersecurity experts and people familiar with the operations of various campaigns. Those include an unwillingness to share information among campaigns about attempted hacks, regulations that prevent campaigns from accepting free or discounted security services, and technological advances that make deterring threats more difficult.
Already there are signs that the same foreign forces that targeted the Clinton campaign are resurfacing.
Microsoft Corp.'s threat intelligence team in recent months detected Russian attempts to hack U.S. think tanks, academics and nongovernmental organizations that may be involved in U.S. politics or become advisers to campaigns, said Tom Burt, Microsoft's senior vice president of customer security and trust.
"We are seeing activity by the same Russian actors that we saw target 2016 and 2018," Mr. Burt said.
The attempts, waged by a group known as Fancy Bear that is believed to have ties to Russia's military intelligence, may be routine espionage, he said. But the actions resemble those Fancy Bear previously took when it sought to interfere in elections in the U.S. and Europe.
"They appear to start by doing that reconnaissance and espionage prior to the hacking of campaigns," Mr. Burt said.
Senior U.S. intelligence officials have repeatedly warned that Russia and other hostile foreign powers remain intent on interfering in elections, including the 2020 presidential contest. Experts say the candidates and their campaigns remain an important -- and likely the most vulnerable -- target.
Campaigns also face new technologically advanced threats, especially on the disinformation front. Chief among them is so-called deepfake technology -- the use of artificial intelligence to create exceptionally realistic-looking fake videos of a person. The House Intelligence Committee held a hearing Thursday to discuss threats to democracy posed by deepfakes.
"I'm much more confident about where election officials have come since 2016 or 2018 than the campaigns," said Joseph Lorenzo Hall, an election security expert and chief technologist at the nonprofit Center for Democracy and Technology, referring to the strides states and counties have taken to secure voting systems.
Many campaigns are reluctant to publicly discuss their cybersecurity efforts. The Wall Street Journal surveyed President Trump's re-election campaign and the 23 major Democratic presidential campaigns.
More than half of the Democratic campaigns declined to substantively answer questions about their cybersecurity staff, engagement with federal agencies or use of best-security practices. Several cited concerns about disclosing specific information that could help malicious actors target them.
Of the 18 Democratic campaigns that did respond to the survey, seven, including those of some top-tier candidates, wouldn't confirm whether they required multifactor authentication for their staff -- the security feature Mr. Podesta lacked. It is viewed as a must-have for cybersecurity because it relies on more than a password, and typically involves a code sent to a user's cellphone. Eleven said they did require the feature.
A spokesman for the Democratic National Committee said all campaigns it had "onboarded" with security training reported enabling two-factor authentication for email, but declined to say how many campaigns that included or whether the practice extended to other online uses, such as social-media accounts.
Mr. Trump's campaign also declined to answer that question and others but said it took cybersecurity "very seriously."

Credit: By Dustin Volz and Tarini Parti
