Behavioral scientists, data experts, journalists and police -- four professions brought together in, of all places, law firms. Traditionally staid law practices increasingly want to be more things to more clients, particularly in the competitive risk and compliance space.
Facing competitive pressure from professional services firms and from clients that want to solve more business problems in one stop, law firms have begun to branch out.
"The law profession, traditionally, has been fairly traditional and not super fast at change," said Zachary Coseglia, a lawyer at Ropes & Gray LLP. "I think that law firms are gradually appreciating that our clients desire more than just traditional legal services."
Mr. Coseglia was involved in founding the R&G Insights Lab, an analytics and behavioral science consulting practice attached to the firm. Among other offerings, the group helps clients craft compliance training meant to outperform the slide decks companies typically offer employees.
That team has scooped up a Stanford University-educated doctor of social psychology to help inform the behavioral science behind the work and recently hired a journalist to aid in its storytelling efforts, Mr. Coseglia said. The result is more engaging and thought-out strategy and training, and with a scientist among the staff, the ability to measure whether efforts to develop a compliance-oriented culture actually work, the firm says.
Elliott Portnoy, chief executive of Dentons, one of the world's largest law firms, said client demands and competitive pressure pushed his firm to look beyond traditional offerings of litigation- and regulation-focused legal services.
"Clients increasingly were coming to us with a problem that they needed to solve and they really didn't much care how we solved it," Mr. Portnoy said. "Very often they were looking for something that was beyond the traditional tool kit."
Dentons employs journalists, law enforcement officers and intelligence personnel to help create a risk report it builds for clients and firm staff. Last year, it started a multidisciplinary advisory firm, Dentons Global Advisors, that advises clients on geopolitical risk, crisis management and other areas outside normal legal practice.
The firm also has made forays into complex technology products, taking stakes in compliance software companies. Dentons owns a stake in Libryo Ltd., a regulatory compliance software maker, and offers a product that proactively gathers intelligence on potential regulatory risks.
Large law firm DLA Piper has developed an in-house litigation analyzer, powered by artificial intelligence, that looks at data sets of litigation history to try to predict how a particular claim might unfold. The development of the tool was spearheaded by a DLA Piper lawyer who went back to school to get an advanced degree in data science.
Right now, the tool is being used to predict outcomes for a client facing mass actions, a class of litigation that includes, for example, multitudinous claims related to asbestos exposure.
The firm then has an advantage in negotiations, said Loren Brown, a partner who chairs DLA Piper's disputes practice.
Credit: By Richard Vanderford
