[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Last year wasn't kind to the world's largest contract chip maker. This year could shape up to be much better for Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. and the chip industry in general.
A pervasive inventory glut throughout the semiconductor supply chain punished all chip makers in 2023, and TSMC was no exception. Revenue at the Taiwanese company fell 2% year over year in dollar terms last quarter, while net profit dropped 19%. That brought about a rare 9% decline in TSMC's full-year revenue. Chip consumers like smartphone and computer makers have been slowly digesting inventories built up at the tail end of the pandemic electronics boom.
But the outlook looks brighter now that destocking seems to finally be over. TSMC expects revenue in 2024 to grow more than 20% from last year. The smartphone market has finally started to expand again: Global shipments in the fourth quarter of 2023 grew 8.5% year over year, according to International Data Corporation -- compared with a 3.2% decline for the whole of 2023.
The sudden surge in demand from generative artificial intelligence -- the likes of ChatGPT -- is another boon for TSMC. Given its technological leadership, the firm is the go-to manufacturer for companies like Nvidia, which are designing the most cutting-edge AI chips. TSMC expects capital expenditure this year to stay roughly the same as last year: between $28 billion and $32 billion.
The ramp-up of the company's 3-nanometer process technology, its most advanced node, could put a dent in its margins, however. That is because a big chunk of the cost of making a chip comes from building fabrication plants, which appear as depreciation costs -- especially at the beginning. Sales of 3-nanometer chips accounted for 15% of TSMC's revenue last quarter, and that percentage will rise further in 2024. TSMC expects that this could shave 3 to 4 percentage points off its gross margin this year. But the company is still confident it can maintain gross margins above 53% in the longer term.
TSMC, which counts Apple, Nvidia and Qualcomm among its customers, is the bellwether for the industry. Heavy capital expenditures -- throughout the industry, not just at TSMC -- are a question mark for future profitability. But at least demand is now bouncing back smartly. That will be welcome news in boardrooms scattered throughout the chip supply chain.
Credit: By Jacky Wong
