TOKYO -- Masayoshi Son, chief executive of Sprint Corp.'s Japanese parent, said Tuesday he may have underestimated the challenge of turning around the U.S. mobile operator.
Mr. Son spoke after the company he leads, SoftBank Corp., reported that net profit in the October-December quarter fell by two-thirds, worse than analysts expected. The results reflected tough competition in Japan as well as costs related to Sprint.
"You never know the heights unless you climb the mountain," Mr. Son said at a news conference. "You never know the depths unless you jump into the river. Yes, the mountain called Sprint is very tough to climb, to be candid."
SoftBank's holdings include an 80% stake in Sprint, acquired in July 2013, as well the third-largest wireless network in Japan and a range of Internet investments. Mr. Son had hoped to combine Sprint, the third-largest U.S. carrier by subscriber numbers, with No. 4 T-Mobile US Inc. to mount a stronger challenge to the top two U.S. mobile operators, AT&T Inc. and Verizon Communications Inc. But those ambitions foundered on regulatory opposition, and since then T-Mobile has been gaining ground on Sprint in subscriber numbers.
Mr. Son appointed a new chief executive at Sprint last year -- Marcelo Claure, a mobile-phone entrepreneur. On Tuesday, the SoftBank chief cited recent technical improvements in the U.S. carrier's network, including a decline in dropped calls, as evidence that the turnaround was on track. Sprint continues to lose subscribers, but the rate of attrition is slowing.
"Sprint is turning around," Mr. Son said. "It's not easy. It's not short-term. However, it's progressing step by step."
A report from network monitor RootMetrics showed that Sprint's call quality strongly improved in the six months that ended Dec. 31. But its data speed and performance -- which matter for subscribers trying to surf the Internet on devices like the iPhone -- continue to lag significantly behind Verizon, AT&T and T-Mobile US.
Mr. Son said Sprint might sell some of its wireless spectrum to help finance its turnaround. An auction of airwaves by the Federal Communications Commission that ended in January raised almost $45 billion, highlighting the value of scarce airwave capacity.
Though Mr. Son had previously expressed interest in acquiring additional spectrum, Satoru Kikuchi, an analyst at SMBC Nikko Securities, said the possible shift "showed he is reasonable and flexible."
This month, Sprint booked impairment charges totaling about $2.13 billion, including reductions in the value of its trademark and its network assets. SoftBank didn't reflect those losses in its consolidated results because of a difference between U.S. and international accounting standards.
In the October-December quarter, SoftBank's net profit fell to 32.3 billion yen ($272 million) from 93.8 billion yen a year earlier. Revenue rose to 2.33 trillion yen from 1.96 trillion yen, while operating profit fell to 191 billion yen from 203 billion yen. The company stuck to its forecasts for the full year ending March 31, after downgrading its outlook for operating earnings by 10% three months ago, citing restructuring expenses at Sprint.
SoftBank didn't explain the discrepancy between operating and net profit in the latest quarter, but the company's results for the first nine months of the year include 29.5 billion yen in severance costs related to job cuts at Sprint as well as higher interest expenses at Sprint.
SoftBank also faces tougher competition in the domestic market. While the company was the first carrier in Japan to offer Apple Inc.'s iPhones, its two main rivals, NTT DoCoMo Inc. and KDDI Corp., now offer them as well. All three main carriers have also begun marketing bundled services combining mobile service and high-speed broadband, reducing the opportunities for differentiation, Mr. Son said.
He said SoftBank, which owns a 32% stake in Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., the Chinese e-commerce company that went public last year in a blockbuster initial stock offering, would focus on "global Internet investments" in the future. The company recently stepped up its investments in Asian Internet companies, including taxi-hailing and e-commerce firms, an initiative led by Nikesh Arora, a former Google Inc. executive whom Mr. Son hired last year.
Mr. Son said SoftBank was postponing the introduction of a robot, called Pepper, that the company plans to sell to Japanese consumers. Previously scheduled for this month, the start of consumer sales was pushed back to sometime between June and August. SoftBank envisions Pepper as an educator of children and companion for the elderly, among other things.
Mr. Son said strong demand from software developers, who are working on mobile phone-style applications for Pepper, made it difficult to build enough stock for consumers. Also on Tuesday, SoftBank announced a partnership with International Business Machines Corp. to develop IBM's Watson, an artificial intelligence technology, for the Japanese market.
---
Ryan Knutson contributed to this article.
Credit: By Eric Pfanner
