If you want to repair a fancy race car at a pit stop, you could have a master mechanic go over the whole thing. Or you could hire a bunch of specialists -- for the engine, brakes, suspension, tires -- and have them swarm all over the car simultaneously. The crowd of specialists would do the job faster. And if you add more specialists (one for the front wheels, say, and one for the back), the job would go even faster.
That's a big part of the genius of IBM's Watson, the "Jeopardy"-playing juggernaut of a supercomputer developed by David Ferrucci's research team. Watson throws a mob of cooperating software specialists at the task of playing "Jeopardy" -- the TV game show that tests your recall of millions of disconnected, generally useless facts plus your understanding of coy, arch or wrenchingly cutesy clues. Winning at "Jeopardy" is not as deep a problem as philosophy or mathematics, but it's much closer to the demands of real life.
Each of Watson's "specialists" is a separate piece of software. The whole crowd can work simultaneously because the program runs on a parallel supercomputer -- many separate computers wired together. Watson focuses more than 2,000 computer processors on this one task at the same time. And as the specialists work, they dip into a massive database of electronic articles, news stories, books, screenplays, encyclopedias and whatnot that have been dumped whole into a vast boiling vat of computer memory. Thus the dirt-cheap fuel of computer power stokes the roaring blaze of artificial intelligence, and lights up the future.
Watson doesn't waste time trying to understand English. Its job is to respond to one meaningless pattern (the question) with another meaningless pattern (the answer) -- as if someone had whistled the first four bars of a simple tune you'd never heard, and you had to invent four more bars to make it complete. The music doesn't "mean" anything, but certain openings seem to fit with certain completions. Watson uses its massive database to notice words that often go together, phrases that follow one another and other patterns. Then it engineers an answer that sounds right with the question.
Deep Blue, IBM's last celebrity computer, beat world chess champion Garry Kasparov in 1997. Blue was a beautiful piece of technology, but not much use unless you often played chess with Mr. Kasparov. Watson, on the other hand, attacks a broader problem with countless real-world applications.
Imagine a Watson to do medical diagnosis (a possibility Mr. Ferrucci mentions for the future). You could dump the whole vast medical literature straight into the program's memory. But you could also add software specialists for many thousands of unusual variations or combinations of diseases. Such software super-specialists would mainly sit around doing nothing, seeing no cases that push their buttons. Still, as I wrote twenty years ago, if each sees action "every five months (or every five decades), but it tells us something interesting when it does, that's fine." I have been fascinated ever since by the tantalizing possibilities that Watson has finally realized.
Any clinician who sees an unusual case might write it up in the form of a software specialist for a Watson-style mob. Thus the medical literature goes from passive to active; takes off on patrol for cases where it can offer information or advice.
In a theoretical WikiWatson, experts all over the world would contribute software specialists. Whatever the problem (say diagnosing home computers and networks), performance would steadily improve and the program's scope would broaden. Naturally, specialists would contradict each other, some would be ignorant and others just nasty. But consensus and experience would drive this multi-mega-program in the right direction.
Watson's mob of specialists is the culmination of research in parallel artificial-intelligence software that has been under way at IBM and elsewhere since the early 1980s. IBM is often upstaged by flashier players in the global buzzosphere, but no company has done more for basic research. In the '00s, "win at 'Jeopardy'" was such a hard problem it was irresistible. Back in the 1950s, IBM launched its AI research effort with a problem that seemed just as nearly impossible then: build software that could prove theorems in high school geometry. IBM's solution was the first AI program to solve non-trivial problems and helped to create the field of artificial intelligence. It's of special interest to me because my father was the man who did it. Today he is following Watson with understandable fascination.
Watson is nowhere near passing the Turing test -- the famous benchmark proposed by Alan Turing in 1950, in which a program demonstrates its intelligence by duping a human being, in the course of conversation over the Web or some other network, into believing that it's human and not software.
But when a program does pass the Turing test, it's likely to resemble a gigantic Watson. It will know lots about the superficial structure of language and conversation. It won't bother with such hard topics as meaning or consciousness. Watson is one giant leap for technology, one small step for the science of mind. But this giant leap is a major milestone in AI history.
---
Mr. Gelernter is professor of computer science at Yale.
Credit: By David Gelernter
