Waves break when they reach the shore because the sea floor drags on their base, while the energy at the crest keeps pushing forward -- until gravity pulls it down. No, this isn't a surfing lesson: This was last Thursday's stock market.
The wave that broke was the momentum trade, which had pushed the "Magnificent Seven" megacapitalization stocks and anything related to artificial intelligence to dizzying heights, leaving the rest of the market far behind.
The question for investors now is whether the breakers will hit the rocks, or merely prove to be whitecaps far from the shore. Is the megacap trade over?
Before weighing the answer, consider just how big a reversal Thursday brought. Everything that worked this year stopped working.
Small stocks rebounded. After a miserable year, small stocks had their third-best day compared with megacap stocks since at least 1995. The Russell 2000 was up 3.6% while the Russell Top 200 was down 1.3%.
The two better days were those of the 2020 $1 trillion Covid stimulus and the 2008 Group of Seven plan to rescue the global financial system. By contrast, the driver of Thursday's move was that U.S. consumer prices fell 0.1% month-on-month in June versus forecasts they would rise 0.1%.
The Magnificent Seven were dismal. The seven Big Tech stocks had been on a tear this year. But they had their worst day since an exchange-traded fund tracking them launched in April 2023, falling 4.5%. Because they're so big, the fifth of the S&P 500 that fell dragged down the entire index, even though 396 of the stocks were up. The average stock beat the ordinary, market-value-weighted index by the most since November 2020: the day that tests showed the first mRNA vaccine against Covid worked.
Value came back. Cheap, or "value," stocks also had their best day compared with growth stocks since November 2020. Value hasn't been doing as badly this year as small stocks -- which were flat before Thursday's boom -- but value has lagged far behind more popular growth stocks.
Global stocks beat America. The combination of being smaller, less tech-heavy and cheaper helped European and other developed-world stocks to their best performance compared with the U.S. since late 2022, in dollar terms.
There are two basic explanations for the moves. The first is economic. A slowdown in inflation means more chance of rate cuts, and that brings down bond yields. That's good for stocks that had been suffering from higher rates. These tend to be smaller companies that borrow from banks at floating rates rather than from the bond market. Cheaper financing is also good for struggling firms, which are usually value stocks.
The trouble with assuming this will continue is that it puts a lot of weight on a single month's inflation figure. Sure, inflation has been slowing for a while, but the significant market reaction came in response to June's data. If it turns out to be wrong, small and value stocks will suffer.
The second reason for the size of the market swings was the scale of the bet that had built up. Investors had piled into Big Tech, adding more than $2 trillion to the value of Nvidia alone this year.
They were attracted by both the AI story and the safety brought by Big Tech's massive cash piles, which had reduced their sensitivity to bond yields. When the inflation figures made investors think small and value stocks had something going for them, it prompted a rush out of what had become very expensive larger stocks.
Some investors had already grown concerned about what AI would have to deliver in terms of productivity to justify the hundreds of billions of dollars being poured into it, as well as about superhot valuations. They were all too happy to take profits.
If the narrative around AI is changing -- and there are some signs it is, including a skeptical tone struck by strategists at Goldman Sachs last week -- the big AI spenders would see their valuations and stock prices fall.
Big moves in hot stocks can become self-fulfilling if those who borrowed to buy are hit by margin calls and forced to trim their holdings. When momentum is lost, price-driven traders switch from betting on more gains to betting on losses. But one day, even a bad one, doesn't make a trend.
Friday's rebound helped Big Tech investors claw back some of Thursday's losses, though smaller companies, value and European stocks outperformed again.
I don't know if the data will continue to suggest a soft landing with inflation back to target, the ideal outcome for bets on small stocks and value. Producer prices certainly didn't on Friday, coming in higher than expected. Equally, I don't know if doubt about AI will spread among those charmed by ChatGPT's tricks -- though it should.
But both are plausible, and Thursday's moves are the result of a market far too convinced that neither would happen. Even if the wave hasn't broken yet, those who think they can surf it for just a bit longer should watch for the shore -- and remember that every wave breaks eventually.
Generate image description

Credit: By James Mackintosh
