Modest daily stock gains cinched a strong six months on Wall Street, fueled by investors' optimism that inflation is easing while the economy continues to hum.
Fresh spending data added momentum on Friday, showing milder core-price increases in May compared with a month earlier, while consumer outlays continued to rise. The data lifted major stock indexes on a day of calm trading, rounding out the Nasdaq Composite's best first half of a year in four decades.
The tech-centric index climbed 1.4% Friday, sealing a 32% gain since the end of 2022. Enthusiasm about artificial-intelligence breakthroughs has sent investors into shares of companies such as Microsoft and Nvidia, while upbeat corporate results have also lifted the tech sector's appeal.
The S&P 500 gained 1.2% Friday, locking in a 16% rise since December. The Dow Jones Industrial Average added 285.18 points, or 0.8%, to end the month at 34407.60.
In the first half of the year, the latest leg of the Federal Reserve's aggressive interest-rate increases sometimes shaded trading with fear that tighter financial conditions could stoke a recession. But so far in 2023, markets and the broader economy have dodged a bevy of potential hazards mostly unscathed.
The S&P financial sector rose in the second quarter after a rough first quarter, when a series of bank failures starting in March sparked worries about the industry's health. A last-minute resolution to June's debt-ceiling standoff soothed bond-market turbulence. The labor market still looks healthy despite some high-profile corporate layoffs.
"Coming into the year, markets overestimated the transmission mechanism of monetary policy in different sectors of the economy, not just the labor market but also in more interest-rate sensitive sectors," said Amar Reganti, a fixed-income strategist at Hartford Funds.
More recently, the year's stock rally -- at first concentrated among a handful of huge technology companies -- has shown signs of broadening. All 11 of the S&P 500's industry sectors gained ground in June.
Solid stock performance has been a welcome surprise this year, but has also shifted investors' focus to the risk that further Fed rate increases may yet tamp down economic growth, said Anders Persson, chief investment officer for fixed income at Nuveen.
"In the second half, I think we're concerned that there's going to be more scrutiny from investors around what the recession probabilities look like," Persson said. His team believes that bonds are now offering a better trade-off between risk and reward than stocks are.
Treasurys edged higher on Friday, paring Thursday's selloff that followed an unexpectedly strong upward revision to the economy's first-quarter growth rate. The yield on the 10-year note, which moves contrary to its price, finished at 3.818%, down from 3.853% a day earlier. Treasury yields, which closely follow growth and interest-rate projections, climbed substantially in the second quarter as economic jitters eased.
Corporate performance has held up better than many analysts expected this year. But a pair of fresh earnings reports drew a tepid response Friday. Nike shares fell 2.6% after the apparel company Thursday evening posted a smaller profit year over year in the latest quarter despite rising sales.
Constellation Brands, which sells Modelo and Corona beer, also said Friday that higher costs weighed on profits even as sales improved. Shares slid 0.3%.
Brent crude, the global benchmark for oil prices, rose Friday by 0.8% to $74.90 a barrel. Oil's 13% decline this year marks its worst first half since the pandemic scuttled demand in 2020.
The stock market will close early on Monday ahead of Independence Day.
Credit: By Matt Grossman
