PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP plans to invest $1 billion in generative artificial-intelligence technology in its U.S. operations over the next three years, working with Microsoft Corp. and ChatGPT maker OpenAI to automate aspects of its tax, audit and consulting services.
The accounting and consulting giant said the multiyear investment, announced Wednesday, includes funding to recruit more AI workers and train existing staff in AI capabilities, while targeting AI software makers for potential acquisitions.
Generative AI tools are designed to generate natural-language responses, images or computer code from user text prompts.
For PwC, the goal isn't only to develop and embed generative AI into its own technology stack and client-services platforms, but also advising other companies on how best to use generative AI, while helping them build those tools, said Mohamed Kande, PwC's vice chair and co-leader of U.S. consulting solutions and global advisory leader.
Mr. Kande said the company would pay to access OpenAI's GPT-4 language model, the underlying software that drives ChatGPT, to build and run apps in Microsoft's Azure cloud. While ChatGPT is a free online tool, OpenAI charges developers to access its language model and create their own software tools. The model, which was recently upgraded, is trained on large stores of language data gathered from online posts, interviews and other sources, to understand natural-language prompts and produce intelligible responses.
Once the models are fully trained and tested, Mr. Kande sees the technology being used to quickly write reports and prepare compliance documents, analyze and evaluate business strategies, identify inefficiencies in operations or create marketing materials and sales campaigns, among many other applications.
"This is about using generative AI to run the company in a more efficient way," Mr. Kande said. "Embracing this technology is critical."
Eric Boyd, corporate vice president of Microsoft's AI platform, said the move will enable PwC to access OpenAI's generative AI tools with the added compliance and data security of its Azure cloud-computing service. Microsoft itself announced a multiyear, multibillion-dollar investment in OpenAI, a startup launched in 2015.
Mr. Boyd said more than 1,000 organizations -- including startups and multinational corporations -- are now using OpenAI tools in Microsoft's cloud in areas like customer support, conversational AI, summarization, writing assistance and customization by "gaining insights from data using search, data extraction and classification," he said.
Other large accounting firms, including KPMG LLP and Ernst & Young, are also investing in generative AI. TurboTax owner Intuit Inc., for instance, is building its own generative AI language model for financial management, trained on years of interactions with its business customers, the company said.
Accounting, tax preparation, auditing and other financial services are ripe areas for generative AI, analysts said.
"Generative AI offers many attractive use cases for companies like this," said Rowan Curran, an analyst at information-technology research firm Forrester Research Inc., covering data science, machine learning, artificial intelligence and computer vision.
Mr. Curran said large language models like GPT-4 can be used to help with information discovery and retrieval -- particularly in exploring unstructured and semi-structured data -- along with the potential to improve the process of preparing reports with a "much lower effort from the human auditors." After the initial burst of interest in generative AI sparked by ChatGPT, which launched in November, companies are now moving into a phase of experimenting, building and deploying their first-generation applications, he said.
In a survey of about 500 corporate IT decision makers conducted by market research firm Enterprise Technology Research, 53% said they planned to evaluate, use or allocate further resources to OpenAI's ChatGPT technology -- a record for any single technology provider, said ETR's Chief Strategist Erik Bradley. Consulting and business-services firms, along with educational institutions, were the leading sectors in plans to evaluate and use generative AI and large language models, according to the survey.
"The outsized investments in generative AI make perfect sense for organizations trying to do more with less," Mr. Bradley said. "The real question is, will all of this initial investment and evaluation turn into actual business utilizations."
Credit: By Angus Loten
