Silver Lake is investing in Abu Dhabi technology company Group 42, in a sign of the private-equity firm's deepening relationship with the emirate, the companies said.
The firm is investing about $800 million for a minority stake, according to people familiar with the matter. The Wall Street Journal reported earlier on the deal.
G42, as the company is known, offers artificial-intelligence and cloud-computing products aimed at digitizing enterprises across Abu Dhabi's economy, and increasingly in other parts of the Middle East.
Its shareholders include Chairman Sheikh Tahnoun bin Zayed al-Nahyan, the brother of Abu Dhabi's crown prince, and Abu Dhabi sovereign-wealth fund Mubadala Investment Co.
Silver Lake will be G42's first Western investor and the buyout firm's co-chief executive, Egon Durban, will join its board.
G42's valuation couldn't be learned, but its four largest segments -- data platforms, cloud, healthcare and smart city -- each had hundreds of millions of dollars in annual revenue, and the business is growing at a rapid clip, the people familiar with the matter said.
With more than $79 billion in combined assets under management and committed capital, Silver Lake has a longstanding strategy of taking big stakes in technology companies and working with their founders or management to help spur growth. It has been one of the most active investors during the pandemic, taking stakes in Airbnb Inc., Expedia Group Inc., Jio Platforms Ltd. and Klarna Holding AB, to name a few.
Led by Chief Executive Peng Xiao, a Chinese-American technology executive who also sits on the company's board, G42 is unique -- a private company that is single-handedly aiding the digital transformation of the Abu Dhabi economy with the blessing of its government.
Having much data at its disposal has helped the company refine its technology, which includes aspects of the offerings of Palantir Technologies Inc., Alphabet Inc.'s Verily Life Sciences and Amazon.com Inc.'s Amazon Web Services.
G42 has a joint venture with Abu Dhabi National Oil Co., helping the state-owned oil firm use data to more accurately pinpoint oil reserves, and another one with ADQ, using artificial intelligence to help cut costs at the state-owned holding company, whose assets include utilities and ports.
It joined with the Abu Dhabi Department of Health on managing the coronavirus pandemic, including its vaccination rollout.
In November, G42 acquired Khazna Data Centers and Injazat, a regional IT services business, from Mubadala. The transaction gave Mubadala a stake in G42 and gave the sovereign-wealth fund's CEO, Khaldoon Khalifa Al Mubarak, a seat on its board.
In September, Mubadala said it was taking a stake in Silver Lake and committing $2 billion to help it launch a new long-term strategy. Silver Lake's investment in G42 is coming from its flagship strategy, according to people familiar with the matter.
While Mubadala's relationship with Silver Lake dates back years, the recent partnership was seen by some as a strategic shift for the $232 billion sovereign-wealth fund's technology investments. Mubadala had been a backer of SoftBank Group Corp.'s Vision Fund, committing $15 billion to the $100 billion vehicle. While it has publicly denied any tensions, it has privately complained about the high valuations at which SoftBank made its investments and subsequent losses in the fund.
Credit: By Miriam Gottfried
