Axios, the digital news startup known for concise stories, is about to go long -- on TV.
The company has signed a deal with premium cable network HBO to produce a limited-run series of news documentaries timed to the midterm elections.
Titled "Axios," the series will focus on politics, technology and culture with a combination of breaking news, short documentaries and high-profile interviews, the company said.
It is part of Axios's strategy to gradually expand the breadth of content the company publishes and experiment with new formats.
By signing up Axios, HBO adds additional content to its slate of current-events programming. Its stable already includes "Vice News Tonight," a deal with Vice Media, a partnership with progressive media company Crooked Media, "Last Week Tonight" host John Oliver and comedian Bill Maher.
HBO parent WarnerMedia was recently purchased by AT&T Inc., and the telecom company has signaled its intentions to spend aggressively on content to compete with rivals like Netflix.
The episodes in "Axios" will feature some of the company's journalists, including co-founders Mike Allen and Jim VandeHei, chief technology correspondent Ina Fried and business editor Dan Primack.
This year, Axios began publishing "deep dives," examinations of weighty topics such as China's rise, automated labor and global trade that run longer than the typical Axios story. The company is currently hiring an editor who will lead the production of similar content.
"Working with HBO gives us the chance to see if our obsession with the big trends reordering America and our shorter, smarter style translates to the big screen," Mr. VandeHei said.
Digital and legacy publishers, from Vox Media to BuzzFeed to the New York Times, are looking for ways to bring their content to television or streaming platforms, to promote their outlets' brands and bring in licensing revenue when selling digital ads is a tough business. Producing high-quality TV can be expensive and time-consuming, as many new entrants learn.
HBO and Axios declined to comment on the financial terms of their arrangement. The TV deal represents one of several revenue streams that Axios is seeking to cultivate, Mr. VandeHei said. The company is on pace to double its revenue to more than $20 million in 2018, mostly through short-form native advertising with companies including Facebook Inc., and Boeing Co. It is unclear whether the company is profitable.
The company has also begun testing a high-end subscription product for corporations and other big organizations, but it isn't known whether it will launch in 2018, according to a person familiar with the matter. After raising $20 million in November for an expansion, Axios has gone on a hiring spree. The company employs 123 people, having hired journalists to spearhead coverage of science, cybersecurity, artificial intelligence and other areas.

Credit: By Benjamin Mullin
