The U.S. Energy Department is banning its researchers from joining Chinese talent-recruitment programs after finding personnel were recruited by foreign military-linked programs and lured with multimillion-dollar packages.
The move is the latest attempt by the Trump administration to stave off what it sees as China's pervasive theft of U.S. science and technology, and it comes as tensions between Washington and Beijing continue to rise.
Trade talks between the U.S. and China foundered last month when the Trump administration accused China of reneging on previously negotiated agreements -- an allegation Beijing denies. Both sides have raised tariffs on each other's goods and drawn each other's companies into the fray.
After U.S. officials cut Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei Technologies Co. off from critical U.S. suppliers, Chinese authorities summoned top U.S. tech firms including Microsoft Corp. and Dell Technologies Inc. to warn them about repercussions if they were to pare back business dealings in China.
President Trump called into CNBC Monday morning and said he is taking on China for the future of the country, even if it may hurt U.S. businesses in the short term. He said U.S. tariffs will force companies to leave China, giving the U.S. a competitive advantage.
China is "going to make a deal because they're going to have to make a deal," he said in the interview.
The Energy Department has become a major target for economic espionage, its leaders said, because it is the government's primary scientific agency, supporting wide-ranging programs from elemental research in physical science up to work enhancing the military's nuclear arsenal.
The ban will apply to more than 100,000 people, mostly contractors, at a network of sites and labs across the country, often researching subjects considered vital to national security, including energy production, artificial intelligence and nuclear physics.
One would "almost have to be willfully blind" to ignore the threat China poses, said Dan Brouillette, U.S. deputy energy secretary, in an interview.
"The threat is that they will take technology and research that is paid for by the American taxpayer that in many cases has dual-use applications" in both commerce and defense, he said.
The White House is leading an effort to protect government science programs from intellectual property theft. In May it created a joint committee including Energy Department leadership that, among other goals, intends to make recommendations that can be applied across the administration, officials said.
As of Monday, the Energy Department is requiring all personnel and nearly all contractors to disclose connections to foreign-government programs designed to recruit scientists, researchers and entrepreneurs, according to a new order that implements a plan reported by The Wall Street Journal in February. Employees working with any programs deemed to be sensitive will have to sever those ties or resign from the department, according to the document and department officials.
The department has found that foreign-talent programs have offered scientists in its national lab system hundreds of thousands of dollars -- in some cases millions of dollars -- to conduct research.
In some instances, Energy Department laboratory personnel have been recruited by foreign military-affiliated talent programs, Mr. Brouillette said.
While Energy Department counterintelligence personnel will develop a comprehensive list of recruitment programs that will be covered by the order, China and iterations of its Thousand Talents Plan are already squarely in the department's sights, officials said.
The order also prohibits countries considered to be adversaries, currently Russia, Iran and North Korea in addition to China, from using talent programs to pay or otherwise lure scientists in the U.S. to help develop technology, officials said.
China's Thousand Talents websites name more than 300 U.S. government researchers who have accepted the program's money, James Mulvenon, general manager at U.S. defense contractor SOS International LLC, told the Senate Judiciary Committee at a hearing in December. The Chinese government targets a mix of Americans and foreign nationals, and doesn't limit recruitment efforts to people of Chinese ethnicity.
Participants in such programs "travel from the U.S. at Chinese government expense, divulge technical knowledge through scripted venues, are briefed on China's technology interests, return to their U.S. "base" for more information, and repeat the process," Mr. Mulvenon told senators.
The threat is now growing, according to U.S. officials, as other countries hostile to the U.S. seek to emulate China's success to nurture their own programs to bolster scientific developments.
China has denied orchestrating a systematic plan to steal U.S. technology. "China places a high priority on protecting intellectual-property rights and improving its business operating environment," the Commerce Ministry told the Journal last year.
The Chinese Embassy in Washington didn't respond to a request for comment.

Credit: By Timothy Puko and Kate O'Keeffe
