Digital culture and all it entails -- from selfies to artificial intelligence -- might seem to have been born fully formed out of nowhere. But a new exhibition suggests that, when it comes to living digitally, the world is simply catching up with artists.
Opening March 30 at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, "The Body Electric" charts a history of tech-inflected art from the 1960s to the current moment. Organized by Pavel Pys, a visual arts curator at the museum, with curatorial fellow Jadine Collingwood, the exhibition presents more than 100 works by some 45 artists, ranging from video, sculpture and installation art to holograms, touch-screen programs and virtual reality. Together, they explore what it means to be human in a world where the lines between physical and digital are starting to blur.
"Regardless of what technology artists are using," Mr. Pys said, "there are common concerns that resonate between generations." For Mr. Pys, the intergenerational aspect is essential: "I wanted to ground the exhibition in that important, pioneering generation in the 1960s," he explained, and then "create a family tree."
The first gallery lays a historical foundation, with works by influential figures like Nam June Paik -- widely regarded as a founder of video art -- and his collaborator Charlotte Moorman. Mr. Paik's 1971 "TV Cello" features a stack of three televisions, all running specially prepared video footage, that he transforms into a musical instrument -- "a discrete sculpture," Mr. Pys pointed out, "but also an object to be performed with." Across the gallery, the notion of television sets as sculptural material gets a nonchalant, 21st-century reboot in Helen Marten's "Dust and Piranhas." The 2011 work features a flat-screen TV running a video as it rests on a pile of used coffee cups, pencils and other detritus.
A section of the show devoted to "Performing for the Camera" explores the roots of selfie culture in photography and video. One of Cindy Sherman's dramatically staged self-portraits of the early 1980s shares wall space with photographs made some 30 years later by artist K8 Hardy, which are reminiscent of Ms. Sherman's groundbreaking work in a looser, more improvisational style. Nearby, a 2007 webcam video by Petra Cortright features a close-up of the artist at her computer as she embellishes her image with dancing pizza slices and other animations.
The show's largest section, "Extending the Self," explores how artists have projected the physical body into virtual space. In her 1986 video "What You Mean We?" Laurie Anderson portrays herself and a pint-size, masculine clone, oddly flattened and distorted. The alter ego in Pierre Huyghe's video "Two Minutes Out of Time" (2000) is an unnamed figure -- later christened Annlee -- purchased from a catalog of Japanese anime characters. More recently, Ed Atkins's 2014 video "Happy Birthday!!" features a "mumbling, hung-over protagonist," as Mr. Pys described him, developed from a 3-D avatar bought online and voiced by Mr. Atkins himself. Compared with earlier figures, this avatar is "much, much more hyper-real," said Mr. Pys. "It will be interesting to see that technological difference."
Women artists are well represented in "The Body Electric," sparking robust cross-generational conversations. In the 1980 video "Free, White and 21," Howardena Pindell recounts racist incidents she experienced as a young black woman. Decades later, Sondra Perry's 2016 video installation "Graft and Ash for a Three Monitor Workstation" brings that perspective into the digital era, with Perry's avatar pointing out that software often perpetuates existing biases -- including the program Ms. Perry used to construct "Graft and Ash," which couldn't recognize her body type as a usable template.
Several works critique society's expectations of women, often with an absurdist twist. Dara Birnbaum's 1978 video "Technology/Transformation: Wonder Woman" zeroes in on those moments in the old "Wonder Woman" television show when the hero bursts into full superpower mode simply by spinning in place. Reflecting on a current icon of digital femininity, Trisha Baga's immersive video installation "Mollusca & The Pelvic Floor" (2018) explores her relationship with the virtual assistant usually known as Alexa, which Ms. Baga renames Mollusca.
One of the most intriguing works in "The Body Electric" greets visitors in the museum lobby: Zach Blas's "Icosahedron," which the artist has described as "an artificially intelligent crystal ball." Commissioned by the Walker for the show, "Icosahedron" is modeled on the Magic 8 Ball fortunetelling toy and the 20-sided shape that it contains -- 10 sides displaying affirmative responses, 5 negative and 5 neutral. Using machine learning techniques, Mr. Blas trained "Icosahedron" on 20 writings that, in his words, were "influential to Silicon Valley's approach to predicting the future," with an eye toward playfully questioning that elite worldview. "It's artificial intelligence projected through an almost holographic head," said Mr. Pys, "and it's quite funny." With "Icosahedron," "The Body Electric" takes a skeptical leap into the future, bringing the richly varied history of video- and tech-based art along with it.

Credit: By Susan Delson
