Hollywood's major studios and streamers have reached a tentative labor deal with the union representing directors, as a writers' strike rolls into its second month.
The three-year deal calls for wage increases, higher streaming royalties and an acknowledgment that artificial intelligence can't replace union members, the Directors Guild of America said.
The tentative pact is set to be submitted for approval at a board meeting on Tuesday, the union said.
The agreement gives the studios a measure of labor peace as negotiations with striking writers have stalled. The Writers Guild of America, which represents about 11,500 television and movie writers, went on strike in early May, shutting down late-night shows and threatening future scripted productions.
The tentative resolution with directors could put pressure on the writers to come to the bargaining table with the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, which represents the studios and streamers.
The WGA is making some demands similar to those of the DGA, including higher wages and better streaming residuals. Writers also want greater job security by requiring shows to hire a minimum number of writers.
The WGA didn't respond to a request for comment. In an email to members last week, the union said that a deal between the studios and the director's guild wouldn't end its strike.
The studios used divide-and-conquer tactics during the last writer's strike in 2008, the WGA said, but this time was different. "The essence of the strategy is to make deals with some unions and tell the rest that's all there is," it said.
This round of negotiations has been complicated by changes in how movies, television and streaming shows are produced. An old order where shows began with pilot episodes that were then picked up by studios has been replaced by one where a season's worth of scripts are often finished before shows are ordered, requiring fewer writers to be kept on.
The studios, meanwhile, are trying to cut costs and change how they operate as growth in streaming subscriptions slows.
The DGA said the tentative pact with studios and streamers will translate into gains in wages and benefits for its 19,000 members, including a 5% increase in the first year of the contract, 4% in the second year and 3.5% in the third year. Foreign residuals for the largest streaming platforms will increase 76%, the union said, so that a one-hour episode will yield roughly $90,000 over the first three exhibition years.
The director's guild said its pact includes a "groundbreaking agreement confirming that AI is not a person and that generative AI cannot replace the duties performed by members."
As the writers' strike continues, the studios and streamers are set to begin talks with Hollywood actors on a new deal. The actors' contract expires at the end of June, and their union has asked members to authorize negotiators to go on strike if a suitable agreement can't be reached.
Credit: By Asa Fitch and Joe Flint
