Normally, a slight fall in a volatile stock-market sector would be of little note. But Friday's pullback in technology stocks bears closer attention than usual, coming out of the blue and, unusually, not being part of a wider selloff.
The fall was small in absolute terms, but it looks huge compared with everything else. The S&P 500 tech sector has had only two worse days relative to the wider market since the dot-com bear market ended in 2003. One was amid the post-Lehman carnage in October 2008, the other after the market began its credit-crunch-induced descent in late 2007. These are not good precedents for investors.
Investors should be cautious about reading too much into one or two days' moves. Nvidia Corp., the graphics card maker that has become the picks-and-shovels supplier to the gold rush in artificial intelligence and cryptocurrencies, had a hard time, dropping 6.5% on Friday. Facebook Inc., Amazon.com Inc., Alphabet Inc. and Apple Inc. fell more than 3% on Friday and were lower again Monday afternoon. But the wider Nasdaq-100 index, dominated by technology, was off only 2.4% on Friday and 1% on Monday afternoon. Even Nvidia's Friday drop wasn't its worst day this year. (The stock was up slightly Monday afternoon.) This will probably turn out to be merely a small correction to the phenomenal run-up in tech stocks this year.
Yet, there are both short-term and long-term reasons to worry about tech. In the short term, the fall was an example of what happens when shares lose momentum. When shareholders buy stocks just because they're going up, any interruption can be brutal.
The tech sector has also become universally popular, suggesting the shares have become a crowded trade. Goldman Sachs Group Inc. analysts even point out that the biggest tech stocks -- the "FAAMGs" of Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Microsoft Corp. and Alphabet (Google) -- have appeal to investors who buy into low volatility, after recording lower volatility than any market sector in the past six months. They already qualified for those who screen shares for momentum and earnings growth. When popular trades go out of fashion, they often do so suddenly.
Yet, tech stocks aren't repeating the dot-com bubble of 2000. It's true that before its drop on Friday, the S&P tech sector came within 0.1% of breaking its dot-com high for the first time. But unlike 2000, many of today's tech stocks are well established and run highly profitable oligopolies.
In the long term, the danger is that hubris in the boardrooms of tech companies will lead them to fritter away shareholder cash as they set out on a landgrab of new technologies away from their core expertise.
Apple has put the "hub" in hubris with its flashy new wheel-shaped headquarters. Some of the maddest projects have been put on ice -- Apple's plan to diversify from mobile phones into electric cars or Google's internet provision via solar-powered drones -- but plenty of "moonshot" projects remain.
Some of these moonshots will surely pay off, but investors would be wise to wonder about the core expertise of some of the companies in which they're buying shares. Are they high-margin oligopolies in social media, mobile phones and operating systems? Or are they generic technology incubation operations able to turn wacky ideas into new business models? Treating them as safe, low-volatility stocks implies the former, but that isn't compatible with their cash generation being plowed back into high-growth moonshots.
Worsening this risk is the lack of effective controls on the powerful founders of many of the big tech companies. History has shown time and again that executives without effective checks and balances waste company cash on poorly thought out or overly expensive vanity projects, and founders of several of the biggest tech businesses have kept control of their companies through special share classes.
Mark Zuckerberg still controls 60% of Facebook votes, co-founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin control 51% of Alphabet votes, and Snap Inc.'s IPO this year gave buyers of its shares zero votes.
There are other risks. New tech eventually disrupts old tech; could a new approach to social media send Facebook the way of Myspace, or a new phone style leave Apple looking like Nokia Corp.? Hard to imagine, but so was the invention of the iPhone. Staff shortages are bidding up costs rapidly, as Silicon Valley competes with itself and Wall Street for the best computer-science graduates. There's also a danger that governments, particularly in Europe, get serious about their tax, antitrust or encryption concerns.
All these are for the future; for now, worry about a crowded trade quickly becoming much less crowded.
Credit: By James Mackintosh
