The S&P 500 backed off its record high and bond yields jumped Monday after investors' hopes for a Federal Reserve rate cut next month were all but dashed.
The moves came after Fed Chair Jerome Powell indicated that central-bank officials aren't in a rush to lower interest rates. Given recent economic strength, "we feel like we can approach the question of when to begin to reduce interest rates carefully," Powell said during an interview broadcast on CBS on Sunday.
He also repeated his statement after last week's Fed meeting that a cut in March wasn't likely.
The S&P 500 fell 0.3% to kick off the week, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average was 0.7% lower after both closed at records on Friday. The Nasdaq Composite dropped 0.2%.
Just a week ago, investors had been betting that the Fed would start cutting rates as early as its next meeting in March. Those expectations have been quickly recalibrated following Powell's recent comments and a jobs report on Friday that showed U.S. hiring is booming.
Traders in interest-rate derivatives currently see a roughly 15% chance that the Fed will lower rates at its next meeting in March, down from 52% going into last Wednesday's Fed meeting, according to CME Group.
The benchmark 10-year Treasury yield climbed for a second day, closing at 4.163%. The yield is up almost one-third of a percentage point since Thursday, its largest two-day gain since June 2022. Higher bond yields are another sign that investors now think the Fed will take longer to cut rates.
Falling inflation, the prospect of rate cuts, and a huge rally in technology shares have helped major stock indexes set records in 2024.
But some investors caution that tech shares are priced for perfection and that the lagged effect of interest rate increases mean there are still risks in the economy.
"We're focused on the fact that despite all the soft landing talk, we might have yet to feel all of the profound impacts of historical rate hikes," said Adam Hetts, global head of multi-asset at Janus Henderson Investors.
Survey data released on Monday showed that the U.S. services sector expanded faster than expected in January, the latest in a string of strong economic data releases that have some investors questioning whether inflation will keep cooling. Goldman Sachs economists are more optimistic.
"Could the recent outsize strength of the U.S. economy derail continued progress on disinflation? We don't think so," Goldman Sachs chief economist Jan Hatzius wrote in a note to clients Monday. "With global growth on firm footing and rate cuts ahead, our market views remain constructive."
For the year, the S&P 500 is still up 3.6%.
While stock indexes stalled Monday, AI mania was in full swing.
Shares of chip manufacturer Nvidia jumped more than 4.8% to a fresh record after Goldman Sachs analysts published a bullish growth forecast for the company, noting that cloud service providers are spending more on artificial-intelligence hardware. Nvidia's market capitalization is now above $1.6 trillion.
In earnings, Estee Lauder shares soared 12% Monday after the cosmetics maker reported falling profits but said it would lay off up to 5% of its workers.
ON Semiconductor was also among the S&P 500's best performers, jumping 9.5% after it reported revenue and profit that exceeded Wall Street expectations.
Caterpillar shares added 2% to close at a record high after the construction equipment maker reported a fourth-quarter profit that topped expectations.
Meanwhile, McDonald's said war in the Middle East weighed on its sales in the fourth quarter. The fast food chain's shares were 3.7% lower.
After the closing bell, Palantir Technologies reported accelerating revenue growth and record profit, sending its shares up 17%.
Other companies scheduled to report earnings this week include the Walt Disney Co. and PepsiCo.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 was little changed. Chinese stocks sold off on Monday but were gaining at midday Tuesday. Japan's Nikkei was down 0.7% at midday Tuesday.
Credit: By Jack Pitcher
