The European Union charged Apple with failing to comply with a new digital-competition law, alleging the iPhone maker's App Store isn't allowing developers to freely direct customers to alternative ways to make purchases.
The charges unveiled on Monday are the first to be issued under the EU's Digital Markets Act, which took effect this year and sets out a long list of rules aimed at boosting competition in digital advertising, online search and app ecosystems.
Apple could be fined as much as 10% of its worldwide revenue if EU regulators determine the company broke the DMA's rules.
The charges cement Apple as the tech company that EU regulators are so far targeting the most aggressively under the new law. They come after the bloc fined Apple about $2 billion in March in a separate case that used traditional antitrust powers to address concerns related to the App Store.
The EU actions add to the regulatory challenges that Apple is facing. The Justice Department sued Apple this year over allegations the company makes it difficult for competitors to integrate with the iPhone, resulting in higher prices for customers. Apple said it would vigorously defend against the U.S. lawsuit.
Europe's approach to tech regulation does carry some risk for the region. Apple said last week it likely won't roll out artificial-intelligence features in Europe this year because of regulatory concerns. The European Commission, the EU's antitrust authority, said tech companies are welcome to offer their services in Europe if they comply with the EU's rules.
In response to the EU charges, Apple said Monday that it has made changes in recent months to comply with the DMA in response to feedback from app developers and EU regulators. "We are confident our plan complies with the law," the company said, adding that it would continue to listen to and engage with regulators.
European competition authorities allege that Apple's App Store rules don't allow developers to provide pricing information within the app, or to communicate freely with customers about offers that are available outside the App Store.
In many cases, Apple places restrictions on developers when they provide links that redirect customers to an outside webpage, the bloc said. It also said fees Apple charges for facilitating transactions outside the App Store go beyond what is necessary.
EU competition chief Margrethe Vestager said during a conference in the Netherlands that the DMA is focused on ensuring an open, contestable market. "It is surprising that some of the most valuable, respected big companies on this planet do not take compliance as a badge of honor," she said.
The charges, which the EU refers to as preliminary findings, come after the bloc opened an investigation into Apple's App Store rules in March. At the time, regulators said they were opening probes related to Meta and Google's compliance with the law. Vestager said the probes into other tech companies are moving forward in parallel but might advance on different schedules.
The EU's digital competition rules are part of a broader response from the bloc to the concentration of market power that some large tech companies have amassed. Unlike traditional antitrust cases, which often take several years to complete, regulators hope the DMA will allow them to move more quickly. The EU has said it aims to complete investigations under the new law within a year.
The DMA raises questions about large tech companies' business models that need to be addressed, Vestager said. For Apple, opening up to competitors "is maybe a bigger leap" because of how highly integrated Apple's products are, she said.
The EU said the charges against Apple represent a preliminary view that the company breached the DMA and don't necessarily mean it will ultimately be found to have broken the rules. It said Apple would have an opportunity to respond to them. The European Commission, the bloc's competition enforcer, said that if its preliminary findings against Apple are confirmed, it would adopt a noncompliance decision by late March 2025.
The EU also said it would open a new investigation into Apple's business model for the App Store in Europe, which includes the introduction of a so-called core technology fee that some app developers said would make it impossible to benefit from new opportunities under the DMA.
Credit: By Kim Mackrael
