The artists who make Captain Marvel fly and Spider-Man scale walls are unionizing.
Visual-effects workers at Walt Disney-owned Marvel Studios have voted to join the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, the union said Wednesday.
It covers 41 workers at the studio behind the multibillion-dollar Avengers series and other blockbuster comic-book films.
IATSE, which represents more than 168,000 technicians and artists in the entertainment industry, said it was the first time a unit made up of visual-effects workers has voted to join its union. Employees at Walt Disney Pictures, who work on the visual effects for projects including live-action adaptations such as "The Lion King" and "Aladdin," also are seeking to join the union.
Matthew Loeb, IATSE's president, said the vote "demonstrates the unprecedented demand for unionization across new sectors of the entertainment industry is very real."
The unionization efforts come at a difficult time for Hollywood, which is currently paralyzed by labor strikes. Writers have been on strike since May, halting the production of many movies and television shows. The actors union went on strike two months later.
The coalition representing Hollywood studios offered several concessions to the writers last month, including guaranteed minimum length of employment, controls around the use of generative artificial intelligence and wage increases. The Writers Guild of America said the offer was inadequate.
The National Labor Relations Board, which conducted the unionization vote, said the Marvel workers voted unanimously to unionize. Marvel has five days to object to the results, the NLRB said.
Employees have said they work under tight deadlines and unionizing could offer protections such as paid overtime and regular breaks.
Marvel and Disney didn't immediately respond to requests for comment Wednesday.
Marvel, which is Disney's most profitable film studio, has seen some setbacks at the box office, with a recent version of its Ant-Man film underperforming a previous one. The studio is releasing new Captain America and Deadpool movies next year.
Credit: By Joseph Pisani
