Graphics-chip maker Nvidia Corp. benefited from continued hot demand for devices from computer videogamers and cryptocurrency miners, pushing its sales and profit to records in its most recent quarter.
Nvidia has been one of the technology companies that profited most handsomely from the pandemic-era economy, when millions of people turned to videogames, online services and other home-based activities during lockdowns.
Sales rose 68% to $6.51 billion in the period ended in July, the company said. Net profit nearly quadrupled, reaching $2.37 billion.
The company's latest generation of graphics cards is popular with computer gamers for whom high-quality images and fast frame-rates are prized. Its high-end cards have sold out fast, and resellers responded to demand by buying available stocks and marking them up well above their list price.
The cards are well-suited to the computing-power demands of cryptocurrency mining. To avoid that demand crimping the supply of components for gamers, Nvidia sells products specifically for the digital-currency market. It put in place software designed to limit the usefulness of its gaming cards for crypto-mining. Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress said more than 80% of the company's latest graphics cards had those limiters on them, adding that crypto-specific chips would be a minimal contributor to future revenue.
Nvidia managed to continue growing its sales in recent quarters despite a shortage of chips that forced some auto makers to pause production and is spreading to a wider set of industries. Demand continues to outpace supply, Ms. Kress said on an earnings call.
Nvidia's gaming revenue was $3.06 billion in the second quarter, a record and an 85% increase from a year earlier.
The company also said its revenue from data-center sales, where its chips are widely used in artificial-intelligence calculations, reached $2.37 billion, up 35% from the year-ago period.
Sales and profit were both higher than analysts surveyed by FactSet on average expected. Nvidia's shares rose about 1.6% in after-hours trading.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
