Calvin, the 6-year-old hero of Bill Watterson's comic strip "Calvin and Hobbes," once asked the question: Where's all our stuff, all the technological wonders we were promised -- flying cars, humanoid robots, atom-powered shavers?
Daniel Suarez's "Influx" (Dutton, 416 pages, $26.95) answers: It's here already. Nuclear fusion? Perfected in 1985. Cure for cancer? Discovered in 1998. "Immortal DNA strand segregation"? 1986. These innovations and more were intercepted by the secret Federal Bureau for Technology Control (BTC) and suppressed with the laudable aim of preventing social disruption. An aim that soon became merely keeping things the way they are and seeing that the benefits stay with the increasingly powerful BTC itself.
What this means for Joe Grady, who has engineered a "gravity mirror" -- effectively an anti-gravity device -- is that the people who come calling aren't all venture capitalists. He soon joins other geniuses in "Hibernity," the BTC prison for inventors, which is a notch more miserable even than the lightless prison for teleporters in Alfred Bester's novel "The Stars My Destination" (1957).
In Hibernity the prisoners are barred in by "aggregated diamond nanorods" sunk into molten rock. Each inmate has an artificial-intelligence warder that reads his mind through wires implanted in the brain, feeds and evacuates him by tube and can hold him down with wall-extruded tentacles -- or pull him apart, albeit with the stipulation that "under no circumstances will you be permitted to die."
It should be hopeless, except that herding together scores of super-geniuses, guarded only by AIs and humanoid clones, is an intellectual mismatch. Electronic systems can be hacked into and subverted. Soon the guards can't trust their machines, nor do they dare report the real situation.
Grady busts out -- and then the novel's real action starts, with several factions competing for control of his invention. There's the BTC, other inventors still imprisoned in Hibernity, the anti-tech Winnowers -- and Alexa, a genetically engineered near-immortal next to whom Cleopatra, Helen and other beauties of legend would turn into wallflowers. And, of course, the legitimate government of the U.S., limping along with its puny arsenal of tanks and drones and nukes.
"Influx" isn't different, deep down, from the "suppressed new invention" plot used by Robert Heinlein, Ursula K. Le Guin, Poul Anderson and many others going back to H.G. Wells himself. But it's done with the dazzling sophistication, the play of ideas, the hints of a new understanding almost within our grasp that characterize sci-fi in the cybertronic age. Has the human mind really "been determined to be a quantum device . . . entangled with particles not contained within the four dimensions of space-time"? That's even better than what Calvin was hoping for.
Credit: By Tom Shippey
