PSYCHOLOGY
Polling the Stars and Stripes
Showing American voters an image of the American flag while asking whom they plan to vote for shifts them toward the Republican Party, a new study finds -- and the effects of that exposure are still evident eight months later.
Researchers recruited some 200 potential voters in fall 2008, about a month before the presidential election, through social-networking sites. Participants were queried two times before the election; again a few days after the election; and yet again in July 2009.
The sample was skewed overwhelmingly to Democrats. But participants who were discreetly shown an image of the U.S. flag during the second session reported warmer feelings toward Republicans and John McCain. Among those who voted for the two major-party candidates, people who had seen the flag preferred Barack Obama by a 73%-to-27% margin. Those who hadn't seen the flag preferred him 84%-16%.
The following summer, people who had seen the flag still gave Mr. Obama a job-performance score that was 16% worse than those who had not.
"A Single Exposure to the American Flag Shifts Support Toward Republicanism up to 8 Months Later," Travis J. Carter, Melissa J. Ferguson and Ran R. Hassin, Psychological Science (forthcoming)
CONSUMERISM
Touchy Shoppers
Getting touched by a fellow shopper -- even an apparently accidental brush -- makes consumers less likely to buy the product they're considering, a new study suggests.
Researchers approached nearly 150 men and women, in a retail district, saying they were interested in general attitudes toward shopping. They asked the shoppers to browse in a luggage store and to evaluate one small bag in particular. As the shopper looked at the bag, a male or female confederate of the researchers walked closely past him or her. Half the time, the confederate brushed lightly against the shopper's right shoulder blade.
Consumers who were touched rated the brand of the bag only 3.3, on a 7-point scale, while those who were not touched gave it a 4.9. Shoppers who were grazed also spent roughly half the time in the store (82 seconds) as those who weren't (158 seconds). A male touch had stronger negative effects than a female touch.
"A Stranger's Touch: Effects of Accidental Interpersonal Touch on Consumer Evaluations and Shopping Time," Brett A.S. Martin, Journal of Consumer Research (forthcoming)
NEUROSCIENCE
Patterns of Dyslexia
Researchers have identified a close link between musical ability -- specifically, recognizing rhythmic patterns -- and the ability to read.
British neuroscientists asked 64 children, 33 of whom had been diagnosed as dyslexic, to listen to three dozen pairs of brief sequences of notes. Sometimes the metrical pattern was identical, other times one note was slightly lengthened in one of the examples. (All notes were the same pitch.) The dyslexic students -- with an average age of 10 -- correctly characterized the sequences as the same or different 63% of the time, compared with 83% for a control group of students of the same age.
Performance on the musical tests could account for almost half of the variability in reading ability. In other words, better rhythmic performance strongly predicted better reading.
"Music, Rhythm, Rise Time Perception and Developmental Dyslexia: Perception of Musical Meter Predicts Reading and Phonology," Usha Goswami and four other authors, Cortex (June)
A Computer That Plays by the Rules (and Reads Them)
A computer can master the videogame Civilization II -- by reading the manual.
In the classic computer game Civilization II, players decide how to deploy entities like settlers and explorers on a map of the world divided into squares; the goal is to occupy as many squares as possible.
Like other artificial-intelligence programs, this one, from researchers at M.I.T. and University College London, took in information about the players' positions on the board and, each turn, considered hundreds of moves. But in some cases it scanned the 35,000-word-long manual (which mostly offers broad strategic guidance rather than rules to follow). Researchers say that without the manual, the program won 46% of contests against the game's built-in automated opponent. With the manual, its win rate jumped to 79%.
Credit: By Christopher Shea
