Miners are turning to machine learning, cutting-edge chemistry and other innovative means to increase the supply of critical materials such as copper and graphite amid the rising demand for green technologies.
In 2011, Nico Cuevas, a Mexican immigrant and Arizona resident, realized Tesla would require a source of graphite for battery anodes to build electric vehicles in the U.S. Fortunately, it just so happened that a friend's family owned an artisanal graphite mine in Mexico. Unfortunately it mined the wrong type of graphite.
Twelve years later, Cuevas is chief executive of startup Urbix, an innovative graphite producer in Mesa, Ariz. It uses machine learning to work out how to create uniform graphite anodes fit for use in EV batteries from a range of natural and synthetic forms of graphite.
It agreed to supply SK On, a South Korean battery and chip maker, with graphite for its cells.
Urbix is one of a number of U.S. startups developing alternative methods in the search for new supplies of critical minerals, providing crucial innovation as the supply of these materials grows tighter.
Governments and companies are searching for new sources of critical minerals to meet rising demand for electric vehicles, batteries, renewables and electrification infrastructure. Despite a recent spate of investment announcements, analysts forecast shortfalls in the coming years. "If all of the planned projects are realized, and that's a big if, they could cover close to three-quarters of energy requirements in the future," said Fatih Birol, executive director of the International Energy Agency.
China processes and produces most of the world's critical minerals, creating concerns that geopolitical tensions could cut off their supply to U.S. manufacturers. China's export restrictions on gallium and germanium starting Aug. 1 are the latest example. Government support for U.S. projects has been made available through bills such as last year's Inflation Reduction Act, to encourage domestic production.
Miners have been searching for new deposits and investing in new processing facilities, but these efforts will take years if not decades to start producing. Others are looking to innovation -- seeking out more novel ways to increase yields and recover materials from existing mine waste.
Machine learning is proving to be one way to increase yields and reduce carbon emissions from critical minerals processing.
Graphite is a naturally occurring form of carbon in which the structure of the atoms allows energy to be held and distributed within a battery, hence its use as an anode in lithium-ion cells for batteries. "An anode stores the energy in the battery like a dish sponge. You squeeze it out and the energy flows," said Cuevas.
The EV industry most commonly uses the flake form, but Urbix tested over 50 to 60 sources. "How do we create a machine learning predictive control model mechanism so the process can adapt to specific feeds to create the same end product?" said Cuevas. "We have created a universal recipe for select sources for graphite."
Cuevas said through this machine learning-based technique waste is reduced significantly, with 80% of what is input as a raw material used in the final product. Yields are typically around a third using traditional methods.
Urbix has received Series C funding and has a pilot plant running. It is also constructing a commercial demonstration facility. It aims to start producing 28,000 tons a year by 2026 and scale up to 320,000 tons beginning in 2032, sourcing graphite from Latin America, Madagascar, Tanzania and Northern Europe.
Another innovator is Locus Fermentation Solutions, a Solon, Ohio, chemical business aiming to increase the yields of copper production by using bio-surfactants from natural sources like yeast. Bio-surfactants are chemicals from microbes that break the surface tension of a given material. They are commonly used in cosmetics, healthcare and pesticides.
Typically copper is processed in one of two ways: either by soaking crushed ore in a solution of water and chemicals that allows target minerals to float to the surface or dissolving the rocks in acid, known as leaching, allowing the minerals to float to the top. Locus says introducing bio-surfactants to the process will increase yields. "We're improving ore recovery by applying bio-surfactants," said Gabi Knesel, the firm's vice president of mining and minerals processing.
Credit: By Yusuf Khan
