[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
There seems to be no shortage of bad news for SoftBank this week. A new artificial-intelligence-driven tech boom could eventually be a tailwind for earnings. But the company's latest results were a reminder of how much work the firm still has to do to convince investors that it will be a canny steward of their capital -- and reliably hit enough home runs to offset its many strikeouts.
The Japanese technology investor on Thursday reported a surprising loss: equivalent to $6.2 billion for the September quarter. Analysts on S&P Global Market Intelligence had expected, on average, a gain of around $1.2 billion.
SoftBank's investments continued to suffer last quarter in a volatile market. The company's Vision Fund segment did book an investment gain -- but that was mostly because SoftBank itself bought an additional 25% stake in Arm, on top of its existing direct stake, from the first Vision Fund in August ahead of the chip designer's initial public offering.
The Vision Fund booked a $5.1 billion investment gain on this transaction, which valued Arm at a generous $64 billion. Arm's market value at the close of Wednesday was, however, only $56 billion.
That transfer probably kept outside investors in the fund, like the sovereign-wealth funds of Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi, happy. But the transaction didn't help the company's overall profitability. Other investments in the Vision Fund segment lost money during the quarter. For example, shares in Norwegian warehouse-robotics company AutoStore fell 35% in the September quarter, while those of its American rival Symbotic dropped 22%.
Another piece of bad news this week was the bankruptcy of office-sharing company WeWork. The company's rise and fall epitomizes the downsides of the aggressive investment style of SoftBank, which once invested in WeWork at a valuation of $47 billion. Even after the implosion of WeWork in 2019, SoftBank doubled down and spent more money to bail out the company.
Throughout the years, SoftBank has lost more than $14 billion on WeWork. It has been writing down the value of its WeWork investments in recent quarters, but the bankruptcy may still not be totally painless. SoftBank wrote down a $300 million WeWork note, held by one of the Vision Funds, to zero. The company also made provisions for a letter of credit lending facility provided to WeWork.
Even Arm is bringing in some bad news. The company announced a disappointing outlook for this quarter on Wednesday, which sent its shares down 7% Thursday.
The artificial-intelligence boom has given a lift to SoftBank's stock this year. But the WeWork debacle is a reminder that the company is still burdened by the poor decisions it made during the last big tech boom -- and of the potential pitfalls of rushing in blindly as a new one begins to unfold.
Credit: By Jacky Wong
