Jerusalem-based Mobileye NV may be one of the biggest auto-parts suppliers you have never heard of. It is also one of the brightest lights of Israel's recent tech startup boom.
Listed in New York with a valuation of around $11 billion, the company makes components essential in the quest for so-called autonomous driving. While a fully functioning, self-driving car may be years out, some of the world's biggest auto makers are already adding elements of the concept to cars they are rolling out today.
Mobileye supplies many of them with chips and algorithms that analyze data to construct a picture of the road and surroundings and help steer clear of danger. Clients include Tesla Motors Inc., General Motors Co. and Volkswagen AG. In October, Tesla offered a "public beta" test of auto-steering and autonomous lane-changing software powered by Mobileye's technology.
Amnon Shashua, Mobileye's founder and chief technology officer, differentiates his company's approach from others, including Google parent Alphabet Inc., as relying less on maps to help interpret the road and a car's surroundings, and more on real-time data analysis from a car's onboard sensors.
Mr. Shashua, 55 years old, and a computer-science professor at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, co-founded Mobileye in 1999. He is also the co-founder of OrCam Technologies Ltd., an Israeli wearable-device maker. Mr. Shashua spoke to The Wall Street Journal recently about Mobileye's approach to autonomous driving. This is an edited transcript.
WSJ: Mobileye is working on an eight-camera combination to power autonomous-driving capabilities in cars. Why eight?
Mr. Shashua: In fully autonomous cars you want the configuration to be aware 360 [degrees]. In urban surroundings things are very complex. You can't allow yourself to have blind spots not covered by a camera . . . We have a production agreement with two, tier-1 manufacturers, for a 2017 time frame. This does not mean that the cars produced with this system will be fully autonomous, only that the sensors installed in these cars would be able to support a fully autonomous mode.
WSJ: Mobileye's technology is strongly based on the analysis of video feed coming from cameras. Can cameras handle conditions in which lighting is less than optimal, for instance, direct sun or darkness?
Mr. Shashua: Today, cameras can achieve the level of performance exhibited by the human eye -- including in direct-light conditions and in dark conditions. The limits are the same ones the human eye has -- fog [is a limit, as it would be for other sensors like laser scanners and radar] . . . When the driver can't see, the vehicle should not be in a fully autonomous mode.
WSJ: Mobileye is now using deep-learning techniques to better help a car see. How does that work?
Mr. Shashua: Deep learning is a set of algorithms that teach themselves and get better over time. Systems like that are very good at using context, for instance, by looking at the whole image and working out where a lane can be. A car [using such technology] can find the path even when it's really hard to do, for instance when no lane marks are visible.
WSJ: Mobileye makes extensive use of "tagged" videos of test rides -- manually annotated videos showing where cars are during a driving sequence, as well as things like road signs and obstacles. How does the company use this data?
Mr. Shashua: We have access to a lot of data. Tagging data is part of the preparations needed in order to enable machine learning. This is how the algorithms learn. We have tagged videos of rides for 30 million kilometers [about 18.6 million miles].
This data comes from lots of geographies -- Europe, the U.S., Asia. It's also diversified in terms of visibility conditions and road conditions -- it's really unbiased, and that is something that is hard to produce. We have 500 people in Sri Lanka [annotating videos manually] and a few dozen in Israel. It takes time to create data. The fact that we work with so many auto makers helps. Just one company would have found it hard to produce that amount of data.
Credit: By Orr Hirschauge
