Startups and venture-capital firms see potential in an unlikely place: food waste.
About 30% to 40% of food in the U.S. is thrown away, according to government estimates. Startups aiming to reduce this waste are attracting more interest as grocery retailers and other companies dealing with excess food are expanding their environmental, social and governance efforts.
Venture-capital firms, in turn, have invested in startups that offer technology-savvy ways to cut down on food waste. The funding demonstrates how environmental initiatives made by big companies are serving as a boon to a small segment of tech startups.
Some startups are using artificial intelligence to gauge customer demand with the hope of reducing leftover food, while others are using technology to streamline logistics processes and resell misshapen produce that grocery stores turn down.
Mentions of "food waste" on corporate earnings calls have tripled between the second quarter of 2016 and this year's second quarter, according to a report by analytics company CB Insights.
More broadly, the food-tech sector -- which includes companies working on food-waste technology, bioengineered foods and food-supply-chain technology -- has raised $170 billion between January and June, up from $147 billion in all of 2020, according to analytics firm PitchBook Data Inc.
Executives and employees in various industries are putting pressure on their companies to allocate capital to environmental, social and governance issues, said Adam Boutin, a partner at Capital One Ventures, the venture division of Capital One Financial Corp. "I think most [companies] in general are feeling more pressure -- and I mean that in a good way -- to focus on ESG," he said.
Capital One Ventures made a seed investment of an undisclosed amount into food-waste startup Goodr Inc. last year. Goodr charges a fee to clients -- such as large companies, event venues, hospitals and airports -- for the use of its waste-management software service, which tracks an organization's surplus food from pickup to donation, handles delivery logistics and automatically generates tax donation receipts. The startup has raised $2.5 million in venture capital since it was founded in 2017.
Monetization and logistics challenges are giving some investors pause.
Clara Brenner, co-founder and managing partner at venture-capital firm Urban Innovation Fund, said the firm has looked at food-waste startups but hasn't invested because not enough companies are willing to pay to get rid of food waste.
Collection and processing is also a costly hurdle, Ms. Brenner said. "Without meaningful regulatory action or government incentives, it's going to be hard," she added.
Credit: By Isaac Taylor and Marc Vartabedian
