In the battle between man and machine, robots appear to have an edge in several areas of the stock-picking arena, according to new research.
Among the key findings of a study conducted by researchers at Indiana University is that portfolios based on the buy recommendations of robo analysts seem to outperform those of human analysts.
Robo analysts also produce a more-balanced distribution of buy, hold and sell recommendations than human analysts, revise their recommendations more frequently and rely less on routine earnings announcements and more on complex periodic disclosures for their recommendations, the researchers found.
"We're not saying that robos can replace humans," says Joseph Pacelli, an assistant professor of accounting at Indiana University, who co-wrote the study along with Braiden Coleman, a doctoral student in accounting, and Kenneth Merkley, associate professor of accounting. "We're just trying to show that robos are valuable and show some reasons why," says Dr. Merkley.
Robo analysts make recommendations by relying heavily on a set of computer instructions, or algorithms, to identify and analyze financial filings and use machine learning to train their programs.
By contrast, traditional equity-research analysts, including large full-service Wall Street banks such as J.P. Morgan and Morgan Stanley, as well as smaller boutique firms, rely heavily on analysis by humans.
The study examined 76,568 reports issued by seven robo-analyst firms, including New Constructs LLC, RapidRatings and Validea, from 2003 through 2018. It compared those with reports written by human analysts on the same companies.
The researchers found that robo analysts tend to issue more sell recommendations than their human counterparts. Buy recommendations accounted for 32% of robo recommendations compared with 47% of traditional analysts' recommendations, while sell recommendations accounted for 24% of robo recommendations, but just 6% of traditional analysts' recommendations. That might be because robos are less subject to behavioral biases and conflicts of interest, the researchers say.
"It's not in [human analysts'] best interest to issue hold or sell recommendations; oftentimes the firms they're covering are their clients," says Dr. Pacelli. "Robos don't face those conflicts of interest."
At the same time, human analysts are now facing larger workloads as the disclosures they need to review have increased and they may be working with fewer resources.
Robo analysts don't face such constraints. Indeed, the robos produced almost one additional recommendation revision per covered company a year over the 2003 to 2018 period, according to the study.
And while human analysts more commonly revise their recommendations in connection with routine and widely watched disclosures, such as earnings releases, robo analysts scour more neglected, more complex disclosures with large volumes of data, such as companies' quarterly and annual reports, which can be hundreds of pages long, says Dr. Merkley.
The stock portfolios created by the researchers based on the robo analysts' buy recommendations generated annualized returns that were 6.4 to 6.9 percentage points higher than those expected from a portfolio with a similar risk profile, the study found. In contrast, portfolios based on traditional analysts' buy recommendations generated annualized returns 1.2 to 1.7 percentage points above the anticipated rate of return.
There was no evidence that the robo analysts' sell recommendations were incrementally more profitable than those of their human counterparts, however. It could be that robos are more focused on reviewing their buy recommendations than in generating profitable sell calls because their individual-investor client base is less likely to take short positions, the researchers say.
Of course, robos have their limitations, which is why the study's authors don't recommend investors ignore human analysts altogether. Robos, for example, are likely less able to incorporate into their analysis nonfinancial or subjective information, such as information from a conference call or discussion with management, which in the case of certain stocks can be significant. They also can't easily replace the services provided by boutique firms, such as organizing specialized investor conferences or facilitating access to management, which are valued by institutional investors.
"Human analysts add value in many ways, especially in these more specialized services," says Dr. Pacelli. "We wouldn't say one is better than the other; using both would probably add the most value to the typical investor."
---
Ms. Maxey is a writer in Union City, N.J. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Daisy Maxey
