Social-media platform Reddit's ad business is growing in a big way as marketers try to connect with its communities of users, but advertisers say the company is still chasing rivals in areas such as measurement and targeting.
Reddit, which was founded in 2005 and went public in March, hosts 91.2 million daily active users who gather around subjects in groups called subreddits, where they vote on each other's contributions to elevate their favorite posts.
Its ad revenue in the second quarter totaled $253.1 million, Reddit said on Tuesday -- a minuscule sum compared with the $38.3 billion in ad sales at Meta Platforms, owner of Facebook and Instagram, during the same period but 41% more than in the same quarter a year earlier.
Ad-revenue growth was aided by the arrival of new users and deepening engagement, according to the company. More than half of the growth came from performance advertising, it added, referring to ads focused more on generating clicks or purchases than building a brand.
The company also used its quarterly results to tout its recent acquisition of Memorable AI, whose generative artificial-intelligence tools Reddit said would help advertisers pick the ad creative that is most likely to spur consumers to action.
So-called lower-funnel ad products are what many marketers have said Reddit needs to strengthen before it can become a bigger player for their business.
Reddit has a unique ability to integrate advertisers' content into online communities where people are the most passionate about a given topic, said Carly Carson, head of integrated media at marketing agency PMG.
But it still needs to help advertisers better capitalize on that ability, Carson said. "We are hoping to see Reddit continue to expand its mid- and low-funnel capabilities to help brands drive immediate conversion outcomes," she said.
Reddit is working to improve search on the platform, another opportunity for ads, executives said on the company's earnings call.
"For many users, they're literally typing into a box exactly what they're interested in," Chief Executive Steve Huffman said on the call.
Some industry players agree. "Redditors use the platform like the average person might use Google," said Colleen Fielder, group vice president for social and partner marketing solutions at programmatic advertising and media automation software company Basis Technologies. "They're seeking research and advice on products and services from others. Being able to align your ads with communities and keywords to show up within that conversation is especially powerful."
But Reddit is still playing catch-up with other platforms when it comes to capabilities including ad formats and measurement options, Fielder said.
"Because Reddit users are anonymous, it can be difficult to really hone in on a specific audience or understand how specific audiences are responding," she said.
Reddit is enjoying a growing profile in pop culture and a consistently engaged community, among other factors leading to its recent success, said Matt Larson, vice president of media and connection strategy at media agency Collective Measures.
While Reddit lags behind large companies such as Meta in sophistication and scale, its potential is clear, Larson said. The question is where its ad capabilities go next.
"With the right creative strategy, the ability to target highly engaged audiences -- including very hard-to-reach segments like [men 18 to 49 years old] -- provides a lot of upside for growth in media investment if they are able to evolve the ad product without alienating their core users," Larson said.
Credit: By Megan Graham
