HONG KONG -- China is implementing new rules to restrict the production of "deepfakes," media generated or edited by artificial-intelligence software that can make people appear to say and do things they never did.
Beijing's internet regulator, the Cyberspace Administration of China, will begin enforcing the regulation -- on what it calls "deep synthesis" technology, including AI-powered image, audio and text-generation software -- starting Tuesday, marking the world's first comprehensive attempt by a major regulatory agency to curb one of the most explosive and controversial areas of AI advancement.
Such technologies, which underpin wildly popular applications such as ChatGPT, a text generator developed by OpenAI, and Lensa, an automated maker of personalized digital avatars, pose new challenges for their potential to generate more deceptive media that could fuel misinformation and casts doubt on the veracity of virtually anything in the digital realm.
The new regulations, among other things, prohibit the use of AI-generated content for spreading "fake news," or information deemed disruptive to the economy or national security -- broadly defined categories that give authorities wide latitude to interpret. They require providers of deep synthesis technologies, including companies, research organizations and individuals, to prominently label images, videos and text as synthetically generated or edited when they could be misconstrued as real.
The new rules, published on Dec. 11 ahead of their implementation this month, follow the unveiling of rules in August aimed at governing the algorithms that underpin the world's most powerful internet platforms.
Whether the new rules on deepfake-generation tools and algorithms have the desired effect will offer a test of Beijing's ability to manage a fast-evolving set of new technologies that is befuddling regulators the world over, technology policy analysts say.
U.S. lawmakers have sought to address the proliferation and potential abuse of deepfakes, but those efforts have stalled over free-speech concerns. In the European Union, regulators are further along but have taken a more cautious approach than China, strongly recommending that platforms find ways to mitigate the ability of deepfakes to spread disinformation, without banning them outright, says Matthias Spielkamp, executive director of Berlin-based AlgorithmWatch, a nonprofit research and advocacy organization.
China's attempt at regulation shows Beijing is heavily influenced by the global debate surrounding the technology, said Graham Webster, a Stanford University research scholar who runs the DigiChina Project, which tracks China's digital-policy developments.
"China is learning with the world as to the potential impacts of these things, but it's moving forward with mandatory rules and enforcement more quickly," he said.
Deepfakes emerged after the creation of an open-source algorithm in 2014 capable of producing hyper-realistic images that look like photographs of people and objects that don't exist. The invention sparked a wave of research in powerful image-synthesis software -- as well as new abuses, such as the grafting of mostly women's faces into pornography videos without their consent.
AI-powered synthesis technologies have since continued to advance and expand into different mediums, including illustrations, video, voice, text and chat conversations -- all of which are now commonly categorized under the broad umbrella of "generative AI" -- in part driven by their growing utility in commercial and entertainment applications.
Face-swapping apps such as Reface and features that add dog ears to selfies on TikTok and Snapchat use variations of generative algorithms to achieve their effects.
But fears about the abuse of generative technologies to create deepfakes have continued to grow.
It is now easier than ever to produce videos of politicians appearing to say anything, which have the potential to sow chaos, especially during elections or wars. The mountains of data used to train newer-generation AI software such as ChatGPT and Lensa -- trillions of words and images scraped from the internet -- have also sparked widespread concerns about data privacy and consent.
Credit: By Karen Hao
