LONDON -- Britain is putting foreign takeovers of its businesses under greater scrutiny, complicating a popular route to overseas expansion for American companies as they spend record amounts on U.K. acquisitions.
The U.K. has for decades prided itself as a global champion of open markets but is now emerging as a test case for how the pandemic has reshaped thinking on the need for domestic capabilities in key areas like computer chips and pharmaceuticals.
British officials are currently assessing whether four deals could have an impact on the country's national security, including Nvidia Corp.'s $40 billion takeover of chip designer Arm Holdings and Parker-Hannifin Corp.'s acquisition of Meggitt PLC, one of the U.K.'s last independent defense companies. Scrutiny is expected to grow in January when companies in 17 sectors -- spanning artificial intelligence to energy -- will be required to notify the government about foreign takeovers or investments, under the new National Security and Investment Act.
Currently such notification is voluntary across six sectors.
"What we are seeing is increased sensitivity in the area of national security, no doubt about it," said Douglas Lahnborg, a London-based antitrust lawyer at Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP.
Governments across the West have grown wary in recent years of the prospect of hostile countries acquiring key technology to win military or economic advantage. In Britain, whose auto makers, utilities, tech companies, large manufacturers and big soccer teams are almost all now foreign-owned, concerns are also growing about the potential loss of headquarters, intellectual property and spending on research and development.
The changing mood is underscored by the Arm takeover. Six years ago, the acquisition of Arm by Japan's SoftBank Group Corp. was welcomed by the government at the time as being in the national interest. Last month, officials referred Nvidia's purchase of Arm to the U.K.'s antitrust authority for an in-depth, "Phase 2" investigation to determine whether the deal threatened national security. Britain's Competition and Markets Authority is also one of several antitrust authorities, including the Federal Trade Commission, looking at whether the deal would harm competition.
The U.K. government has said its efforts to place foreign takeovers under greater scrutiny are motivated by a desire to protect companies developing technology key to guarding national security, as well as those combating public-health threats such as Covid-19.
Other countries, including Germany, Italy and Spain, have also tightened takeover defenses since the onset of the pandemic.
Some worry about the consequences of so many foreign takeovers of British businesses, with more than 16% of Brits working for a foreign-owned company, compared with less than 5% in the U.S., according to government data.
A Nvidia spokesman had no immediate comment. The company previously said it would, if required, make legally binding commitments to appease any concerns over its commitment to Arm and the U.K.
Despite greater scrutiny, the takeovers currently being reviewed on national-security grounds could still go ahead.
Credit: By Alistair MacDonald and Ben Dummett
