Microsoft is betting nuclear power can help sate its massive electricity needs as it ventures further into artificial intelligence and supercomputing.
The technology industry's thirst for power is enormous. A single new data center can use as much electricity as hundreds of thousands of homes. Artificial intelligence requires even more computing power.
Nuclear power is carbon-free and, unlike renewables, provides round-the-clock electricity. But it faces significant hurdles to getting built, including the daunting and expensive U.S. nuclear regulatory process for project developers.
In a twist, Microsoft is experimenting with generative artificial intelligence to see if AI could help streamline the approval process, according to Microsoft executives.
The generative AI experiments tap in to Microsoft's investment in OpenAI, creator of the viral chatbot ChatGPT. For the past six months, a team of Microsoft employees have been training a large language model with U.S. nuclear regulatory and licensing documents, hoping to expedite the paperwork required for such approvals, which can take years and cost hundreds of millions of dollars.
Power demand is growing globally at the same time as a range of industries is trying to shift away from fossil fuels, said Michelle Patron, Microsoft's senior director of sustainability policy.
"If we're going to do that carbon-free, we're going to need all the tools in the tool kit," she said.
Nuclear power is broadly seeing a surge of popular interest, including at COP28, the United Nations' annual climate conference in Dubai, where the U.S. was among a group of countries pledging to triple global nuclear power generation by 2050.
The reality for nuclear power is that output continues to slide globally as plant closures outpace openings, and no Western country has started construction of newly designed, smaller modular reactors, or SMRs, which many consider the future of the industry.
Generation dropped 4% last year and nuclear's share of the global electricity market is at the lowest point in four decades, around 9.2%, according to the latest World Nuclear Industry Status Report released last week.
In the U.S., nuclear power in the past decade has had a hard time competing against cheaper options. The cost of building renewable-energy projects has fallen and the shale boom dropped fuel costs for natural-gas-fired power plants.
While solar and wind deals remain the primary way for companies to buy clean energy, they can't provide round-the-clock power. More companies want to add other kinds of clean generation on local or regional grids that can provide steady power.
Google executives said they would consider signing a power-purchase agreement, traditionally used to help finance new wind and solar projects, with the developer of a SMR. Some cryptocurrency miners, too, say they want to be among the first customers of SMRs to power their data campuses. Microsoft founder Bill Gates is among several tech billionaires backing SMR developers.
Microsoft posted a job opening this fall for a nuclear-power expert to help it integrate SMRs into its electricity planning. It is also buying power from existing nuclear plants.
Constellation Energy, the nation's largest owner of nuclear plants, in June agreed to sell nuclear power to Microsoft for a data center in Virginia when wind and solar aren't available. It gives Microsoft price certainty and power generation available "second to second," said Joseph Dominguez, chief executive of Constellation. He called the matchup between data centers and nuclear power "peanut butter and jelly."
Constellation projects that because of the emergence of AI, new demand for power for data centers could be five or six times what will be needed for charging electric vehicles.
Google doesn't have a power-purchase agreement with an existing nuclear plant but would consider one with an SMR, said Maud Texier, Google's global director of clean energy and decarbonization development. All of its purchase agreements are for new projects, known as "additionality."
"I do think nuclear, especially advanced nuclear, is making a lot of progress," said Texier, who compares the cost of nuclear projects to where wind and solar were 15 years ago. "Cost decline is going to be a function of deployment," she said.
The costly permitting and construction process remains a primary hurdle for SMRs in Western countries.
In the U.S., so far just one SMR developer, NuScale Power, has had its design approved by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The process cost NuScale around $500 million.
Credit: By Jennifer Hiller
