The stock market opened in the red and extended declines after another mixed round of earnings reports on Wednesday, dragging all three major indexes to their steepest declines in weeks.
The slide spanned soda makers, a coffee giant and an aircraft manufacturer, with losses by chip stocks adding momentum to the broader market's turn lower in the afternoon.
The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite led the retreat with a decline of 1.6%, or 296 points, to 18276.65. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 1%, or 410 points, to 42514.95, while the S&P 500 dropped 0.9%, or 54 points, to 5797.42.
Investors have tapped the brakes on stocks' record run, jeopardizing what could be their seventh straight week of gains, while they unpack a barrage of earnings reports offering snapshots of the health of U.S. consumers.
Even though the American economy remains robust, the companies reporting so far have shared outlooks that many investors view as good, but not great.
With businesses valued so highly relative to profits, said Jose Torres, senior economist at Interactive Brokers, "any disappointment in the outlook for the bottom line can significantly impact stock-market performance."
Boeing reported a $6.2 billion quarterly loss, its biggest since the pandemic upended global air travel.
Chief Executive Kelly Ortberg said the plane maker needs a culture change. Striking machinists rejected a revised contract offer from the company late Wednesday. Boeing also said it will burn through cash in the next three quarters. Shares declined 1.8% Wednesday and have plunged 40% this year.
Coca-Cola slipped 2.1% Wednesday after posting soft sales that some analysts have attributed to price increases.
Starbucks shares ticked 0.9% higher after the coffee chain suspended guidance for next fiscal year and a new chief executive called for a strategic overhaul.
Meanwhile, AT&T shares rose 4.6% thanks to better-than-expected earnings and despite booking a $4.4 billion impairment related to its business-wireline unit.
Market-moving reports continued after the bell with earnings by Tesla and IBM. Investors are awaiting a jammed slate next week, when Alphabet, Microsoft, Meta Platforms and Amazon.com report.
Elsewhere in the stock market, McDonald's was the Dow industrials' worst-performer after federal officials said they were investigating Quarter Pounders as the potential source of an E. coli outbreak across 10 states. The company's shares fell 5.1%, their largest single-day drop since the outset of the Covid-19 pandemic.
While earnings have been top of mind on Wall Street, positive data about the U.S. economy has scrambled investors' expectations for Federal Reserve interest-rate cuts and pushed up bond yields.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury, which is heavily influenced by the outlook for short-term interest rates set by the Fed, surpassed 4.2% this week for the first time since July and settled Wednesday at 4.240%.
Political jitters have added to the pressure.
In recent weeks, Wall Street has ramped up bets on a Republican sweep of the White House and Congress that could pave the way for tax cuts, spending bumps and tariffs on foreign goods. Most economists believe the agenda will buoy inflation and lead to higher interest rates over time.
Safe returns from bonds could peel away some investors from riskier assets such as stocks, particularly in industries that need to borrow money to fund innovation such as artificial intelligence. On Wednesday, shares fell in many of the companies that design or manufacture chips needed for AI, including Nvidia's 2.8% decline. Qualcomm and Arm also posted losses amid a licensing dispute. Qualcomm shares dropped 3.8% while Arm's American depositary receipts declined 6.7%.
The impact of climbing Treasury yields has already rippled into the housing market, where high prices and mortgage rates are keeping buyers on the sidelines.
Existing-home sales in September fell 1% from a month earlier to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 3.84 million, the National Association of Realtors said Wednesday, on pace for their worst year since 1995.
In commodity markets, benchmark U.S. crude futures fell 1.4%, to $70.77 a barrel, weighing on energy stocks. Oil prices have retreated about 17% from a year ago despite continuing fighting across the Middle East.
Credit: By David Uberti
