For a look at the strength of China's consumer economy, look no further than the latest quarterly results from e-commerce company Alibaba Group Holding Ltd.
The company said Thursday that its fiscal fourth-quarter revenue jumped 60% from a year earlier to 38.6 billion yuan, or $5.6 billion. Revenue from its core commerce unit rose 47% to $4.59 billion.
Its net income for the period, which ended March 31, was 10.65 billion yuan, nearly double the year-earlier tally.
Driving the revenue growth are rising wages that allow Chinese consumers to spend more on discretionary goods, Alibaba Vice Chairman Joe Tsai told analysts in a call.
"The potential leveraging up of the Chinese consumer, especially among the younger Chinese population, will provide a powerful driver of consumption many years into the future," Mr. Tsai said.
China's National Bureau of Statistics said online retail sales of physical goods rose 26% in China in the first four months of the year.
Analysts from J.P. Morgan said in a report that rising online purchases reflect the trend of Chinese consumers upgrading their household goods and appliances as their discretionary spending power increases.
Alibaba, which runs China's most popular online shopping websites, Taobao and Tmall, also said Thursday that the company's board approved a $6 billion share buyback over the next two years to prevent share dilution.
Alibaba's American depositary receipts were up 1%, to $121.92, in Thursday afternoon trading.
Alibaba's revenue for the latest quarter beat the $5.3 billion forecast by analysts surveyed by S&P Global Market Intelligence, while earnings per share narrowly missed estimates at 4.35 yuan.
Revenue at Alibaba's digital media and entertainment division more than tripled to $571 million as the firm consolidated sales from its online video acquisition of Youku Tudou. Even so, the digital media unit posted a loss of 1.7 billion yuan in the fourth quarter.
Executives said competition in China's online video sector remained intense with many players competing for licensed content.
Alibaba has plans to invest more than 50 billion yuan over the next three years in media content and infrastructure. It said it is looking to work with talent to develop proprietary content.
In retailing, Alibaba said it is focused on expanding its operations overseas, and would invest in artificial intelligence to develop technologies that would boost consumer spending on its existing platforms.
Alicloud, its cloud-computing arm, doubled its revenue in the quarter to $314 million as it added more paying users.
In response to a question, Mr. Tsai said Alibaba wasn't looking to create a self-driving vehicle, which has become a major initiative of fellow Chinese internet company Baidu Inc.
Credit: By Liza Lin and Austen Hufford
