Slack Technologies Inc. built up a $3.8 billion valuation and buzz as one of Silicon Valley's hottest startups by getting millions of office workers to use its group messaging app. Now some of the technology industry's biggest competitors want to be part of the conversation.
Microsoft Corp. this month unveiled its Teams workplace collaboration service, which came on the heels of Facebook Inc.'s launch last month of Workplace by Facebook. The tech giants' moves put pressure on the San Francisco startup, whose user base is tiny by comparison.
"I've been paranoid about this for a long time," Slack Chief Executive Stewart Butterfield said in an interview after the Microsoft Teams announcement.
Slack has been bracing for the assault. It signed a partnership last month with International Business Machines Corp. to use its Watson artificial-intelligence services.
The growing battle reflects more than excitement over the prospect of a more efficient alternative email. Tech companies envision messaging as a gateway to other business software from other vendors.
For instance, a worker could type in the chat box to book vacation days in a human-resources program or enter a transaction in an expense-reporting program. The company that provides that interface could wield extraordinary power in the enterprise software market.
Slack already lets users beef up messages with information from partners -- tweets from Twitter Inc. or customer information from Salesforce.com Inc. -- and add comments to files and share them.
The messaging service offers a free version but its two paid tiers, at $6.67 and $12.50 per user per month, are considered costly by some standards.
Slack already has battled other competitors large and small, including Atlassian Corp.'s HipChat and Alphabet Inc.'s Google Spaces, and Symphony Communication Services LLC, a startup backed by Wall Street. (Dow Jones Newswires, which is owned by Wall Street Journal publisher News Corp, is a provider of news on the Symphony platform.)
Microsoft said it would include Teamsfree with the commercial version of the online Office 365 productivity suite.
Mr. Butterfield said the market is large enough for more than one provider, and that there are plenty of companies that don't use Office 365.
Credit: By Rachael King
