Thomson Reuters's news site has been free for consumers since 1995. That is about to change.
The global news organization will start charging readers who come directly to its news site and apps. The subscription, which will cost $1 a week, will be launched this month in Canada and roll out in the U.S. and parts of Europe in the coming weeks and months.
In charging readers, Reuters is following a path that many other publishers are pursuing as ad-supported business models come under strain. On Tuesday, CNN said it was starting to ask users to pay a monthly fee of $3.99 for unlimited access to CNN.com, a so-called subscription paywall that would kick in after they have read a certain number of free articles.
Technology outlet the Verge is considering a paid subscription as well, according to a person familiar with the matter. The newsletter Status earlier reported on the Verge's plans.
Reuters is known for licensing its content to other news organizations around the world. Its consumer-facing news site represents just a sliver of its global news operation. The company has 2,600 full-time journalists around the world who churn out news articles and videos that are picked up by other publishers.
The effort to pursue subscriptions follows a yearslong push to get people to register their information with the outlet once they read a certain number of articles. Reuters will rely on subscription revenue to expand its coverage and ultimately its consumer-facing business, said Reuters President Paul Bascobert in an interview.
"It hasn't been a place where we've decided to push aggressively in terms of growth and investment," he said. "Having subscriptions now gives us the basis to invest."
While the paid-subscription model has panned out for established news publishers such as The Wall Street Journal and the New York Times, newcomers could face challenges in an already crowded news and entertainment subscription market. They also risk eroding web traffic, lowering their reach and appeal to advertisers.
Reuters's consumer-facing news sites reach 45 million to 50 million unique viewers a month, drawing traffic from 240 countries and territories, the company said. Bascobert is betting Reuters's global reach will give it an advantage over other publishers.
News publishers have experimented with subscriptions and other sources of revenue such as games and e-commerce, as traditional ad-supported business models face an array of challenges. Crucial issues include advertisers shying away from news, social platforms sending publishers less traffic and the impact of artificial intelligence on publishers' businesses.
For Reuters, marketing its brand to a general news audience will be a challenge, but the company is counting on readers' trust in its reporting as a selling point. "Not a lot of folks knew us for being a source of news. We've been a source of news to the news," Bascobert said. "We think there's an opening in the market now, particularly around the issue of misinformation."
In 2023, Reuters News made up 11% of parent Thomson Reuters's revenue. A large portion of the company's revenue comes from units focused on legal content, research and tools.
CNN says it draws 150 million monthly visitors to its flagship site, making it one of the biggest competitors in online news. It has explored launching subscriptions over the past several years, under different management teams, but those plans never took flight. The company also launched a $5.99-a-month streaming video service in 2022, CNN+, but shut it down after only a month when demand proved tepid.
The new $3.99-a-month offering for CNN.com "is just the first step in CNN's journey to become a more consumer-oriented, digital-product company," Alex MacCallum, CNN's executive vice president of digital products and services, wrote in an internal memo.
MacCallum said the company will create other subscription products to capitalize on news as well as lifestyle journalism.
Credit: By Alexandra Bruell
