Automating Inequality
By Virginia Eubanks (2018)
1. With harrowing first-person testimony -- including her own, about her experience navigating the U.S. health-insurance system -- Virginia Eubanks argues in "Automating Inequality" that America has created a "digital poorhouse." Thanks to the country's increasing reliance on algorithms and machines to replace human decision-making, choices -- and mistakes -- are often made at the expense of those without access to the "information, discretionary time and self-determination" that wealthier citizens enjoy. Ms. Eubanks brings clarity to what those who bear the brunt of algorithmic decision-making currently face. She tells us, for instance, of the severely disabled child in Indiana who was denied Medicaid because of an automation experiment gone wrong. Our reality now approaches the dystopia of a science-fiction novel, and reminds us of what is at stake if we fail to navigate the rise of artificial intelligence with intention and care.
If Then
By Jill Lepore (2020)
2. "If Then" details the rise of the Simulmatics Corp., a Silicon Valley-esque tech company of the 1950s and '60s. The company's goal was to help win political campaigns by using computers to analyze voter opinions and behavior. These are practices we accept as normal today, but at the time were considered dangerous and immoral. The men of Simulmatics were well-intentioned liberals who supported JFK, but their product, according to Jill Lepore, was a prototype of the kind of technology that -- through its ambition to categorize humanity -- has helped "atomize the world." Simulmatics ultimately failed and went bankrupt, not because of the government, which looked the other way, but because the technology simply wasn't good enough. Today we live in the world that those early pioneers wanted to create. Ms. Lepore laments Simulmatics's descendants and the technology that "manipulates opinion, exploits attention, commodifies information, divides voters, fractures communities, alienates individuals, and undermines democracy."
Artificial Intelligence
By Melanie Mitchell (2019)
3. A deep technical understanding of artificial intelligence is not necessary to comprehend its effects on our communities, businesses and democracies. But being armed with the basic details of the mathematical and computational advances that have underpinned the AI revolution will help demystify it. Distinguished computer scientists who can write well and explain difficult concepts clearly to a lay audience are worth their weight in semiconductors, as are AI technologists who are free from hype and bluster. In this compact book, Melanie Mitchell is sparing about what we really need to know yet equips us with enough information to understand the technological strides behind everything from ChatGPT to autonomous vehicles. Stories include how the winner of an obscure computer-vision competition in 2012 set off the current wave of Big Tech investment in AI. Along the way there is a healthy dose of skepticism about the plausibility of a humanity-surpassing superintelligence, along with thoughtful attention to the challenges that lie ahead.
Klara and the Sun
By Kazuo Ishiguro (2021)
4. In this dystopian science-fiction novel, the Nobel laureate Kazuo Ishiguro gently but devastatingly explores a world in which gene-editing has created an elite class of human rulers while a combination of artificial intelligence and robotics has placed much of the "unlifted" masses into "post-employment" communities -- leading to fear, anger and division. In spare yet beautiful prose, Mr. Ishiguro gracefully asks us to think about the effects of technological disturbances -- in particular how they may be unequally applied and distributed, and what such a society might feel like to its inhabitants.
Race After Technology
By Ruha Benjamin (2019)
5. The bounties of science have not always been distributed equally in America. For black people, there have been many hard examples to drive this home. Henrietta Lacks's cancer cells -- which, it was discovered, could divide and multiply indefinitely -- continue to be used in medical research more than 70 years after they were obtained without her consent; the Tuskegee Syphilis Study observed the course of the disease among poor black men, deliberately leaving them untreated over the course of 40 years; in the early 20th century, the study of eugenics was respected as a legitimate academic discipline at prestigious institutions. The technological divide continues. In "Race After Technology," Ruha Benjamin describes the "New Jim Code": a system of "coded inequity" that sees online abuse targeted disproportionately at black women, or faulty facial-recognition programs falsely incriminating black men. Such inequality stems from a variety of impulses and biases, including the lack of diversity in today's tech industry, which often prevents prejudicial mistakes from being caught or thought about. As Ms. Benjamin highlights, this is a portent of things to come. "In many ways, Black people already live in the future."
Credit: By Verity Harding
