Fifty years of technological advancement revolutionized the treatment of heart attacks and increased survival rates, but heart disease remains the nation's leading cause of death for women. While we have made dramatic progress, efforts to prevent heart disease have been disappointing, especially for women. Yet a standard feature of women's health -- mammography -- offers a promising gateway for cardiovascular screening through breast arterial calcification, or BAC.
BAC consists of visible deposits of calcium in breast arteries, which can be seen on mammograms and should prompt doctors to screen for heart disease. Since the X-ray primarily screens for breast cancer, this finding is rarely reported and leaves most patients unaware of the amount of BAC on their exams.
Women who get mammograms reduce their 10-year risk of death from breast cancer by more than 40%. This finding could conceivably lower mortality rates for heart disease, too. Doctors usually screen patients for heart disease by evaluating traditional risk factors such as high blood pressure and cholesterol, diabetes and family history. A doctor might order a CT scan to evaluate coronary-artery calcification or calcium deposits in heart arteries. Though plaque buildup and calcification in the arteries supplying breast tissue can have similar causes as coronary-artery calcification, it doesn't receive the same attention as calcification in other blood vessels. Women with BAC are 51% more likely to develop heart disease than those without BAC, and the Canadian Society of Breast Imaging is working to share this finding with doctors.
The use of machine-learning software in medical imaging has led to new incidental findings. In mammography, BAC can be quantified to evaluate the risk of cardiovascular disease and death. The implications for women's health extend beyond heart disease: High levels of these deposits are found in patients with end-stage kidney disease and diabetes.
Regulators must embrace technology that helps bridge gender gaps in healthcare. Although the Food and Drug Administration has allowed quicker development tracks for some software tools that help doctors make clinical decisions, government classification and approval for artificial-intelligence-enabled products can take years. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services should make establishing payment codes for products involving women's heart disease a priority to prompt private insurers to cover new service lines.
Heart attacks in women have been poorly understood because of insufficient research and screening. BAC measurements can take advantage of cancer screenings to improve cardiovascular health.
---
Mr. Jindal served as governor of Louisiana, 2008-16, and a U.S. assistant secretary of health and human services, 2001-03. He serves on the board of U.S. Heart and Vascular, a provider of cardiovascular services. Dr. Parghi is a breast radiologist and the chief medical officer of Solis Mammography.
Credit: By Bobby Jindal and Chirag Parghi
