Nvidia Corp. unveiled a new chip for well-heeled gaming enthusiasts that it hopes will also appeal to artificial-intelligence specialists.
The company said its new Titan X chip, the successor to a current model under the same name, will be packaged on an add-in card for personal computers that will be available Aug. 2 for $1,200.
Its announcement is the latest sign that the market for graphics chips remains hot. Rival Advanced Micro Devices Inc., which sells similar technology for PCs and videogame consoles, reported strong quarterly results Thursday that pushed its shares up 12%. Nvidia's stock rose 2% Friday.
Nvidia, based in Santa Clara, Calif., called the Titan X one of the most sophisticated chips ever built. It packs 12 billion transistors on a piece of silicon, compared with around seven billion for a high-end microprocessor of the kind sold by Intel Corp.
There are substantial differences between those chip categories. Nvidia and AMD's graphics processing units, or GPUs, have hundreds or thousands of specialized calculating engines rather than a few general-purpose processor cores.
GPUs have long been used to render imagery in videogames and other software. But the chips have more recently become applied for a technique known as deep learning that allows computers to teach themselves by sifting through troves of data rather than through explicit programming instructions.
The approach is being used for such purposes as identifying faces in large numbers of photographs and allowing cars to recognize objects in their surroundings and drive autonomously.
Jen-Hsun Huang, Nvidia's chief executive, unveiled the new Titan X at an event Thursday night at Stanford University. He presented the first card to Andrew Ng, a deep-learning pioneer who has recently worked in the Silicon Valley labs of the Chinese web search giant Baidu Inc.
The announcement of the new product comes just two months after Nvidia unveiled the GTX 1080, a new GPU sold in a $599 card that Nvidia said far exceeded the performance of the $1,000 Titan X model introduced in 2015. Mr. Huang, who had then termed the GTX 1080's performance as "almost irresponsible," said the new Titan X is even more impressive. It can perform 11 trillion floating point calculations per second, compared with 9 trillion for the GTX 1080.
Kelt Reeves, president of the boutique gaming PC maker Falcon Northwest, said the new Titan X came as a surprise given the recent timing of the GTX 1080 and its lead over rival products.
Credit: By Don Clark
