Artificial intelligence has mastered some of the world's most complex games, beating top players at chess, Go and even StarCraft II, a real-time strategy computer game. But where AI stumbles is in cracking some of the seemingly simple games, the ones that require an ability to communicate and collaborate.
That could be about to change. Researchers at Alphabet Inc.'s Google Brain project and DeepMind unit, which cooked up the AI programs that defeated humans at Go and StarCraft II, have set their sights on a new game: Hanabi, a card game in which players cooperate with one another. Everyone either wins or loses based on how well they communicate through their play.
If the researchers can figure out how to create a Hanabi master, that could represent a significant advance for AI, possibly yielding insights into how machines can interact more fluidly with humans in contexts such as conversation and autonomous driving, the researchers involved in this project say. "In everyday life we don't spend time competing with each other -- we spend time communicating and cooperating," says Jakob Foerster, a University of Oxford researcher.
Hanabi is played by two to five people who work together to play cards of five different colors in the right order. The twist: While all players can see each other's hands, they can't see their own. To bridge that information gap, players are allowed to give each other hints about their hands, but they're limited to naming colors or numbers, leaving players to infer what cards they should play.
It is that act of communicating efficiently that makes Hanabi scientifically intriguing. Humans, for example, may naturally interpret a co-player's hint as an indication that the named card is playable. But machines won't intrinsically understand such cues.
"These cooperative games are different and hard because you need to be able to agree on a way that you're communicating with each other in order to play the game well, and doing that agreement requires collaboration among all the players," says Nolan Bard, a DeepMind researcher working on the challenge.
Researchers working on the Hanabi challenge at DeepMind set up an open-source platform where people can experiment with artificial agents and algorithms, but they don't expect the problem's solution to come soon. Dr. Foerster says he'd be surprised if it only took five years to master ad hoc play.
Still, Julian Togelius, an associate professor at New York University who studies AI and games, says games like Hanabi are fertile ground for innovation. "Game design as it has progressed is an ongoing mapping of human intellectual ability," he says. "If there is a form of intelligence, then someone will at some point design a game that exercises that intelligence."
---
Mr. Fitch is a reporter in the San Francisco bureau of The Wall Street Journal. He can be reached at asa.fitch@wsj.com.
---
TIMELINE
Computer Wins
Games have been valuable testing grounds for machine-learning algorithms. Here are some milestones in the history of humans playing games against machines.
October 1989
Chess champion Garry Kasparov defeats Deep Thought, a computer developed at Carnegie Mellon.
May 1997
IBM's Deep Blue defeats Garry Kasparov in a tournament, the first victory by a computer over a reigning world champion in chess.
May 2017
DeepMind's AlphaGo beats the world's top-ranked player at Go, a complex board game with vast numbers of possible moves, a major milestone for an AI-based system.
December 2017
Researchers at Carnegie Mellon publish a paper describing how Liberatus, an AI bot that plays Texas Hold 'Em poker, defeated the world's top players in a 20-day competition with thousands of hands.
January 2019
DeepMind's AI defeats two of the top human players of the real-time strategy videogame Starcraft II, a step forward for machines in mastering complex videogames.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
