Google reported a second straight drop in advertising revenue, extending a rare decline as the company navigates economic concerns and tries to capitalize on recent advances in artificial intelligence.
Alphabet Inc., Google's parent company, posted $54.5 billion in ad revenue for the first quarter, a decrease of less than 1% from the same period last year but a smaller decline than Wall Street anticipated. That is the third drop in ad sales since Google became a public company in 2004, and the second consecutive quarterly decline following a 3.6% drop in the fourth quarter.
Both Google and Microsoft Corp., which also reported earnings Tuesday, showed slowing growth but areas of resilience that defied somber market expectations.
Microsoft said revenue for the three months through March rose 7% from a year earlier, better than expected but marking the second-straight quarter below the company's yearslong trend of double-digit percentage growth.
Shares in both companies advanced after hours as the results surpassed analysts' estimates and Alphabet disclosed plans to buy back as much as $70 billion of its stock.
"We did see some signs of stabilization in ad spend," Google Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat said on a call, referring to the company's video platform YouTube, which experienced a third straight quarterly decline in ad revenue.
The online advertising market has remained wobbly as companies respond to an uncertain economic outlook.
Last week, Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg told employees to expect a slower pace of hiring following the company's latest rounds of layoffs.
Google is trying to jump-start growth during a period of heightened competition in AI, a technology that helps power the company's search-ads business. Google combined its two main AI research groups into a unit called Google DeepMind last week, a move it said would significantly accelerate research.
Google also plans to add conversational AI features to its flagship search engine, following a similar move by rival Microsoft, CEO Sundar Pichai said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal this month.
"We'll be rolling it out in an incremental way so that we can test, iterate and innovate," Mr. Pichai said Tuesday on a call with analysts. "Overall, I think it can apply to a broad range of queries."
Alphabet's total revenue increased by 2.6% from last year to $69.8 billion in the first quarter, aided by continued growth in the company's cloud-computing unit.
The company reported operating income of $17.4 billion in the first quarter, a decrease of 13% from the same period last year.
Google's video platform YouTube reported $6.7 billion of ads revenue in the first quarter, a decrease of 2.6% from the previous year. YouTube typically attracts a large amount of so-called brand advertising, an area that is quicker to fall off in times of uncertainty compared with search advertising, which usually has well-defined performance targets.
Sales in Google's cloud-computing division increased 28% from the same period last year to $7.5 billion in the first quarter, a slower pace of growth compared with the fourth quarter.
The unit produced an operating profit of $191 million for the first time since Google began reporting its results in 2020, following a change in how the company accounted for some costs.
"We're very focused on the long-term path to attractive profitability," Ms. Porat said.
Google, which announced the largest layoffs in company history in January, has recently looked to further slash expenses.
Ms. Porat told employees last month to expect additional cost cuts this year in areas ranging from cafeteria hours to the company's use of internal servers.
The company reported a charge of $2.6 billion in the first quarter tied to job cuts and reduced office space and said it might incur additional charges as it continues to evaluate its real-estate needs.
The buyback announced Tuesday follows a separate $70 billion buyback authorization in 2022 and a $50 billion buyback authorization in 2021.
In the interview with the Journal, Mr. Pichai said Google hadn't yet reached its productivity targets and declined to directly address the possibility of a second round of layoffs at the company.
Mr. Pichai received $226 million in total compensation last year, including a triannual stock grant valued at $210 million. Alphabet said more of the grant would depend on stock performance over time compared with the previous compensation package awarded in 2019.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
