FDA
Third Adviser Quits
Over Alzheimer's Drug
A prominent Harvard drug researcher on Thursday became the third member of a Food and Drug Administration advisory committee to resign over the agency's decision to approve a drug for Alzheimer's, questioning whether the drug works.
Harvard Medical School professor Aaron S. Kesselheim called the FDA's approval of the Biogen Inc. drug Aduhelm "probably the worst drug approval decision in recent U.S. history."
The outside advisory committee that he served on -- the FDA's panel on peripheral and central nervous-system pharmaceuticals -- had rejected supporting the drug, known generically as aducanumab, saying the company needed to conduct further study.
Earlier this week, David S. Knopman, a neurologist at the Mayo Clinic, and Joel S. Perlmutter, a neurologist at Washington University in St. Louis, resigned from the advisory committee in protest over the FDA decision. The recommendations of advisory panels, which consist of acknowledged experts in their fields, are generally accepted by the FDA.
Dr. Perlmutter said in his resignation letter to Stat, a health news organization, that he was quitting "due to this ruling by the FDA without further discussion with our advisory committee."
-- Thomas M. Burton
---
MICHIGAN
Football Coach Knew
Of Abuse, Son Says
The son of legendary University of Michigan football coach Bo Schembechler said he told his father that he was sexually assaulted by a former university team physician who is accused of having abused more than 800 other people.
Matt Schembechler, 62 years old, told The Wall Street Journal Thursday that he told his father, who was head football coach from 1969 to the end of the 1989 season, about the abuse but that his father did nothing in response.
Mr. Schembechler's comments come after a law firm's report, commissioned by the university and released last month, found that Robert Anderson engaged in sexual misconduct with patients "countless times" during his 37 years at the university.
The elder Mr. Schembechler, who died in 2006, was one of the most celebrated college football coaches of his era. His son's comments add to allegations that he knew about the doctor's abuse but didn't act.
-- Kris Maher
---
TREASURY
Year-to-Date Budget
Gap Hits $2.1 Trillion
The U.S. budget deficit grew to a record $2.1 trillion during the first eight months of the fiscal year as spending continued to outpace tax receipts that are rising as the economy recovers from the damage inflicted by the Covid-19 pandemic.
Federal revenue for the eight-month period ended in May rose 29%, to a record $2.6 trillion, primarily because of higher receipts from individual and corporate income taxes, the Treasury Department said Thursday.
Outlays rose 20%, to a record $4.7 trillion, driven by payments for jobless benefits, nutrition assistance and Covid-19 relief programs including emergency small-business loans and stimulus checks to households.
---
TECHNOLOGY
Task Force Launched
On AI Research
The Biden administration launched an initiative Thursday aiming to make more government data available to artificial intelligence researchers, part of a broader push to keep the U.S. on the cutting edge of the crucial new technology.
The National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource Task Force, a group of 12 members from academia, government and industry, will draft a strategy.
-- Ryan Tracy
