In 2021, at the height of the investor frenzy for crypto startups, entrepreneur Chris Horne raised $2 million in seed funding for Filta, a marketplace on which customers could buy and sell custom nonfungible token face filters that could digitally augment their face, say, by adding cat whiskers or a block head. But by the time the company launched in late summer of 2022, enthusiasm for crypto had waned and Filta was faltering.
So Horne pivoted to the new hottest sector: artificial intelligence. He ditched the NFT idea, and this year relaunched Filta as a generative AI-powered digital pet, one that talks and can offer its owner emotional support. The technology behind his new company is OpenAI's large language model, ChatGPT. And Horne is running his new Filta venture off the capital he raised for his original concept.
Horne is among a group of founders abandoning their crypto ambitions and shifting to start an AI company. Driven by the diverging fortunes of the respective sectors, founders are restructuring their startups and rewriting their pitches as they aim to capitalize on the mania over AI, according to interviews with roughly a dozen industry observers, including investors, entrepreneurs and analysts.
Robert Le, a crypto analyst at data provider PitchBook Data, said he first noticed crypto startups migrating to AI while compiling a crypto report this year. Several companies he wanted to include had, it turned out, morphed into AI companies.
Some investors and fellow entrepreneurs criticize a subset of these crypto founders for jumping ship to chase venture dollars.
Pete Flint, a general partner at venture firm NFX, which targets AI and other sectors, said many crypto entrepreneurs moving to AI are committed to moving the technology forward, but there are some simply aiming to cash in on AI hype.
"Those are the tourists, the people that are looking for the next quick thing moving over from crypto into AI," Flint said. "They generally don't get funded but they're seeing the hype signs, like they saw with crypto."
Still, others note that being strategically nimble and adaptable to new technology have long been crucial to startup success.
"I can't fault anyone for pivoting into a new transformative technology," said Paul Hsu, the founder and chief executive of crypto-focused venture firm Decasonic. "AI is here to stay. If you're young and you're striking out in crypto, of course you should do that pivot."
Hsu said that of the 200 early-stage crypto founders that his firm reviews each week, nearly 20 will pivot from crypto to AI.
Not long ago, crypto entrepreneurs could raise capital from investors with little more than a sketch of a business plan; today, it's a different story. Global venture funding for crypto startups plummeted 86% to $1.75 billion in the third quarter from its peak in the first quarter of 2022, according to crypto data provider RootData.
Horne, the Filta founder, was initially all in on crypto. While working for Meta Platforms, then called Facebook, on its early metaverse technology he became intrigued by the marriage of NFTs, or digital collectibles, and virtual reality.
In 2018, Horne left Facebook and started developing NFT ideas and in 2020, he started Filta.
Horne's idea for a market for digital face filters was accepted into Y Combinator, the Mountain View, Calif.-based startup accelerator that provides funding and mentorship to startups. When he set out to raise a seed round in 2021, investors were so eager to fund crypto projects that before he got through a demo of his company at an exhibition event, investors said they were on board, Horne said.
But by the time Filta launched in mid-2022, the perception of crypto had curdled, Horne said, and his product failed to draw much interest.
He and his handful of employees brainstormed other business ideas they thought might get more traction.
Reviewing their list of new business directions, those related to AI jumped out, Horne said. OpenAI had launched ChatGPT in November 2022 and Horne and others on his team had experience experimenting with AI.
Eventually, the team landed on the idea of an AI-powered emotional-support digital pet. Users can download the app, called Zoo Pals: AI Comfort Pet, choose a digital companion -- the options include a dog and a squid -- and get advice and interact with the AI.
Credit: By Marc Vartabedian
