Hollywood writers are able to return to work Wednesday after a five-month strike, having secured staffing guarantees, increased pay and the potential for more upside when streaming shows hit it big.
Now comes the test of whether those hard-fought victories actually translate into fatter paychecks and more job opportunities across the union's membership base.
The Writers Guild of America said Tuesday that the tentative agreement it forged with the coalition of studios, streamers and networks includes significant increases in international residuals as well as greater compensation throughout the creative process.
The WGA estimated the value of the three-year deal at $233 million annually. It said it was initially seeking a deal valued at $429 million annually while the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers initial offer was a deal valued at $86 million a year.
Members are scheduled to vote on the package between Oct. 2-9, and a deal could open the door to a resolution of the Screen Actors Guild strike. The writers strike was scheduled to end early Wednesday.
For now, the agreement is likely to revive late-night TV shows and put Hollywood scribes back in writers rooms.
Some major provisions in the writers' agreement include:
Writers will receive greater insight into how shows perform on streaming services. Streamers including Netflix have agreed to tell the union on a confidential basis how many hours customers spent watching content that platform produced, the union said.
Union members will be able to share in the success of content that performs well on streaming services. Movies and films that are viewed by more than 20% of a streaming service's domestic subscribers in the first three months of release will receive a bonus of 50% of the fixed domestic and foreign royalties.
Studios and streamers will hire a minimum number of writers per project, based on episodes in a series. A six-episode series must have at least three writer-producers; that figure increases for shows with more episodes.
Foreign royalties will increase by 76% in the new deal, the WGA said, and will be based on a streaming service's international subscriber base. The three-year foreign residual for a one-hour episode of a Netflix show, for example, will increase to $32,830 from the current $18,684.
Studios will be transparent about how they use AI. The writers received some protections in the use of artificial intelligence by the studios, but not as much as they had sought. The WGA wanted broad oversight over artificial intelligence including the use of scripts to train AI, but didn't secure it in the agreement. Still, AI-generated material cannot be used to "undermine a writer's credit," the WGA said, and studios must tell writers if any materials it gives them have been made by AI.
The agreement sets the new rules of the streaming era and was forged as the full cost of an industrywide pivot from legacy TV to streaming comes into clear relief. Even before the Writers Guild of America put down their pencils in May, entertainment companies were paring back investments in new TV shows and films.
Netflix, Disney, Warner Bros. Discovery and Paramount Global have all been in cost-cutting mode. Investors last year began demanding streaming profitability over subscriber growth, ushering in a more austere period of spending on content. Meanwhile, consumers continued to cut the cable cord in earnest, sapping entertainment companies of a stream of revenue executives hoped would ease the transition to streaming.
The bottom line: Writers will walk away with better financial protections and the ability to earn a steadier living. But streamers and studios will have to come up with that money one way or another. That could mean that getting shows picked up or renewed could get harder, and rich upfront paydays for writer-producers could go to a select, elite few.
Credit: By Joe Flint and Sarah Krouse
