LONDON -- The U.K. has more surveillance cameras per capita than any other country in the West. But private companies' cameras, not the government's, are starting to worry activists and regulators.
Retailers, property firms and casinos are all taking advantage of Britain's general comfort with surveillance to deploy their own cameras paired with live facial-recognition technology -- the use of artificial intelligence to instantly recognize people caught in surveillance footage.
Store owners and landlords have embraced the tools to thwart shoplifters and other troublemakers. Companies are also now using watch lists compiled by vendors that can help recognize flagged people who set foot on company property.
Privacy advocates in the U.S. and across Europe have contended the technology is overly invasive. Companies, though, are pushing ahead with deploying their own facial-recognition-enhanced surveillance. That is setting up the U.K. as a test case for public comfort with the use of the technology by more than government authorities.
There were more than six million surveillance cameras across Britain -- one for every 10 people -- according to a widely cited 2013 survey by the British Security Industry Association. The vast majority were used for commercial purposes. That was enough to rank Britain as having the highest density of surveillance technology outside of China at the time. The BSIA says that number has gone up since the report was published, now approaching 10 million cameras.
The culture of surveillance is rooted in the government's long domestic fight with the Irish Republican Army, bolstered by terrorism concerns post-9/11. London's "ring of steel," a network of hundreds of cameras, road barriers and cordons, has been a fixture in the capital since the 1990s.
Critics say pairing plain-vanilla closed-circuit surveillance with live, AI-enabled facial recognition goes too far. Privacy activist Big Brother Watch said in August that facial recognition had become an "epidemic across privately owned sites in the U.K." Liberty International, a U.K.-based human-rights group, called the technology "dangerously intrusive and discriminatory."
Some outlets of Budgens, a chain of independently owned convenience stores, have been using facial-recognition technology provided by Facewatch Ltd. for more than a year. Facewatch charges retailers for the use of a computer and software that can track the demographics of people entering a store, including their ethnicity, and screen for a watch list of suspected thieves through a CCTV camera. The system works by sending an alert to a staff member's laptop or mobile device after detecting a face on the watch list.
James Lacey, a staff member at one Budgens store in Aylesbury, southern England, said the system can ping his phone between one and 10 times a day. People have been known to steal large quantities of meat from the store's refrigeration aisle, he said. The new system has helped, he said, though about a quarter of alerts are false.
A spokesman for Facewatch said a maximum of 15% of alerts are false positives. Tracking ethnicity, the spokesman said, can help retailers understand their marketplace.

Credit: By Parmy Olson
