Unpredictable weather has long complicated wind and solar-power generation. Now companies are turning to sophisticated computer models to cut costs and produce energy more efficiently despite fluctuations.
Compared with a coal, gas or nuclear plant, wind and solar facilities produce a dizzying amount of data that utilities are struggling to put into use. Each solar panel and each wind turbine sends out data on electricity output, unlike with a traditional power plant.
Utilities can easily say how much electricity they can provide from a coal, gas or nuclear-power plant because they can adjust output. This is far more difficult for wind and solar farms because they rely on sunlight and wind that changes daily, if not hourly. The industry calls this problem intermittency: the uncertainty of how much power renewables will produce throughout the day.
When electricity providers in regions including the U.S. and the European Union deliver too little or too much energy compared with their predictions, they often have to pay fees for the inaccuracy, known as imbalance prices in the EU. These fees -- which can run into the millions of dollars annually for a large renewables portfolio -- are commonplace for wind and solar power. Companies are trying to narrow these costs with better predictions, which are in large part based on weather forecasts and machine learning.
"Having humans that manage all the complexity in real time is becoming impossible. It was possible a couple of years ago when we had less renewables," said Alexandre Cosquer, an executive at French utility Engie SA. "With the growth of renewables, it is becoming virtually impossible."
To help sift through the data, utilities are turning to predictive analytics to forecast the output of these vast numbers of solar and wind farms.
Machine-learning computer models examine their previous performance under various types of weather and market conditions.
Then they estimate their electricity generation based on the weather forecasts for the coming hours, or even minutes.
Credit: By Dieter Holger
