Less than one day after Microsoft Corp. released Tay, an artificially intelligent software chatbot that communicated through messages on social media services, the program went rogue.
On Wednesday, Microsoft's research arm launched the software on services run by Twitter Inc., Facebook Inc., Snapchat Inc., and Instagram. Hours later, it started spewing anti-Semitic rants, which Twitter users collected and posted on social media.
One tweet from Tay, whose persona was intended to mimic the voice of an American woman aged 18 to 24, read, "Hitler was right I hate the Jews." Another, in response to a question about the Holocaust, said "it was made up," followed by a hand-clapping emoji.
Microsoft silenced Tay on Thursday morning and erased virtually all of its tweets. The latest tweet suggested that Tay will be offline for a bit.
"c u soon humans need sleep now so many conversations today thx," it read.
Microsoft blamed the tweets on users who fed Tay offensive comments in a deliberate campaign to prompt similar responses.
"Unfortunately, within the first 24 hours of coming online, we became aware of a coordinated effort by some users to abuse Tay's commenting skills to have Tay respond in inappropriate ways," Microsoft said in an emailed statement. "As a result, we have taken Tay offline and are making adjustments."
The artificial intelligence created for Tay was designed "to engage and entertain people where they connect with each other online through casual and playful conversation," according to the Microsoft Web page announcing its arrival.
Users were able to elicit offensive replies by getting the software to repeat much of what was tweeted at it.
The campaign to sabotage Tay appears to have been coordinated by the 4chan and 8chan anonymous message-board websites. There, users figured out how to get Tay to respond with obviously objectionable statements, and gleefully crowed about their successes.
On an 8chan thread filled with anti-Semitic comments, one poster wrote Wednesdaythat "We need to turn the bot into a holocaust denier." And a minute later, another replied, "It already likes Hitler." A little later, when it became clear that Tay would respond with offensive tweets, an 8chan poster wrote, "This has so much potential."
4chan didn't immediately respond to a request for comment. 8chan couldn't be reached for comment.
Although recent advances in artificial intelligence are promising, the effort to imbue computers with "intelligence" has a history of creating public-relations issues for companies when things go awry. In May, Yahoo Inc.'s photo service, Flickr, made its debut software designed to automatically tag objects in photos, such as cars or dogs. But the service also tagged a black man with the word "ape" and a picture of a concentration camp as a "jungle gym." Similarly, the auto-tagging feature from Alphabet Inc.'s Google caused embarrassment a month later when it mislabeled a photo of a black man with the word "gorilla."
At that time, a Yahoo spokesperson said the company had removed the incorrect tags and said Yahoo allows users to exempt their photos from autotagging. Google acknowledged the error in its image-tagging software and said it was working to fix the problem.
Credit: By Jay Greene
