SEAWORLD
Drop in Visitors Hits
Theme Park Hard
SeaWorld Entertainment Inc. reported a bigger loss in the latest quarter, hurt by higher expenses as fewer people visited its venues.
Attendance has taken a dive at the amusement park as SeaWorld faced intense public scrutiny over its killer whale program. Last year, the company said it would stop breeding killer whales in a bid to reshape its image, but that has yet to have an impact on ticket sales.
During the quarter, attendance fell 30,000 guests, or 0.7% from a year earlier, and revenue from admissions fell 3%. However, revenue from food and merchandise helped offset the drop.
Over all, SeaWorld reported a loss of $11.9 million, or 14 cents a share, compared with a loss of $11 million, or 13 cents a share, the year before.
Revenue remained steady at $267.6 million, compared with $267.9 million a year earlier.
-- Joshua Jamerson
---
SOLAR ENERGY
EU Court Rejects
Trade-Duty Appeal
A top European Union court on Tuesday rejected an appeal by Chinese solar-panel companies to scrap antidumping and antisubsidy measures imposed by European Union member states in 2013 on imports of solar panels and essential components.
"The court rejects all the applications and confirms all the definitive duties set by the Council," the Luxembourg-based General Court of the EU said.
Separately on Tuesday, the commission decided to impose definitive antidumping duties on imports of heavy steel plates from China, the latest action against that country's exports.
The Council of European Union member states in December 2013 imposed definitive duties of an average of roughly 50% on imports of solar panels from China for a duration of two years.
-- Natalia Drozdiak and Laurence Norman
---
HONDA MOTOR
New Research Arm
To Focus on AI
Honda Motor Co. is creating a research arm focused on artificial intelligence, an area where one of its American advisers says it risks falling behind.
R&D Center X will open in Tokyo in April as a software-focused counterpart to Honda's existing hardware-focused basic research center, which built the robot Asimo, the company said Monday.
Car makers are racing against global technology giants and Silicon Valley upstarts to design new technologies for self-driving cars and electric vehicles.
-- Sean McLain
