Facebook Inc. will soon require that advertisers wanting to run ads on hot-button political issues go through an authorization process first, a move the social network hopes will prevent the spread of misinformation across its platform.
The company announced in blog posts Friday that it plans to work with third parties to develop a list of key issues, which will be updated over time.
Separately Friday, consumer groups filed a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission saying Facebook violates users' privacy rights through its facial-recognition software.
In October, Facebook unveiled a similar authorization requirement for election-related ads. The latest move will cover "issue ads" -- those that don't specifically mention a candidate but weigh in on a divisive issue, including during an election.
Such advertisers will be required to confirm their identities and locations with the company.
The change marks the latest step in Facebook's efforts to secure its platform after Russian-backed groups used the social network to sow divisions before and after the 2016 U.S. presidential election, and elsewhere in the world.
A selection of Facebook ads released by U.S. lawmakers last year showed how Russian-linked operatives used the platform to buy ads to stoke tensions around issues ranging from race to gun rights, as well as ads featuring the presidential candidates.
Starting this spring, election-related ads will carry a "Political Ad" label, alongside information on the advertisers who paid for them, the company said. In June, Facebook will make public a searchable archive of the ads carrying that label, including information on the amount the advertiser spent and the intended target audience.
Political ads on digital platforms aren't subject to the same disclosure requirements as in traditional media, such as television and radio stations, which must publicly disclose the campaign ads they broadcast.
In a blog post, Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said the company supports the Honest Ads Act, a bill in Congress that would require large digital platforms to keep a public library of the paid political ads that appear on their sites.
"This will help raise the bar for all political advertising online," Mr. Zuckerberg said.
Additionally, the company will soon require people who run Facebook pages with large numbers of followers to go through an authorization process, as it looks to make it harder for fake accounts to spread divisive content that has the potential to go viral.
Facebook hasn't disclosed the number of followers a page would have in order to trigger an authorization request. It also hasn't provided details on what this verification process will entail.
Facebook said it would hire more staff to work on verifying ads and pages and that it is investing in artificial intelligence to help uncover advertisers that have skirted the process.
Beyond the political-ad spectrum, beginning this summer Facebook will let users globally see all the ads a page is running, following a test in Canada, the company said.
In recent weeks, Facebook has been making a raft of changes to its data-sharing and privacy policies as it works to rebuild trust among users and regulators. Many of those changes were kick-started following revelations that personal details of as many as 87 million users were improperly obtained by Cambridge Analytica, a data-analytics firm that worked for the 2016 Trump campaign.
In a call with reporters on Wednesday, Mr. Zuckerberg said he had made a "huge mistake" in not focusing more on the potential abuse of users' personal information. He also said he had been "too flippant" in 2016 when he dismissed the idea that fake news could influence an election as "crazy."
The FTC is investigating the Cambridge Analytica incident, and Mr. Zuckerberg is set to testify at two congressional hearings next week.
The complaint about Facebook's facial-recognition software was filed by a coalition of consumer organizations led by the Electronic Privacy Information Center. It focuses on a Facebook feature that helps users identify people in uploaded photos by suggesting the names of people it recognizes.
The "Tag Suggestions" feature relies on sophisticated facial-recognition software that compares faces in photos with a massive database of face templates.
According to the complaint, Facebook "routinely scans photos for biometric facial matches without the consent of the image subject." The company uses Facebook users' confirmations to help "advance its facial recognition techniques," the complaint said. It said these practices are deceptive and ignore the explicit preferences of many Facebook users.
Facebook defended its practices, saying users are able to decide for themselves whether to deploy the technology.
"People can choose whether or not to allow this technology and they can change their mind at any time," said Rob Sherman, Facebook's deputy chief privacy officer. "When someone has their setting turned off, we don't use this technology to identify them in photos."
The complaint is similar to one filed in 2011 that didn't lead to FTC action.
EPIC President Marc Rotenberg pointed to recent changes in Facebook's use of facial recognition, including efforts to tag nonusers who appear in photos, as one reason for the new concern.

Credit: By Lara O'Reilly and John D. McKinnon
