Hedge-fund billionaire Steven A. Cohen has started efforts to raise his first private-markets fund, a venture that will test whether his decades of experience investing in public companies will translate to private markets.
The fund -- Mr. Cohen's first client offering that isn't a hedge fund -- has been pitched to investors as a hybrid venture and private-equity fund called Point72 Hyperscale, according to people familiar with the matter. The fund would back early-stage technology companies focused on artificial intelligence. It would also buy majority stakes in operating companies that could benefit from those technologies and marry the investments, the people said.
The fund aims to raise between $500 million and $900 million this year and counts Mr. Cohen as its anchor investor, some of the people said. It couldn't be determined what the fund would charge investors or how long its lifespan would be.
The unusual model was described as a way the tech companies could access data, customers and revenue -- all typically difficult for AI startups to acquire or generate. In turn, AI technology could help operating businesses like call centers and translation services become more efficient by automating the most mundane parts of the work, the people said.
"Steve has been investing in companies for nearly three decades. We are always exploring new business and investing opportunities," said a spokeswoman for Point72 Asset Management LP.
Hyperscale marks the continuing evolution of the 63-year-old Mr. Cohen.
He started his career by "reading the tape," or predicting which way a stock price would move tick by tick. Later, as his hedge fund grew in size, he encouraged his portfolio managers to dig into companies' fundamentals. Since then, he also has moved to embrace quantitative investing and a blend between quant and fundamental approaches. From 1993 through 2011, his original hedge-fund firm, SAC Capital Advisors, trailed the S&P 500 only once.
SAC pleaded guilty to insider trading in 2013. Mr. Cohen was never criminally charged. Point72 is the successor firm he started in 2018, after accepting a two-year ban on managing outside money. At the start of this year, Point72 managed $16.1 billion, near the peak managed by SAC.
While Mr. Cohen is a formidable competitor in public markets, his acumen in private markets is less clear. He has been investing in private companies for decades with his personal wealth, but those returns aren't public.A person familiar with Mr. Cohen said he focuses on investing in good companies, regardless of whether they are public or private.
The concept behind Hyperscale has been in testing for more than a year through investments made by Point72 Ventures, a unit started in 2016 to invest Mr. Cohen's personal wealth in startups, said people familiar with the matter. Point72 Ventures has more than 50 companies in its portfolio and has seen at least two portfolio companies get acquired.
Tesla Inc. acquired driverless car technology startup DeepScale Inc. last year, and McDonald's Corp. acquired Apprente, a voice technology business, in September.
Private markets have taken up an increasing share of Mr. Cohen's attention in recent years.

Credit: By Juliet Chung and Katie Roof
