'The Runaway Species: How Human Creativity Remakes the World'
By Anthony Brandt & David Eagleman
Elevator pitch: The authors look at art and science together to examine how innovations -- from Picasso's initially offensive paintings to Steve Jobs's startling iPhone -- build on what already exists and rely on three brain operations: bending, breaking and blending. This manifesto of sorts shows how both disciplines foster creativity.
Very brief excerpt: "Your brain is running its creative software under the hood all the time."
Surprising factoid: In 1969, Bradford Phillips patented the folding umbrella, the design most of us use today. Inventors looking to one-up it persist however. The U.S. Patent office receives so many patent applications for umbrellas, it must employ four full-time examiners to indefatigably evaluate them.
'WTF: What's the Future and Why It's Up To Us'
By Tim O'Reilly
Elevator pitch: Humans are at a crossroads. Income inequality has shifted power from nation states to a new global elite while technology continues to render ordinary jobs obsolete. But it doesn't have to be this way. How we choose to use technology and the impact it has on society is up to us.
Very brief excerpt: "Might it not be the case that in a world where routine cognitive tasks are commoditized by artificial intelligence, it is the human touch that will become more valuable, the source of competitive advantage?"
Surprising factoid: Bar-code data from U.S. sales reveals that from 2004 to 2013, the variety of products targeting high-income households increased, and that existing goods aimed at those households were less affected by inflation than goods targeting the poor.
'A Year in the Wilderness: Bearing Witness in the Boundary Waters'
By Amy and Dave Freeman
Elevator pitch: The Freemans take readers along as they spend a year in the great outdoors canoeing and dogsledding through Minnesota's Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness (BWCAW). Warning: They blog.
Very brief excerpt: "Maybe it's best that the camera can't capture the cool moist air soothing trail-worn muscles or the sound of swans skimming the treetops and disappearing into the fog. Moments like these fuel our souls and bring into focus the intangible values of the wilderness."
Surprising factoid: The last person to live in the BWCAW was Dorothy Molter, a former local resort owner who started brewing root beer for canoeists and became known as the Root Beer Lady before she passed away in 1986.

Credit: By Lane Florsheim
