The traditional enterprise software sales process is hitting Manhattan's Fifth Avenue.
This fall, Amazon.com's cloud-computing business Amazon Web Services opened a New York City "Builder Studio," designed to showcase cloud-based technology and provide a space where companies can build prototypes alongside AWS engineers.
Chief information officers walking through the space can experience prototypes of technologies such as a digital twin -- a virtual, real-time rendering of a sensor-studded physical space or other asset. It boasts a virtual try-on demo where visitors can see renderings of what some shoes sold on Amazon.com would look like on their feet and an advertising-mood-board creator fueled by generative AI.
The in-person aspect of the experience is critical for CIOs to really understand what they can do on the AWS cloud, said Shaown Nandi, director of technology, strategic industries, at AWS and a former CIO of Wall Street Journal publisher Dow Jones. "The tangible aspect makes everything go from seeming sort of theoretical and I read about it to like, 'Oh, this is real, and there are other customers doing it.'"
The studio, in Amazon's new outpost at the Lord & Taylor building, is one of two studios AWS operates in the U.S., with a similar site located in Santa Clara, Calif.
The plan is for 80% of the demos to rotate every three to eight months, though they are somewhat geared around New York-centric industries, like financial services, media and retail. "It's almost like they're trying to deliver a Disney-like experience when you walk in there," said R "Ray" Wang, founder and principal analyst of IT consulting firm Constellation Research.
Systems integrators such as Capgemini and Infosys have operated similar prototyping labs for years, Wang said, but cloud providers are just starting to get in the game. That's because customers of companies like AWS are increasingly looking for specific solutions rather than just needing to put stuff in the cloud.
For startup Proto, which has teamed up with AWS to demo its hologram technology in the Builder Studio, the chance to get the tech face to face with customers is incredibly valuable.
"We have YouTube videos all over the place of people experiencing our products. It's just not the same as having a volumetric spatial computing experience in person," said Raffi Kryszek, Proto's head of AI & innovation.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
