ROME -- Elon Musk and Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni have formed one of 2023's more unlikely trans-Atlantic alliances.
Behind their budding friendship lie common interests in political issues such as immigration and demographics, as well as in tech-sector regulation and the risks associated with artificial intelligence.
Musk, the 52-year-old billionaire behind Tesla, SpaceX and X, has visited Italy several times in 2023 and was the star guest at a political festival in Rome hosted by Meloni's right-wing Brothers of Italy party in December.
In June, Meloni hosted Musk at her official residence in Rome where the pair talked about AI and displayed their chemistry as they laughed and hugged. Most visitors get a handshake.
Musk has said he spoke with Meloni, 46, earlier in 2023 when he was looking for an ancient Roman venue where he and Mark Zuckerberg could hold a cage fight. In October, Musk liked a post by the Italian leader on X in which she announced the end of her 10-year relationship with her daughter's father.
"For Meloni, Musk is a great visionary, so it's easy to see what she gets out of the relationship: access to what for her is a new and captivating world," said Stefano Quintarelli, a former Italian lawmaker turned technology entrepreneur and venture-capital investor. "What's less clear is what he gets out of this."
Some in Europe believe Musk is looking for political allies in the region as the European Union seeks to regulate AI. Musk also is facing scrutiny in the EU over his ownership of X. The platform is facing an EU probe over its handling of illegal content and disinformation. If found to have breached the EU's online-content rules, X risks a heavy fine at a time when revenue has been hit by the withdrawal of some advertisers unhappy with some of Musk's posts.
Musk and Meloni didn't respond to requests for comment.
Meloni, who won power in Italian elections in 2022, made her name as a right-wing firebrand in Italy's culture wars over immigration and traditional family values.
For years, her signature policy promise has been to stop illegal immigration across the Mediterranean Sea from Africa to Italy -- although she has struggled to prevent an increase in migrant arrivals since taking office.
This fall, when Meloni slammed Germany for funding nongovernmental organizations that rescue migrants in the Mediterranean, Musk weighed in on X. "Surely it is a violation of the sovereignty of Italy for Germany to transport vast numbers of illegal immigrants to Italian soil," he posted, adding: "Has invasion vibes. . ."
The two also have found common ground in boosting birthrates, and in fighting against what he has dubbed the "woke mind virus." Both themes featured prominently at the political festival in Rome.
"Every year I look at the birthrates and it's kind of depressing," Musk said at the Rome event, which he attended with one of his sons. "One can't depend on other countries for immigration. Italy is the people of Italy."
The entrepreneur said he would worry about investing in a country with Italy's low birthrate. "Will there be enough people to work there?" Musk said at the event. "Please make more Italians, is what I'm saying."
---
Tim Higgins contributed to this article.
Credit: By Eric Sylvers and Margherita Stancati
