When you're behind the wheel of a 4,000-pound automobile at 60 miles an hour, distractions cost lives. Drivers nonetheless take selfies, livestream on Facebook, respond to text messages, and scroll through news feeds. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, an average of eight people a day die in accidents caused by distracted driving.
Smartphones are often at the root of these tragedies. As Big Tech sets its sights on modern vehicles, it's appropriate to ask if it's time to limit attention-stealing technology that distracts the driver.
Big Tech wants to take on the automotive industry. Several years ago, Google introduced its Android Automotive OS, an operating system built specifically to run in vehicles. Video-streaming services are starting to be incorporated into dash-mounted systems, with Amazon's Fire TV already in some models. Apple is taking an even bigger step. It reportedly seeks a partnership with a yet-to-be-named auto maker to produce Apple cars.
Big Tech is good at grabbing both attention and information from users. At first, the goal of Facebook, Twitter, Google and others was to give away services at no cost, simply to attract a customer base. Now they exist to sell information about their users to advertisers. Their increasing thirst for valuable user information has led them to the automotive industry, where a whole new world of data awaits.
Location data, driver behavior, vehicle status, frequent destinations, passenger preferences -- terabytes of data are found in family cars, and the average dashboard has the potential to be a Trojan horse. Smartphone mirroring, voice-enabled virtual assistants, operating systems and autonomous-driving software are all gateways for this information.
Mobile tech is walled off from vehicle operating systems by what is known as a "hypervisor," software that isolates infotainment features from the mission-critical driving electronics. If auto makers surrender their core OS to tech powerhouses, they will essentially become hardware suppliers to Silicon Valley.
Car companies have priorities opposed to those of Big Tech. Their responsibility is to keep attention on the road, providing vehicle information and a modicum of entertainment options while getting occupants from place to place as safely as possible. Smartphone makers and digital-media providers don't have this priority. They want eyes on their products, not on the road.
With electric vehicles transforming the auto industry, and such tech innovations as augmented reality and artificial intelligence more prevalent than ever, we're at a dangerous moment. Car makers are, and should be, the most trusted technology companies in the world. Because their hardware is wrapped around families, they have an obligation to keep them safe. The only way they can do that is to maintain control of the driver's seat.
The quality, safety and security of the driver interface will make or break trust in auto makers. Without it, cars will be simply one more intrusive and risky mobile device.
---
Mr. Juran is CEO of Altia, an automotive software and services company.
Credit: By Mike Juran
