Corrections & Amplifications
Rocket Fuel Inc.'s stock rose 93% in its initial trading session Friday. The increase was incorrectly given as 83% in a Corporate News article Saturday about two technology IPOs. The incorrect figure also appeared in some editions in a page-one What's News item.
(WSJ Sept. 23, 2013)
Shares of Internet security firm FireEye Inc. soared on their first day of trading Friday, benefiting from investor interest in the security sector following some high-profile hacks at companies and government agencies in recent years.
The successful initial public offering comes even as some question whether the market can support so many antihacking companies, many of which rely on similar technology.
Meanwhile, another hot IPO by Rocket Fuel Inc. suggests that investors also are optimistic about some advertising-technology companies.
Both companies' shares more than doubled in early trading Friday, though they gave back some of those gains later in the trading session.
FireEye, a Silicon Valley company led by veteran software executive Dave DeWalt, priced its first round of shares Thursday at $20, raising $280 million. The stock closed at $36, up 80%, giving it a market capitalization of about $4.2 billion.
The valuation might seem high for a company with $83.3 million in revenues in 2012. Mr. DeWalt said the "evil emanating from the Internet" is creating a surge in spending for companies like FireEye. "There's going to be a tectonic shift in spending and someone is going to get that," he said. "We have as good a chance as anybody."
Mr. DeWalt's past exploits include selling McAfee, a bigger security company known for antivirus software, to Intel Corp. for $7.68 billion. Last year he joined FireEye, which was founded in 2004. He now holds stock worth nearly $166 million at Friday's closing price.
FireEye seeks to block the most advanced hackers by observing the behavior of their code, rather than the longtime approach of matching incoming software with known malicious programs. It does this by testing code downloaded onto a computer in a sort of digital petri dish walled off from the rest of the network.
In theory, this allows the company to block dangerous code never seen before -- called a "Zero-Day" attack -- simply because it acts like something up to no good.
However, many larger companies, including Trend Micro Inc. of Japan, Palo Alto Networks Inc. and AhnLab Inc. of South Korea -- use similar approaches and are improving their products, some security experts say.
"It's a bit of a bubble," said Adam Hills, a researcher on cybersecurity technology at Gartner Inc., of the buzz around FireEye. "If they're going to be a viable product company, they need to broaden their portfolio and they're doing that."
"There is a limit to what the market can absorb," said investor Ted Schlein, whose firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers has invested in many security companies.
FireEye has already expanded its offerings, and they work on servers and data centers instead of just individual machines, according to Mr. DeWalt.
For the six months ended June 2013, FireEye reported a $67.2 million loss. Its revenue for the same period more than doubled to $61.6 million.
Like other companies that offer software as a subscription service, FireEye books much of its revenue over time rather than as it cuts sales deals.
Shares of advertising firm Rocket Fuel, meanwhile, shot up 83% to close at $56.10 in its first trading session Friday.
Most ad technology companies operate networks in which advertisers and publishers talk to each other about when and where to place ads. Rocket Fuel, founded in 2008, instead primarily serves advertisers with an artificial-intelligence program that makes rapid decisions about when and where to place ads.
George John, Rocket Fuel's chief executive and co-founder, said that talking about Rocket Fuel's big data use "really helped" with general tech investors on the roadshow. "A lot of people were talking about big data, and a lot of them wanted to know more about the [artificial intelligence] business on top of it," he said.
---
Don Clark contributed to this article.
Credit: By Danny Yadron and Telis Demos
