Tim Stone, Ford Motor Co.'s chief financial officer, is leaving the auto maker after 18 months to join a software firm, the latest high-profile Detroit auto executive to defect to the technology industry.
Mr. Stone, 53 years old, will join ASAPP Inc., an artificial-intelligence software company, as its CFO and chief operating officer, Ford said. The auto maker appointed as Mr. Stone's replacement John Lawler, 54, a longtime Ford executive who most recently has been leading Ford's driverless-car efforts.
Mr. Stone's departure for New York City-based ASAPP comes less than two months after General Motors Co.'s chief financial officer, Dhivya Suryadevara, left the auto maker to join Stripe Inc., a San Francisco-based online commerce firm.
His exit comes the same day Jim Farley takes over as Ford's CEO, succeeding the retiring Jim Hackett. In a statement, Mr. Farley said Mr. Lawler has held various roles in his 30-year Ford career that prepare him to take over as finance chief, including leading the auto maker's China business.
"John knows our company inside-out, has a clear view and great ambition for what Ford can be," Mr. Farley said. Mr. Stone will stay on for two weeks during the transition, the company said.
Mr. Stone joined Ford in April 2019 from social-media firm Snap Inc., where he briefly served as CFO following about two decades in finance roles at Amazon.com Inc.
Mr. Stone helped steer the auto maker through the early days of the pandemic this spring, which forced Ford's North American factories to close for nearly two months, burning billions of dollars in cash. Ford suspended its dividend and tapped roughly $15 billion in credit lines and issued $8 billion in unsecured debt.
During his tenure at Ford, Wall Street analysts have at times expressed frustration over the amount of information the company was willing to provide about its profit outlook and the pace of a continuing, $11 billion restructuring mainly of its operations in Europe and South America.
Credit Suisse analyst Dan Levy said in a research note Thursday that Mr. Lawler is highly regarded, and investors likely will look for Ford to disclose more details about its financial performance under the new CFO.
Detroit's auto makers in recent years have struggled to retain top talent, especially amid a booming technology industry and disruption in the car business.
In the wake of Ms. Suryadevara's departure in August, Morgan Stanley analyst Adam Jonas cited the challenge of attracting and retaining talented people as the biggest risk facing Detroit's car companies.
Last year, Alicia Boler Davis, a rising star at GM and then its head of global manufacturing, left to become vice president of global customer fulfillment at Amazon. Another former GM executive, J. Ofori Agboka, who was an executive director in human resources, left in April to become a vice president in Ms. Boler-Davis' division at Amazon, according to his LinkedIn page.
Mr. Stone's time at Ford coincided with a turnaround effort set by Mr. Hackett that failed to reverse a slide in profits, despite cost cuts and a revamp of Ford's vehicle lineup to focus on higher-margin models, such as a new Bronco SUV slated to go on sale next year.
On Thursday, Mr. Farley outlined internal changes aimed at reviving profit growth. He said he would put more responsibility on the heads of Ford's regional businesses -- the Americas, Europe, and the International Markets unit, which includes China -- to speed the turnaround.

Credit: By Mike Colias
