When Jess Klein emailed her mother to make plans, the response startled her.
"Cool, see you there."
Ms. Klein, a 38-year-old from Brooklyn, was suspicious. "Why is my mom talking like a Valley Girl?" she wondered.
She quickly found out her mother, a retired teacher, was using Gmail's Smart Reply feature, which Alphabet Inc.'s Google released widely this summer. It displays three little bubbles showing suggested responses at the end of some Gmail messages.
"Google told me to say this, so I said it," Rose Klein replied, tongue-in-cheek, after her daughter asked about the unusual vernacular.
"I knew that it would confuse her," the elder Ms. Klein said, but using Smart Reply "was just so easy."
Originally launched as an app-only feature to help smartphone users avoid the hassle of typing on their phones, Smart Reply has become ubiquitous since Google began defaulting its 1.4 billion active accounts to the new version of Gmail in recent weeks. By next month, the feature -- which uses artificial intelligence to scan incoming emails and predict possible responses -- will become a default setting for all Gmail accounts.
Already, 10% of all Gmail responses are generated through Smart Reply.
Early adopters say the replies careen between overly enthusiastic ("Very interesting!") and dismayingly flat ("Thanks a lot."). The context can be slightly off, particularly in work settings.
Rory Hurlburt, a 41-year-old creative director in West Springfield, Mass., recalled a recent companywide email informing him a client was taking his business elsewhere. He was offered Smart Reply suggestions such as "That's great!" and "Awesome news!"
Shane O'Regan, an Irish actor currently in an off-Broadway show, said his suggested replies often include "Sweet!" and "Awesome!" -- answers he wouldn't want to send his agent. "I'm not a surfer dude."
There is a reason "Awesome" comes up so often, said Ajit Varma, director of product management at Google: A lot of people use it when responding to email.
Mr. Varma said all suggested replies are drawn from an ever-growing "library" of phrases that a Google bot identified as relevant after analyzing billions of Gmail messages. The model will suggest up to three responses to any new email received, as long as it's able to determine the message's context. Dour or rude responses tend to be excluded from the bot's library of possible replies.
During testing, Mr. Varma said, engineers working on the prototype noticed one gaffe: The algorithm was identifying the phrase "Sent from my iPhone" as a popular response to emails. They fixed the issue before the phrase became a suggested reply, he said.
Another one: Google said an early prototype of the feature had "a propensity to respond with 'I love you' to seemingly anything," forcing it to tweak the algorithm. "You don't want to respond that to your boss," Mr. Varma said.
Gmail refines the style and tone of the suggested responses as a user chooses more replies, Mr. Varma said.
Some users say the tool is particularly useful to quickly acknowledge they have seen someone's message. Others see it as a creepy reminder that Google's computers are reading their correspondence.
Brittany Van Horne, a Los Angeles-based comedy writer, was looking for a new gig last month when a potential employer emailed to ask if she was free for an interview. Gmail suggested she say she was "pretty open" or "available next week" or "available any time." She wondered if the feature had looked at her calendar, which was indeed pretty empty.
Mr. Varma said Smart Reply doesn't work with other tools such as Google Calendar to formulate suggestions.
Google and other email providers have come under fire for allowing bots and outside software developers to scan users' emails. The company has said it "will keep privacy and security paramount."
Google is taking the concept further with Smart Compose, which offers to finish your sentences as you type. Mr. Varma said it would become a default feature for all Gmail users by the end of the month.
Ms. Klein, who has been trying out Smart Compose, found it striking that "we're so willing to let Google replace our voice," she said.
A web user-experience designer for the Wikimedia Foundation, Ms. Klein said she uses Smart Reply in emails to her parents -- it's now become an inside joke between them -- and to colleagues for quick acknowledgments. However, when she realizes she's on the receiving end of a canned response, she can't help but feel a little sad.
"I feel they didn't take the time to write a real response," she said. "Like, we're at that level now?"
Google said the user feedback for Smart Reply and Smart Compose has been positive. Users who don't like the feature can opt out of the replies on the mobile app, Mr. Varma said, and the ability to opt out of the desktop version will be added in the coming weeks.
Sarah Scott, a 31-year-old DJ in Melbourne, Australia, found a positive side to Gmail's perky responses after a music festival promoter emailed to tell her she had been cut from the program.
An angry Ms. Scott was composing a response she referred to as "passive aggressive," when she noticed those bubbles below her screed. She erased her message, clicked: "No problem, thanks!" and hit send.
Later that day, the promoter responded to say Ms. Scott would be considered for next year's festival.
"Gmail auto replies make me a better person," Ms. Scott said.

Credit: By David Marcelis and Douglas MacMillan
