In September 2015, three executives walked into the Tokyo office of Toyota Motor Corp. President Akio Toyoda with a call for a radical change. Toyota, they believed, needed to embrace the goal of building cars that could drive themselves, possibly without drivers -- something Mr. Toyoda, a race-car enthusiast who likes his hands and feet on the controls, had long resisted.
The three faced Mr. Toyoda in the office, which one of them recalled felt like a teenage boy's room, sporting minicars and race helmets. They were ready to spend a long time to persuade the boss.
But he had already come around.
"You guys are overthinking this," one of the participants recalled Mr. Toyoda saying. "Our goal is to make sure everyone can move around freely."
"I personally went through a big change in my thinking," said Mr. Toyoda in an interview at this week's North American International Auto Show in Detroit. His epiphany came more than a year earlier when he met Paralympics athletes who wanted to ride in fashionable cars, he said, conceding it was much later that he communicated his change of heart.
"I believe there is a point in Toyota participating in the field of autonomous driving," he said. "And we've got the resources to do so."
The Toyota scion's turnabout is part of an industry upheaval. With cheap gasoline and record U.S. sales, business is good for big global auto makers. Yet the threat of a technological shift haunts them.
In the battle for global pre-eminence, traditional car makers fear software makers will steal the auto's soul and profitability, putting incumbents in a similar position to Chinese factories making smartphones for global brands.
Google parent Alphabet Inc. is developing self-driving-car software, and
Apple Inc. is working on an electric car. They and startups such as ride-sharing provider Uber Technologies Inc., are pushing toward a future in which bandwidth augments horsepower in cars.
The rise of electric cars made by the likes of Tesla Motors Inc. could lower the barrier to entry by circumventing the internal-combustion engine and its century of accumulated engineering.
Some big auto makers are building bridges to the new players.
General Motors Co. is investing $500 million in ride-sharing service Lyft Inc.
Ford Motor Co. is talking with Google about using the tech company's software for developing self-driving cars, people familiar with the matter said.
None illustrates the challenge better than Toyota. It is the world's No. 1 auto maker in sales -- more than 10 million vehicles a year -- and profits. For the year ending in March, it expects net profit of $19 billion.
Yet within Toyota, anxiety has slowly built over the shift in competition toward a domain outside its traditional strengths of reliability and manufacturing prowess, current and former Toyota executives said.
"You're strong so long as you're playing in your own field," said Hiroyoshi Yoshiki, a former Toyota executive who moved to exhaust-system supplier Futaba Industrial Co. last year. "But if an unexpected player makes an entrance from a different field, and the rules of the game that you thought were rock-solid completely change, then the player that was the strongest under the old rules gets beaten easily."
Behind the scenes over the past four years, Toyota executives declined a secret overture from Google and grappled with terminology, some viewing the word "autonomous" as taboo.
They struggled, according to people involved in the autonomous driving project, with how to persuade the boss. A grandson of Toyota's founder, Mr. Toyoda had made clear his skepticism about robot drivers.
In 2014, he said he wouldn't trust an autonomously operating vehicle until one could beat a human-driven car around the Nurburgring racecourse in Germany, where he often takes part in a 24-hour endurance race.
Now that Mr. Toyoda has made his revised view known, Toyota is rolling out one initiative after another. It said it would invest more than $1 billion and hire some of the best Silicon Valley talent. It plans to make cars that drive themselves on highways by 2020 and to look at other business opportunities opened by artificial intelligence and robotics.
"I have hopes," said Mr. Toyoda in the interview, "that what we are studying now could be used beyond the automotive business."
Sebastian Thrun, former leader of Google's self-driving-car project, said the big Toyota investment could spur similar moves by rivals. "This is exceeding the commitment of other companies," said Mr. Thrun, who now heads the online university Udacity. "At this point, every automotive CEO has to talk about it and make plans about self-driving cars because they have an enormous disruptive business power."
Crises have dominated the 59-year-old Mr. Toyoda's reign. He took over in 2009 amid the global economic downturn, shortly after Toyota reported its first annual loss in decades. It suffered recalls after allegations some of its vehicles sped up uncontrollably, which resulted in more than $2 billion in fines and settlements. U.S. regulators later found Toyota's software wasn't faulty. Then the 2011 earthquake and tsunami struck Japan, bringing auto production lines to a halt.
The crisis years made Toyota more sensitive to liability concerns, which for a while held it back from fully throwing itself into pursuing self-driving cars, current and former Toyota executives said. Mr. Toyoda also was determined to avoid complacency, which he has said exacerbated the U.S. safety problem.
Meanwhile, Google was beginning its self-driving car project in 2009. "We were a fringe group," recalls Mr. Thrun, the former project leader, "and I don't think anyone took us seriously."
Public attention grew as California and Nevada in 2012 started letting some self-driving cars be tested on public roads. That spring, Google approached Toyota with a proposal to cooperate on vehicle control, said people familiar with the talks, including Yasumori Ihara, a senior Toyota executive at the time. Mr. Toyoda said he wasn't aware of the talks.
Google, rich in software expertise, was eager to gain Toyota's know-how in controlling a car's physical movements -- accelerating, braking, turning -- the people said. Google didn't respond to inquiries.
Mr. Ihara said he visited Google headquarters and rode in its prototype. "I was shocked at how quickly Google had been able to get to that level," said Mr. Ihara, who now heads parts supplier Aisin Seiki Co.
Back in Japan, Toyota engineers and executives debated working with Google. Toyota eventually declined, worried about sharing knowledge and concerned cars would turn into commodity hardware for Google's operating system, one person familiar with the talks said.
Around this time, major car makers and suppliers became more vocal about self-driving technology. The Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas became a showcase for auto makers' technologies, first the connectivity of cars, then autonomous vehicles.
Toyota had a few people looking at new driving technologies as part of its research budget, now at around $9 billion a year. At a technical center near Mount Fuji, engineers worked on self-parking cars. Ken Koibuchi, an engineer, said they didn't dare take the prototypes outside the property -- the concept of vehicles with any autonomy on public streets felt too alien.
Toyota began testing the technology in cars in Michigan around 2012, people involved in the project said. But Toyota engineers labored under corporate ambivalence about the idea, said a Toyota engineer, knowing Mr. Toyoda's passion lay elsewhere.
Mr. Toyoda often said he wanted to encourage enthusiasm among young drivers who were paying more attention to their smartphones. Toyota's slogan, "fun to drive," would be moot if car lacked driver.
"Our vision is not necessarily a car that drives itself, but rather a car equipped with an intelligent, always-attentive co-pilot whose skills contribute to safer driving," said Mark Templin, a Toyota executive in the U.S., at the 2013 Consumer Electronics Show, showing a car described as an "advanced active safety research vehicle.""
In January 2014, with no fanfare, Toyota established a team dedicated to self-driving cars led by Mr. Koibuchi, the engineer.
But it often wasn't mentioned by name because of internal resistance. Toyota called the team the Business Reform Intelligent Vehicle Development Department.
"We couldn't be associated with driverless cars," said a person involved, "or anything that looked like we were going against the corporate slogan."
Google in May 2014 disclosed its new self-driving prototype. There were sightings of the car on California roads, and Google was piling up miles of real-world autonomous experience.
Around then, Mr. Koibuchi had a chance to plead his case before about 20 executives at Toyota's headquarters. Mr. Toyoda wasn't there. Mr. Koibuchi said he told them the challenges were something Toyota had never seen before. Making autonomous cars work required high-grade maps, artificial intelligence and image-recognition technology.
Toyota's traditional suppliers -- the vast network making brakes, steering wheels, rearview mirrors -- weren't going to be enough, he told them. "The executives grasped that with new players entering from the IT industry, we have to fight in a different way from the past," Mr. Koibuchi said. Following the talk, Mr. Koibuchi said, his team got more engineers and budget.
Outside Toyota, buzz around self-driving technology accelerated. In July 2014, Nissan Motor Co.'s CEO said it planned by 2020 to introduce cars that could navigate themselves through intersections. In January 2015, Mercedes-Benz's Daimler AG showed a concept self-driving car whose cabin resembled a meeting place.
Questions grew internally and externally about Toyota's autonomous-driving stance. Reporters pressed Toyota to explain why it seemed to lag so far behind Google. Executives at the time said they believed their research was just as advanced, yet they stuck to the answer they thought would go over smoothly with Mr. Toyoda: Technology was there to help drivers, not replace them.
Mr. Toyoda said it is sometimes hard for information from the front lines to filter up to him, although he tries to actively reach out to stay in touch. "Even if the information reaches me," he said, "by the time it does, it's probably outdated."
Mr. Koibuchi said he started to speak with Toyota's public-relations team about how to communicate externally about his team's efforts and how Toyota shouldn't draw a line about what it could and couldn't do using autonomous technology.
Finally, three executives decided they had to put the issue to the boss. Mr. Koibuchi, future-technology chief Kiyotaka Ise and public-relations manager Hiroshi Hashimoto walked into Mr. Toyoda's office. Although they were surprised to find he already agreed, the meeting was a turning point for Toyota, Mr. Toyoda said, and "helped accelerate our moves."
Mr. Toyoda said his change of heart came when he met the Paralympics athletes in 2014. They told him they didn't want to ride bulky vehicles designed so handicapped people could easily ride or steer them.
He acknowledged his favorite slogan might have confused some employees. "I've come to realize that even when I speak about 'fun to drive,' I need to be more diverse in my thinking," he said, adding that he still doesn't want to let go of that goal. Autonomous cars, he said, should ultimately eliminate traffic accidents.
The change in Toyota's public stance was quick. In November, it said it would pump $1 billion into a new Silicon Valley lab to study artificial intelligence, headed by Gill Pratt, a former robotics manager at the U.S. Defense Department's research unit.
It hired the former head of Google Robotics -- one of 200 researchers it expects to employ at the new lab -- and invested $8 million in a Tokyo venture specializing in teaching machines to learn on their own. Toyota has around 70 people studying autonomous technologies at the facility near Mount Fuji and about 100 more in Silicon Valley, Mr. Koibuchi said.
Whether autonomous or not, Mr. Toyoda said, cars should offer freedom. "That's an element that cars should never lose," he said. "No matter what, cars need to win the love of their users."
---
Mike Ramsey contributed to this article.
Credit: By Yoko Kubota
