Manufacturers will be spending far more on data-management and analytics tools after the pandemic and will be using those tools for deeper insight into operations, sales and supply-chain disruptions, chief information officers and observers say.
Jo De Vliegher, information chief at aluminum company Norsk Hydro ASA in Oslo, said the company is building its data capabilities to remotely monitor plant equipment, which engineers had limited access to during the pandemic.
"While we expect more employees to return to work on-site when authorities allow so, this data availability is a clear game-changer," he said.
Mr. De Vliegher said the company uses data -- produced by shop-floor scanners and other hardware tools -- to more accurately measure and improve the performance of production-line machinery. That machinery includes hydraulics systems, compressed air and power transformers.
"The coronavirus measures have, as we believe, been a catalyst that has kick-started a revolution in unlocking value hidden in our data," he said.
Before coronavirus, the company discussed using data more widely throughout its factories, he said. But with the push to access more data remotely, "we now have both the experience and the capabilities to make objective and effective investments," he said.
These and other benefits are expected to spur annual spending by global manufacturers on data management, analytics and other advanced capabilities to nearly $20 billion by 2026, up from roughly $5 billion this year, according to a report by information-technology research company ABI Research.
Expenditures will be focused on software licenses, cloud services, connectivity and professional services geared toward data and analytics, the report said, as well as scanners and other interconnected hardware devices.
Advanced data tools will give factories a clearer view of operations and equipment performance, allowing them to speed up production, reduce waste, improve their product quality and avoid downtime by more quickly identifying maintenance issues, among other things, ABI said.
Factories will be able to identify and extract relevant data sets to feed into artificial-intelligence software designed to predict production and supply-chain problems, said Michael Larner, a principal analyst at ABI. "It's a case of going from reactive analytics, reporting on what happened, to proactively analyzing what might happen and the suggested actions to take," Mr. Larner said.
The pandemic made manufacturers aware of the need for more sophisticated ways to monitor operations, he said, especially when plants are accessible to a handful of workers.
"From a data analytics perspective, it is a realization that they cannot rely on guesswork," Mr. Larner said.
Barry Shurkey, information chief of manufacturing-technology vendor NTT Data Services, said its customers are more quickly adopting new software and hardware, with many rolling out new tech projects in a matter of months, rather than years.

Credit: By Angus Loten
