A wave of startups offering artificial-intelligence-infused compliance software are promising to help organizations meet complex new regulations while keeping costs in check. No need to hire new employees to do the laborious data-related work their AI does in minutes, the startups say.
But compliance executives are proceeding with caution.
On the one hand, these executives say using emerging AI features to automate tedious tasks like fraud reviews or compiling data security reports could be a game changer, especially as companies struggle to meet new compliance regulations without ballooning costs.
But some worry that novel technologies could be more prone to making errors. Others are hesitant to invest in AI tools before guidelines for the emerging technology are set, and possibly have to change course down the road. Some simply wonder if getting AI up and running might be more trouble than it is worth.
Still, compliance teams are experimenting with AI software. One example is sales software company ZoomInfo Technologies. Like many businesses in recent years, it has had to adjust on the fly to new laws that largely regulate how companies treat data.
Rob Priore, ZoomInfo Technologies' senior manager for compliance technology, said he was looking this year for a way to improve automation of certain data privacy processes brought on by the California Privacy Rights Act and Europe's General Data Protection Regulation. Priore wanted, for example, a more efficient way to automatically pull specific user data kept by ZoomInfo in a way that could conform with these new data protection laws.
Priore started his search with legacy compliance software providers, but found they couldn't offer what he was looking for.
He then turned to startups, identifying a pair that he believed could get the job done. But Nasdaq-listed ZoomInfo's security and finance departments were wary of using software from young unproven startups instead of stalwart compliance software providers, Priore said.
Priore said they ultimately went with the startups, but only after adding protections like limiting what the startups could do with ZoomInfo's data. With the new technology, Priore said ZoomInfo doesn't have to hire additional full-time employees to address the issue, eliminated its reliance on an India-based firm that was doing some of the work and reduced meeting time.
ZoomInfo isn't alone in wrestling with how to use emerging compliance tech. Alla Valente, a senior analyst at research and advisory firm Forrester Research who helps corporate compliance executives evaluate AI technology, said common concerns include the investment required to train data and the unease that the AI may overstep security requirements or produce erroneous feedback.
The concerns have merit, Valente said. In a survey of 106 generative AI decision makers conducted by Forrester, roughly 21% said their organizations have experienced an increase in legal investigation and litigation related to generative AI efforts.
Despite the hesitations, Valente said her clients are mostly deciding to move forward with using AI technology for functions including modeling specific risk scenarios.
Some companies are opting for more-established vendors over startups. Pilar Caballero, the CCO and chief privacy officer of transportation and logistics company Ryder System, said she is experimenting with AI tools via Ryder's existing tech partners rather than experimenting with offerings from startups partly out of caution.
"There are some risks that we examined -- evaluating whether it is secure, reliable, transparent, privacy-focused and also ethical," Caballero said. "That's the balancing test that we're looking at."
Credit: By Marc Vartabedian
