BEIJING -- The Chinese government is considering plans that would allow shares in technology giants such as Tencent Holdings Ltd. and Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. to trade back home, a move that could raise the profile of the country's tightly controlled capital markets.
The country's securities regulator has reached out to a number of state-owned investment banks to explore ways to let already-listed companies and private businesses issue shares on the mainland, according to investment bankers briefed on the discussions.
One option being considered is to allow such companies to issue depositary receipts, so they can bypass Chinese law prohibiting firms incorporated overseas from going public on the mainland. The likes of Tencent and Alibaba are incorporated abroad in a special corporate structure so they can get around Chinese restrictions on foreigners investing in sectors such as technology.
It is part of China's longer-term goal to turn the tide on years of the country's businesses going public overseas. Beijing would like to see more Chinese companies choose the mainland capital market as their primary listing destination eventually, the investment bankers said.
"At some point, it makes sense for Alibaba and Tencent to have their primary listings in China," said Paul Gillis, an accounting professor at Peking University's Guanghua School of Management. "The government has a long-term plan to wean these companies off the U.S.," he added.
Tencent and Alibaba are already among the world's most valuable companies, and China has earmarked technologies such as artificial intelligence as important growth drivers for the country's economy.
Shares in Hong Kong-listed Tencent -- the owner of China's most popular messaging app, WeChat -- more than doubled last year. In the process Tencent became the first Chinese tech company to crack the $500 billion valuation club, joining industry titans such as Facebook Inc. and Apple Inc.
NYSE-listed shares of Alibaba, China's largest e-commerce company, almost doubled last year. Alibaba now has a market capitalization of more than $460 billion.
Recently, a number of tech firms said they are open to a China listing, though executives haven't gone into details. Tencent Chief Executive Pony Ma said the company would "actively consider" listing inside China. Baidu Inc. Chairman Robin Li said recently that the search-engine company has "always wanted to come home to China." Richard Liu, chairman of Nasdaq-listed e-commerce company JD.com Inc., said "if the authorities allow it, we are willing." The executives were speaking on the sidelines of China's annual legislative meetings, currently taking place in Beijing.
Chinese technology firms have in the past often opted for overseas listings, many in the U.S., for the prestige and to benefit from rules allowing dual-class share structures that give company owners more control over the business. The Chinese regulator's tough listing rules, such as the requirement for companies to be profitable for three years before listing, have also deterred high-growth technology firms from seeking direct share sales at home.
The Wall Street Journal reported earlier this month that Chinese regulators have already approached smartphone maker Xiaomi Corp., which has plans to go public in Hong Kong. Investors say it would be sensible for China's tech companies to list at home, given the brand awareness they command there and the likelihood their shares would trade at high valuations.
Still, analysts have some concerns. Depending on how contracts are drawn up, Chinese individual investors buying depository receipts could lack full shareholder rights, they say. The listings of a few hot names could also fuel speculation by Chinese individual investors, who dominate trading on the mainland.
"When the government is supporting something, everyone rushes in," said T.J. Wong, a professor of business administration and accounting at the University of Southern California's Marshall School of Business. "What you don't want is a huge bubble, then a burst."
Chinese companies often have to wait years before getting approval from the market regulator to list their shares. The authorities would likely expedite this process for some tech companies, the investment bankers said.
Letting a number of top-quality companies issue shares on the mainland could help the Chinese market mature, analysts said.
---
Yoko Kubota contributed to this article.

Credit: By Chao Deng and Liza Lin
