Corrections & Amplifications
VocalIQ, a voice-recognition startup spun out of Cambridge University and recently acquired by Apple Inc., will remain in Cambridge to boost the quality of the Siri virtual assistant. A Business & Tech article Tuesday about how Cambridge and the University of Oxford compete in the tech industry incorrectly said VocalIQ now serves as Apple's R&D center in Cambridge.
(WSJ Oct. 29, 2015)
OXFORD, England -- A centuries-old rivalry between two of the world's best-known universities is now spilling into the global tech-startup scene.
For years, the University of Oxford, about 900 years old, has been playing catch-up with the University of Cambridge, 806, when it comes to tech-related spinoffs and the funding of new tech ventures. But now, Oxford is quietly gaining ground and establishing this ancient university town -- about an hour's train-ride west of London -- as another global tech hot spot.
One measure of Oxford's success: Startups springing up around the university have attracted more investment so far this year than competitors from Cambridge. Oxford-based startups raised $169.2 million in venture capital in the first nine months of the year, edging out Cambridge-based companies, which raised $156.8 million, according to Dow Jones VentureSource, a database of startup funding.
Oxford firms raised more money than Cambridge during all of 2012, too, but otherwise have lagged behind. For all of last year, for instance, Oxford ventures raised $102.83 million, compared with Cambridge's $184.96 million.
Oxford, meanwhile, has ramped up its courtship of startups and made it easier for student and faculty entrepreneurs to make money off their research. It also has embarked on a tech-related building boom: A 17,000-square-foot biotech research center is set to rise across the street from Oxford's main medical-school campus. It will house what Oxford is calling its "bio-escalator," a startup accelerator geared toward biotech firms.
"There's no question that Cambridge got out there with the tech thing way ahead of us," says Oxford's John Bell, whose post as Regius professor of medicine was created by Henry VIII. "But we're reeling it in."
Prof. Bell is now a driving force in Oxford's tech push, overseeing both the biotech accelerator and a new data-crunching center going up next door. He also sits on the board of Isis Innovation Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary -- named after the portion of the River Thames running through Oxford -- which commercializes the university's intellectual property and serves as its on-campus startup incubator.
The two schools are still minnows amid the world's burgeoning tech hubs. Outside Silicon Valley, cities like Tel Aviv, Stockholm and New York have all made strides in attracting tech startups. The two British universities are also sometimes overshadowed in the tech world by other college towns, like Cambridge, Mass., home to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University.
For years, Cambridge University has been a top destination for British research, particularly in life sciences. Pharmaceuticals giant AstraZeneca PLC is relocating its global corporate and research headquarters to Cambridge, joining a handful of other big-name labs, life-sciences institutes and firms that have grown up next to the university.
Tech has also long been a draw. Trinity College, one of Cambridge's oldest, created the Science Park in 1970. It has grown into a tech- and sciences-related business park home to more than 100 companies.
Andy Hopper, who now heads the university's computer laboratory, helped build Acorn Computers Ltd., the British personal-computer maker. It broke up into several independent units in 1998, including spinning out what became chip-design giant ARM Holdings PLC.
In 2003, Cambridge established the Centre for Entrepreneurial Learning to promote and encourage aspiring entrepreneurs. Today, Cambridge "has a powerful, tight tech cluster," says Prof. Bell of Oxford. "And they've got terrific angel investors and a swarm of venture capitalists."
Another key attraction: Cambridge has been relatively liberal about allowing faculty to benefit commercially from research. It allows in certain circumstances faculty to hold copyrights for intellectual property without having to license it from the university, as Oxford requires.
"Cambridge employees have much more freedom," Prof. Hopper says.
Roy Azoulay, a senior technology-transfer manager at Oxford's Isis, defends its more-conservative copyright policies. Oxford's approach can "add a lot of value by licensing IP on behalf of the inventors -- some of whom are researchers who have no desire in starting companies," he says.
For centuries, Oxford and Cambridge have competed fiercely on everything from the number of Nobel Prize laureates and British prime ministers educated at their respective campuses, to a 186-year-old rowing race held each year on the River Thames.
Now, the two schools also compete for top tech-startup luminaries. Artificial-intelligence darling DeepMind Technologies was founded by Demis Hassabis, who studied computer science at Cambridge between 1994 and 1997. Alphabet Inc.'s Google snapped up DeepMind last year.
VocalIQ, a voice-recognition startup that was spun out of the engineering department's spoken dialogue systems group, was recently acquired by Apple Inc. to boost the quality of the Siri virtual assistant. It now serves as Apple's R&D center in Cambridge.
Oxford, meanwhile, counts as one of its recent tech successes NaturalMotion Ltd., a digital-animation company created by an Oxford zoology student that was bought last year by game maker Zynga Inc. Also last year, the company formerly known as Google, through its DeepMind acquisition, bought up two Oxford artificial-intelligence spinoffs, Dark Blue Labs and Vision Factory.
Oxford officials acknowledge they are still playing catch up with Cambridge when it comes to a startup ecosystem. Isis Innovation is boosting its staff and moving into new offices.
Isis says it spins out a new company about every two months. Since starting to keep track eight years ago, Oxford says it has spun out 110 startups, 80% of which are still operating. Cambridge says it has spun out at least 226 companies since 1976, with 53% of those still active.
Credit: By Amir Mizroch

ERIC Subject: Academic Achievement; Computers
