LONDON -- The U.K. government proposed new legislation to bolster its powers to block foreign takeovers of British companies, the latest effort under Prime Minister Boris Johnson to shield industries that are deemed strategic or important to the country's national security.
Since Britain quit the European Union this year, its government has tried to strike a middle ground between welcoming foreign investment and protecting strategic sectors from takeover, particularly amid concerns around acquisitions by Chinese state-backed companies. These fears have been compounded by the pandemic, as the U.K. government tries to shore up protective-equipment supplies and intellectual property to fight Covid-19.
Under the proposed rules, investors would have to notify the government about transactions involving 17 sectors including nuclear, artificial intelligence, transport, energy and defense. The regulations update a takeover regime dating back 20 years that the government says is no longer adequate.
The new system would screen transactions within 30 days, with a timeline set out in law. Those who don't comply would face fines of up to 5% of world-wide turnover, or a minimum GBP 10 million, equivalent to $13 million, and imprisonment of up to five years.
Officials say that the new rules would apply to all nationalities and aren't targeted at China. Given the government's majority in Parliament, the legislation is likely to pass in close to its current form.
"This will mean that no deal which could threaten the safety of the British people goes unchecked, and will ensure vulnerable businesses are not successfully targeted by potential investors seeking to cause them harm," the U.K.'s Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy said Wednesday.
British concerns mirror wider European worries about strategic firms hammered by the pandemic being snapped up on the cheap by foreign investors. The EU issued guidance in the spring warning that foreign-investment screening was needed to protect assets that might affect the trade bloc's overall competitiveness. In September, Germany tightened rules to force greater disclosure by foreign firms looking to buy companies. Britain's new law would bring it closer in line with France, Germany and Italy.
The U.K. rules also would confer powers to the government similar to those of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S., which requires foreign investors in certain deals involving critical technology to submit to national-security reviews.
"I anticipate that businesses will err on the side of caution and file voluntarily where there is any possibility that they are caught by the mandatory system or there is otherwise a possible national security issue," said Samantha Mobley, a lawyer at Baker McKenzie.
For years, Britain prided itself on its hands-off approach. While other European countries fought off foreign investors in certain sectors, the U.K. largely welcomed them in.

Credit: By Max Colchester and Ben Dummett
