Over the past decade, five big technology companies morphed into five great technology empires.
The stock market values this group -- Apple Inc., Microsoft Corp., Amazon.com Inc., Google parent Alphabet Inc., and Facebook Inc. -- at more than $4 trillion, while the six surviving men behind four of those companies are together worth nearly $450 billion, according to Forbes. Both valuations have quintupled since "Avatar" was in theaters.
Such an accumulation of wealth is unparalleled perhaps since Standard Oil. And the impact these companies have had on society may be just as revolutionary.
It starts with the billions of smartphones packed in pockets world-wide. We have outsourced so much of our daily lives to these mini-supercomputers, equipped with GPS chips, fast 4G connections and powerful cameras, they have become appendages, a third hemisphere of the brain.
Social media, internet search and online shopping were old news as the aughts rolled into the teens, but the mobile revolution was just starting, making our hand-held devices increasingly powerful. Witness the birth of the "gig economy," whose wildly popular services, from ride- and home-sharing to food and grocery delivery, barely existed 10 years ago but now employ millions.
As the five tech superstars blazed, they changed practically everything they touched. They vacuumed up data, hired so many top engineers and bought out so many rivals, the breadth of their powers not only kept expanding but reshaped and redefined the technology universe.
Take artificial intelligence. Theories underlying AI date back decades, but machine learning for commercial use became possible only with the amassing of huge data sets used to train computers to think on their own -- assets controlled largely by the big tech companies -- and the parallel development of faster semiconductors. Facebook and Google both have computers that can recognize people and objects in images with help from their gargantuan photo and video libraries. Now image search and auto-tagging, in turn, are useful.
Amazon's Alexa assistant, meanwhile, gets smarter with each voice query. And by the time the next decade ends, Google may have revolutionized the car and truck industries with its state-of-the-art autonomous-driving technology running on even faster 5G networks.
As successful as the tech giants have been, however, such concentration of power, both in computing and in the marketplace, has also come at a cost. As the decade ends, our dependency on these platforms is feeding a backlash over privacy, screen addiction, software algorithms that mislead users, the spread of misinformation and online mobs that pollute political discourse, and more. Critics want to see the tech giants broken apart by antitrust authorities, or at least regulated more tightly.
The turning point for public perception of tech companies came in 2016, in the wake of Britain's Brexit referendum and the U.S. presidential election, says Margaret O'Mara, professor of history at the University of Washington. Russia interfered in the U.S. election by posting propaganda on social media, U.S. authorities determined, and is accused of playing a similar role in the Brexit referendum as well.
"There was an expectation that these companies had control of their creations," says Prof. O'Mara. "Now it's more like Frankenstein's monster." Facebook, Google's YouTube and Amazon have allowed unfettered growth on their platforms for so long, they are difficult to police.
Americans' feelings toward tech companies took a noticeable turn in recent years. A Pew Research Center survey from July showed that U.S. adults rank tech companies second, behind churches and religious organizations, for having a positive impact on the country. But the percentage who felt that way this year was only 50%, down from 71% in 2015; the percentage who felt tech companies had a negative impact, meanwhile, grew to 33% from 17%.
Among the biggest concerns, Facebook has been used to spread misinformation and conspiracy theories, promote genocide, and live-stream a mass shooting.
YouTube faces many of the same criticisms. It built algorithms designed to maximize "watch time" that also helped crackpot conspiracy theorists build audiences.
Huge contract workforces hired by the companies have struggled to keep pace with the volume of violent, pornographic and other prohibited content that is uploaded every minute.
At the same time, the companies have come under fire for their very power to determine what we see and don't see. "These people shouldn't be deciding speech codes for the world," says Zeynep Tufekci, a University of North Carolina professor who studies technology's impact on society. She describes them as "de facto sovereign entities" and points out how, at Facebook and Alphabet, the decisions fall ultimately to their founders. Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg rules his empire via supervoting stock, as do Larry Page and Sergey Brin at Alphabet, although the latter two recently gave up their executive positions.
Amazon's advantage lies in the immense logistics network it has built, which makes it possible to deliver so many products across the U.S. in two days or less. More than 100 million Americans now pay for Prime memberships, more than half of households, according to an estimate by Consumer Intelligence Research Partners.
Also over the past decade-plus, Amazon turned the computing infrastructure that supports its own operations into a juggernaut new business, Amazon Web Services, powering other companies' systems in its cloud. AWS is on pace for $35 billion in revenue this year, up 20 times since 2012, the first year Amazon reported the entity's stand-alone results. It also carries the fattest profit margin among Amazon's businesses.
Amazon, too, is being criticized for allowing bad actors on its platform. It has been unable or unwilling to effectively police third-party sellers, some of whom sell dangerous or toxic products, many coming from China. And in its race to deliver packages quickly, it has been criticized for pushing third-party logistics partners to operate at unsafe speeds. In both cases the company has deflected responsibility, saying it is shielded from liability.
And therein lies one big threat to big tech next decade. To date, the giants have grown mostly unfettered because a powerful if little-known law lets them avoid responsibility for what is posted on their platforms, from hate speech to third-party sales of dangerous products. If the "techlash" ever pushes politicians to rewrite that rule, it could change the internet as we know it.
---
Mr. Winkler is a Wall Street Journal reporter in the San Francisco bureau. Email: rolfe.winkler@wsj.com.
---
When They Were Young
Here's the first time these future tech giants made headlines in The Wall Street Journal
Apple
ITT Plans to Market Personal Computers Overseas for Apple
April 21, 1978
Microsoft
Microsoft Corp. Sues Two Japanese Firms Over Software Rights
Nov. 19, 1982
Amazon.com
Reading the Market: How Wall Street Whiz Found a Niche Selling Books on the Internet
May 16, 1996
Google
Google Gets Funding, to Add 2 Financiers to Company's Board
June 4, 1999
Facebook
Too Much Information? Colleges Fear Student Postings On Popular 'Facebook' Site Could Pose Security Risks
Dec. 8, 2005

Credit: By Rolfe Winkler
