Two Chinese technology startups backed by e-commerce giant Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. raised over $900 million in new capital, solidifying their standing in the country's swelling ranks of technology unicorns.
Xiaohongshu, or "Little Red Book," said Friday it had closed a $300 million financing round that valued the five-year-old e-commerce and lifestyle mobile app at more than $3 billion.
Separately, SenseTime Group Ltd., an artificial-intelligence company, last week said it received $620 million in fresh funds, less than two months after a $600 million funding round led by Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba. The latest round, which drew investments from Fidelity International, Hopu Capital, Silver Lake, Tiger Global and Qualcomm Ventures, valued Sensetime at $4.5 billion.
Investors from the U.S. to China have been plowing cash into technology unicorns -- private companies with valuations of over $1 billion. China is home to more than 100, many having tapped global investors' sustained enthusiasm for companies positioned to gain a competitive edge in China's rapidly growing internet consumer industry.
Shanghai-based Xiaohongshu was started in 2013 by a pair of young entrepreneurs. Its app allows users to purchase clothes, cosmetics and other consumer goods locally and from overseas and to share lifestyle snippets -- from food to travel -- through videos, photos and texts. The company had more than 100 million registered users as of May, and said more than 70% are under the age of 28.
Other Chinese investors in Xiaohongshu include a venture unit of Tencent Holdings Ltd., GSR Ventures, Tiantu Capital and Zhen Fund. Participants in the latest funding round also included Genesis Capital, whose founder is a former Tencent executive, and U.S. venture-capital firm GGV Capital. The company said it plans to use the money raised "to support talent acquisition, machine-learning infrastructure and user growth."
Beijing-based SenseTime, founded in 2014, has become an industry leader in commercial use of technologies like facial recognition. The company, which said it was profitable last year, has now raised over $1.6 billion and calls itself "the world's largest and most valuable artificial-intelligence unicorn."

Credit: By Stella Yifan Xie
