TUSKEGEE, Ala. -- Black residents of this Southern town say the pain and distrust fomented by a decadeslong syphilis study here are inseparable from their deliberations over whether to take a Covid-19 vaccine.
Beginning in the 1930s, federal officials enrolled hundreds of Black men in Tuskegee in an experiment to examine the effects of untreated syphilis. The men were told they were being treated for "bad blood," according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In fact, the infected were left to suffer and die from syphilis, decades after treatment existed.
Chris Pernell, a physician conducting nationwide outreach regarding Covid-19 vaccines, said the legacy of the Tuskegee study has made many Black people wary of the shots. As officials race to get shots into arms, inoculation rates in Black communities have fallen behind.
At Tuskegee's farmers market on a recent morning, David Banks said he won't get the shot because he doesn't trust those administering it. The 67-year-old said some neighbors have said they suspect the first dose of a two-shot regimen is used to infect a person, and the second to see if they are cured. "It's cynical," he said. "But like I said, they have reason to be."
The Food and Drug Administration has said the Moderna Inc. vaccine being distributed in Tuskegee is 94.1% effective at preventing symptomatic Covid-19 after the second dose.
Alabama's public-health department said 13% of Covid-19 vaccinations have gone to Black people in a state with a population that is 27% Black. A recent Census Bureau survey showed Alabama had among the highest percentage of unvaccinated adults who said they probably or definitely won't be vaccinated.
"You can't be in Tuskegee and not have the Tuskegee syphilis study in the back of your mind," said Rueben Warren, director of Tuskegee University's National Center for Bioethics in Research and Health Care.
A confluence of factors make Tuskegee's 8,500 mostly Black residents particularly vulnerable to Covid-19, according to data from clinical artificial-intelligence company Jvion Inc. They include a high poverty rate, high share of older residents and high prevalence of comorbidities such as diabetes.
Walter Baldwin, the 78-year-old manager of the Tuskegee farmers market, said he decided to get the shot, his skepticism outweighed by the risk of contracting Covid-19. "I hear it has those lingering effects," Mr. Baldwin said of the disease. "I just know I don't want it."
At the Tuskegee Human and Civil Rights Multicultural Center, the names of victims of the syphilis study are written on the floor. A display about the civil-rights movement includes a portrait of Anthony Lee, whose legal battle to enter an all-white school led to the desegregation of Alabama's schools. "I like being first," said Mr. Lee, 75, at his home in Tuskegee.
When it came to the Covid-19 vaccine, though, he originally planned to wait to see how others fared. He said the emergence of fast-spreading variants changed his mind. Mr. Lee said that with more Black people in positions of power now than during the days of the Tuskegee study, he has more confidence in the medical establishment.
At a beauty shop, Latrinia King Oliver, 40, stood behind a counter piled with lipstick, wigs and hair extensions. She said her distrust in healthcare runs deeper than the Tuskegee study.
Ms. Oliver said that years ago a doctor ignored her complaints of pain in her abdomen. She said she ended up in an emergency room, where she was told she needed surgery to remove a kidney stone. While she was unconscious, she said, her gallbladder was removed without her consent.
Ms. Oliver said she didn't trust the media and was offended by public-awareness campaigns that included Black celebrities encouraging people to get vaccinated. "I don't think it's a good vaccine," she said. "They just don't want to tell us the truth."
At Tuskegee's health-department office, older people and essential workers streamed in to receive shots. Assistant administrator Tim Hatch said the office was administering all of the 50 first doses and 50 second doses it received each week.
Kate Bulls LaFayette and Bernard LaFayette Jr., in their 80s, sat at an intake station going over paperwork. After the LaFayettes received their shots, a nurse brought them to a waiting area to be monitored for adverse reactions.
"We have to trust the judgment of our best doctors and scientists," said Mr. LaFayette, a civil-rights activist whose roommate at American Baptist College in Nashville, Tenn., was the late U.S. Rep. John Lewis.
Credit: By Julie Wernau
