Meta Platforms is urging California's attorney general to block OpenAI's planned conversion to a for-profit company, siding with Elon Musk in a battle between Silicon Valley's most powerful artificial-intelligence players.
In a letter to Attorney General Rob Bonta dated Thursday, Meta said allowing the ChatGPT maker to become a for-profit company would set a dangerous precedent of allowing startups to enjoy the advantages of nonprofit status until they are poised to become profitable.
"OpenAI's conduct could have seismic implications for Silicon Valley," Meta wrote. "If OpenAI's new business model is valid, nonprofit investors would get the same for-profit upside as those who invest the conventional way in for-profit companies while also benefiting from tax write-offs bestowed by the government."
OpenAI Chairman Bret Taylor said there will continue to be a nonprofit arm of OpenAI following a potential restructuring that will receive full value in its ownership stake of the for-profit, along with "an enhanced ability to pursue its mission" of ensuring AI benefits humanity.
A spokeswoman for Bonta didn't respond to a request for comment.
Meta is one of OpenAI's biggest competitors and has invested billions of dollars to develop its own AI technology that matches or exceeds ChatGPT. OpenAI is also closely allied with two large Meta rivals: Microsoft and Apple.
Meta hasn't previously weighed in on the long-running feud between Musk, who co-founded OpenAI in 2015 and then left amid a power struggle in 2018, and OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman.
Musk, who runs a rival company called xAI, has filed a series of legal complaints against OpenAI. He has accused OpenAI of betraying its original nonprofit mission by creating a for-profit arm and colluding with its largest investor, Microsoft, to dominate the development of AI.
Musk didn't respond to requests for comment.
On Friday, OpenAI published a series of internal documents meant to rebut Musk's request last month for a preliminary injunction blocking it from transitioning to a for-profit company. Musk has argued he was manipulated into believing OpenAI would be a purely nonprofit venture when he initially invested in it.
OpenAI said the documents show Musk, in fact, previously backed the idea. "When he didn't get majority equity and full control, he walked away and told us we would fail," the company wrote on its blog.
In a court filing Friday, OpenAI called Musk's injunction request an "evidence-free effort to harass a competitor."
The documents show Musk had his wealth manager register a public-benefit corporation -- a for-profit company that is also committed to a social good -- called Open Artificial Intelligence Technologies Inc., in Delaware in September 2017. Two days earlier, Musk wrote OpenAI co-founder Ilya Sutskever an email proposing a for-profit structure in which he would "unequivocally have initial control of the company."
Credit: By Jessica Toonkel, Keach Hagey and Meghan Bobrowsky
