Hedge funds and other active managers had a much better 2017 than many anticipated a year ago.
Hedge funds held their own and even posted their best relative performance in a rising equity market in almost a decade. There is still a lot of pressure on the business, especially when it comes to its historically high fees, but only a few large shops closed their doors in 2017.
As for other active managers, rising markets helped mitigate the pain of continued outflowsfrom stock fundsand some managers posted comebacks against their benchmarks. Broadly, however, nothing in the past 12 months has stopped the rise of passiveinvesting.
As 2018 starts, here are the money managers and executives to watch:
Abigail Johnson
One of the most senior women in asset management, Fidelity Investments' Chief Executive Abigail Johnson is leading the money-management and brokerage giant as both industries confront unprecedented cost pressures from the rise of low-cost index-tracking funds.
Under Ms. Johnson's leadership, the Boston-based firm has pushed further into exchange-traded funds, a type of product executives at the firm have long viewed as less important than traditional actively managed mutual funds. Fidelity also cut trading commissions in its brokerage business in early 2017 in a bid to capture more client assets flowing into ETFs. These are both passive plays.
Ms. Johnson has rarely made public speeches since succeeding her father as chief executive in 2014 and chairman in 2016, but over the past year she has stepped into the spotlight to discuss emerging technology in financial markets. In one 2017 speech she championed the prospects of bitcoin and other alternative currencies, an unusual stance for the head of a large financial services company, and in another discussed the promise of artificial intelligence in financial planning and asset management.
Ms. Johnson has had to respond to allegations of sexual harassment at the firm. That led to the departure of one of its star stock pickers and prompted the firm to hire a consultant to review workplace conduct and create a sexual-harassment task force.
-- Sarah Krouse
Jeffrey Gundlach
As bond investors prepare for a more challenging environment, all eyes are on how Jeffrey Gundlach will handle the new market.
Mr. Gundlach's DoubleLine Total Return Bond Fund grew to $62 billion over its first six years, thanks to years of outsize performance, gaining Mr. Gundlach widespread recognition as "the new bond king." But after peaking in September 2016, the fund dropped to nearly $54 billion by the end of November 2017, even after adding nearly $500 million over the past two months, according to Morningstar Direct. Mr. Gundlach says his firm "had a record year" in inflows and performance for investors.
The DoubleLine fund gained 3.5% for the year through Dec. 26, compared with 3.38% for the average fund in the category, putting it in the 44th percentile for the year, Morningstar says.
Amid growing indications that the Federal Reserve will continue to raise interest rates, short-term Treasurys came under pressure in 2017, with the yield on two-year notes climbing to 1.87% from 1.19%. But yields on 10-year Treasurys barely moved, trading at 2.49% this week, raising questions about whether this "flattening" of the yield curve suggests an economic downturn is around the bend.
Mr. Gundlach, who didn't reply to a request for comment, has told investors he and his team don't see a recession in the offing, and on Twitter he warned of a possible "disaster" for corporate bonds when interest rates rise.
-- Gregory Zuckerman
David Einhorn
Hedge-fund manager David Einhorn has fallen on tough times.
The stock picker has lost more than 10% since 2014, compared with a 38% total return in the S&P 500. His Greenlight Capital Inc. rose 2% in 2017, while the S&P 500 climbed 25%.
Greenlight paid out more than $400 million to clients who chose to cash out midyear, helping shrink the firm to $7 billion in assets under management. More money was expected to flow out at year-end, said people familiar with the matter.
The 49-year-old Mr. Einhorn is far from the only fundamentally oriented investor who has lost his footing in recent years, raising questions about whether the rise of algorithmic trading and passive investing have changed their prospects.
-- Juliet Chung
Qi Wang
When Qi Wang arrived at Pacific Investment Management Co., she inherited one of the toughest seats at the firm -- in more ways than one.
Pimco hired Ms. Wang in 2010 to co-manage its hedge fund that places bets based on sweeping views on economic policy and geopolitics -- an investment strategy blunted by low interest rates and serene markets. What's more, her desk at the California bond manager sat next to Bill Gross, the famously hard-charging investment chief whose 2014 exit sent shock waves through Wall Street.
The 44-year-old manager appears to have succeeded: She now oversees some $7.5 billion in hedge-fund investments at Pimco.
Ms. Wang, who spent 12 years at hedge-fund firm HBK Capital Management before joining Pimco, has fared better. One of her funds was up 3.5% through October, according to a recent HSBC hedge-fund performance report, in part because she bet on Emmanuel Macron's victory in the French presidential election this past May.
"I don't consider myself an old-style macro investor," she said. "The toughest challenge for an investor, but especially a traditional macro investor, is to have the intellectual flexibility to understand the landscape has changed. You have to adjust."
-- Justin Baer
