Tools for Humanity named X's former vice president of global affairs as head of policy, the latest executive from what was formerly Twitter to join the startup co-founded by OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman.
The San Francisco-based company appointed Nick Pickles as chief policy officer in a newly created role to liaise with governments and regulators as its World Network venture, which scans people's eyes in exchange for cryptocurrency tokens, faces scrutiny. He reports to Alex Blania, co-founder and head of the startup.
The British executive spent a decade at X, becoming the go-to person for heads of state and regulators that took aim at the social-media network over compliance or policy issues. He left Elon Musk's company in early September.
"One of the issues that I dealt with every day at X, and Twitter before that, was how trust in the public conversation is being undermined because of the growing issue of bot-automated accounts," Pickles said in an interview.
"I could see the acceleration of the problem where people didn't know if they were speaking to another person and how that was damaging online discourse," he said.
Last year, Elon Musk floated the idea of charging users of his X platform to eradicate fake and spam accounts.
Now, Pickles plans to be the face of Tools for Humanity in its bid to develop technology that helps distinguish humans from artificial intelligence while safeguarding their privacy.
Pickles is the latest former X executive to join Tools for Humanity following the appointments of Rebecca Hahn as chief communications officer and Damien Kieran as head of privacy.
The company said Thursday that Kieran's role, announced in early July, had been expanded to chief privacy and chief legal officer.
Pickles's pivot to the startup comes after Musk escalated his legal feud with Altman's OpenAI and Microsoft, claiming the companies colluded to eliminate competition in an attempt to dominate the development of artificial intelligence.
His addition to the team underscores efforts from the startup to invest in compliance as regulators in some jurisdictions cast doubt on claims that its technology can differentiate between humans and bots in the AI age without privacy violations.
Tools for Humanity is behind the 2023 launch of World Network, a venture formerly known as Worldcoin, that lets users download a wallet app with a digital identity known as World ID.
To get their identity verified, users stand in front of a basketball-sized chrome device known as the orb that relies on sensors to scan their irises "to verify humanness and uniqueness." Worldcoin cryptocurrency tokens are then distributed to users in countries where they are legally available.
However, the company's processing of biometric data raised eyebrows. It has been raided in Hong Kong, blocked in Spain, fined in Argentina and investigated in Kenya.
Earlier this year, the venture agreed to give users the option to have their biometric data deleted permanently following consultations with third-party privacy and security experts in a bid to allay concerns from regulators.
"The reason for creating a chief policy officer role is a direct signal of how seriously we take those conversations," Pickles said. "Whenever you have a new technology, people will always have questions."
Credit: By Mauro Orru
