Max Tegmark has long believed in the promise of artificial intelligence. As a physicist and AI researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a co-founder of the Future of Life Institute, which studies technology, he has envisioned a near future in which superintelligent computers could fight climate change, find cures for cancer and generally solve our thorniest problems. As long as proper safety standards are in place, he argued, "the sky's the limit."
Recently, however, Tegmark's optimism has turned into alarm. "I had really hoped that humanity would be more up to the task of managing this," he says, pointing to what he calls a "dangerous race" among tech companies to build and release systems that we don't yet understand, haven't yet regulated and may soon be unable to control.
Speaking from his home outside Boston, Tegmark, 56, explains that one day AI may become as good as humans at all intellectual tasks, capable of learning on its own -- a phenomenon called Artificial General Intelligence, which some now predict is just a few years away. Once this happens, the technology will be able to continuously improve itself, surpassing our own power to think and act. If these systems develop priorities that don't align with our own, they could pose an existential threat to humanity.
"Ever since the term AI was coined in the 1950s, it was obvious to leaders in the field that if we ever succeeded in getting close to human-level AI, it was pretty likely we would face enormous risks, like extinction, but people kept thinking this was really far away," Tegmark says. "What's new is not the idea. It's that, holy guacamole, it's happening, and we didn't have as much time as we thought to do the safety part."
In March, Tegmark's Future of Life Institute spearheaded an open letter calling for a pause in training the most powerful AI systems until researchers adopt a shared set of safety standards. "Should we develop nonhuman minds that might eventually outnumber, outsmart, obsolete and replace us?" the letter asks. Its 33,000 signatories include Elon Musk, Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak and Yoshua Bengio, a computer scientist who won the Turing Prize for his pioneering work in AI.
Tegmark admits he didn't expect the letter would actually halt advanced AI work, but he believes it helped spur a wider conversation about the perils of AI. "Before this it was taboo in certain circles to even suggest a pause. People might call you a scare-mongering Luddite," he says. He notes that tech leaders will often admit privately that they are concerned about AI risks but feel real commercial pressure to innovate faster than their rivals.
"The only way there will be a pause is if the U.S. government comes in and says, 'Hey, you can't release stuff that doesn't meet these safety rules,'" says Tegmark. Otherwise, there are few near-term incentives for companies to invest in safety research. In May, CEOs from OpenAI, Google DeepMind, Anthropic and other AI companies endorsed a one-sentence statement from the Center for AI Safety, a nonprofit organization. It reads: "Mitigating the risk of extinction from A.I. should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks, such as pandemics and nuclear war." "If that's not a cry for help, I don't know what is," says Tegmark.
Before becoming an AI Cassandra, Tegmark mostly pondered the cosmos. "I was always fascinated by big questions, the bigger the better," he says. Growing up in Sweden -- his mother was a Swedish psychologist, his father an American mathematician who emigrated partly in protest against the Vietnam War -- he loved science and wrote some computer games, but in college he pursued economics, believing it would allow him to make a bigger social impact. By the time he earned his B.A. at the Stockholm School of Economics, however, he was disillusioned: "I realized economists published all these good ideas and politicians just listened to the ones who said what they wanted to hear."
Tegmark's girlfriend at the time was studying physics, which seemed more fun, like "the ultimate intellectual adventure." He switched gears, earned his Ph.D. at Berkeley in 1994, then spent the next 25 years in the "wild west of cosmology" -- at Princeton, the University of Pennsylvania and MIT, where he joined the faculty in 2004. His last name, Shapiro, was unusual in Stockholm but common in American academia, so he adopted his mother's maiden name to avoid being confused with other physicists. When he began to speculate about theories of the multiverse in the 1990s the concept was often dismissed as crackpot, but now it is fairly mainstream. "I think many people are just getting used to the idea that our universe is a bit weirder than we thought," he says.
Similarly, few people were warning about the pitfalls of AI when Tegmark co-founded the Future of Life Institute in 2014, with a mission to help maximize technology's benefits and minimize its risks. "It was kind of like the lung cancer and smoking debate in 1954. You couldn't even talk about it without being seen as a weirdo," he says. Tegmark wooed AI leaders from academia and industry to his conferences by couching his concerns in a general optimism about AI's potential to amplify human intelligence. These hopes have since curdled: "I'm upset not just because I worry about the risk but because we're squandering all the upside we could've had, too."
Tegmark has also been an outspoken critic of many roles AI already plays, from drone warfare to online news media. "Algorithms don't care about accuracy or nuance. They are trained to maximize engagement," he says. "The result has been there's so much more hate going around, not just within nations but between countries." It troubles him that lawmakers are "so cozy with the companies they are supposed to regulate," even enlisting tech CEOs for advice on managing the industry.
He recommends the creation of something like a Food and Drug Administration for AI, which would force companies to prove their products are safe before releasing them to the public. It's "reckless" for tech companies like Meta and Microsoft to release the source code of their AI models, Tegmark warns: "It's like giving a bunch of kids some hand grenades and chain saws and hoping they're not going to use them." He points to a study published in the journal Nature Machine Intelligence in 2022 which found that one AI model was able to invent 40,000 potentially lethal molecules in less than six hours.
For Tegmark, the crusade for safer AI feels personal. Along with two adult children from his first marriage, he now has a baby son with his current wife, Meia Chita-Tegmark: "I look into his eyes and think, how is he going to make a living? What is the point of him going to school?" He wonders how to raise a child in a world in which AI could undermine the purpose and even the possibility of human life. "Why are we grown-ups being so reckless?" he asks. "Why are we jeopardizing the future like this when it can be so great?"
Credit: By Emily Bobrow
