Tesla plans to slash more than 10% of its global workforce and two of Elon Musk's top deputies said they were leaving the company, a shake-up that reflects a cooling in consumer demand for electric vehicles.
The changes revealed Monday come as the world's most valuable automaker -- long valued by Wall Street for its growth potential -- adjusts to a weaker market for its battery-powered cars.
Tesla's once-enviable profit margins have narrowed in recent quarters as the company resorted to deep price cuts to stimulate sales. Of late, it has leaned into efforts to develop autonomous cars.
Musk, the company's chief executive officer, informed employees on Monday of the planned job cuts, according to an email reviewed by The Wall Street Journal. He cited the need to reduce costs and increase productivity.
Hours later, Drew Baglino, a senior vice president and 18-year company veteran, posted on X saying he had made the "difficult decision" to leave Tesla.
Baglino, who was one of just four named executives on Tesla's website, was a stabilizing force in a company known for high executive churn. As the head of powertrain and energy engineering, he frequently appeared alongside Musk and oversaw initiatives including Tesla's efforts to manufacture its own battery cells. The 43-year-old Baglino was named to the company's leadership team in 2019.
Another top executive, Rohan Patel, 42, who oversaw policy and business development, bid colleagues farewell on X on Monday. Musk, in a reply, thanked him for "everything you've done for Tesla."
The two executive departures follow the exit of Zach Kirkhorn, who stepped down as chief financial officer last summer and had been discussed as a possible successor to Musk as CEO.
Tesla's stock closed down more than 5% Monday. It has fallen roughly 35% in 2024.
"About every 5 years, we need to reorganize and streamline the company for the next phase of growth," Musk said on X.
As the electric-vehicle market has cooled, Musk has pushed to increase adoption of a souped-up version of the company's driver-assistance software called "Full Self-Driving." The promise of this technology -- and the hope that Tesla will one day develop fully autonomous vehicles -- has underpinned the company's lofty market valuation.
Employees recently were told to give priority to a robotaxi project.
Tesla had more than 140,000 employees globally as of the end of 2023, according to a securities filing.
Tesla reported this month its first year-over-year decline in quarterly deliveries since 2020, stoking concern about the company's prospects this year. The EV maker delivered about 387,000 vehicles globally in the first three months of 2024, down 8.5% from a year earlier. It was the company's lowest quarterly performance since the third quarter of 2022.
Tesla has shown signs of stress as growth in the EV market is slowing and automakers are scaling back investment plans.
The company has an aging lineup and faces fierce competition, especially in China where homegrown EVs are more popular.
China's BYD briefly surpassed Tesla as the world's largest EV seller in the fourth quarter of last year, though Tesla has since reclaimed the title.
Tesla executives have described the company as being between two growth waves: the first driven by the company's popular Model 3 car and Model Y crossover, and the second by its next generation of vehicles. This next generation has been expected to include both a robotaxi and a less-expensive model designed to extend Tesla's reach into the mass market.
Musk said in his email that remaining workers face a difficult job ahead as Tesla is developing "some of the most revolutionary technologies in auto, energy and artificial intelligence."
Baglino, like other Tesla executives, was compensated largely with stock in the carmaker. Since becoming an officer, he has sold more than $130 million of Tesla shares, according to Equilar. As of Friday, he held shares and vested stock options valued at more than $113 million, Equilar said.
Analysts are looking for more clarity on Tesla's strategy, noting that a lower-cost car is important for the company's near-term growth. A robotaxi, which Musk said Tesla plans to reveal in August, could have a longer adoption curve.
Morgan Stanley analyst Adam Jonas wrote in a recent research note: "While we are prepared for Tesla to unveil an actual physical robotaxi-prototype this summer, we would urge caution on potential commercialization time-lines for a fully autonomous taxi service."
In China, the number of Tesla's vehicles both made and sold in the country slid for two consecutive quarters from a year earlier, based on data from the China Passenger Car Association.
Senior managers in China said they were told by the company in recent months to identify roles that are critical to their teams. Some of them said they were asked to rank their team members in order of performance.
Tesla made a sweeping round of layoffs in 2022, when Musk told employees he planned to cut 10% of salaried workers.
---
Ryan Felton contributed to this article.
Generate image description

Credit: By Rebecca Elliott, Selina Cheng and Raffaele Huang
