Even as a rusted shell five years ago, Building 128 in the Brooklyn Navy Yard projected a singular presence, a vast space with steel trusswork stretching into pitched 70-foot ceilings.
"It was really one of the most dramatic spaces I have seen in New York," said David Belt, co-founder of New Lab, an interdisciplinary workspace that now inhabits one wing of Building 128. "It looked like a cathedral to manufacturing."
Building 128, which is more than century old, once housed shipbuilding operations, using technology considered cutting edge for its time. Mr. Belt and his New Lab co-founder Scott Cohen wanted to tap that spirit when they remade the space to support entrepreneurs working in robotics, artificial intelligence technology and connected devices. The building has been re-christened the Green Manufacturing Center.
The U-shaped building was built mostly in 1899 and 1900, said Aileen Chumard, executive director of programs and exhibits at the Navy Yard, a former naval facility that is now an industrial park owned by New York City. The space was used as a machine shop where workers built all types of ship components, including engines. After World War I, Building 128 served as place for some of those studying surrendered German U-boats, Ms. Chumard said.
"I think the history of the building resonated throughout the whole concept for the project entirely," said Nicko Elliott, design director for Macro Sea, which developed and designed New Lab's space. He added, "There are people there now with a passion for [making] hardware."
For designers redeveloping the New Lab wing, the trick was to avoid cliches, such as going "super industrial chic" or fashioning a look that was "tech 4.0, making everything look like an iPhone," Mr. Belt said. Instead, the designers reached for inspiration from the early 1970s, an optimistic period just after NASA's moon landing and before the emergence of troubles such as the energy crisis.
"We were thinking more of Archigram, a British speculative design and art group from the 1960s and early 1970s and something that led to high-tech modernism," said Mr. Elliott.
Macro Sea's designers, who worked with Marvel Architects, incorporated key elements of the old building, including its giant gantry cranes. Once used to move large ship parts, the cranes now suspend three bridges stretching part of the width of the building and connecting the mezzanine levels. One serves as an exhibit space for companies to display their products. The middle bridge is a cafe space. The other is used as a project space.
Macro Sea added 34,000 square feet of mezzanine space to the original 50,000 square feet below. They fashioned studios, open lounges and shops containing millions of dollars' worth of prototyping equipment to be used by New Lab's members, which include Nanotronics, a company developing advanced industrial microscopes.
To the largely black-and-white scheme, Macro Sea added touches of color with its furniture -- royal blue, cherry red and lime green.
Its team also selected cushioned sofa blocks designed by Gaetano Pesce with dimpled surfaces resembling focaccia bread. And the front of its reception desk is an infinity mirror, designed to create the illusion of a reflection continuing into an unending distance.
Credit: By Keiko Morris
