A search by U.S. authorities for Chinese researchers with ties to China's military is leading to intensifying cat-and-mouse tactics involving what prosecutors say are foiled escapes, evidence tossed into a dumpster and a chase through an airport.
FBI agents have questioned dozens of researchers about their work and military affiliations. In recent weeks, the widening operation has triggered efforts by some suspects to evade authorities and led to the arrest of at least two researchers whose work is allegedly tied to China's military development, according to court filings by prosecutors.
In one case, a researcher at the University of California, Los Angeles studying artificial intelligence is accused by federal prosecutors of destroying evidence sought by the FBI in an investigation into potential technology theft. The researcher, Guan Lei, threw a damaged computer hard drive in a dumpster days after he was stopped from leaving Los Angeles International Airport, prosecutors allege.
In another, a scientist researching fluid dynamics at the University of Virginia is charged with stealing proprietary software code under development for two decades by his adviser, who received U.S. Navy funding. The adviser told investigators that Hu Haizhou, whom U.S. authorities prevented from boarding a flight in Chicago last month, hadn't informed him he planned to return to China, prosecutors allege in filings in his case.
Messrs. Guan and Hu, arrested separately in late August, are in custody and have yet to enter pleas. A lawyer for Mr. Hu said that in his experience trade secrets charges are "typically overstated." Mr. Guan's lawyer didn't respond to a request for comment. In an affidavit Mr. Guan filed in a related proceeding, he said he spoke with the FBI because he "had nothing to hide" and he believes he was targeted because of the "political climate between China and the U.S."
Mr. Guan's fiancee, Yang Zhihui, a Chinese national studying computer science at the University of California, Irvine, was arrested running through the Los Angeles airport to board a flight to China on Aug. 31, even though her lawyer had agreed she would surrender for detention as a witness against Mr. Guan, prosecutors said. Her lawyer said Ms. Yang is a law-abiding student.
The FBI sweep launched in June factored into the U.S. decision to close China's consulate in Houston, after authorities suspected that Chinese diplomats were assisting some of the scholars with evading investigators. On July 21, when the State Department ordered the consulate closed, it also told the Chinese ambassador to get the remaining military researchers out of the country, The Wall Street Journal reported.
China's Foreign Ministry has said its diplomats "have never engaged in activities incompatible with their status," and Beijing has denied U.S. accusations of intellectual-property theft, characterizing them as political. The Chinese Embassy didn't respond to a request for comment on the latest cases.
At least four cases the Justice Department filed in the weeks leading to the consulate closure accuse researchers of visa fraud. Two have pleaded not guilty while two have yet to enter pleas.
The latest cases appear to involve research with military applications that China's People's Liberation Army is trying to develop.
Mr. Guan's research centers on machine learning, an artificial intelligence field. One of his advisers at China's National University of Defense Technology is a lieutenant general and a leading figure in the PLA's supercomputer program, according to an FBI affidavit filed with his criminal complaint.
Mr. Hu, who works for a military-funded lab at Beihang University in Beijing, was researching underwater robotics, according to an FBI affidavit. The code prosecutors accuse him of stealing was developed by his UVA adviser, who runs a collaborative program with other schools funded by the Office of Naval Research.
In an interview with Customs and Border Protection officers at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport on Aug. 25, Mr. Hu admitted he had code on his laptop that his adviser would be upset to learn he had, the affidavit said. Beihang University didn't respond to a request for comment.
The professor, who wasn't identified in court filings, told the FBI he had repeatedly denied Mr. Hu's requests to access his code and didn't know how he obtained it, according to the affidavit. He told authorities Mr. Hu "had left UVA to return to China without contacting him to bid him farewell," the filing said.
A university spokesman said the school is cooperating with law enforcement. The U.S. Office of Naval Research didn't respond to a request for comment.
At UCLA, Mr. Guan was working in the math department and studied "an optimization algorithm and its application in machine learning," the criminal complaint said. A UCLA spokesman said the university is cooperating with the investigation.

Credit: By Kate O'Keeffe and Aruna Viswanatha
