Virtual reality gets the buzz, but its less-immersive cousin -- augmented reality -- is also attracting investment and spawning new products.
Two small Silicon Valley companies are releasing electronic glasses that show workers a digital display in their field of view. They are getting the jump on similar augmented-reality devices from Microsoft Corp. and Google parent Alphabet Inc.
Entertainment giant 21st Century Fox Inc. said Tuesday that it had bought a stake in one of the augmented-reality firms, Osterhout Design Group, to push "the film experience into the future."
San Francisco-based Osterhout Design last month began shipping $2,750 headsets that resemble sunglasses and display partly transparent digital screens. Atheer Inc., of Mountain View, Calif., plans by April to ship $4,000 headsets that resemble ski goggles and can be controlled with waves of the hand.
For now, augmented-reality devices are aimed at business users. Augmented-reality glasses can show a patient's vital signs to a surgeon or highlight boxes that need to be moved to a warehouse worker. Osterhout Design said Caterpillar Inc. is testing its glasses for mechanics repairing bulldozers. Atheer says engineers who build missiles are testing its glasses.
Google is remaking its Glass devices for commercial customers, after it discontinued the consumer version last year. Microsoft says it will first target business users, including U.S. astronauts, with its HoloLens headset,
The 21st Century Fox investment shows interest in consumer uses of augmented-reality devices. Until mid-2013, Fox was part of Wall Street Journal parent News Corp.
A recent demo illustrated how Osterhout Design's glasses can show a slightly transparent 65-inch television screen floating about 8 feet away from the user. Wearers see vibrant three-dimensional images that aren't visible to bystanders and can do so without losing track of their surroundings.
At the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas this week, the company will display a prototype with a larger screen, nearly akin to a floating movie screen in a user's view. Last month, augmented-reality firm Magic Leap Inc., a Dania Beach, Fla., startup focusing on entertainment uses, filed documents that said it was seeking as much as $827 million in funding. That could value the company at roughly $3.7 billion, according to the documents.
Millions of consumers are expected to try virtual reality this year on headsets scheduled to be released in coming months by Sony Corp., HTC Corp. and Facebook Inc.'s Oculus unit. Augmented reality, however, is likely still years away from widespread adoption -- in part because the technology is more challenging.
Virtual reality immerses users in experiences that appear to be all around them, generally by tapping into smartphones, game consoles or high-end computers. Augmented-reality glasses are typically stand-alone devices, with less computing power and shorter battery life, which are important considerations in keeping the devices lightweight and affordable.
Over time, tech companies want the devices to understand the physical world around them to provide users with relevant information about their surroundings. That could include, for instance, showing reviews when a user looks at a restaurant or the arrival time of a train when the user looks at a train station. That will require far more sophisticated sensors, software and artificial intelligence.
Despite the challenges, some analysts and investors believe augmented reality has more promise than virtual reality. In the two years ending Sept. 30, 2015, investors made 114 investments totaling $1.3 billion in virtual and augmented reality, according to CB Insights.
Credit: By Jack Nicas
