Even if you don't own a Tesla, you are, or might soon become, part of the company's experiment in automotive safety.
There are already more than 200,000 Teslas on the road, and all of them built after early 2015 are capable of Autopilot -- that is, semiautonomous driving. This makes drivers, and anyone encountering these cars on the road, guinea pigs who are helping to train the artificial intelligence Tesla hopes to use for a fully autonomous driving system.
During this experiment, at least two people have died in driver's seats of Teslas that crashed while Autopilot was engaged, but Chief Executive Elon Musk argues the system continues to improve and, overall, Teslas are safer than they would be without the technology.
Uber Technologies and Alphabet's Waymo, among others, are also road-testing on public streets. They're experimenting at much smaller scales, though an Uber autonomous vehicle struck and killed a pedestrian in March. Subsequently, Uber suspended its self-driving-car program. CEO Dara Khosrowshahi has said it will resume within a few months.
These experiments are based on assumptions about the abilities of AI, and the compatibility of humans and partially autonomous driving systems. If automobile companies are wrong about any of them -- and there's reason to believe they are -- we'll almost certainly see more self-driving-car accidents, as semiautonomous technology becomes commonplace.
That isn't to say we shouldn't be on this path. Every year, some 40,000 people die in the U.S. in traffic-related accidents -- a situation made worse by distracted driving.
We have established methods for responsibly rolling out life-saving new technologies before -- think of clinical trials for new drugs -- and we can do it again. But it might mean pumping the brakes on the rollout of self-driving cars.
When engaged, Autopilot keeps the car within in its lane, can automatically change lanes, and maintains a safe distance from cars ahead and behind. When it senses a dangerous situation it alerts the driver, whether or not Autopilot is engaged. Sometimes, however, it's up to the driver to realize the Autopilot system isn't doing what it should.
Tesla says its cars with autonomous-driving technology are 3.7 times safer than the average American vehicle. It isn't clear how much of this safety is because of the driving habits of enthusiast owners or other factors, such as the cars' crash-avoidance technology, rather than Autopilot.
After a fatal 2016 crash, which happened when Autopilot was engaged, Tesla cited a report by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration as evidence that Autopilot mode makes Teslas 40% safer. NHTSA recently clarified the report was based on Tesla's own unaudited data, and NHTSA didn't take into account whether Autopilot was engaged. Complicating things further, Tesla rolled out an auto-braking safety feature -- which almost certainly reduced crashes -- shortly before it launched Autopilot.
There isn't enough data to independently verify that self-driving vehicles cause fewer accidents than human-driven ones. A Rand Corp. study concluded that traffic fatalities already occur at such relatively low rates -- on the order of one per 100 million miles traveled -- that determining whether self-driving cars are safer than humans could take decades.
What we do have is evidence -- acknowledged in Tesla's own user manuals -- that Tesla's semiautonomous driving system is fooled by bright sunlight, faded lane markings or seams in the road. Researchers continue to document other ways to trick these systems, as well.
Tesla emphasizes its system is driver-assist technology, not full autonomy, and blamed the driver in the most recent crash that occurred when the system was engaged. Yet Tesla drivers and news reports suggest that in some cases, the only thing keeping drivers from getting into Autopilot-related accidents is their own reflexes.
None of this surprises experts who understand the AI at the heart of autonomous driving systems. Deep learning -- the so-called intelligent component of these systems -- is "brittle, opaque and shallow," says Gary Marcus, a professor of psychology and neural science at New York University and the former head of Uber's AI lab.
AI is brittle because it can't carry over insights from one context to another, opaque because humans can't evaluate its neuron-like tangle of connections, and shallow because it's easy to fool. You can't just throw more deep learning at a problem and expect it to be as good as a human, says Dr. Marcus.
Alphabet's Waymo decided it was too dangerous to let drivers take control when needed, and skipped to a fully self-driving ride-share service, Waymo CEO John Krafcik has said. According to the company, a system that never asks a driver to take over is safer than making potentially tricky machine-human handoffs.
Tesla promised to release safety data on its self-driving technology starting next quarter. It isn't clear what kind of data it will release, but experts say public sharing of data, from all makers of autonomous vehicles, is the only way to ensure proper evaluation of the safety of these technologies. Given that we already evaluate the safety of every other part of a motor vehicle in this way, it just makes sense.

Credit: By Christopher Mims
