Amazon.com CEO Andy Jassy said generative artificial intelligence could be one of the largest technological transformations in decades.
In his annual letter to shareholders, Jassy laid out a vision for how generative AI could be a critical building block in establishing the company's next pillar of growth following its online retail Marketplace, Amazon Prime and its cloud-computing unit Amazon Web Services.
"Generative AI may be the largest technology transformation since the cloud (which itself, is still in the early stages), and perhaps since the Internet," Jassy wrote in his letter Thursday. "This GenAI revolution will be built from the start on top of the cloud. The amount of societal and business benefit from the solutions that will be possible will astound us all."
Jassy's annual shareholder letter, his third since he took over as CEO, follows a longstanding tradition set by Amazon founder Jeff Bezos, who as CEO of Amazon for 27 years released annual letters that were studied across the tech industry and beyond. Bezos, who stepped down as Amazon CEO in 2021, typically used the letters to speak about Amazon's accomplishments and ambitions.
Amazon has been in search of its next pillar of success, but that search has been elusive as the company has struggled to build out businesses such as its physical stores and healthcare. Jassy said the company thinks of its successes as businesses that can spur other successful projects. He listed AWS and the company's logistics operations as two previous initiatives that accomplished that and said that beyond AI, it sees promise in units such as grocery and Prime Video.
Jassy also said Amazon remains committed to cost-cutting.
"We've challenged every closely held belief in our fulfillment network, and reevaluated every part of it, and found several areas where we believe we can lower costs even further while also delivering faster for customers," Jassy said in his letter. The company overhauled its delivery systems in the past year to place items it sells in warehouses closer to customers, which it says saves costs. Amazon has hundreds of warehouses throughout the U.S.
Amazon shares are up 24% this year through Thursday's close, with a market cap approaching $2 trillion. The stock has outperformed the S&P 500 by more than double amid investor excitement over AI.
Amazon fell behind its tech rivals in the AI race, though it has been trying to boost its standing with new offerings at AWS and its retail operations. Jassy, who has spoken about AI as a long-term bet, again used Thursday's letter to lay out that Amazon believes it will take time to build out the technology.
The company has invested $4 billion in AI startup Anthropic, which is among a group of notable tech companies building large language models and other cutting-edge technologies. As part of its deal with Amazon, Anthropic is using Amazon's custom chips to build and deploy its AI software.
Amazon disclosed Thursday that it added Dr. Andrew Ng, a computer scientist, entrepreneur and AI expert, to its board. A former Google and Baidu executive, Ng has specialized in developing machine learning and deep learning algorithms. He is an adjunct professor at Stanford University.
On its e-commerce side, Amazon in February announced a new AI-powered shopping assistant for its mobile app named Rufus that executives said is designed to improve the shopping experience and enhance its product search bar.
Late last year, it also introduced a chatbot for workplaces. It also started a program to train millions of workers in artificial-intelligence skills as it competes with Google, Microsoft and others for AI talent.
Despite Amazon's recent investments on AI, the company has continued to lay off teams of employees throughout its businesses, continuing a cost-cutting effort that began in 2022. Amazon this month slashed hundreds of jobs from across AWS, a move that came after it said it would remove its "just walk out" cashierless technology from its Amazon Fresh grocery stores in the U.S. The company in recent months has eliminated hundreds of positions across divisions such as entertainment and its Alexa division.
Jassy has spoken about a three-pronged approach to AI innovation. He said Amazon is focusing on the AI models, followed by the applications built on top of the models, like ChatGPT. The third prong is chips that power the technology.
"We're optimistic that much of this world-changing AI will be built on top of AWS," Jassy said in his letter.
Jassy has said he expects AI to drive tens of billions of dollars of revenue for the company over the next several years, yet Amazon has also tamped down expectations by repeatedly saying that it is the "early days" of AI.
Jassy also expressed optimism about the company's Prime Video streaming service, citing its library of exclusive content including Thursday Night Football and "The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power," as well as advertising. Amazon has added ads to its streaming offering as it looks to further build its ad business and generate more revenue from entertainment.
He also touted Amazon's space endeavors. Jassy said its satellite internet business, dubbed Project Kuiper, hit "a major milestone" in October when it launched two prototype satellites into space. The goal is to provide broadband in remote areas, a business currently dominated by Elon Musk's Starlink.
Jassy said he expects Amazon to launch its first production satellites this year.
"We've still got a long way to go, but are encouraged by our progress," Jassy said.
Credit: By Steven Russolillo and Sebastian Herrera
