Corrections & Amplifications
College marketing consulting firm Capture Higher Ed is based in Louisville, Ky. A July 16 U.S. News article about colleges' recruiting efforts incorrectly said it was located in Lexington, Ky.
(WSJ August 2, 2018)
Houston Baptist University found a new way to appeal to prospective graduate students: boats.
The university hired higher-education consulting firm EAB to analyze a vast consumer database aiming to identify potential applicants the same way retailers find shoppers. EAB created a demographic and psychographic profile of Houston Baptist's enrolled students and found a high percentage had interests in recreational boating and fishing. They also liked to travel, and many had children, so their schedules were packed tight.
Houston Baptist's next Facebook advertisement used a picture of a woman fishing with her children, suggesting adults could go to school and still have time for family fun. Another featured a woman checking flight times at an airport, referencing the global opportunities available to business students -- 75% of whom indicated an interest in travel.
Consumer-driven marketing, as EAB calls it, is the latest step in universities' efforts to enroll adult students and build up a new revenue stream as the number of new high-school graduates stagnates.
While traditional college prospects are easy to find -- in high schools, with plenty of data on their family income and academic interests available for purchase through the companies that administer standardized tests -- adults who may want to complete their degrees or pursue graduate studies are trickier.
A tight labor market means adults can find decent-paying jobs without advanced degrees. That makes pricey programs a tough sell, even if there is payoff down the line. Undergraduate and graduate enrollment by students over age 24 fell by 6.8% between fall 2015 and fall 2017.
Big data aren't new in admissions, with colleges targeting prospects in certain ZIP Codes or with particular test scores, for decades. But the schools have come a long way in embracing consumer marketing techniques. EAB taps into a database run by V12 Data, with 115 data points on more than 200 million U.S. adults.
With the help of consultancy Capture Higher Ed in Louisville, Ky., tiny Kentucky Wesleyan College has posted ads akin to the "Were you still interested in that blouse?" messages that online retailers use after a shopper leaves a site. Once web users toggled over to another page after visiting the school's admissions website, they would see a banner ad reminding them it isn't too late to finish applying.
The school ended its contract with Capture Higher Ed in March, after a year, said spokesman Eddie Kenny, citing budget constraints. "We certainly wish we had the resources to utilize more of what they have to offer," he said.
Prospective students might be turned off by the idea of schools following their online moves, though the institutions only use that tack for individuals who opted in to sharing their information via browser cookies, according to Thomas Golden, senior vice president for data science at Capture Higher Ed. And while the consumer-marketing methods are more efficient than mailing the same postcard to thousands of people, schools say, it isn't necessarily cheaper.
"You're meeting the prospect where they are," said Brittany Murchison, managing director of program marketing for EAB's adult learner division. The company began using machine learning in identifying and marketing to potential students in late 2016, and now works with about 70 schools on that initiative.

Credit: By Melissa Korn
