WALLDORF, Germany -- Business-software maker SAP SE said it would restructure at a cost of nearly $1 billion as it continues to shift toward cloud-based computing.
Chief Executive William McDermott said Tuesday roughly 4,400 employees are likely to be affected, though the company expects its current workforce of about 96,500 to grow by the end of 2019.
"We are going to move our people, and our focus, to the areas where the new economy needs SAP the most," he said in an interview, citing such opportunities as artificial intelligence, the Internet of Things, blockchain and quantum computing.
Mr. McDermott said the job changes would entail a mix of new assignments, early retirements and exit packages, and the company will continue to offer training.
"We are building a company that is a fighting machine, that is ready to go into the marketplace against any dot-com from America, and win," he said.
The cost of the restructuring, the company's first in four years, is expected to run between 800 million euros to 950 million euros ($915 million to $1 billion), with the majority being booked in the current quarter.
The company on Tuesday also reported its fourth-quarter profit fell 15% from a year earlier to 1.8 billion euros on an adjusted basis, despite a 9% rise in revenue to 7.4 billion euros. Analysts polled by FactSet were expecting profit of 1.86 billion euros on revenue of 7.2 billion euros.
SAP's shares fell 2.8% to 89.81 euros.
The German company offers a range of products and services to businesses, including its Concur expense-management platform, IT-data platform SAP Hana, analytics, customer-experience software and digital supply-chain tools.
SAP has been expanding its cloud-computing business as growth in its core software division has slowed. Excluding the effect of currency fluctuations, fourth-quarter bookings in its cloud-services division grew 23% to 736 million euros, while cloud revenue for the full year rose 33% to 5 billion euros. The company's total revenue grew 5% to 24.7 billion euros in 2018.
Mr. McDermott said the company isn't expecting to feel the effects of a slowdown in China's economy, citing its cloud partnership with Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., which was expanded last year.
"I think I've been listening to how China is slowing down now for at least eight years," he said. "Don't be too short on China, would be my advice."

Credit: By Sara Germano
