The Future
By Al Gore
(Random House, 558 pages, $30)
There have always been two Al Gores. There is techno-enthusiast Al, who, during his 2000 run for president, proposed that an online network ("G-Bay") be used to auction off surplus government property. I found techno-enthusiast Al beguiling when I was researching manned Mars missions for his 1988 presidential campaign. But there is also Savonarola Al, who loudly denounces the excesses of modern capitalist society and demands repentance -- though, given Mr. Gore's lucrative commercial dalliances (most recently, the sale of his Current TV network to the repressive, oil-rich Qatari regime), perhaps Jimmy Swaggart would be a closer clerical model than Savonarola.
Each of the two Als takes a star turn in "The Future: Six Drivers of Global Change." In the end, alas, Savonarola Al comes out on top.
Techno-enthusiast Al has a wide range of interests. He thus provides a survey of all sorts of forward-looking developments, ranging from robotics and nanotechnology to artificial intelligence and genetic engineering. Though the ground he covers will be familiar to readers of futurists like Ray Kurzweil and James Miller, there is value in having so much advanced thinking summarized for the general reader. And many of the problems that Mr. Gore identifies are, in fact, genuine problems.
For example, what he calls "robosourcing" -- the devouring of jobs by machines -- is likely to place considerable stress on employment markets. While such predictions have been made since the days of Ned Ludd, it is also true that we have seen plenty of labor-market disruptions since those days. And as machines grow ever more competent, the likelihood of drastic disruptions in the future looks much higher.
As the Nebraska Guitar Militia sang, "people gotta have somethin' to do" -- and if there is nothing else, they are likely to sit around "gettin' stewed." Not an appealing prospect for humanity, even if we all have robot gardeners. Worse yet is the risk that the robots will reach the point where they don't need us at all.
Mr. Gore himself worries about the growth of commercial monoculture crops. He reports that, by the 1990s, "only six varieties of corn accounted for 46 percent of the crop, nine varieties of wheat made up half of the wheat crop, and two types of peas made up 96 percent of the pea crop." This state of affairs, he says, might leave much of the world vulnerable to starvation if a monoculture-adapted blight should appear. In agriculture, as in many fields, the effort to squeeze out cost savings has often led to choices that achieve those savings at the expense of robustness and resilience. Such developments, Mr. Gore argues, may lead to a future in which food will be scarcer and more expensive.
The author also addresses the promise and peril of genetic enhancement, a process that will take us well beyond the dreams of 20th-century eugenicists, without the ugly forced-sterilization part. But Mr. Gore worries that this "neo-eugenics" might be abused. He mentions the prospect of women being engineered to produce sperm, making men obsolete, and sounds almost pro-life in his concern for discarded embryos. (Of course, Mr. Gore used to take all sorts of pro-life positions, back when the rigors of political life demanded it.) On the other hand, he notes the many upsides, from restoring eyesight to the blind to allowing gay and lesbian couples to have children who are biologically their own.
Techno-enthusiast Al's discussion is interesting, if occasionally heavy-handed in its erudition. With so many facts on display, errors inevitably creep in: Bronze wasn't chosen over copper in ancient times because copper is too brittle (it isn't brittle at all) but because bronze tools could hold an edge under hard use, as copper tools couldn't. Even so, Mr. Gore's fans will find the book a useful introduction to the future, if not to the past. Yes, he does go on about climate change at some length, but that is hardly news. There is much, much more to the book than a rehash of the global-warming debate.
But then Savonarola Al intervenes, his fondness for high-toned scolding coloring every topic. It's a pretty monochromatic color. After reading Savonarola Al's sermons, one might be excused for thinking that all of the evils in the world come from corporations. There is a lot about what Mr. Gore calls "the domineering crimes of the robber barons" and the evils of capitalism, but the actual "crimes" that Mr. Gore mentions, chiefly lobbying efforts that thwart regulation, don't seem all that bad in comparison with the things that governments are capable of doing. In much of the Third World -- think Zimbabwe or Iran -- people have far more to fear from the despotic regimes that misrule them than they do from private enterprise. And even in the free world, governments have a coercive power that no corporation can rival. Hence the need for lobbyists as a check on wealth-destroying intrusions into markets and abridgments of commercial freedom.
Even when Mr. Gore describes government malfeasance, he misses the point. His discussion of the 20th-century eugenics movement is admirably frank in its admission that many progressive heroes, like Planned Parenthood founder Margaret Sanger, openly supported laws requiring the sterilization of citizens deemed "defective." Mr. Gore even recounts the famous 1927 case of Buck v. Bell, in which the U.S. Supreme Court upheld a Virginia statute authorizing the sterilization of the "feebleminded," with Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. writing for the court that "three generations of imbeciles are enough." Mr. Gore correctly notes that in fact the sterilized Carrie Buck wasn't even retarded and that the case was an abuse of the judicial system to set a eugenicist precedent.
The government sterilized Carrie Buck, not a corporation, and in the name of "progress," not profit. Pondering this might have encouraged Mr. Gore to broaden his focus where abuses of power are concerned. His narrow focus -- on capitalism and private depredations -- doesn't rob Mr. Gore's book of usefulness, but it does say something about the worldview that produced it.
---
Mr. Reynolds is a law professor at the University of Tennessee.
Subscribe to WSJ:
Credit: By Glenn Harlan Reynolds
