Did you document your hair-raising rock-climbing trip on Instagram? Post happy-hour photos on Facebook? Or chime in on Twitter about riding a motorcycle with no helmet? One day, such sharing could push up your life-insurance premiums.
In January, New York became the first state to provide guidance for how life insurers may use algorithms to comb through social-media posts -- as well as data such as credit scores and home-ownership records -- to size up an applicant's risk. The guidance comes amid expectations that within years, social media may be among the data reviewed before issuing life insurance as well as policies for cars and property.
New York set a high bar, requiring insurers to prove that any social-media data used in underwriting is actuarially justified, logical for use and doesn't unfairly discriminate against certain customers.
"We're going through a period now where most life insurers are exploring using all types of data, not just data they get directly from the customer proactively, but other external sources of data -- social media being a big one," said Ari Libarikian, a senior partner at McKinsey & Co. in New York.
He anticipates that someday, underwriters will assess potential customers with automated reports based in part on their social-media use. "It's here to some degree, and it's coming in the next couple of years," Mr. Libarikian said.
Here, insurance and data experts offer insight and advice:
If I post photos of potentially risky behavior, will my life-insurance premiums go up?
The time and effort to monitor an applicant's online presence can be costly, so few if any insurers are doing it yet in detail or at scale, says Jacques van Niekerk, chief executive of Wunderman Data, a unit of WPP Group. To spend resources figuring out that a policyholder went to Saint-Tropez and paraglided without a helmet for purposes of boosting a premium rate "could be bad and misguided," he said.
What should I avoid posting on social media?
Given how digital histories can linger, people should go easy on photos of risky behavior such as smoking and instead play up boasts about healthy activities, like recent cycling trips or marathons, said Mike Vogt. He is executive director of data and analytics for SPR, a firm whose services include using artificial intelligence and social-media accounts to help insurers process claims.
"Paragliding, ice-climbing, riding a motorcycle while drinking a beer: They are a little over the top, but honestly, I've been surprised at what people post," he said. "That history never goes away, even if you remove the post a few hours later."
Could my digital habits help my insurance costs go down?
Some life and car insurers are exploring whether consumers will share real-time health or driving data. Remember, a life insurer who took blood and urine samples already knows a lot about the customer. To develop friendly relationships, some insurers are offering perks like gift cards in exchange for reaching milestones in exercise and providing details about sleep. "If you live a healthy life, why not share that?" Mr. van Niekerk said.
However, such sharing isn't for everyone and some privacy experts caution against trading personal data for perks.
In the future, social-media data and other information sources could make life insurance cheaper and less of a hassle to secure. "What if you didn't have to go to the doctor and give blood?" Mr. Libarikian said.
On the car-insurance side, many people are using mobile apps that track their driving habits, such as how often they slam on the brakes. "Consumers are going to get more and more benefits offered to them -- like reduced premiums or better risk advice," Mr. Libarikian said, "if they share some of their data on social media or elsewhere."
How are insurers using social-media data right now?
Some insurers are using social media in handling claims. Insurers can check explanations of auto claims against Facebook testimonials about an accident. And they could challenge disability claims if photos posted from a ski trip, for example, contradict a claim of impairment or illness.
What is holding back the use of social media in underwriting?
The technology to study individuals' social-media accounts to make underwriting decisions is underdeveloped but likely inevitable, consultants and data scientists say. "We know that underwriting is the next big thing" to mine online postings, SPR's Mr. Vogt said.
But until and unless the technology is perfected, it generally isn't cost-efficient for insurers to assign staff to look at Facebook pages and tweets. Verifying identifications on social media, tracking oft-changing accounts and converting the information into usable, predictive data isn't yet scalable or cost-effective, companies said.
Also, insurers aren't yet confident that information from social media is better than traditional sources, such as answers to questions on applications, prescription-drug databases and blood and urine samples -- though ultimately it could be easier and cheaper to get.
Do privacy settings help?
Yes, industry consultants say. Review the privacy settings on each social-media account, making sure posts are shared only among your selected network. Untag yourself from photos other people post, and ask friends not to tag you in the first place.
Ultimately, though, experts warn that if you lead an unhealthy life, your insurance company will figure it out the old-fashioned way, by asking questions and taking blood and urine samples.

Credit: By Ellen Byron and Leslie Scism
