Talk of movements makes me nervous. The latest swirling in tech world is "effective altruism." Elon Musk had a brush with it. Its biggest proponent is crypto king Sam Bankman-Fried, CEO of FTX, who very quietly was the second-largest donor in support of the Biden campaign at $5.2 million. Be warned, he said on a podcast, he might donate $100 million to $1 billion in the 2024 election cycle.
So who is this guy? Mr. Bankman-Fried, 30, made his first killing doing bitcoin arbitrage, taking advantage of different prices in Japan and the U.S. He also leveraged a "kimchi premium" -- a 30% gap between the American and South Korean prices. Then he created one of the largest crypto exchanges. Profiles of him dutifully note he's a vegan, drives a Toyota Corolla, and sleeps on a beanbag next to his office chair. FTX bought the naming rights to the Miami Heat's arena and lots of umpire and referee uniforms. Since May, he has been bailing out failing crypto firms, and he noted recently that FTX has a "few billion" left to help. Hope that's enough. Oh, and he plans to give away everything except for 1% of his annual income to "long-termist" causes, guided by effective altruism.
Others active in this movement include Facebook founder Dustin Moskovitz and his wife, Cari Tuna. So what is effective altruism? In 1972 philosopher Peter Singer suggested using metrics rather than emotion to direct charitable giving. On the surface it makes perfect sense. There is even a framework to be effective: Giving must scale, be aimed at causes neglected by mainstream philanthropy, be directed at solvable problems, and be a good personal fit for the giver. Sounds great so far.
But like everything else, high thoughts often devolve to personal biases. While claiming that effective altruism is a worldview and a way of life, Mr. Singer also said "there are glaring things wrong with the way people are living." Effective altruism also seems to be related to the "work to give" movement. Workers will rationalize high-paying jobs by giving most of their income away. Actually, when you work, you already give to society, but that is too complex for some to understand. Animal rights and veganism are big in the movement as well.
For true believers, it must be hard to find worthy projects. No problem! An organization known as GiveWell will tell you what charities are effective. I did a little digging, and I'm not so sure they're effective at all. Yes, they direct money toward malaria nets and treatments for parasitic worms, but they also supply supplements for vitamin A deficiency, though genetically modified "golden" rice already provides vitamin A more effectively. Hmmm, seems like a move backward. GiveWell also suggests direct cash transfers to solve extreme poverty, similar to universal basic income.
William MacAskill, a major effective-altruism booster, told the Washington Post that more should be spent on "preparing for low-probability, high-cost events such as pandemics." That's a bit like closing the barn door after the horse has bolted. He has pitched a Future Fund, focusing on artificial-intelligence risk, governance and worst-case biorisk.
Mr. Bankman-Fried talks a lot about systemic risk from AI as well as pandemic preparedness, but here's where things get weird: Partly as a result of his and his brother's efforts, $30 billion for pandemic preparation was written into the Biden administration's thankfully stalled Build Back Better porkfest.
And Mr. Bankman-Fried's various entities, along with Cari Tuna and others, have put up about $19 million for a future California ballot measure, the California Pandemic Early Detection and Prevention Act, which would add a 0.75% tax on incomes over $5 million to raise up to $15 billion over 10 years. Catch that? Someone else pays. Effective, but not exactly selfless.
It's the classic progressive playbook: Raise taxes to fund their pet projects but not yours or mine. I don't care if altruists spend their own money trying to prevent future risks from robot invasions or green nanotech goo, but they should stop asking American taxpayers to waste money on their quirky concerns.
And "effective" is in the eye of the beholder. Effective altruism proponent Steven Pinker said last year, "I don't particularly think that combating artificial intelligence risk is an effective form of altruism."
There are other critics. Development economist Lant Pritchett finds it "puzzling that people's [sic] whose private fortunes are generated by non-linearity" -- Facebook, Google and FTX can write code that scales to billions of users -- "waste their time debating the best (cost-effective) linear way to give away their private fortunes." He notes that "national development" and "high economic productivity" drive human well-being. So true. History has proved that capitalism is the most effective and altruistic system.
There are only four things you can do with your money: spend it, pay taxes, give it away or invest it. Only the last drives productivity and helps society in the long term. Eric Hoffer wrote in 1967 of the U.S.: "What starts out here as a mass movement ends up as a racket, a cult, or a corporation." That's true even of allegedly altruistic ones.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Not All Charities Are Equal. Give to Save the Most Lives" -- WSJ Aug. 3, 2022)
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Thinking About How to Do Good in the World" -- WSJ Aug. 5, 2022)
Credit: By Andy Kessler
