New York -- Sometimes everybody knows when history is being made -- think of the first moon landing. But world-changing moments often arrive quietly. On April 3, 1973, four months after the last manned moon mission, a 44-year-old Motorola engineer took a small step onto Sixth Avenue outside the New York Hilton. There Martin Cooper did something commonplace now but at the time revolutionary: He made a call on a cellular telephone.
"Joel," Mr. Cooper said to the man who picked up, "I'm calling you from a real cellular telephone -- a handheld unit." Joel Engel worked at Bell Labs, the research division of AT&T. Mr. Cooper was calling to gloat about surpassing the phone monopoly.
At the time, a phone was a device attached to the wall or sitting on an office desk, and hardly anyone used it for anything other than talking to people. Touch-tone dialing had been introduced a decade earlier, and PhoneMate had recently begun to sell answering machines that recorded messages on a reel-to-reel tape. Mobile phones existed, but they weighed 80 pounds and were found only in the cars of the very wealthy. The phone Mr. Cooper used -- a prototype of Motorola's first commercial model, the DynaTAC 8000X -- was unimaginably cumbersome by today's standards, weighing 2 1/2 pounds and taking 10 hours to recharge. But in 1973 it was a marvel.
"The function of a cellphone -- I can't express it any better -- it is to set people free," Mr. Cooper, 94, says. We're sitting in a lounge at the Hilton on the 50th anniversary of that first call. I've asked him how he'd describe his vision for the technology to someone in the 1960s. "A cellphone gives a person the freedom to be connected to the rest of the world, wherever they are and whenever they want to." Today the world is there to pick up your call. The global population is nearly eight billion, of which more than six billion have access to a mobile phone -- more than the 4.5 billion who have working toilets.
Some of Mr. Cooper's expectations back then proved uncannily accurate: "We knew that everybody would have a phone," and that phone numbers would be portable. You used to have to change them every time you moved.
What they didn't foresee is "that someday there would be a supercomputer in what we stupidly call a phone." The device you carry in your pocket is more powerful by many orders of magnitude than the calculating machines that guided Apollo 11 to the moon. It sends voice and text messages, plays music and games, gives driving directions and hails a taxi. It's a television, a flashlight, a camera and photo album, a tape recorder, a vast library, an address book, an alarm clock, a calendar, a medical device and more. Old-fashioned conversation is barely an afterthought. "I'm never comfortable calling these things phones," Mr. Cooper says.
He and his team built the first cellphone by hand in Motorola's research lab, incorporating technology the company had developed there and at other facilities: "It was like having a watchmaker put a watch together," he says. "You could never do that on a production line. We had all these parts, hand-soldered by a guy with a big magnifying glass, and we put all of those things together in three months."
Motorola installed only two cell sites at first -- one a block north of the Hilton in Midtown Manhattan, the other downtown near AT&T's headquarters, in case Motorola executives wanted to demonstrate their new device to their rivals in person.
The basic idea of the cellphone was, and is, simple -- "nothing more than a two-way radio," Mr. Cooper says. That was an established product line for Motorola, but in fact there was something more: Integrated circuits, a fresh innovation, allowed Mr. Cooper and his team to fit a complicated device into a far smaller, lighter package. They considered several variations -- "flip phone, a folding book phone, a sliding phone, a capsule phone" -- before settling on the 2 1/2-pound block they called the "shoe phone" in homage to the 1960s sitcom "Get Smart." "It was all one piece," Mr. Cooper says. "The last thing we needed was a complicated mechanism" that might "break in the middle of a demonstration."
The use of a "cell," meaning the area covered by a receiving and sending tower, was also novel: "What we do is divide the city up into a lot of small areas so that we can use a radio channel in one area, and then another part of the city used the same radio channel over again," he says. "Cellular telephony is a way of using the radio spectrum more efficiently." There was also more spectrum to use, as Motorola's cell phones broadcast at previously underused higher frequencies. "At that time, even a car phone only used maybe a dozen radio channels," Mr. Cooper says. "The cellphone that we built had almost 500 radio channels."
A study for AT&T once predicted that the market for car phones would top out around a million. These advancements vastly expanded that potential. Not that the gains came quickly at first: Motorola didn't bring the DynaTAC to market until 1983, and it cost $4,000 -- the equivalent of more than $12,000 today.
"We expected the first phones to go to wealthy people," Mr. Cooper says. "To a large extent that was true. But it turns out that one of the biggest users were real-estate people." They needed to take calls from clients and go out to show properties. "The cellphone allowed them to do both at the same time. They could be showing a home and still answer the call. So to them the phone, even at that huge price, doubled their effectiveness."
These early adopters, for whom the technology was worth the cost, helped fund further innovation, which ultimately made cellphones affordable to the masses. Advancements in data-transmission, display and input technology made possible the inexpensive, versatile smartphones we take for granted today.
They also brought ill effects, especially for young people, such as compulsive cellphone use and social media that promote both groupthink and bitter division. "Those are all big problems," Mr. Cooper says. "I think addiction is a serious problem. I think my wife spends too much time on the cellphone." But he insists "they're not new problems," and he notes that "we had an addiction problem with television. Seriously. When the TV came out, people would sit there glued to their screens like eight, 10 hours a day."
That casts an unflattering light on Mr. Cooper's vision of the cellphone. Among other things, it turns out to give users the freedom to sit there glued to their screens "wherever they are and whenever they want to." As for social media, he pleads ignorance: "I'm a dinosaur," he says. "I still don't know what TikTok is. You use TikTok?" (I don't.)
But he accentuates the positive. "We are just starting to figure out what the value of the cellphone is," he says. "Humanity will solve these other problems if the advantages are big enough. And the advantages -- the services you get out of the cellphone, the value to you to make you more efficient -- are so great that there's no question in my mind that humanity is going to solve these problems."
He is confident that the benefits already outweigh the costs. "Today, people are healthier. There are fewer people in poverty. They live longer than ever before. Something has made that happen, and I think the cellphone is one of the contributors." By improving efficiency, "it has taken away a lot of the time issues, given people more time to do other things."
His vision for the future beyond 2023 features a central role for artificial intelligence: "A phone is now an extension of you. . . . Today, if you want to customize a phone for you, all I can do is a simple thing like sort through four million apps and decide what's the right one for you. In the future, you will have an artificial intelligence -- that's you, your personal, own artificial intelligence -- and it will examine your behavior, and it will decide what app you need, and it will either create that app or go find it for you."
He describes today's smartphone as "suboptimal": "It's a flat piece of glass, and you put it up to your curved head, hold it in an uncomfortable position -- that's not what a future phone should be. The phone is going to end up being distributed on your body." What does that mean? "Ultimately it's going to be embedded under your skin," he says. "You don't have to charge it because your body is the charger."
Voice recognition will be perfected, so if you want to make a call, you'll tell your phone to call Marty. "It'll say, 'Which Marty you want, Marty Cooper or Marty Jones?' And you'll say, 'Get Marty Cooper on the phone,' and we'll be talking. So that is what I call an optimum phone. Maybe four or five generations from now, you'll just think 'Marty.'"
There's more, including potential victories in the war on cancer and in actual wars. "We are learning how to put sensors on a human body that will anticipate disease, that will tell you that you've got a disease coming -- your immune system is still in control of it, but it's about to be out of control," he says. "Everybody's got cancer cells. If you can know somebody's immune system is getting out of control, there are ways of stopping those cancer cells -- or we're going to find those ways."
Mr. Cooper was born in Chicago to Jewish immigrants from Ukraine. "They published some time ago a volume of famous Ukrainian people, and guess what?" he says. "There was Marty Cooper." Ukrainian defenders credit his invention for the ability to communicate on the battlefield: "It turns out the cell systems are designed to be resilient, which is what you want in a war. If cells get exploded by the enemy, there are always lots of cells to pick up the messages."
After our interview, Mr. Cooper returns to Sixth Avenue to mark the anniversary of that first call. Dressed in a dark sweater under a worn tweed jacket, a National Academy of Engineering pin on his lapel, he poses in the chilly Manhattan morning with a mockup of the old Motorola shoe phone held to his ear. His friends and family snap photos -- using their phones.
---
Ms. Bottum is an assistant editorial features editor at the Journal.
Credit: By Faith Bottum
