Kioxia Holdings priced its $800 million initial public offering as it seeks to raise capital to meet the growing demand for chips used in artificial intelligence and data centers.
The Bain Capital-backed Japanese chip maker said on Monday that it would offer shares at 1,455 apiece yen, equivalent to $9.70, landing in the middle of its previously projected price range.
Kioxia plans to issue new shares, while two of its largest shareholders will sell part of their stakes. The stock is scheduled to be debut on the Tokyo Stock Exchange on Dec. 18.
The company produces NAND flash-memory chips used in smartphones, computer servers and other devices.
The company anticipates growth in the flash-memory market, driven by demand for AI applications and data centers.
Formerly part of Toshiba Corp. and known as Toshiba Memory, Kioxia was acquired in 2018 by a group led by Bain Capital for around $18 billion. Toshiba retained a 40% stake in the chip business, which was renamed Kioxia the following year.
In 2020, Kioxia called off an IPO as U.S. export restrictions on China's Huawei Technologies hurt its business.
While chip-making can be highly profitable during technology booms, it remains vulnerable to downturns. Kioxia reported net profit of 176 billion yen for the first half ended September, recovering from a loss in the same period a year earlier, as revenue jumped 85% to 909 billion yen. For the fiscal year ended March, however, its net loss widened amid a decline in revenue.
In June, Kioxia secured agreements with a group of Japanese banks to extend the maturity of 540 billion yen of outstanding loans and establish an additional loan facility of 210 billion yen.
At the IPO price of 1,455 yen, the total offering of 82.7 million shares is expected to raise about 120 billion yen, equivalent to $800.2 million. The company had earlier projected a price range of 1,390 yen to 1,520 yen per share.
Toshiba plans to offer 37.7 million shares while Bain Capital is expected to sell 12.7 million shares. An additional 10.8 million shares will be offered, Kioxia said.
Kioxia plans to issue 21.6 million new shares, with proceeds earmarked for capital expenditures to support expected growth in chip demand and enhance production capacity and efficiency.
The IPO follows several large public offerings in Japan this fall and comes on the heels of the Nikkei Stock Average reaching records earlier this year, boosted by stronger corporate earnings and a weak yen.
Credit: By Kosaku Narioka
