Amazon.com recorded robust revenue and profit growth last quarter as demand for its cloud services and e-commerce sales rose and capital expenditures reached a record amid a big artificial- intelligence buildout.
The company said it plans to spend around $75 billion on capex this year and more next year as part of a push to build generative AI services.
The faster we grow demand, the faster we have to invest capital in data centers, network gear and hardware," Chief Executive Andy Jassy said on a conference call after results. "We invest in all that upfront in advance of when we can monetize it."
Shares of Amazon -- which have risen more than 20% this year -- rose close to 5% in after-hours trading following its results the announcement Thursday.
Many top technology companies have been ramping up spending on the expensive chips, data centers and real estate needed to meet the anticipated demand for computing power from AI.
Amazon's capex jumped more than 80% to $22.62 billion last quarter, its biggest-ever quarterly spend.
The company's net sales rose 11% to $158.87 billion and its net income rose 55% to $15.33 billion. Both results were above Wall Street's forecasts.
Earnings announcements earlier this week underlined the focus on capital expenditure. The $53 billion that Microsoft has spent this year represents about 28% of the company's revenue, well above the 12% of revenue the company has averaged between 2014 and 2023. Meta Platforms said it plans to spend between $38 billion and $40 billion on capex this year, which would represent about 24% of Wall Street's projected revenue for the company for the year.
Jassy wants to make Amazon an AI leader. The company has created special teams to drive generative AI innovation and has released a flurry of services, including an AI shopping assistant on its app named Rufus.
To make way for its AI pivot, Jassy has looked to cut costs in other divisions. In May, the company named Matt Garman, a veteran executive with a strong engineering background, as the new Amazon Web Services CEO in a move to better capitalize on AI.
Revenue from Amazon's cloud-computing unit, Amazon Web Services, grew by 19% to $27.45 billion last quarter. The business is the company's main profit driver and has shown renewed strength after experiencing a slowdown in 2023.
Demand for cloud services slowed last year as corporate customers curtailed some spending. Meanwhile, the artificial intelligence boom has also led to more competition for Amazon from its cloud-computing rival, Microsoft, which has been attracting customers through its AI business.
The company has recently had to contend with new competitors in its e-commerce business. Temu and Shein, both companies with Chinese roots, have captured the spending of many U.S. consumers looking for bargain deals online.
Amazon is planning a Temu-like service focused on shipping inexpensive fashion, household goods and other products directly to customers from warehouses in China. The company has tried to find ways to make its bargain items more visible to customers. It is also pushing its fast delivery deeper into rural America.
The company expects net sales to be between $181.5 billion and $188.5 billion during the current quarter, which is in line with Wall Street's expectations. The company projected an operating income of between $16 billion and $20 billion, which is also in line with forecasts.
Credit: By Preetika Rana
