Sequoia Capital named a new leader, a rare transfer of power at one of Silicon Valley's most storied venture-capital firms.
Sequoia partner Roelof Botha will take on a new role overseeing the firm's U.S. and European funds, the company said. In a concurrent note to investors, exiting Sequoia leader Doug Leone wrote that Mr. Botha "will set the overall tone and oversee the global centralized functions." His ascension settles widespread speculation over who would assume the job with the expected retirement of Mr. Leone.
In July, Mr. Leone will reach the firm's mandatory retirement age of 65. He joined Sequoia in 1988 and has led the firm for about the past decade.
Sequoia is known for early investments in Apple Inc., Google and Airbnb Inc., among other companies. It has more recently become entangled over its growing business in China, where it invested in TikTok owner Bytedance Ltd.
Sequoia shared Mr. Botha's new role with its investors who are gathering in London this week, people familiar with the matter said. The change is set to take place in July and was announced after The Wall Street Journal inquired about the pending change.
In his email, Mr. Leone said he would continue to be active in the firm and continue to represent Sequoia on a number of boards.
The appointment of Mr. Botha, who got a career boost in 2017 when he was handed responsibility for the firm's U.S. operations, comes as Sequoia tries to navigate its increasingly complex relationship with its powerful China affiliate, said people familiar with the matter.
Years of mounting geopolitical tensions and U.S. regulations have complicated tech investing for venture firms with Chinese ties, particularly ties to the Chinese government. In the past year, scrutiny from both governments has made it more difficult for Chinese startups to go public on a U.S. stock exchange, adding uncertainty to investing in China.
Sequoia Capital China chief Neil Shen has in recent years influenced the firm's global strategy, along with Mr. Botha and Mr. Leone, people familiar with the matter said. Mr. Shen is one of China's most well-known venture capitalists and has made enormous returns for the fund through investments in companies including e-commerce platform JD.com Inc., ride-hailing company Didi Global Inc. and food-delivery company Meituan.
Mr. Shen will continue running the China operations for Sequoia, according to the announcement. Mr. Botha will act as "senior steward" of the firm, the announcement added.
Mr. Botha assumes Sequoia's top job after a two-year tear during the pandemic that saw valuations and venture financing reach record highs. Yet the public-market gyrations and tech-stock rout of the past few months have created uncertainty and caution in startup investing. Some investors have walked away from pricey deals and others cut valuations. The volatile conditions have caused some companies to pause public-listing plans, even as fanfare for some new tech companies remains high, including for the more speculative sector of crypto-based companies.
While Sequoia China's investments have brought lucrative returns for the firm's investors and leaders, they have also included startups that have been caught in the crossfire of mounting geopolitical tensions. Regulators, the White House and members of Congress have grown concerned over possible technology theft, surveillance and data sharing by Chinese companies.
Investments include drone company DJI, which has been blacklisted by the U.S. military over concerns about data sharing with Beijing; 4Paradigm, an artificial-intelligence startup with a contract with the Chinese military; and ByteDance.
Former President Donald Trump issued an executive order that effectively sought to ban TikTok in the U.S., saying it was an economic and national-security threat because China's government would have access to data on U.S. TikTok users. A federal judge later blocked the order and President Biden revoked the ban, but national-security policy has focused increasingly on protecting Americans' personal data from foreign governments.
DJI and TikTok have denied that they would hand over data to Beijing. 4Paradigm didn't respond to a request for comment.
Mr. Shen is a committee member of a political advisory body to the Chinese Communist Party and is known to be closely connected to some party officials, the people said.
The venture firm had already signaled to investors that Mr. Botha was likely to take over upon Mr. Leone's retirement, people familiar with the issue said. Some investors said they viewed Mr. Shen's ascension as unlikely because of his deep China ties.
Mr. Shen and a spokeswoman for Sequoia Capital China didn't respond to requests for comment.
Mr. Botha, an immigrant from South Africa, moved to Silicon Valley during the dot-com era and joined PayPal Holdings Inc. Shortly after the dot-com bubble burst starting in 2000, he became a venture capitalist at Sequoia. He made early investments in Instagram and YouTube before they were bought as well as payments company Square, now known as Block Inc.
He was also an important figure guiding Sequoia's early scout investment program, which has funneled millions of dollars to well-connected entrepreneurs and others to make investments and introductions, helping the firm identify promising startups.
Mr. Botha is set to take on the top leadership role as Sequoia enters its 50th year and has turned the venture-capital financing model on its head. The firm last year said it was doing away with the traditional model of a series of funds that hold investor capital for a 10-year period. Instead, it said it was creating a single, open-ended fund that collects money from limited-partner investors and from the gains on stock of companies the firm has backed that have since gone public. This capital would be invested in venture-capital funds to back private startups. It is one of the most significant reorganizations in the U.S. venture-capital industry.
The fund restructuring didn't include Sequoia Capital China. In some ways, the U.S. and China funds remain deeply connected. They share some of the same limited partners.
---
Juliet Chung contributed to this article.
Credit: By Heather Somerville, Rolfe Winkler and Eliot Brown
