ALPHABET INC.
GOOG +4.4%
The artificial-intelligence war is heating up. Alphabet's Google unit and Microsoft Corp. on Tuesday unveiled rival AI-powered search features as companies capitalize on a wave of renewed excitement about the technology. The day before, Google also announced that its new conversational AI service, called Bard, was open to select testers. Bard will compete with OpenAI's popular chatbot ChatGPT, whose technology Microsoft is adding to its Bing search engine. The chatbot uses generative AI, which can produce new content from text to images. Alphabet shares gained 4.4% Tuesday.
BED BATH & BEYOND INC.
BBBY -49%
Bed Bath & Beyond found a cushion to keep it out of bankruptcy. The Wall Street Journal reported Monday that the troubled retailer reached a deal with hedge fund Hudson Bay Capital Management to sell over $1 billion of additional equity, diluting existing shareholders' stakes. The deal allows the company to avoid bankruptcy for now, as Bed Bath & Beyond missed interest payments to its bondholders after having its credit lines frozen. The retailer also said Tuesday it will shut dozens more stores as part of its plan to stay in business. Bed Bath & Beyond shares plunged 49% Tuesday.
ZOOM VIDEO COMMUNICATIONS INC.
ZM +9.9%
Zoom is cutting its connection to some workers. The videoconferencing company is laying off 1,300 employees, or 15% of its staff, as the work-from-home trend wanes. Chief Executive Eric Yuan also reduced his salary and is forgoing his bonus. Dell Technologies Inc. on Monday said it will cut more than 6,500 workers, or about 5% of its staff, as a slump in demand for PCs persists. Zoom shares rose 9.9% Tuesday.
WALT DISNEY CO.
DIS -1.3%
Bob Iger is hoping a new strategy will bring some magic back to Disney. In its first earnings report since Mr. Iger's return as chief executive, the entertainment giant on Wednesday posted a narrower loss in its streaming business and announced a major reorganization. The shake-up, which includes cutting 7,000 jobs and slashing $5.5 billion in costs, will give more power to Disney's content executives and puts a greater emphasis on sports media. The next day, activist investor Nelson Peltz ended his proxy fight with the company. Disney shares ended 1.3% lower Thursday.
MATTEL INC.
MAT -11%
Mattel's holiday season lacked cheer. The maker of Barbie dolls and Hot Wheels cars said Wednesday that fourth-quarter sales fell 22% after cash-strapped consumers pulled back on spending. Stores overflowed with toys in the weeks leading up to Christmas, and eleventh-hour holiday purchases weren't enough to lift sales. Mattel expects elevated inventory levels to weigh on its results in the coming quarters. The results came after rival Hasbro Inc. recently warned that consumers pulled back on holiday spending. Mattel shares dropped 11% Thursday.
PEPSICO INC.
PEP +0.9%
Inflation-wary shoppers are still splurging on snack food. PepsiCo posted a better-than-expected profit in the latest quarter, with its Frito-Lay North America snacks business reporting a 25% increase in revenue. The company's prices on average rose 15% as Pepsico aimed to offset rising costs including packaging, fuel and commodities such as cooking oil and seasoning. If inflation slows, price increases will follow suit, said PepsiCo finance chief Hugh Johnston. The company also said it plans to raise its dividend by 10% later this year. PepsiCo shares added 0.9% Thursday.
LYFT INC.
LYFT -36%
A weak outlook for 2023 drove Lyft shares lower. Despite growing revenue, Lyft on Thursday posted an unexpected quarterly loss and said this quarter's revenue will likely come in below Wall Street's forecasts of roughly $1 billion. Lyft and its rival Uber Technologies Inc. had been grappling with a shortage of drivers until recently, pushing ride prices to record highs. The ride-share marketplace is now improving as the companies have enough drivers to meet consumer demand, leading to lower prices. Lyft shares plunged 36% Friday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
