Disturbing social-media posts apparently made by Nikolas Cruz before a deadly shooting have rekindled questions about what responsibilities and capabilities technology companies and law-enforcement authorities have for detecting threats among the billions of words and images online.
Mr. Cruz admitted Thursday to gunning down 17 people the day before at a Florida high school.
Months earlier, a user by the name of "nikolas cruz" posted images on Instagram of guns, bullets and a dead frog. Separately, a user by the name of "nikolas cruz" posted a comment on a YouTube video, saying: "Im going to be a professional school shooter."
The Federal Bureau of Investigation said Friday it mistakenly didn't investigate a credible and specific tip about the teenager.
Broward County Sheriff Scott Israel, who is investigating the Parkland, Fla., killings, called attention to the posts Thursday, describing them as "very, very disturbing."
At a news conference, the sheriff suggested the shooter had mental-health issues, and he called on lawmakers to give police greater power to detain those who make threats on social media and have them examined.
YouTube, part of Alphabet Inc.'s Google unit, as well as Facebook Inc. and other social-media companies have been criticized in recent years over their responses to damaging content on their platforms, ranging from violent live videos to harassment of users.
The companies have taken steps to curb such activity, hiring more workers as monitors and deploying more aggressive software that leans on artificial intelligence to identify and remove violent content and hateful speech.
YouTube recently said it is ordering workers to review thousands of hours of its most popular content to screen for objectionable material. It still relies on algorithms and users to flag content for most of the hundreds of hours of material uploaded every minute.
Google has said it continuously tweaks its algorithms for displaying search results to bar fake or objectionable information, with people evaluating the quality of those tweaks.
The social-media posts made under the name Nikolas Cruz show the depths of the challenges companies and authorities face in policing what amounts to a drop of water in a digital ocean.
Social networks are overflowing with heated rhetoric, often making it difficult to separate tense debates from actual threats. Disturbing images like those found on the Instagram account are a significant test. Many aren't illegal in and of themselves -- however sinister they might appear in hindsight.
Social-media companies face challenges in dealing with apparent manipulation of their platforms during times of unrest.
The Alliance for Securing Democracy, a self-described bipartisan group that tracks Russian online disinformation campaigns, said its dashboard saw an increase in shooting-related hashtags on Twitter Inc. from Russian bots in the wake of Wednesday's killings. "There has also been a strong focus on the gun-control debate," said Bret Schafer, an Alliance analyst.
Twitter couldn't be reached for comment.
Some observers believe technology companies need to do more to ensure threats of violence are detected.
"If you can design a social-media platform, then you can design the means to monitor the content of that platform," said Reid Meloy, a forensic psychologist and FBI consultant.
It isn't clear whether YouTube alerted authorities to the comment made by the user "nikolas cruz" on its platform. The company didn't respond to a request for comment.

Credit: By Georgia Wells and Sarah E. Needleman
