Google suspended the ability to generate images of people in its flagship chatbot following an online backlash around the tool's treatment of race and ethnicity.
The search company said Thursday it would pause the feature in the chatbot Gemini as it works to address recent issues with "inaccuracies in some historical depictions." Google didn't say for how long it would be suspending the ability to generate human images.
The tech giant's decision came after users flooded the social network X with examples of Gemini responses they viewed as historically inaccurate or biased against white people.
In one widely shared example, Gemini appeared to respond with a racially diverse group of images when prompted to generate a German soldier in 1943, when the Nazi Party was in power.
Google initially stood behind Gemini's propensity to generate racially diverse images, citing the company's diverse global user base, and said it was working to improve the historical depictions.
"Gemini's AI image generation does generate a wide range of people. And that's generally a good thing because people around the world use it," Google said Wednesday in a statement on X. "But it's missing the mark here."
The pause Thursday highlights the perilous balancing act of moderating artificial-intelligence programs that can generate novel text and images, tools that technology leaders have promoted as the biggest new development since the advent of the mobile phone.
Gemini also refused requests to explicitly generate images of white people, citing concerns about definitions of race and the spreading of harmful stereotypes, according to posts on X and tests performed by The Wall Street Journal. The tool didn't appear to have the same restrictions on creating images of nonwhite people.
Google and parent company Alphabet released a succession of new AI products in recent months, including a paid version of the Gemini chatbot it said would include advanced image-generation capabilities. It made the chatbot, previously known as Bard, available as a stand-alone app on phones running Android software and as a prominent feature in the Google app for iPhones.
Other chatbot makers including OpenAI, the company behind ChatGPT, also have faced difficult questions about how to moderate the outputs of their systems, including persistent concerns about political bias as the U.S. prepares for this year's presidential election.
Google said last year it would restrict responses to certain election-related queries in its chatbot and AI-powered search engine, without providing more detail on which kinds of prompts would be affected.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
