Can the Quad contain China? Last week the leaders of the four nations that make up the informal grouping -- the U.S., Japan, India and Australia -- met for the first time in person at the White House. A few years ago, when tiptoeing around Chinese sensibilities was more of a global norm, such a gathering would have been almost unimaginable.
It's too soon to say whether the Quad will achieve its unstated goal: stopping an authoritarian China from becoming Asia's undisputed hegemon. But the four nations have signed on to an ambitious strategy, spanning cooperation on vaccines, infrastructure and technology, designed to blunt Beijing's challenge. Taken together with the new Aukus military pact among the U.S., the U.K., and Australia and a thickening web of bilateral agreements across the region, these initiatives signal clear intent to combat Beijing.
"You have to squint very hard not to see a serious budding partnership between the Indo-Pacific's four leading democracies," says Richard Fontaine, chief executive of the Center for a New American Security. "That is the most significant outcome of the summit."
Quad proponents should feel optimistic. The group is a rare bipartisan point of agreement in Washington. President Trump spearheaded the Quad's revival in 2017 after it had lain dormant for about 10 years. President Biden has doubled down on his predecessor's commitment.
Just four years ago, Quad discussions were limited to diplomats talking on the sidelines of other meetings. The group's foreign ministers met for the first time only two years ago -- on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly. Under Mr. Biden, we've seen the Quad progress from "friends who chatted at a party to throwing their own party," says Tanvi Madan, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.
What about substance? In a joint statement last week, the Quad's leaders underscored their belief in "rule of law, freedom of navigation and overflight, peaceful resolution of disputes, democratic values, and territorial integrity of states." Each of these principles rebukes Beijing.
The group also reiterated its intention to supply 1.2 billion doses of Covid-19 vaccine globally, including at least one billion by the end of next year. Biological E., an Indian firm, will manufacture the vaccines, including one licensed from Johnson & Johnson. After suspending vaccine exports earlier this year amid a horrific second wave of Covid, India has agreed to resume them in October. The U.S., Japan and Australia will pay for the production. Australia will use its logistical expertise to deliver them to Southeast Asia.
Many of the Quad's plans are still unclear. For instance, they didn't specify what exactly a "green shipping network" entails or how much "high-standards infrastructure" will actually get built in Asia under its auspices. Still, Ms. Madan says she was pleasantly surprised by how much the four countries "have got into the nitty-gritty of issues in order to operationalize cooperation."
In particular, a commitment to advance "critical and emerging technologies" has both commercial and strategic implications. It's possible to imagine a future in which Quad cooperation prevents Chinese telecom firms Huawei and ZTE from dominating global 5G networks, preserves the democratic world's edge in semiconductors, and wards off Chinese domination of emerging technologies such as synthetic biology, genome sequencing and artificial intelligence.
A Quad working group on space holds similar promise. And a new "Quad Fellowship" will fund 100 masters and doctoral students a year -- 25 from each nation -- to study science, technology, engineering and mathematics in the U.S.
The elevation of the dialogue, accompanied by a flurry of practical proposals for cooperation, has quieted arguments that the Quad is nothing more than a talk shop. There now appears to be consensus in all four capitals that they can't prevent Chinese belligerence by kowtowing to Beijing. "The idea that everything is premised on changing Chinese minds has gone out the window," says Mr. Fontaine. "I think increasingly in Washington and capitals around the world they see that a policy built on not provoking China hasn't worked."
There are still reasons to be skeptical of the Quad. The grouping may be too informal and unstructured to be effective. One of its constituents may decide that cutting a deal with China is preferable to confronting it. Turmoil in the Islamic world, including Mr. Biden's haphazard withdrawal from Afghanistan, threatens Indian security. And New Delhi still has one foot in Chinese-dominated groupings, including Brics and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Most important, the fraught U.S. debate on trade has hobbled Washington's ability to provide a compelling economic alternative to a Beijing-led order. Earlier this month, China announced its bid to join the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, an 11-member grouping that came together after Mr. Trump withdrew America from the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
So far Mr. Biden hasn't shown any inclination to rejoin the pact. "It's like fighting with one arm tied behind our backs," says Mr. Fontaine. That may be true, but at least the Quad is showing some stomach for a fight.
Credit: By Sadanand Dhume
