Apple has apologized for an advertisement that depicts an array of creative tools being crushed and reveals a new iPad in their place, saying it fell short of the company's standards.
The company doesn't plan to run the ad on TV.
The ad, which Chief Executive Tim Cook posted on X after Apple unveiled new iPads Tuesday, depicts a studio filled with musical instruments, a record player, cans of paint with vibrant colors and other items being physically crushed by what appears to be a giant compressor.
When the compressor lifts, an ultrathin iPad is all that remains in place of the tools.
Tor Myhren, Apple's vice president of marketing communications, said in a statement sent to Ad Age: "Creativity is in our DNA at Apple, and it's incredibly important to us to design products that empower creatives all over the world. Our goal is to always celebrate the myriad of ways users express themselves and bring their ideas to life through iPad. We missed the mark with this video, and we're sorry."
A company spokeswoman confirmed the veracity of the statement made to Ad Age but declined to provide it to The Wall Street Journal. Cook didn't delete his original post or say anything publicly about the company's apology.
While the ad with the title "Crush!" emphasizes the thinness of the iPad, a point Apple executives highlighted when they unveiled the device, some critics saw it as an ominous symbol of the company's power, the rise of artificial intelligence and its potential to replace human creativity.
Apple has long been seen as one of the most creative and dominant corporate advertisers, launching numerous campaigns that are among the most widely admired in the industry and in popular culture.
Co-founder Steve Jobs was personally involved in many of the company's most successful campaigns, including "Think Different," which launched after Jobs's return to the company.
Some people drew a contrast between the iPad ad and Apple's 1984 Super Bowl spot, which introduced the Macintosh personal computer. That ad shows a dystopian world in which a giant screen featuring a Big Brother-like figure is smashed by a hammer thrown by a colorful track athlete.
Apple announced new iPads on Tuesday, with the pro version featuring the new M4 chip that the company said enhances artificial-intelligence capabilities. The company also said that the new 13-inch iPad Pro is the company's thinnest product ever with a thickness of 5.1 millimeters.
Revenue for Apple's tablet business has declined nine out of the past 10 fiscal quarters. Apple's broader business has also seen growth slow.
Credit: By Aaron Tilley
