Google Chief Executive Officer Sundar Pichai defended to employees the internet giant's controversial push to do more business in China but said the company is "not close to launching a search product" in the country, according to a person briefed on the comments.
Mr. Pichai, speaking Thursday at a weekly all-hands meeting in Mountain View, Calif., was responding to criticism from employees, human rights groups and others who in recent days have voiced concerns over the Alphabet Inc. unit's work with the Chinese government. Google is developing services for Chinese citizens, including a search engine that could adhere to China's strict censors, The Wall Street Journal and others reported last week.
At the meeting, Google co-founder and Alphabet president Sergey Brin sounded optimistic about doing more business in China, cautioning that progress in the country is "slow-going and complicated." Mr. Brin was instrumental in Google's decision in 2010 to withdraw its search engine from China to protest the government's censorship regime and attempts to hack into the Gmail accounts of Chinese human rights activists. At the time, he described the government as having the "earmarks of totalitarianism" of the Soviet Union, where he was born.
On Thursday, Mr. Brin said the company has launched a number of products in China over the past eight years, such as a file-management app and a search engine for academic research. He said the decision-making around such projects requires "a certain set of trade-offs."
Google is balancing its desire to expand its business in China -- a market with the world's most web users -- with its identity as a champion of human rights.
The company is also contending with an increasingly activist workforce that is pushing management to be more transparent in its decision-making over controversial issues like China.
Pressure from Google employees helped sway the company's decision earlier this year not to renew a Department of Defense contract helping the U.S. government identify images for drone targeting. Employee objections to that effort, called "Project Maven," also helped push the company to adopt a new ethics-review process guiding its deployment of artificial intelligence technology.
Hundreds of employees signed a letter this week asking Google to give rank-and-file workers a voice in the ethics-review process and the ability to opt out of working on certain projects, according to a person who has seen the letter.
"Google employees need to know what we're building," the letter read.
On Thursday, Mr. Pichai said the company has a number of projects in exploratory stages that are still being debated, but it is committed to transparency and he thought it was important to speak to employees in person on this topic.
Mr. Pichai said his experience growing up in India, at a time when multinational companies operating in the region helped make a positive change, informs his view on whether Google should do more business in China. "I genuinely do believe we have a positive impact when we engage around the world and I don't see any reason why that would be different in China," he said.
That argument, which various company officials have made before, has drawn criticism from others concerned about Google's involvement in China.
In an essay he published online this week, former Google engineer Brandon Downey said the company's executives got employees to go along with their first push into China by arguing that giving the country's citizens access to filtered results through a search engine was better than no Google search engine at all.
That plan backfired in the ensuing years, when Google learned authorities in China were hacking its systems to target dissidents, wrote Mr. Downey.
"Censoring ourselves there wasn't making things better," he wrote. "In fact, technology was enabling the suppression of dissent."
In his three years as CEO, Mr. Pichai has been a frequent visitor to China, meeting with top Chinese officials and encouraging businesses to use Google's free open-source tools like TensorFlow and Android -- the mobile operating system that powers three-quarters of all Chinese smartphones.
Google has more than 700 employees -- roughly split between salespeople and engineers -- across offices in Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen. That's up from about 500 since 2015, the year Mr. Pichai became CEO. Late last year, it opened an artificial intelligence research lab in Beijing.
"Our stated mission is to organize the world's information," Mr. Pichai said on Thursday, noting that China accounts for a fifth of the world's population. "I think if we were to do our mission well, I think we have to think seriously about how we do more in China."

Credit: By Douglas MacMillan
