A few years ago one could watch social-justice activists shouting at speakers on campus and conclude the country still has bigger problems than intolerant young progressives. Maybe it's time to start worrying. Witness the implosion of a new Google advisory board after an employee protest.
This week Google dissolved an artificial-intelligence ethics board merely a week or so after the company created it. Google formed the board in response to the company's internal conflicts over the ethical use of AI. Last year progressive employees bullied CEO Sundar Pichai into discontinuing one Pentagon artificial-intelligence project and withdrawing the company's bid for another. The new eight-person board, composed mainly of academics, included Heritage Foundation president Kay Coles James.
Google's young militants passed around a petition titled "Googlers Against Transphobia and Hate," which called for Ms. James' removal and accumulated more than 2,000 signatures. The petition complained that in selecting Ms. James "Google is making clear that its version of 'ethics' values proximity to power over the wellbeing of trans people, other LGBTQ people, and immigrants." Other board members also came under pressure to resign rather than work with Ms. James.
As a think-tank president Ms. James has expressed support for policies well within the norm of center-right ideas, such as more security at the border and skepticism about the more coercive elements of the transgender movement's political agenda.
These charges of intolerance are particularly rich against Ms. James, an African-American who integrated an all-white middle school in 1961. In an op-ed last year Ms. James recounted that at the school a boy pushed her down the stairs. Another student stopped to help her. She remembered her fellow student's "quiet act of courage" and wrote that in 2018, another tumultuous moment in U.S. history, "instead of ugly rancor, we should show respect." Ms. James has shown the civility and tolerance the woke police claim to champion but so rarely seem to muster.
Even as Google employees rage at Ms. James, the company may be contributing to China's repression. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs General Joseph Dunford, who is usually circumspect in public, last month said Google's work "indirectly benefits" the Chinese military. AI in China, he said, will "help an authoritarian government assert control over its own population" and perhaps help China steal U.S. technology.
So let's summarize the value system inside the Googleplex: Employees last year blew up the company's Pentagon work because of concerns about a U.S. military that protects their right to protest, even as the company is doing business in an authoritarian rival country that puts Uighurs in labor camps. Then Google's ethicists demanded the company cashier an African-American conservative from an advisory board for her supposed intolerance, and management promptly caved and ended the entire project.
Google's Mr. Pichai told Congress last year that "even as we expand into new markets we never forget our American roots." Perhaps he should sponsor seminars for Google's employees on citizenship in a free society.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Executives Must Be the Adults in the Room" -- WSJ April 13, 2019)
