TOKYO -- Vaio, Sony Corp.'s former unprofitable PC business, is getting a makeover.
The Japanese consumer-electronics maker sold Vaio last year to a private-equity fund, which stopped selling computers overseas to focus on Japan. Now, despite high hurdles, the business is attempting an international comeback.
Vaio Corp. plans to start selling laptops at Microsoft Corp. retail stores in the U.S. in October, Chief Executive Yoshimi Ota said in an interview. The company also plans a move into Brazil, with Positivo Informatica, a Brazilian computer manufacturer, making and distributing PCs designed by the Japanese company.
Sony sold Vaio to private-equity fund Japan Industrial Partners Inc. after nearly two decades of trying to make itself into a major player in the PC industry. While Sony's Vaio laptops won plaudits for their design, they failed to stand out in a shrinking market.
Even in Japan, Vaio's market share has fallen to less than 1%, according to research firm Euromonitor, and the company faces long odds internationally. The global PC market has become saturated, contracting 12% in the second quarter, according to data from research firm IDC. Even cost-competitive giants, such as China's Lenovo Group Ltd., are feeling pressure from shrinking margins. With only 250 employees and a single factory of its own in Japan, Vaio is a tiny player by comparison.
Mr. Ota, who joined the company in June, says Vaio can succeed with a modest strategy of filling high-end niches, rather than pursuing mass-market customers the way Sony did. Sony focused too much on market share rather than profitability, he said.
"At the new Vaio, I ask every project team to make realistic goals and be accountable," Mr. Ota said. While analysts say the company will have a hard time re-establishing itself, Mr. Ota is upbeat, saying the fund envisions an initial public offering by June 2018.
Vaio doesn't disclose its financial figures. Mr. Ota said it recorded an operating loss in the financial year ended in June, but expects an operating profit in the current financial year as the company is seeing strong sales of new laptops released this year .
A former executive of Japanese trading house Sojitz Corp., Mr. Ota previously turned around two midsize companies. The 62-year-old executive said the job would be "easier" this time. Still, analysts are skeptical.
"Vaio Corp. will struggle to gain significant market share and may eventually be forced out of the market," said Karissa Chua, an analyst at Euromonitor. "Since the sale of the Vaio PC business was completed, Vaio Corp. has failed to launch any innovative products that differentiate itself from its competitors."
The company still sells laptops designed when it was owned by Sony, and is supplementing these with new designs aimed at heavy users. Vaio's new machines cost around 200,000 yen (about $1,600) in Japan and will start at $2,199 in the U.S., more than twice the price of the mass-market models that Sony sold globally. The company plans to add a document-size laptop with cellular capability, which would eliminate the need for users to plug in a mobile data card, and also desktop PCs.
Vaio first wants to attract graphic designers, photographers and others who now use Apple Inc.'s Mac computers because there are no good alternatives among computers running Microsoft's Windows operating system, Mr. Ota said.
"We are not interested in cheap models for everyone," he said.
Microsoft said in an emailed statement that it had chosen to feature Vaio computers at its U.S. retail stores "to give shoppers a range of options when making purchase decisions."
Rhoda Alexander, an analyst at IHS Technology, said Vaio, though small, could benefit from consumer awareness of the brand name it inherited from Sony, calling it "a good starting point" for international expansion.
Mr. Ota said PCs alone wouldn't be enough to ensure the company's viability. To make use of spare capacity at its factory, Vaio has started making Palmi, an entertainment robot designed by Fujisoft Inc. The factory previously made the Sony Aibo, a toy robot dog.
"Whether it's humanoid or dog-shaped, we plan to start making Vaio-branded robots in the near future," Mr. Ota said.
He said Vaio plans to add communication devices, wearable gadgets and factory-automation machines with artificial intelligence, taking it into some areas in which it could compete with its former owner. By fiscal 2017, Mr. Ota predicted, profits from non-PC operations will be equal to those from the PC business.
Also in that year, Japan Industrial Partners would like to exit from its investment, either via an initial public offering or a sale, Mr. Ota said. He named an ambitious slate of potential buyers -- including Vaio's former owner. A Sony spokesman said its decision to leave the PC business remains unchanged.
"My preference is listing the company, though finding a good partner -- such as Sony, Microsoft or Apple -- would also be an option," Mr. Ota said.
Kristin Huguet, an Apple spokeswoman, declined to comment about a potential partnership with Vaio.
---
Eric Pfanner in Tokyo contributed to this article.
Credit: By Takashi Mochizuki
