The answer to every pilot's worst nightmare is closer than you think: Some recreational flyers can now can buy private planes that can safely land themselves in emergencies.
Air-safety experts have long envisioned a future in which confused or incapacitated aviators could rely on a single command -- sometimes dubbed pushing the "big red button" -- to cede control to computers that save lives by preventing crashes and quickly getting planes on the ground.
Some single-engine propeller planes are now outfitted with systems that can manage aircraft speed and engine performance on their own, while automatically descending toward the nearest suitable airport. Without any human input, the computers communicate with air-traffic controllers, line up with the correct runway and extend landing gear -- all while avoiding storms and entering a holding pattern if necessary. After touchdown, other sensors help automatically apply brakes and shut down the engine.
These "auto-land" capabilities go beyond those used in many commercial aircraft. Proponents of the systems predict they could start reshaping jetliner cockpits within the next decade.
The new features have been approved by U.S. air-safety regulators and since May have been standard equipment on Piper M600 turboprops that carry six people, adding about $150,000 to the roughly $3.2 million overall price tag. The avionics were developed by Garmin Ltd. for Piper Aircraft Inc., which has sold 35 planes with such safeguards, though it says none of them has been activated in flight.
Honeywell International Inc., France's Thales SA and United Technologies Corp.'s Rockwell Collins unit are working on similar technology.
Such features also are expected to be available shortly on the personal, single-engine Cirrus Vision Jet and Daher TBM 940 turboprops. Similar systems eventually could spread to business jets and airliners, fundamentally changing operations, pilot training and the way future crews will interact with flight controls.
At this point, Garmin is solely targeting pilot incapacitation due to a stroke, heart attack or other medical crisis. The emergency backstop can kick in with the push of a button, or turn on automatically if pilots fail to respond to computer prompts checking on their condition. It can even be turned on by a passenger, and clicked off the same way.
Some of the broader impact is likely to show up first in cargo jets. Currently mandated two-pilot crews could be replaced with a single pilot, monitored from the ground and, in extreme cases, replaced by an auto-land system in the event of incapacitation.
Phil Soucy, a 69-year-old former military aviator and Virginia aerospace entrepreneur who normally flies a couple of times a month for pleasure -- often with his wife or other family members -- says he was instantly sold on the feature. Mr. Soucy took delivery of a Piper M600 in May, recalling: "I wouldn't have done it, if it weren't for the auto-land system."
Mr. Soucy adds that his wife "was all for getting it" to alleviate concerns about having to take over the controls in the unlikely event he passed out.
Impaired pilots -- whether suffering from health issues or problems stemming from drug or alcohol use -- account for roughly 8% of fatal crashes of private planes nationwide.
Garmin's breakthrough "at a minimum, increases the comfort level for pilots" if something goes wrong, according to Randy Babbitt, a former head of the Federal Aviation Administration. Beyond that, he says, "it opens the door to more confidence for less experienced pilots, or maybe inviting fewer pilots required, for some commercial operations."
Some experts continue to think human pilots are a better bet. Consultant Mica Endsley, a former chief scientist for the U.S. Air Force, says existing automation simply can't anticipate problems as well as humans: "It isn't up to the level of complexity that pilots have to handle on an ongoing basis."
Skeptics worry about software reliability and inadequate federal oversight. "Technology is advancing very fast, but regulators clearly aren't keeping pace," says Najmedin Meshkati, an engineering professor at the University of Southern California. "The people who are supposed to validate, verify and test simply cannot keep up." The FAA has said it is ramping up recruitment and enhancing reliance on a new cadre of automation experts.
With the benefits of increasing automation, safety experts also stress the biggest factor in avoiding crashes is the importance of manual flying skills -- plus the willingness of pilots to take over quickly and confidently when computers go awry.
Since airline pilots typically use automation for all but a few minutes of each flight, many computerized systems are devised to prevent crews from overriding them.
In recent years, Airbus SE and Boeing Co. have gone public with separate projects to develop single-pilot or pilotless planes. Both companies are relying heavily on artificial intelligence and anticipate initial flights of such aircraft within a decade. Boeing CEO Dave Calhoun has gone further, saying: "We are going to have to ultimately almost -- almost -- make these planes fly on their own."
The automation debate is bound to intensify as next-generation airliners with more capable systems roll off assembly lines. The Pentagon is pioneering the concept of fully autonomous helicopters and fighter jets. Many airliners already preclude pilots from flying too slowly, banking too steeply or raising the plane's nose dangerously high. Other forms of automation step in if an engine fails at takeoff, adjusting thrust on the remaining engine, along with the direction and rate of climb.
Other sensor suites and software upgrades offer the ability to land airliners in virtually zero visibility, with pilots merely monitoring instruments. Instrument landing systems use sensors on aircraft and on the ground to locate runways in all types of weather. But in most cases, those features don't automatically turn on, choose runways by themselves or turn off engines.

Credit: By Andy Pasztor
