U.S. GOVERNMENT
CBP Has New Plan
To Target Fentanyl
As overdose deaths continue at a record pace, U.S. Customs and Border Protection announced a new government-wide strategy on Thursday involving scores of agencies that will target the precursor materials used by traffickers to make fentanyl and other synthetic drugs.
Troy Miller, acting commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, said his agency will work with the postal service and express consignment carriers, air carriers and other logistic companies to share information about suspicious goods, potential transit routes, and other data that can help thwart the supply chain of fentanyl and other illicit synthetic drugs. Legal goods that could be targeted include molds and presses to make pills, as well as chemicals.
The pilot project will be launched in Los Angeles, San Francisco and Portland, Ore., and will leverage partnerships at all levels to combat networks tied to the deadliest overdose crisis in U.S. history.
Legal goods used in the making of fentanyl have been arriving increasingly via air cargo from Asia to airports including Los Angeles International Airport and then driven south into Mexico where cartels produce the drug and send it back to the U.S. to be sold illegally, officials said.
-- Associated Press
---
TEXAS
Appeals Court
Halts Execution
Texas' top criminal appeals court stopped Thursday evening's scheduled execution of an inmate who had been condemned for killing another prisoner in 1997.
William Speer, 49, had been set to receive a lethal injection at the state penitentiary in Huntsville. The victim's sister and religious leaders had recently asked authorities to spare his life.
Speer was convicted of the strangling death of Gary Dickerson at the Telford state prison, located near New Boston in northeast Texas.
His attorneys had asked the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals to stop his execution over allegations that prosecutors at his 2001 trial failed to disclose evidence, presented false testimony and that his trial lawyers failed to present evidence about Speer's troubled childhood. Prosecutors have denied the allegations against them. Less than five hours before his scheduled execution at 6 p.m. CDT, the appeals court granted the request by Speer's attorneys.
At the time of Dickerson's killing, Speer had been serving a life sentence for fatally shooting a friend's father, Jerry Collins, at the man's Houston area home in January 1991. Speer was 16 then.
The parole board on Tuesday voted 7-0 against commuting Speer's death sentence to a lesser penalty.
-- Associated Press
---
OHIO
Norfolk Installs First
Inspection Portal
To help quickly spot safety defects on moving trains, Norfolk Southern said Thursday it has installed the first of more than a dozen of a new generation of automated inspection portals on its tracks in Ohio -- not far from where one of its trains careened off the tracks in February and spilled hazardous chemicals that caught fire.
The new portals, equipped with high-speed cameras, will take hundreds of pictures of every passing locomotive and rail car. The pictures are analyzed by artificial-intelligence software the railroad developed. Unlike previous versions, these new inspection portals will be able to capture all sides of a train that passes through them with well-lit images.
The first of these new portals was recently installed on busy tracks in Leetonia, Ohio, less than 15 miles from where that train derailed in East Palestine in February.
Norfolk Southern and the other major railroads have invested in similar inspection technology for years as they look for ways to supplement -- and sometimes try to replace, where regulators allow it -- the human inspections that the industry has long relied on to keep its trains safe. Rail unions have argued that the new technology shouldn't replace inspections by well-trained carmen.
-- Associated Press
