Microsoft has hired Mustafa Suleyman, a well-known leader and entrepreneur in artificial intelligence, to lead the software giant's efforts on consumer AI products.
Suleyman helped lead Google's DeepMind, a pioneering artificial-intelligence lab that the company acquired in 2014. He left Google and co-founded AI startup Inflection AI, a startup that was last valued at $4 billion and raised funding from investors including Microsoft and Nvidia. In a post on X, Suleyman said he was stepping down from his position at Inflection AI.
Suleyman will be reporting to Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella. He, along with his Inflection co-founder Karen Simonyan, will be leading a new organization Microsoft is forming called Microsoft AI, which will focus on advancing its Copilot integration of AI into its products as well as its other consumer products and research.
In an email to Microsoft employees, Nadella lauded Suleyman's work as an engineer on AI. He also noted that several of Inflection's employees would be joining Microsoft as part of this new division.
The move helps clarify how the company is organizing its AI strategy, which previously sprawled across several divisions. Suleyman will be overseeing AI tools for consumer products like Bing and Windows. Rajesh Jha, who leads its workplace software suite Microsoft 365, will oversee Copilots for that group. Kevin Scott, chief technology officer, will manage AI research and partnership efforts with companies like OpenAI.
Scott has pioneered Microsoft's AI strategy and has been key to its $13 billion investment in OpenAI. Nadella said that in this new structure, he would continue to lean on Scott "to ensure that our AI strategy and initiatives are coherent across the breadth of Microsoft."
The big new hires and creation of a new division come as Microsoft is diversifying its AI bets. After OpenAI's board ousted its CEO, Sam Altman, last year, Nadella intervened to reinstate him. The episode, during which Microsoft's share price swung wildly, highlighted how dependent the company was on the startup and a technology it doesn't own exclusively. This year, Microsoft invested in another AI startup, Mistral AI.
In Nadella's email to employees, he said the company was committed to its relationship with OpenAI.
Inflection has raised more than $1.5 billion in the past two years. One of its co-founders is investor Reid Hoffman, who is also a member of Microsoft's board.
Inflection has built several AI products, including Pi, an AI assistant. As part of the announcement that Suleyman and Simonyan would be leaving for Microsoft, Inflection announced it was pivoting its focus to making its technology available to enterprises and developers.
Credit: By Tom Dotan
