International Business Machines Corp. reported falling quarterly profit and sales, adding to doubts about Chief Executive Ginni Rometty's lengthy effort to reinvent the 106-year-old technology company.
The 4.7% drop in second-quarter revenue, to $19.3 billion, marked the 21st consecutive quarter of declining sales at IBM. Profit margins also narrowed across all business units, including the divisions for its main cloud computing and Watson-artificial intelligence operations -- two areas Ms. Rometty is counting on to propel the company's turnaround. Profit fell 6.9% from a year earlier.
Ms. Rometty highlighted new features and clients for IBM's cloud services, the business of hosting and managing customers' computing operations in its data centers.
"We strengthened our position as the enterprise cloud leader," she said Tuesday. The company said cloud revenue rose 15% from a year earlier to $3.9 billion. But IBM includes in that tally sales from various divisions, and revenue slipped 5% in the technology services and cloud platforms segment.
Earnings results exceeded analysts' expectations.
Still, revenue came in below forecasts, and shares in Big Blue slid more than 3% in after-hours trading Tuesday, extending a roughly 8% drop this year through Tuesday's close. In contrast, the S&P 500 has gained nearly 9% in the same period.
IBM's legacy businesses selling hardware, software, and services for traditional corporate computing facilities have been slowing as companies embrace cloud computing.
Ms. Rometty, who became CEO in January 2012, has placed big bets on markets IBM calls "strategic initiatives" -- including cloud computing as well as artificial intelligence and cybersecurity -- where it believes it can achieve faster growth and higher margins.
The company has struggled to keep those new businesses growing at a pace that outweighs the decline in its old ones.
Martin Schroeter, chief financial officer, said IBM "finished the first half spot-on where we said we would. We positioned ourselves to have the second half that we're confident we'll deliver."

Credit: By Ted Greenwald
