MICHIGAN
Law Sets Mandates
For Clean Energy
Michigan is implementing one of the nation's most ambitious clean-energy mandates, aiming to be carbon-free by 2040 in what is a pivotal test of the Democrats' environmental goals in a state with a longstanding manufacturing legacy.
Michigan will join four other states in requiring utility providers to transition to 100% carbon-free energy generation by 2040 under legislation signed Tuesday by Gov. Gretchen Whitmer. The state has also set a goal for utilities to generate 50% of their energy from renewable sources by 2030, a leap from the current 12%.
The state-level mandates support the Biden administration's goals of a carbon pollution-free electricity sector by 2035 and a net-zero emissions economy by no later than 2050.
Connecticut, New York, Oregon and Minnesota all share Michigan's timeline of being carbon-free by 2040, while Rhode Island has set a goal of using 100% renewable energy by 2033, according to the Clean Energy States Alliance.
-- Associated Press
---
KENTUCKY
State Republican
Chair Leaves Post
Mac Brown is stepping down as chairman of the Kentucky Republican Party after an eight-year tenure highlighted by the GOP's growing dominance but coming just weeks after the party failed to unseat Democratic Gov. Andy Beshear.
Brown's departure from his post at state GOP headquarters was revealed in an email sent Monday night to members of the Republican State Central Committee. He urged party members to "listen to and respect each other."
The GOP lost the top-of-the-ticket race in the Nov. 7 election, when Beshear and his running mate, Democratic Lt. Gov. Jacqueline Coleman, won re-election.
Republicans flexed their muscle by dominating the down-ballot races, winning the other statewide constitutional offices. Republicans hold both of Kentucky's Senate seats and five of six House seats. The GOP overtook Democrats in statewide voter registration last year -- another historic milestone during Brown's tenure.
-- Associated Press
---
MINNESOTA
Mayo Clinic Plans
$5 Billion Expansion
The Mayo Clinic announced a $5 billion expansion plan for its flagship campus Tuesday that includes new buildings designed so they can evolve and expand as patient needs change over the coming decades.
The project is part of a Mayo strategy to transform both patient care and its campus in downtown Rochester, about 80 miles southeast of Minneapolis.
A key to it will be the creation of "neighborhoods" within the new facilities, where patients can go for all the services they need for their particular condition, such as cancer, without needing to be shuttled between various departments. Another component of that strategy will be integrating in-person and virtual visits, and taking advantage of artificial intelligence, including to accelerate the development of new cures.
"This is not about making a nicer facility," said Dr. Gianrico Farrugia, Mayo's CEO. "This is making a place that will give a better outcome."
Mayo is funding the project with its own money, he said.
-- Associated Press
