[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Microsoft will be just fine without Activision Blizzard, though its cloud game ambitions might not be.
The U.K.'s Competition and Markets Authority rejected Microsoft's $75 billion deal to buy Activision on Wednesday.
The agency, which is the country's main antitrust watchdog, ruled the deal would harm the nascent market for cloud-based videogame services by giving the owner of the Xbox platform control over Activision's popular game franchises such as "Call of Duty." In its statement, the CMA said Microsoft "would find it commercially beneficial to make Activision's games exclusive to its own cloud gaming service," thus stifling future competition.
Both companies vowed to appeal the ruling. They could be on solid ground arguing the decision reflects a misunderstanding that Microsoft needs to make Activision's games exclusive to financially benefit from having those games on the cloud. Nevertheless, the decision is a setback to a deal that had been looking more likely lately, following a 15-month slog through the regulatory approval process.
Activision shares slid nearly 12% on Wednesday, even though the company pushed out its first-quarter results a day early showing better-than-expected revenue for the period. Analyst Doug Creutz of TD Cowen said the deal's chances of success "are no more than 10%" in a note to clients Wednesday morning.
Microsoft shares jumped 7.2%, thanks mostly to the surprisingly strong results the company reported the previous evening for its fiscal third quarter. What was expected to be a bleak operating period turned out to be hardly so. Revenue of $52.9 billion was up 7% year over year, which was below the double-digit streak the company maintained for five years before the last quarter, but more than twice the growth rate Wall Street expected. Operating profit beat analysts' estimates by 9%, and Microsoft issued a revenue and operating profit forecast for the June quarter that exceeded projections.
The results showed strength across business lines -- even the sagging market for personal computers. Windows Commercial, which reflects volume licensing for the company's storied operating system, saw revenue jump 14% year over year during the quarter. And the far more crucial cloud business stayed afloat as well, despite persistent signs that large corporate tech buyers are slowing down or "optimizing" their spending on such services. Revenue from the company's Azure public cloud service grew 27% year over year, which was its slowest growth on record but one point better than analysts' projections. Operating earnings for the Intelligent Cloud segment that is Microsoft's largest profit source were 5% above consensus estimates.
Even more notably, the company is seeing some early traction for its high-profile efforts in generative artificial intelligence. It projects that Azure revenue will grow between 26% to 27% from a year earlier in the June quarter, which Chief Financial Officer Amy Hood said includes one point from AI services.
While seemingly small, Mark Moerdler of Bernstein called the contribution from AI "a huge number" considering Microsoft only announced those services recently. "If this trend continues, then AI will be a very large driver of the size of Azure's long-term revenue and will require re-evaluation up of how big Azure could be," Mr. Moerdler wrote Wednesday.
Azure is more than three times the size of Microsoft's gaming business, and doesn't even reflect the full extent of its cloud operations. Still, losing Activision would be a setback to Microsoft's effort to usher the videogame market to a cloud-based business model. Microsoft was best suited for such an endeavor, given its financial heft and the cloud-first business model that reshaped the company.
But cloud gaming needs hit games to succeed and past efforts failed because major independent publishers such as Activision are hesitant to disrupt their existing business models. A streak of scandals at Activision created an opportunity for Microsoft to acquire the high-profile game titles needed to push cloud gaming to the next level. Without "Call of Duty," that job gets much harder.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
