Salesforce.com Inc. said it would embed artificial intelligence technology into its software for salespeople, making it the latest in a gaggle of companies racing to enhance workplace tools with humanlike abilities. The company will demonstrate the new software at its annual user conference next month in San Francisco.
Called Einstein, the new offering is a set of online AI services designed to automate tasks, predict behavior and spotlight relevant information.
Einstein is the latest in a long line of AI products branded with human-sounding names including Alexa from Amazon.com Inc., and Watson from International Business Machines Corp.
Broadly speaking, AI is the ability of computers to execute tasks and solve problems in ways usually ascribed to humans. The group of technologies that go by this name has been credited with improving services such as individualized product recommendation and targeting online ads at particular customers.
The software techniques aren't necessarily new. However, the technology has gained newfound power with the advent of large-scale cloud computing and the accumulation of large bodies of data, such as photos uploaded by users to social networks, which give computers enough material to make useful distinctions between one photo and another.
Much of the recent activity has involved a technique known as deep learning, which enables computers to discern patterns in large sets of data without being told specifically what to look for. Einstein uses a combination of deep learning, predictive analytics, natural-language processing and data discovery, the process of using multiple data sources to uncover hidden trends.
If Salesforce can integrate AI into its applications, the San Francisco, Calif., cloud-software provider may get a jump on competitors, said Tom Austin, vice president at research firm Gartner Inc. "There are no simple, easy applications today to buy that really work," he said.
Beyond offering AI-equipped applications, Salesforce is joining companies such as IBM, Microsoft and Google in making AI services available for other companies to build into their own applications. Prior to their efforts, AI was limited to companies that could afford to hire data scientists and build large computing facilities. Providing access to AI software as a cloud-computing service over the internet lets companies tap the technology with a smaller investment.
Salesforce said Einstein can better predict which customers are likely to buy products, and recommend which consumers a sales person should contact. It analyzes data stored on Salesforce's servers such as customer information, email, and social-media posts to learn how specific consumers are likely to behave.
"We spent about $700 million in the past three years buying the best AI teams and data scientists in the industry," said Alex Dayon, president and chief product officer at Salesforce.
Credit: By Rachael King
