Artificial intelligence and robotics are two of the hottest sectors in tech -- and ETF providers are starting to take notice.
Several firms have introduced AI-focused funds in recent months, including fund giant BlackRock. In June, the company announced the launch of iShares Robotics & Artificial Intelligence (IRBO), an exchange-traded fund offering exposure to global companies involved in different aspects of the technology, featuring names like iRobot Corp., Advanced Micro Devices and 3D Systems Corp.
"We identified robotics and artificial intelligence as an exciting global investment theme," says Daniel Prince, head of iShares product consulting at BlackRock. "There have been many milestones and breakthroughs in robotics, AI and the intersection of the two."
The entry of firms like BlackRock is to be expected in a surging "thematic" area like AI and robotics, says Dave Nadig, managing director of news and analysis site ETF.com. New entrants, he says, are also being attracted by the success of established funds like Robo Global Robotics & Automation Index ETF (ROBO), which has assets of $1.57 billion, and Global X Robotics & Artificial Intelligence ETF (BOTZ), which stands at $1.72 billion.
"That's a big enough pool that the bigger players are inevitably going to want to jump in," he says.
Robo Global CEO Travis Briggs says specialized ETFs like ROBO offer direct exposure to the surging field that is hard to find in broader, tech-focused ETFs, despite the growth of AI and robotics across the tech sector as a whole. For example, ROBO includes access to small and medium-size companies that produce not just robotic arms used for surgery but the companies that make the components that go into them.
But recent times have been tough for the funds. BOTZ has seen returns of minus 16.8% year to date, and ROBO is down by 12.1%. BlackRock's $8.7 million IRBO is down 9.5% since its inception in June.
Mr. Briggs acknowledges that it "seems contradictory that such evolving technologies could be lagging." He attributes it partly to a hangover effect following a particularly buoyant 2017, when ROBO returned about 44%. Additionally, he points to declining demand in China, thanks to a tightening monetary policy and trade tensions with the U.S.
Jay Jacobs, head of research and strategy at Global X, says investor expectations for the area became extremely high in 2017, but earnings of a number of companies missed those expectations earlier this year. But he is bullish, arguing that "long-term growth expectations are completely unchanged."
BlackRock's Mr. Prince notes that in the short term, growth stocks "may be susceptible to volatility, but we launched IRBO to capture the long-term theme of a structural shift in the economy leveraging robotics and AI innovation."
Mr. Nadig cautions, "Anytime you invest in a narrow theme like this, you are in fact a speculator, whether you think of yourself as one or not."
---
Mr. Cowan is a writer in Northern Ireland. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Gerrard Cowan
