WASHINGTON -- President Biden is expected to sign an executive order next week addressing rapid advances in artificial intelligence, laying the groundwork for Washington's embrace of AI as a tool in the national security arsenal while also pressuring companies to develop the technology safely.
The order, which hasn't been finalized and was described by people briefed on its expected contents, is aimed at establishing guideposts for federal agencies' own use of AI, while also leveraging the government's purchasing power to steer companies to what it considers best practices.
The White House began inviting people this week to an event on "safe, secure and trustworthy AI," according to people familiar with the matter. A spokeswoman for the White House declined to comment.
The order comes as the administration seeks to maintain U.S. momentum on orderly development of AI in the face of growing fears over it, including its potential to displace workers or increase national security threats. Many of those worries have come from the tech industry itself, and top executives have urged government regulation.
One person briefed on the order said it is expected to use the National Institute of Standards and Technology to strengthen industry benchmarks around testing and evaluating AI systems. The administration also is expected to use the order to tighten and formalize the government's oversight of AI commitments that major U.S. tech companies made in July, particularly around national security, though some observers question the extent of the government's enforcement powers absent new authority from Congress.
A significant focus of the order will be on development of AI as a national security tool.
The order could include a classified annex that deals with national security uses, some people familiar with the matter said. Some of it could focus on offensive deployment.
A related area of focus for the executive order concerns cybersecurity threats posed by the rise of artificial intelligence, according to current and former U.S. officials familiar with the matter.
AI is expected to become an important resource in identifying vulnerabilities, finding phishing attempts and exploring social media, emails and chats to find threats. It also could be helpful in finding patterns within intelligence reports that humans might miss.
Security researchers and intelligence officials have said that AI can be an instrument to vastly improve cyber defenses for businesses, critical infrastructure, government agencies and individuals. But it also could be weaponized by foreign governments and criminal hackers to write malware, more easily automate intrusion attempts and quickly respond to evolving security defenses. Those scenarios are top areas of concern for senior Biden administration national security officials.
"AI is fundamentally a dual-use technology," Anne Neuberger, the president's deputy national security adviser for cyber and emerging technology, said at a Council for Foreign Relations event this week. "There are specific scenarios I won't go into here that keep me up at night regarding using AI for particularly effective adversary offensive cyber weapons against us. And on the defensive side, AI could potentially solve some of the intractable cybersecurity problems -- like, how do you rapidly detect an anomalous attack?"
---
Deepa Seetharaman contributed to this article.
Credit: By John D. McKinnon, Sabrina Siddiqui and Dustin Volz
