As the great Italian Stallion said sometime around "Rocky 47": "It ain't about making hit products. It's about how hard you can hit a billionaire in the face."
And Twitter owner Elon Musk and Meta Platforms Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg agreed -- at least through social media -- to do just that.
Whether we get a debut of "The Real Cage Fights of Silicon Valley" or not, these titans putting up their dukes is a good metaphor for tech's current rivalries. And these rivalries have gotten more intense after the pandemic, the tech-stock plunge and the arrival of generative artificial intelligence. No more frenemies -- it's enemies all the way.
AI is "making everyone anxious," said Tim Wu, a professor at Columbia University and former special assistant to President Biden for competition and technology policy. "There's a real possibility that a company comes out of nowhere and eats one of these longstanding players alive."
AI will intensify the current competition between tech giants. What does that mean for us? Possibly better tech. Possibly an AI-pocalypse.
Let's call this Big Tech Wars 101, where we fast forward through decades of innovation and strategy to break down the fights:
-- Search: There's Google and there's . . . Google. It holds 93% of the global search-engine market share while Microsoft Bing has long held a Raisinet-size 3%, according to analytics company StatCounter. Microsoft's foray into generative AI with the ChatGPT-powered Bing was meant, at least in part, to restart the search wars. Search is very important to us users because we need answers to burning questions such as "Why don't dogs wear pants?" And it's really important to the tech companies because they can sell ads for doggy pants.
-- Social media: Facebook and Instagram, both owned by Meta. TikTok. Twitter. LinkedIn. Snapchat. They've all figured out ways to keep us scrolling through never-ending feeds of text, photos and videos. It used to be about users seeing each other, but lately it's more about us being fed memes and addictively silly videos. These companies compete for our eyeballs and our time because -- again -- ads.
That's partially what the Musk vs. Zuck fight is all about. Meta is preparing to launch a Twitter rival, an app that integrates with Instagram but focuses on text updates.
-- Platforms: Good old operating systems, the tech battle classic. (See history books for Gates vs. Jobs.) Today, Apple's iOS and Google's Android dominate the fight. The companies want you to buy into their ecosystems of hardware (phones, tablets, computers), software (mail, notes, messaging, etc.) and services (App Stores, music, movies, etc.). They make money on it all.
Microsoft ceded the mobile space, but Windows still competes on laptops and desktops. And rivals including Meta and the parent of TikTok are arming themselves against Apple for the next big platform war: mixed-reality headsets.
-- Cloud computing: We've arrived at the tech equivalent of watching a snail race: enterprise cloud systems. Google Cloud, Microsoft Azure and Amazon AWS are used by companies around the world to power cloud services, including websites and other tools we all use. Largely invisible to us users, these systems basically power the internet.
Just last week Google filed a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission alleging Microsoft uses unfair practices to box out competition in the cloud market. A Microsoft spokesman said the company made changes to address concerns and provide more opportunity for cloud providers.
Now look at that list above. Each of them stands to be pummeled by AI -- starting with search.
I find myself skipping Google and going right to OpenAI's ChatGPT on a daily basis for simple recipes and famous Rocky quotes.
And then there's Microsoft's Bing, a nearly forgotten relic turned fun new toy -- and potential renewed threat to Google. Bing incorporates OpenAI technology through a multibillion-dollar partnership. Famous nice-guy CEOs Satya Nadella (Microsoft) and Sundar Pichai (Google) aren't headed for a real boxing ring, but they're in a figurative one, throwing words instead of punches.
Google rushed to release generative AI products, including its Bard chatbot and a new search experience that's in beta. So far, the winner in that battle is . . . us.
Social media and the platforms are feeling AI's impact. Meta released AI models and research. Microsoft-owned LinkedIn incorporated AI tools for improving posts, and Snap has an OpenAI-powered chatbot in its app. Microsoft started to incorporate AI in Windows, Word, Excel and other products. Google did the same in Docs, Sheets and more. And you can expect Apple will do the same.
The cloud businesses stand to greatly benefit from AI. Amazon, Microsoft and Google put generative AI at the center of their business-to-business sales pitches.
Here's the really exciting part: The companies that dominate our lives in the coming decade might not be any of the traditional big-tech players. Hardly anyone had heard of OpenAI a year ago, now it's a household name.
"It would be nice if, out of this shake-up, we had some new blood," Wu said. That would probably mean fewer cage fights, real or imagined. "Actual entrepreneurs wouldn't have time to do that kind of thing," he said. "They'd be trying to figure out a way to make a better product."
Credit: By Joanna Stern
