Asset managers are rushing to help investors play the new hot corner of the stock market: artificial intelligence.
Investors are piling into shares of graphics chip maker Nvidia, Microsoft, Google parent Alphabet and other stocks that they think stand to benefit from AI technology. That has set up a race among providers of exchange-traded funds to boost their existing offerings or launch new ones.
All 10 funds tracked by ETF.com with artificial intelligence in their names have recorded inflows this year. The funds are small compared with the largest actively managed equity funds in the market, but they are universally gaining traction at the moment.
The latest AI-focused exchange-traded fund, the Roundhill Generative AI & Technology ETF, began trading May 18. Its conception began late last year when Roundhill employees first began playing around with OpenAI's ChatGPT, the generative AI platform that can produce sophisticated text responses to human queries.
"There are plenty of existing ETFs with AI in the name or AI and robotics in the name, but there was not one that was solely focused on the generative AI side and related technologies," said Dave Mazza, chief strategy officer at Roundhill. "We wanted to get that to market quickly."
In the two weeks since launch, assets in the actively managed fund, which goes by the ticker CHAT, have grown to $35 million from under $1 million. That included a net inflow of $13 million on Thursday, according to FactSet.
Nvidia, the highflying chip maker whose technology is integral for generative AI companies, is the fund's largest holding and has helped drive an 8% return for the fund in its first two weeks. Nvidia shares have climbed 24% over the same period and have nearly tripled in 2023.
The largest fund in the AI-theme segment, Global X's Robotics & Artificial Intelligence ETF, has $2.2 billion under management and has taken in about $450 million of new money this year.
Launched in 2016 to track a market-cap-weighted thematic index of companies that are developing robotics and AI, the fund invests in a range of companies in the sector, said Tejas Dessai, a research analyst at Global X ETFs. Nvidia is also its largest holding, with a roughly 12% weight. The fund is up 37% year to date.
"A new generation of investors is out there -- millennials and Gen Z are putting their money into markets -- and they tend to resonate very well with some of these ideas compared to the broader segment of investors," said Dessai.
The interest in AI investing has also increased demand for single-stock ETFs, a product that hit the U.S. market for the first time last year and has largely struggled to gain momentum. Single-stock ETFs allow investors to bet against a stock by shorting it or to amplify their returns using leverage. Before such funds tied to Nvidia gained popularity in recent weeks, those associated with Tesla were the only ones to see much trading activity.
AXS Investments' 1.25x NVDA Bear Daily ETF, which seeks to provide 1.25 times the inverse performance of Nvidia shares, smashed its single-day record for inflows on May 26, taking in a net $52 million. It is the first non-Tesla single-stock ETF with more than $100 million under management. AXS has also filed to launch a bull version of the Nvidia ETF.
In the ETF industry, where many providers often offer similar funds, competition is fierce and the urgency to be first to capitalize on a new trend is prevalent, said Johan Grahn, head of exchange-traded funds at Allianz Investment Management.
"The first mover advantage is important for many of these funds, especially if they're very niche," Grahn said. "You are always going to see a segment of the market that will act on these things -- the latest and greatest and most exciting theme out there."
The interest in AI funds contrasts with the broader equity ETF segment, which has faced a challenging stretch amid the high interest-rate environment.
Technology sector ETFs logged a net $8 billion in inflows in May, while all other segments had a collective $5 billion outflow, according to State Street Global Advisors.
Todd Rosenbluth, head of research at VettaFi, said he thinks AI has more traction than some other trends in the ETF industry, thanks to the involvement of some of the world's biggest tech companies. In a survey conducted by his firm last month, 69% of respondents said they are considering investing in AI, a larger share than any other category.
"AI is top of mind for many investors, and this is a theme that likely has legs," said Rosenbluth. "I think we're going to see more of these products, and this space is going to be more crowded -- in a good way, if you're an investor."
Credit: By Jack Pitcher
