TOKYO -- The founder of SoftBank Group Corp. of Japan now expects to devote much of his attention to companies in Europe and the U.S.
Masayoshi Son said Thursday he expects to split his time equally between working with ARM Holdings PLC, the British chip designer SoftBank agreed to buy for $32 billion earlier this month, and trying to turn around Sprint Corp., the unprofitable U.S. wireless carrier the Japanese company bought in 2013.
"I am convinced in my heart that ARM will become the biggest and most central pillar of SoftBank's business," the billionaire chief executive of the telecommunications and internet group said during an earnings briefing on Thursday.
The comments came as SoftBank posted solid first-quarter earnings. Net profit rose 19% from a year earlier to 254 billion yen ($2.41 billion) for the three months ended in June, while operating profit edged up 0.2% to 319 billion yen. Revenue rose 2.9% to 2.13 trillion yen. The company didn't provide earnings forecasts.
SoftBank struck a deal earlier this month to buy ARM in a bet on demand for internet connectivity in everyday devices such as automobiles and refrigerators. While declining to comment specifically on how the acquisition could create synergies with SoftBank's existing businesses of telecom services and its many investments in internet and technology companies, Mr. Son said he was confident that skeptics would be proven wrong as the market for the so-called Internet of Things expands.
Mr. Son said ARM, which designs microprocessors that power more than 95% of the world's smartphones, would continue to operate independently and keep its own business model, brand and management. Mr. Son said he doesn't plan on sending any SoftBank executives to ARM, which is based in Cambridge, England, but said he would be involved in developing the company's mid-to-long-term strategy. He said he has talked with ARM about increasing market share, investing in research and development and hiring more engineers -- proposals he said were greeted with strong agreement.
The proposed acquisition of ARM was SoftBank's first major deal since former Google executive Nikesh Arora, handpicked by Mr. Son to be his successor, abruptly left the company last month. It also came after SoftBank raised about $17 billion in asset sales, including selling shares in Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Finnish game maker Supercell Oy SoftBank's net interest-bearing debt totaled 8.3 trillion yen ($79 billion) in the first quarter, and some analysts had hoped funds raised by the asset sales would be used to fix the company's balance sheet.
Instead, the cash is going to pay for the purchase of ARM and SoftBank will be taking on even more debt -- about 1 trillion yen in bridge loans -- that will convert into longer-term financing. Mr. Son has said the ARM deal reflects his confidence that Sprint's fortunes were turning around.
SoftBank has been cutting expenses to revive the No. 4 U.S. mobile carrier, and on Monday Sprint reported strong customer additions in the latest quarter, adding 173,000 postpaid net subscribers for a fourth consecutive quarter after several years of losses. Its first-quarter loss, however, widened to $302 million from $20 million a year earlier. The company hasn't reported an annual profit since 2006.
Unlike Sprint, however, ARM is profitable. For 2015, ARM reported revenue of $1.5 billion and profit of GBP 340 million ($450 million), and on Wednesday reported a second-quarter rise in revenue and profit.
ARM has recently devoted more of its resources to designing chips for the Internet of Things, such as lightbulbs that will have small chips in them to store information about energy use and then transmit that data to the internet.
Mr. Son has depicted the acquisition as part of a broader strategy to build artificial-intelligence functions into the kinds of devices that carry ARM-designed chips.
Mr. Son's vision in these areas has already been in motion for several years. In 2014, he introduced a humanlike robot named Pepper that he said could sense human feelings. On Monday, SoftBank said the robot would be available to corporate customers in Taiwan through a subsidiary of Foxconn Technology Group, marking the first time Pepper will be available outside Japan. Foxconn is formally known as Hon Hai Precision Industry Co.
SoftBank also said last week that it would work with Honda Motor Co. to build cars that would learn to perceive drivers' emotions from sensors and cameras, as well as from conversing with the motorists.
Credit: By Alexander Martin
