New York City tech startups are reacting to the workplace upheaval caused by the coronavirus pandemic by subletting their spaces, breaking their leases and negotiating lower rents.
Manhattan office leasing is on track to end the year at the lowest volume of the past 20 years, and tech-firm leasing has also slowed, with real-estate brokerage firm Colliers International estimating that it will total 2.8 million square feet, the slowest activity since 2015. Last year, by contrast, tech companies signed more than 7.5 million square feet of office space in Manhattan.
Officials are counting on this trend turning around and the tech sector helping to propel the city's economic recovery. Keeping startups around is critical to maintaining the tech ecosystem, since small tech companies draw skilled workers to the city and create the innovation that attracts big tech, said Maria Gotsch, chief executive of the business group Partnership for New York City's investment fund.
While the pandemic has caused companies from all industries to rethink the traditional workplace, Ms. Gotsch said in the long run even tech startups will need office space. Workers in their 20s and 30s often rely on the office as a way of meeting people when they move to the city.
"If you are not addressing that desire of that demographic, to give them a place to work, you are potentially impeding your ability to recruit those people," she said.
Seven months of working remotely changed startup founder Rachel Tipograph's perspective on what tech offices will look like in the future. Ms. Tipograph, chief executive of the e-commerce-software company MikMak, doesn't believe five-floor offices with open floor plans and workers clocking in five days a week will survive the coronavirus.
She decided this summer to break the 18-month lease on her SoHo office, even though the company had invested in the space and moved in only 2 1/2 months before the pandemic closed the office. Ms. Tipograph said she is committed to keeping her company in New York City and plans to sign another lease in the future but doesn't think that will be until 2022, or when a vaccine is widely available.
MikMak's next location will be used more as an event space and less as an office. "I'm calling it a hub," she said. "You'll do new employee onboarding, big team meetings, maybe fancy client presentations. But you don't come there 9 to 5 every day to get work done."
Ms. Tipograph told current employees that they could move anywhere in the U.S. and work remotely, permanently, without having their salaries reduced. She believes the move will help her retain and recruit more-diverse talent as big tech companies, such as Microsoft Corp. and Shopify, are signaling that they will allow employees to work remotely post-pandemic.
Corey Capasso, chief executive of Urbint, which uses artificial intelligence to help utilities prevent problems such as gas leaks or power outages and worker injuries, said the company isn't going to renew its lease in NoHo when it expires at the end of the year and he isn't sure if the company will lease office space in the future. Many employees don't feel comfortable going back into the office because of the coronavirus, and the company is productive with everyone working remotely, he said.
Some big tech companies have continued to double down on New York City real estate during the pandemic, including Facebook Inc., which in August signed a 730,000-square-feet lease at the Farley Building on Manhattan's West Side.
Two Trees Management, which houses hundreds of startups across several buildings it owns in the Brooklyn neighborhood of Dumbo, is offering more-flexible terms to retain and attract tenants, said Alyssa Zahler, director of commercial leasing. Two Trees is now open to leases as short as one year or six months for startups, compared with its standard three-year agreements pre-pandemic.
More than 3 million square feet of office space in Manhattan was put up for sublet in the third quarter, nearly half from technology, advertising, media and information companies, according to Colliers.
Spring Health, an employee mental-health-benefits platform, sublet its Gramercy Park office for six months, said Chief Executive April Koh. But the company isn't abandoning New York City real estate. Ms. Koh said she has more than doubled her head count in recent months and plans to rent a bigger space and bring most corporate employees into the office once the coronavirus threat passes.
"I think it's much easier to stay in sync and stay aligned when you're seeing each other every day," Ms. Koh said.
Paperspace, a deep-learning and cloud-computing startup, recently extended its lease with a 70% discount on its monthly rent. It was the first time the company had entered into a lease negotiation with leverage, said Daniel Kobran, chief operating officer.
Mr. Kobran said he doesn't know when the staff will return to the office but that he misses brainstorming with his co-workers, as well as the hackathons, meetups and other events that he said made Brooklyn's tech ecosystem so special.
"I'm still very much bullish on New York in the long term," he said. "Obviously, until the pandemic comes to an end, there's really nothing there for us. But this thing will eventually go away, and we're really eager to get back to the city."

Credit: By Kate King
