WASHINGTON -- The pandemic has deepened global inequality, fueled political polarization in many countries and handed authoritarian regimes a pretext to crack down on domestic political opposition, according to a new U.S. intelligence report that says the virus's impacts could linger for many years.
"The ongoing Covid-19 pandemic marks the most significant, singular global disruption since World War II, with health, economic, political and security implications that will ripple for years to come," says the report by the National Intelligence Council, which charts likely global trends over the next 20 years.
"The response to the pandemic has fueled partisanship and polarization in many countries as groups argue over the best way to respond and seek scapegoats to blame for spreading the virus and for slow responses," while contributing to low levels of trust in political institutions, the report says.
Meanwhile, the pandemic "is slowing and possibly reversing some longstanding trends in human development," such as gains in poverty reduction and gender equality, it says.
The report, Global Trends 2040, envisions a rough ride ahead for the planet, with accelerating contests over resources, governments struggling to meet citizens' aspirations, and increased fragmentation of communities where "people are likely to gravitate to information silos of people who share similar views, reinforcing beliefs and understanding of the truth."
It sees some bright spots. Population growth in Latin America and South Asia could spur economic expansion, the report says, even as China, Japan and South Korea deal with aging populations. The advent of artificial intelligence, by boosting productivity, could help governments deliver more services and tackle rising national debts, it says.
The Global Trends report, issued every four years, isn't meant to predict the future, officials say, but rather sketch out likely scenarios. Its author, the National Intelligence Council, focuses on long-term strategic analysis and reports to Director of National Intelligence Avril Haines.
The Covid-19 pandemic, which has killed nearly three million people world-wide, is just one of numerous global challenges "without a direct human agent or perpetrator" that are likely to become more frequent and intense, said Maria Langan-Riekhof, director of the NIC's Strategic Futures Group. Others include demographic shifts, the impact of climate change, migration, and financial crises.
"During the next 20 years, the physical effects from climate change of higher temperatures, sea level rise, and extreme weather events will impact every country," with the costs falling disproportionately on the developing world, the report says. This will lead to fiercer debates about how to implement greenhouse gas emission cuts, it says.
Economic trends include rising national debts, a more fragmented trading environment, and the rising influence of online marketplaces that will drive globalization and give small firms access to global markets.
Credit: By Warren P. Strobel and Dustin Volz
