The last time the Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed for 13 straight sessions, Paul Volcker was finishing his inflation fight at the Federal Reserve. Today was Jerome Powell's turn.
The blue-chip index on Wednesday notched a 13th consecutive advance for the first time since January 1987, rising as the Fed increased interest rates to a 22-year high.
The Dow wavered between small gains and losses throughout the day, eking out a 0.2% increase after Powell, the current Fed chair, suggested the central bank might consider pausing rate increases at its September meeting. The S&P 500 edged less than 0.1% lower, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite fell 0.1%.
Since the Fed began a series of 10 straight rate increases between March 2022 and this May, stocks tended to fall after Powell emerged from central-bank meetings to explain the group's rationale to the market. Investors seemed less certain after Wednesday's widely telegraphed increase.
While stocks wobbled, bond traders largely yawned. Yields on benchmark 10-year Treasurys slipped to 3.850%, while 2-year Treasurys -- a rough proxy for investors' rate expectations -- ticked down to 4.825%.
Powell hedged his outlook for the September meeting, pointing to the possibility that the lagging effects of tightened lending conditions may slow wage growth or loosen the labor market.
"It is certainly possible that we would raise," said Powell, who has cited Volcker's fight against inflation in the face of darkening economic conditions. "It's also possible that we would hold steady."
Volcker's Fed in the early 1980s boosted the federal-funds rate above 20%, helping lead to a recession that pushed up unemployment and weighed on stock markets. As central bankers have this time pursued a steep, but smaller, set of increases -- the rate on Wednesday was lifted to a range between 5.25% and 5.5% -- the American economy has largely held strong.
That has slowly but surely led a growing cohort of investors to come around to the possibility that the good times in markets might keep rolling.
"Risk appetite is off the charts," said Eddy Vataru, chief investment officer of total return at Osterweis.
The influx of investment in the first half of 2023, fueled by excitement about innovations in artificial intelligence, largely went to large-cap technology stocks. It has more recently broadened to industrial firms, as seen with the Dow's recent run.
Boeing was the blue-chip index's best performer, jumping 8.7%, after it said that customers including Air India, Riya Air and Ryanair booked new orders for jets. 3M gained 2.6%, Home Depot rose 1.4% and Coca-Cola edged 1.3% higher.
Microsoft fell 3.8% after investors focused on falling cloud-computing demand rather than better-than-expected earnings.
So far, second-quarter corporate earnings have largely exceeded Wall Street's projections. About 78% of 152 S&P 500 companies that have reported results that outperformed earnings expectations, according to data firm Refinitiv, up from a 66% clip across average quarters since 1994.
Those earnings beats have ranged from technology companies, such as Google-owner Alphabet, which rose 5.8% today, to energy firms focused on throwing off cash to shareholders in the form of dividends or buybacks.
Many investors are eyeing rising oil prices as another variable in the Fed's inflation calculus. While the Fed doesn't factor energy into its core inflation metrics, crude dictates prices for everything from gasoline and diesel to petrochemicals used in an array of plastic products.
Benchmark U.S. crude on Wednesday ticked 1.1% lower, setting at $78.78. But prices have risen more than 13% over the past month as Russian and Saudi production cuts have taken hold.
Credit: By David Uberti
