If you've ever hiked through the woods with one of those savants who can identify every plant, every tree, every berry, bug and birdsong, you know it can be a revelation. When we're alone in the trees with our ignorance, however, nature remains an inscrutable beauty.
It needn't be. On recent walks through Alabama forests and Brooklyn cemeteries, I experimented with apps that use my smartphone's camera and microphone -- plus cloud-based machine learning technology -- to identify plants and animals around me as quickly as Shazam can recognize a deservedly obscure Adam Ant song.
I now know a nightmarish-looking red mushroom I saw pushing its way through the grass was an "Elegant Stinkhorn." And that the avian chorus crooning at my window each morning and interrupting my sleep isn't just a bunch of stupid birds; it's a bunch of stupid "house sparrows." Here, three free apps to demystify flora, fauna, and fine feathered frenemies.
BirdNET
It's often easier to hear a bird than see it, particularly when the tree canopy is dense with leaves. But if you're curious about what's accompanying your barbecue so melodically, BirdNET lets you record snippets of song and upload them for instant analysis. It can match your recordings with those of the birds in its database -- soon to top 1,000 species. The app displays its findings, its level of certainty and a link to the creature's Wikipedia page. Available for Android
Seek
Able to identify anything from a porcupine to a porcini, Seek analyzes whatever you point your phone's camera at, working its way up the tree of life in real time -- revealing the kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus and finally species. While Seek does its work quickly and with impressive accuracy, always consult a trusted expert before eating anything. You shouldn't bet your life on an app's attempts to discern the difference between a delicious honey mushroom and a deadly galerina. Available for iOS and Android
Merlin
This app offers two avenues for ornithological identification; either snap a photo and submit it, or just answer a few basic questions about the bird in question. What is its coloring? Is it bigger than a raven? Smaller than a goose? The app uses uploaded info along with your location and observations from the eBird community to suggest likely candidates, delivering images of the bird in question, plus relevant info and audio clips of its songs and calls. If your signal is wimpy in the wild, geographic packs covering more than 60 countries and 3,500 species can be easily downloaded. Available for iOS and Android

Credit: By Matthew Kronsberg
