Tesla's profit tumbled 45%, falling for a second straight quarter, as the electric-vehicle leader continues to feel the impact of slower demand and stiffer competition.
The financial results also missed Wall Street expectations on both income and free cash flow, sending the stock down about 8% in after-hours trading.
Profitability took a big hit as a result of lower sales and buyers paying less for Tesla's core models. Chief Executive Elon Musk partly attributed the lackluster performance to a price war that has broken out within the past year as rivals flood the market with their own EV offerings.
"There were quite a few competitor vehicles hitting the market, which haven't done very well, but they have discounted these vehicles very heavily," Musk said on a call with analysts.
One bright spot for Tesla was a record amount of regulatory credit sales to other carmakers that are failing to meet emissions requirements. Revenue from those credits, essentially pure profit, rose to $890 million in the second quarter, accounting for more than half of its operating income.
Musk gave some additional details about Tesla's future vehicle plans, saying that the company would unveil a long-anticipated robotaxi at an event in early October -- two months later than originally planned. He explained the extra time would allow it to improve the robotaxi design, as well as ready some other items to show off during the product reveal.
The Tesla chief also provided an update on the forthcoming affordable model, which he said is on track to start production in the first half of 2025. This spring, he said it could be as soon as late this year.
Asked whether Tesla would sell stripped down versions of its current vehicles to make them less expensive, Musk said he didn't want to hurt demand for Tesla's existing models by elaborating on the company's future plans.
Musk is trying to steer the company through a turbulent period, as he contends with challenges in the core auto business while pressing forward on expensive bets on self-driving cars and artificial intelligence.
Tesla has curtailed some factory production, after ending the first quarter with a relatively high number of unsold vehicles. It has also slashed costs and laid off more than 10% of its global workforce. And still, its net income dropped 45% in the second quarter to $1.5 billion.
While its cash flow turned positive, profitability remains under pressure. Tesla posted a 6.3% operating margin in the second quarter, down from 9.6% a year earlier and below that of many established carmakers.
After years of double-digit sales increases, the EV volume leader has said growth in 2024 would be "notably lower" than in the past, guidance that was reiterated Tuesday. The company is confronting more competition in the U.S. and around the world, particularly in China, where rival BYD is threatening to overtake Tesla as the world's biggest seller of electric models.
The outspoken billionaire has recently inserted himself more directly into the U.S. presidential race, throwing his support behind Donald Trump.
Musk said Tesla would put off a decision on whether to build a plant in Mexico until after the election. "Trump has said he would put heavy tariffs on vehicles produced in Mexico. It doesn't make sense to invest a lot in Mexico if that is going to be the case," Musk said.
Tesla's current travails are mirrored in the broader EV market, particularly in the U.S. Electric-vehicle sales, which surged during the pandemic, have cooled recently as many Americans find them still too expensive to buy and impractical for everyday use.
Generate image description

Credit: By Sean McLain
