Sizmek, an advertising-technology company owned by private-equity firm Vector Capital, agreed to acquire public ad-tech company Rocket Fuel Inc. for $125.5 million, or $2.60 a share, the companies said Tuesday.
Including assumption of debt, the deal values Rocket Fuel at approximately $145 million.
Rocket Fuel shares closed at $2.69 Monday. The deal includes a 30-day "go-shop" period, in which Rocket Fuel will solicit and potentially enter into alternative proposals from third parties.
"The board unanimously approved this transaction and we encourage our stockholders to follow that recommendation and tender their shares," Rocket Fuel CEO Randy Wootton said in an email.
The deal price shows how Rocket Fuel, one of ad tech's high-profile players, has fallen from its lofty position a few years ago. The company's stock traded as high as $66 in its first month as a public company in 2013 and its market valuation peaked at around $2 billion.
Sizmek provides advertising buyers with tools to purchase digital ad space, optimize what their ads look like and manage their data for ad-targeting purposes.
Rocket Fuel also has data-management capabilities and offers a demand-side "predictive marketing" platform that it says uses artificial intelligence to help marketers place their ads efficiently.
The two companies plan to combine their technology and scale in the hope of providing ad buyers with an alternative to Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Facebook Inc., as well as other ad-tech vendors. Together, they will serve more than 20,000 advertisers and 3,600 ad agencies, the companies said.
The acquisition will mark the latest in a wave of consolidation for the ad-tech sector, which has seen private-equity firms and companies in the media, cloud-computing and telecommunications industries swoop in as buyers.
The majority of pure-play ad-tech firms have had a rough ride on the public markets, struggling to convince investors of their long-term potential, largely thanks to the dominance of Google and Facebook in the digital-advertising market. Combined, the two firms collect 77 cents of each new dollar spent on digital advertising in the U.S., according to research firm eMarketer.
Excluding the sector's star performers, Criteo and The Trade Desk, ad-tech stocks were down an average of 7% in the three-month period ended June 6, according to data from investment bank Luma Partners.
But Rocket Fuel's share price began a precipitous decline in 2014. In May of that year, the Financial Times published a report alleging ads Rocket Fuel bought on behalf of its client Mercedes-Benz had been viewed by more bots than humans.
Rocket Fuel denied the allegation, saying only 6% of the ads served were questionable.
The following year, the company announced layoffs and sweeping changes in its top management.
Rocket Fuel's net loss, adjusted for depreciation and amortization, is expected to be between $4 million and $3 million in the second quarter of this year and full-year results "will be below current analysts' estimates," according to Mr. Wootton, who became CEO in November 2015.
Rocket Fuel posted a 1% decline in revenue last year to $456 million in 2016. It narrowed its net losses to $66 million, from $211 million in 2015.

Credit: By Lara O'Reilly
