A long-running rift atop one of the world's largest hedge funds has burst into the open, raising questions about the firm's future.
Over the last 22 years, John Overdeck and David Siegel built Two Sigma Investments into a $60 billion quant-trading behemoth. But behind the scenes, the billionaire co-founders have clashed over the firm's direction, succession planning and more, people familiar with the matter said.
The relationship has deteriorated to the point where Two Sigma felt the need to disclose the friction in a March 31 securities filing. In a little-noticed section on "material risks" related to its investments strategies, the firm warned that Two Sigma's management committee -- which includes only Overdeck and Siegel -- is having difficulty making key decisions, a disclosure that lawyers, investors and others said is virtually unprecedented in the investment world.
Two Sigma, according to the filing, is experiencing "a variety of management and governance challenges," and the management committee has "been unable to reach agreement on a number of topics." These include "defining roles, authorities and responsibilities for a range of C-level officers, including for the various roles of the members of the Management Committee," as well as "organizational design and management structure of various teams" and "succession plans," among other disagreements.
"I've never seen anything like this," said Jamie Nash, a partner at law firm Kleinberg Kaplan who advises hedge funds. "Disagreements among founders aren't uncommon, but I've never heard of a disclosure like this."
The operating agreement the two men drew up decades ago specifies they must agree on most decisions, people familiar with Two Sigma said. So when they disagree, little gets done.
People who work for the two men feel caught in the middle. In early 2022, a group of senior modelers who report to Overdeck threatened to resign if Siegel didn't step back at the firm, according to people familiar with the matter. Siegel called their bluff. The group, which included investment chiefs Alex Ginsburg and Geoffrey Duncombe, ended up staying.
Overdeck is a mathematician who worked for Jeff Bezos in Amazon.com's early days. He and Siegel, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology-educated computer scientist who also worked at Tudor Investments, met while working at quant firm D.E. Shaw Group in the 1990s and went on to found Two Sigma in 2001. Mark Pickard, another co-founder, retired in 2006.
The firm's computers digest torrents of information from earnings reports, weather bulletins and more, and its scientists write trading algorithms to invest based on patterns and signals detected in the data.
Two Sigma has described itself to prospective employees -- often math and engineering Ph.D.s -- as "the best place for nice geeks to work," current and former employees said, a slogan that emphasized the importance of passion and collegiality. The New York firm has expanded into venture, private equity, reinsurance and market-making businesses.
Early on, Overdeck, 53 years old, and Siegel, 61, appeared close, people who know them said. They and their families vacationed together, and the two founders ate lunch together often at Lupe's East L.A. Kitchen, a Mexican spot near their office in Manhattan's SoHo neighborhood.
The executives, who have offices about 30 feet from each other, split their duties. Overdeck has managed the investment researchers, or modelers, usually favoring a hands-off approach. Siegel oversees the firm's engineers and appears at industry conferences, often to speak about artificial intelligence, which he studied decades ago at MIT. Each executive has groups of loyalists.
"It's two tribes," a person close to the firm said.
In a 2015 profile of Two Sigma, Forbes described Overdeck as the "master chef" at Two Sigma, and Siegel as the firm's manager. Soon after, Overdeck brought a chef's hat into a meeting with Siegel, people familiar with the situation said. Siegel was furious about the incident for days, the people said.
The two men also have clashed over succession planning, some of the people said. Siegel has favored a plan to hand control to a chief executive officer, while he and Overdeck would keep their chairmen roles. Overdeck, meanwhile, has wanted to maintain an operating role.
The slated retirement of Chief Operating Officer Jonathan Hitchon, who has played something of a diplomat's role between the men in recent years, was one trigger for Two Sigma's recent disclosure, people familiar with the firm said. Overdeck and Siegel have disagreed about whom to hire as a replacement for Hitchon.
Those discussions have prompted broader conversations -- and disagreements -- between the pair. Together, they control virtually all of the equity in the firm, though Overdeck holds a slightly larger stake.
In recent years, Overdeck and Siegel have rarely appeared together at firm events. They frequently snipe at each other in meetings, attendees said. Decisions get delayed and projects killed because employees assume they won't be able to get both founders to agree, the people said.
One person familiar with Overdeck and Siegel described their relationship as evolving over the years "from irritation to Cold War to hot war."
In the March filing, Two Sigma said that the discord could affect the firm's "ability to retain or attract employees (including very senior employees) and could continue to impact the ability of employees to fully implement key research, engineering, or corporate business initiatives."
Ongoing disputes could affect investors' returns over time, the firm said.
Credit: By Juliet Chung and Gregory Zuckerman
