Walgreens Boots Alliance is on its third chief information officer in a little over a year, a high level of turnover as the drugstore chain looks to technology to boost sales, scale its healthcare segment and transform its retail stores to logistics hubs.
But an internal shake-up within the IT department -- including contractor cuts, disruption in work processes, low morale among employees and the exit of key managers over the past year -- poses a challenge to the department seen as central to the company's strategy, according to interviews with current and former staff.
Additionally, the group could be affected by the company's planned $1 billion in cost cuts and a $600 million reduction in capital spending announced in October, about two weeks before Chief Executive Tim Wentworth took over. Walgreens declined to comment.
The company will require new technology, including artificial intelligence, to execute a turnaround, said Ginger Graham, who briefly served as interim CEO when former CEO Rosalind Brewer stepped down in August, during the company's most recent earnings call in early October.
Graham said Walgreens has introduced a new pharmacy inventory system across its entire chain that already is simplifying workflows. "We're driving supply-chain efficiencies, including using artificial intelligence to more accurately forecast demand," Graham said on the call. She added Walgreens also is working to control inventory, reduce workload, improve customer support and cut all nonessential projects. Graham continues to serve on Walgreens' board as lead independent director.
Walgreens needs a high-functioning technology team for what comes next, including helping the pharmacy giant pivot further into healthcare, streamline its supply chain, tackle the ongoing pharmacist shortage and improve working conditions that have recently resulted in walkouts. Walgreens declined to comment on any changes being made.
The drugstore chain also is contending with legacy systems and technical debt -- a term referring to the future costs of quick-fix solutions -- issues made even more complex by its acquisitions in recent years, said Mohanbir Sawhney, associate dean of digital innovation and professor of marketing at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management.
The new CEO has brought on Neal Sample, who worked with him at pharmacy benefit manager Express Scripts, to be chief information officer and drive the company's digital transformation. Sample, who took over on Nov. 1, brings two decades of leadership experience to the role, having worked most recently as CIO of insurer Northwestern Mutual.
Walgreens, Wentworth and Sample declined to comment beyond the company's statement announcing Sample's appointment.
Sample's predecessor, Hsiao Wang, said his vision was to boost the IT group's ability to develop software. During his tenure, he was able to build out the team's engineering capabilities and set up a new AI lab. Those efforts, however, led to the disruption of some longstanding processes and relationships within the department.
Wang, who joined in September 2022 under Brewer and left a year later, said he wanted to make Walgreens, "the Google of healthcare." He said he directed resources away from roles such as project managers, people managers and enterprise architects and instead focused on hiring engineering and AI talent.
Wang said he created a new screening process for IT roles with the expectation that if a top technology company wouldn't hire a candidate, neither should Walgreens.
Some former workers said they were frustrated because their teams needed other types of roles besides engineers.
"It was definitely a very, very hard, challenging time to be in," said Ekta Anand, a former senior product manager at Walgreens who left at the end of July, about Wang's time in the role.
Tensions rose early this year when hundreds of contractors were asked to pause work. The move resulted in loss of knowledge and set work back by months, said Eugene Shapiro, a consultant who has worked with Walgreens for 11 years. Walgreens declined to comment.
Wang said that while he made progress during his tenure, he also tried to push too much change too fast, which created uncertainty and frustrated workers.
In addition, the IT department was among the teams affected by corporate layoffs in May.
"Changes are not easy," Wang said, "it has been with a lot of valuable lessons for me as well: The bigger the change, the more leaders should lean on internal support."
Much of Walgreens's ability to turn things around will depend in part on the ability of Sample to reshape the IT organization, analysts said.
"The single biggest thing that the new leaders need to think about in the organization is: 'How do I build trust?,'" said Robert Hetu, vice president, analyst for retail at consulting firm Gartner.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
