Chinese government-backed trolls are targeting U.S. voters ahead of the presidential election, assuming fake identities of politically engaged voters on social media to promote divisive narratives around issues including gun control, racial inequality and the Israel-Hamas war, according to new research.
The propaganda push, which researchers attributed to a prolific influence network known as Spamouflage that has been previously linked to the Chinese government, has sought to undermine confidence in U.S. elections, a new report said. The push has been somewhat agnostic on the candidates themselves, targeting Republican Donald Trump and Democrats Kamala Harris and President Biden, before he exited the race.
"One of the world's largest covert online influence operations, an operation run by Chinese state-linked actors, has become more aggressive in its efforts to infiltrate and sway U.S. political conversations ahead of the election," said Jack Stubbs, chief intelligence officer at the research firm Graphika, which published the report Tuesday on Spamouflage's alleged activities.
On one account on TikTok, a persona assuming the identity of a conservative U.S. news outlet called the Harlan Report published videos that collectively accrued millions of views and generally attacked Democrats. While most videos earned only thousands or tens of thousands of plays, others achieved minor liftoff.
The most popular one was posted on July 10, had 1.5 million views and shows a Fox News clip of Biden speaking at a recent NATO summit in Washington. It mischaracterizes his remarks to make him look incoherent. Text overlaying the video reads, "Biden: 'I realized I was *** your wife'?" In the clip, Biden says he realized he was "talking to your wife," but the text implies a naughtier quip.
Reached for comment on TikTok, the account declined to identify itself and said its YouTube and Instagram pages were blocked for supporting Trump. "In your world, I am a clown," the account said, using sometimes broken English. "Sorry, You cannot know my identity, nobody ensure my safety."
TikTok banned Harlan Report after The Wall Street Journal asked about it, and a spokeswoman said the account violated its community guidelines. The Chinese-owned app has policies against covert inauthentic accounts on its platform that mislead audiences.
"We relentlessly pursue and publicly report on the covert influence operations we remove on an ongoing basis," the TikTok spokeswoman said, adding, "We will continue to remove deceptive accounts and harmful misinformation as we protect the integrity of our platform during the U.S. elections."
A spokesman for China's Embassy in Washington said China has "no intention and will not interfere in" the U.S. election. "The so-called report has no factual basis and is full of prejudice and malicious speculation against China," the spokesman, Liu Pengyu, said.
The new findings come amid heightened concerns about foreign influence in the U.S. presidential election. Last month, the Trump campaign disclosed it had been compromised by hackers the U.S. intelligence community concluded were working for Iran, the latest of several signs that Tehran has a deep interest in interfering in the vote.
The new campaign appeared to be most successful on TikTok, although modestly so, and it failed to achieve much traction on X -- where Graphika identified 15 active accounts in the Spamouflage network -- or on Instagram or YouTube, both of which have suspended accounts tied to it.
A recent Journal investigation found TikTok pushing thousands of videos with political lies and hyperbole to its users. One network of anti-Trump videos, generated with the help of artificial intelligence, was traced to a complex web of overseas accounts appearing to operate in China, Nigeria, Iran and Vietnam.
U.S. spy agencies shared earlier this summer their assessment that China wasn't attempting to alter or change the outcome of the presidential race -- in contrast to Russia, which they said is again seeking to undermine Democrats, and Iran, which is striving to keep Trump from re-entering the White House. China, Russia and Iran have all denied U.S. accusations that they are targeting American voters with covert online propaganda campaigns.
Spamouflage has been tracked by Western cyber-threat researchers since at least 2019. Meta Platforms took down thousands of accounts last year linked to Spamouflage.
Credit: By Dustin Volz
