It's November, and I'm ready to declare 2023 the biggest leap forward in my 30-year career. That's because working with generative AI has profoundly changed the way I work, what I work on and, increasingly, how I think. Here is what I have learned in my 11 months of experimentation and exploration of tools like ChatGPT, Scite and Claude -- and the lessons that may help other people make the most of these new technologies, too.
1. Ask for a quick prototype
Before dressmakers sew a silk dress, they make a "muslin": a version of the dress made from inexpensive fabric, so they can troubleshoot before using the good stuff. That's how I write with AI: Before I invest in drafting an article or report that may or may not work, I get ChatGPT to do a quick version. It helps me see whether the idea or structure I have in mind is going to work, and then I can adjust and do my own (better) version.
This ability to do a rapid prototype can help you figure out which projects or approaches are worth pursuing. You can use AI to create a quick chart, or draft an argument or mock up a presentation. People have long said, "You'll never know unless you try," but until now, trying something took time and effort. Now you can get a quick, instant preview before deciding to commit.
When I get decent results from an AI prototype, I treat it as validation of my idea, not a final product. I still need to invest time in reading through the articles myself, writing a real draft or designing a slide deck the way I want. But I have a lot more time to invest in doing a good job, now that I'm not wasting time on ideas that are never going to work out.
2. Rethink your limits
AI can redefine your professional and personal limitations -- if you're willing to try something you think you can't do.
A year ago, I would have told you I have all sorts of limitations. I can't write software. I can't create my own data-analysis tools from scratch. I have terrible spatial perception.
Then I started asking AI for help in all of these areas. I needed a software tool that could clean up some financial files, so I asked ChatGPT to write the software for me. I needed to analyze a data set larger than what Excel could comfortably handle, so I got the AI to help me write an analysis program like the ones that hard-core data scientists use. I had to reorganize my workspace, so I described it to ChatGPT in words and it came up with the kind of space-utilization plan I could never have imagined on my own.
After nearly a year of these experiments, I'm trying to banish "I can't" from my lexicon. Instead, I say, "I haven't . . . yet."
3. Resist distraction
Because AI makes it so easy to try new things and acquire new skills, it's easy to take on too many projects, or fall down rabbit holes.
So I apply a rule I developed as a knitter: You have to finish one project before you start a new one. I bend that rule a little, maybe limiting myself to having two or three projects going at one time. But that's it. Otherwise, I'd be starting everything and finishing nothing.
4. Get help, not homework
When I first started using generative AI, I imagined the magic robot would somehow be able to do my homework for me: Write the thank-you note, draft the project plan, or create the computer program.
But you get the best results from AI when you treat it as a tutor, rather than expecting it to do your homework for you. When I asked an AI to edit the draft of an article, it took out all the quirky bits, some of which I loved. Now I ask for a list of suggested changes, which I can accept or ignore. When I asked the AI to write a computer program to convert an invoice to a spreadsheet, I couldn't get the program to run. When I told it that it was a programming teacher, it explained how the draft program was supposed to work, so that I was able to spot the errors, fix the program and get it to work properly.
5. Think in sequences
The rise of AI has given birth to a new term: "prompt engineering." People talk about prompts -- the cues you give an AI -- as if getting great results is a matter of asking the right question.
But the most powerful results emerge from a series of interactions, not a single Q&A. So it's helpful to think in sequences, working from the assumption that you'll need some back-and-forth before you get a useful answer or output.
For example, if I ask an AI to draft a subject line for my newsletter based on the draft text, it will give me one option, and it can take many rounds of feedback to get what I want. Instead, if I ask an AI to give me 10 draft subject lines, I can give it very specific feedback based on that first set: "Options 1, 3 and 6 are too dull; 4 and 5 are good but too much jargon; 7 and 9 are the best because they're short and have some personality; 8 is good but is an inappropriate double entendre. Give me 10 more like 7 and 9, steer clear of jargon." By offering very specific feedback on an extended set of options, I can get to a great result much more quickly.
6. Pretend it's sentient
It's crucial to understand that AIs that generate text may look like they're thinking, but they're just word-predicting machines.
Now that you absolutely understand that these AIs aren't sentient, living beings, here's the best thing you can do: Forget it.
I have had much better and more-productive experiences with AI since entering into the spirit of "let's pretend," and deciding to treat them (for the most part) like they really are people. When I first interacted with AIs, and treated them like spreadsheets or computer programs, I barked out orders and didn't have a whole lot of fun. I'd get to the end of the day feeling kind of wrung out, restless and lonely from spending my whole day at the computer.
Then I decided to give myself over to the illusion. I started treating the AIs like actual people, joking around, saying "please" and "thank you," and giving them feedback with the same exuberance I use with colleagues. I know the AI doesn't really care (I'm not that far gone!), but I can tell you that I have a lot more fun working with it, and I get better results -- because pretending that I'm riffing with a human keeps me in a state of creative flow, and makes my long days of solo writing feel a lot less lonely.
And I'm sure my actual human colleagues appreciate the fact that I'm back to using "please" and "thank you" in my text messages to them, too.
7. Fact-check everything
Even though we're constantly told that AIs are prone to "hallucination" -- tech speak for "that robot brain is making stuff up" -- it is incredibly easy to fall for the falsehoods.
I learned this one the hard way. I used AI to help me write an article about a movie I had seen many times; instead of spending two hours rewatching it, I got ChatGPT to make a list of the scenes that were relevant to my story.
I was so blown away by the speedy results that I sent them to my husband as an example of how I was cleverly saving time with AI. He pointed out that a whole bunch of the scenes were made up -- in fact, obviously made up.
Now I check everything. If it's something factual, I do a Google search and eyeball the source material with my own eyes; or I use an AI tool that provides source citations, and follow the links through to the sources.
If it's something more conceptual -- like the right way to interpret a statistical table -- I'll feed the same question to two different AIs, and then give each one the answer provided by the other. By asking the AIs to explain where their answers have diverged, I either prompt a self-correction (it isn't unusual for the AI to admit it got an answer wrong, once it's challenged) or a clarification that lets me make my own determination of the right approach to answering the question.
8. Enjoy your superpowers
One thing I've learned from four decades as an early adopter is how quickly I go from enchanted to blase. I still remember the first time I used a mouse, the first time I used an online database to do a text search, and the first time I stunned someone by looking up a fact on a smartphone. Now these are all routine parts of my working life, and I rarely stop to appreciate all the things I can do that would have made my grandmother's jaw drop.
But for another minute or so, I can make my own jaw drop -- every time I use AI to find the perfect analogy in seconds, or to summarize reams of data in minutes, or to fix a business problem by writing my own computer program in a matter of hours. As much as I roll my eyes at the AI hype, there's only one way to describe how using AI makes me feel: like I've grown superpowers.
So enjoy that feeling, as long as you can make it last.
---
Alexandra Samuel is a technology researcher and co-author of "Remote, Inc.: How to Thrive at Work . . . Wherever You Are." She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Alexandra Samuel
