Alt Capital, a venture-capital firm helmed by Jack Altman, is entering a crowded field of accelerators by launching one for business-software startups developing artificial-intelligence technologies.
Jack's brother Sam Altman chief executive of OpenAI, will be one of the speakers and advisers for the program, which will serve about 10 to 15 startups at a time. Other advisers in the San Francisco-based accelerator, called Generate, will include investor Elad Gil and Dylan Field, CEO of Figma, a developer of collaborative software tools.
Jack Altman said Generate will bring on founders of software-application companies with generative AI features. "So you'll have a peer set all in the same AI boat," he said.
One of the perks for participants, as well as other future Alt Capital portfolio companies, will be access to Microsoft's computing infrastructure at no cost. Microsoft will allow Alt portfolio companies to use its graphics processing unit clusters for training and running large language models to create AI features.
Alt joins nine other firms, including Y Combinator, AI Grant and Conviction, whose portfolio companies get such GPU access as part of an initiative Microsoft launched in November.
"We've been at utilization capacity since we launched," said Annie Pearl, corporate vice president of growth and ecosystems at Microsoft, about the GPU access program. On average, each startup uses the cluster for about two weeks, she said.
Microsoft will also supply each Generate company with $350,000 of credits to use for its Azure cloud-computing services, as well as provide networking with customers and other business-related support.
Alt Capital, meanwhile, will invest $250,000 in each startup that would give the firm equity in the startup's next funding round.
Alt Capital's Generate will work with somewhat more mature companies than most accelerators. It targets startups that have raised up to $10 million via seed and Series A rounds before joining.
"The idea here is to work with companies that have customers and are in the early stages of growth," Altman said. "We'd see ourselves as, for example, a complement, to come later, after you went through YC, for example," he said, referring to Y Combinator.
Generate will run over two months out of San Francisco, with the first batch expected to start in late May. Generate plans to help startups meet customers, make hires, raise capital and learn from experienced advisers.
Launching accelerators has become popular among venture firms over the past couple of years, with firms including Andreessen Horowitz, Sequoia Capital and Better Tomorrow Ventures running efforts. Investors often see such programs as a way to develop closer connections with founders at promising startups.
"I hope to make some good investments through it," Altman said. "My hope is that I'll build relationships and invest over time, too."
Altman was previously the co-founder and CEO of Lattice, a maker of human-resources software. He dedicated himself full time to Alt Capital after stepping down from the CEO role at Lattice earlier this year. Alt recently raised a $150 million fund.
He doesn't view Generate as competing with other accelerators. "These programs are in many ways stackable on top of each other. Different programs serve different niches and different moments in a company's life cycle."
Credit: By Yuliya Chernova
