Tim Cook
Apple CEO
1 Infinite Loop
Cupertino, CA 95015
Dear Mr. Cook,
I hope you had a great long weekend. The weather in New York was beautiful.
I'll cut the small talk, though. I want to tell you about something that's been happening on my iPhone.
See, I have this folder called Apple Apps. It used to be full of the undeletable apps I had no use for -- Compass, Tips, Contacts. I mean, does anyone, even at Apple, use Find Friends?
But lately the folder has been growing as I add once-essential apps, including Photos, Music and Mail. Your competitors -- Google, Facebook, Microsoft and others -- have been releasing superior services that have taken their spots. And while Siri is still at thumb's reach, I find myself talking more to Amazon's Alexa these days.
My iPhone is still reaping the benefits of the expanding smart tech universe, but it isn't because of services made in Cupertino. At recent Facebook and Google developer conferences, your competitors demonstrated a future of artificially intelligent software that can take care of things for us -- even on Apple devices.
You may not see this as a problem as long as the millions of iPhone owners use what you put on their plate. And I get that you're focused on the features you think most people want to use. But if Apple can't keep up, the iPhone risks becoming an empty shell for other companies' services.
Why do I care when I already benefit from the other options? Your users expect superior hardware and software integration, with services and apps that compete -- all the while protecting user data, as has been your stated mission. That's what I hope to see at your upcoming developer conference, and here are particular areas where I hope to see it:
Smarter Siri
Five years in, Siri is still great for setting an alarm or making a phone call. But she can't carry on a conversation or execute complex tasks across many apps and services the way her rivals can.
Amazon's Alexa is only in the Echo speaker in my living room, not with me 24/7, yet she's the closest thing I have to a computer-based valet. Alexa is always listening, quicker to respond (even if she doesn't always know the answer as well as Siri) and works with third-party apps.
She can get me an Uber, she can order flowers via 1-800-FLOWERS, she can play Backstreet Boys on Spotify. Plus, unlike the hands-free "Hey Siri" prompt on my iPhone 6s, I don't have to scream her name repeatedly when standing on the other side of the room. Microsoft's Cortana integrated in Windows 10 may not yet work with third-party apps, either, but it's similarly responsive on the Dell XPS 13 from a few feet away.
The upcoming Google Assistant promises to be able to carry on a conversation. Available across apps and in a new Google Home speaker, the nongendered assistant will be able to buy movie tickets and make dinner reservations without you typing or tapping.
Still, that won't beat Google's real competitive advantage: data-driven, predictive suggestions. Siri reminded me that I had to leave for my 3 p.m. flight to Hong Kong on Monday. The Google iPhone app did that, too -- and then piled on loads of helpful information.
What makes Google better at this, of course, is its cloud-based data collection. It has records of what I search for in its search engine or Maps service, and it knows the contents of my email. By crunching all that, Google has a pretty good picture of me.
You, on the other hand, have said Apple doesn't want my data. You do most of the processing on the phone itself, away from the eyes of advertisers or hackers. I applaud and appreciate your assurance of privacy, but I worry you simply can't afford to maintain that mentality when the competition has such a great advantage -- and users haven't shied away from their services.
At what point do you admit you need more user data? Your users trust you, but I don't envy your position.
Smarter Messenger
The most important social network in my life is found inside my Apple Messages app, but Apple is blowing a huge opportunity.
It's not just that you're missing stickers or animated GIFs (but please, can we get those and an easier way to search emojis?). Within Facebook Messenger, you can send money to a friend, order an Uber, even get customer service from airlines like United and Delta. The app is a new portal to the internet.
Facebook, Google and Microsoft are betting big on "bots" -- robots you can have two-way conversations with. I don't entirely buy it, especially since Facebook's implementation is quite bad right now. I don't want to chat with a CNN news bot who spams me with news I don't care about, or a travel-booking bot who asks incessantly about my preferences.
Instead, something like Google's Allo seems far more appealing. In the forthcoming messaging app for iOS and Android, you'll be able to chat with the assistant to have it do things for you, including get the news, travel times -- essentially anything you could search the web for. It can even suggest responses or web searches while you're in conversations with other humans.
The biggest weakness of Messages? Once-a-year updates. Forget the big-feature reveal, just start rolling out improvements the way others do. It also would be great if we had web, Windows and Android apps. This is one of your most important services; treat it that way.
Smarter Photos and Music
Your lack of deep data mining is hurting you in less-obvious places, too. I've replaced your Music and Photos apps with ones that work harder for me behind the scenes.
It wasn't only the original bugs and issues that landed Music in my hidden folder, or the fact that on my Mac, I have to use the awful iTunes software to access it. It was that Apple Music doesn't try hard enough to understand me. Spotify is front and center on my homescreen because every week it creates a tailored playlist just for me based on what I like to listen to. It nails the suggestions and helps me discover new artists.
Apple Music has a fabulous selection of playlists. Yet even though it's meant to be tailored for me, it never feels like it totally gets the real me -- at least not well enough to take me in new, unexpected directions. Plus, Spotify has social integration. I love seeing what my friends are listening to.
Photos has suffered a similar fate. Like Apple Photos, Google Photos lets you search by location or face. But Google trumps Apple with deeper image recognition. Type in "wedding" and "mom" and it brings up all photos I've taken at weddings with my mom. The app's assistant automatically creates GIFs, albums or collages with new photos and old. There's also that free, unlimited storage for lower resolution images, while iCloud costs $3 a month for 200GB.
Whether it's Alexa chiming in when I have to take the chicken out of the oven or Google sensing my plan and providing travel time to the mall, these are glimpses of a future that isn't dominated by little devices we control with taps and clicks.
Five short years from now, what will Apple's role be when the interface is everywhere? Your superior hardware may continue to be at the center of it all, but will you also create the smarts -- inside computers, homes and even cars -- that will power our lives?
Speaking of, feel free to share those car plans with me ASAP.
Sincerely,
Joanna
Credit: By Joanna Stern
