"Charles Dickens's horses used to wander round here," says the British novelist Ian McEwan, gesturing toward the alley outside his window. His London flat sits in a row of converted stables, or mews, a stone's throw from where the great 19th-century novelist wrote "Oliver Twist" and "Nicholas Nickleby" (though Mr. McEwan prefers Anthony Trollope to Dickens and considers George Eliot, the pen name of Mary Ann Evans, the true master of the English novel). In 2008, the Times of London listed Mr. McEwan among the 50 greatest British writers since 1945. He is the author of 17 books, six of which have been nominated for the Man Booker Prize ("Amsterdam" won in 1998); several have been adapted for film, most famously the Oscar-winning "Atonement."
At first glance, Mr. McEwan's new novel, "Machines Like Me," might seem worlds away from Dickens. Set in an alternative-reality version of 1980s London, the book begins as Charlie, a 32-year-old tech enthusiast, buys Adam, an artificial human -- one of the first generation of "Adams" and "Eves" to hit the market. What starts out as an amusing trial of the latest technology takes on darker overtones as Adam falls in love with Charlie's girlfriend, Miranda, and uncovers a criminal secret from her past.
"Machines Like Me" turns out to be knotted with the same kind of moral complexity found in the Victorian classics. It asks not only whether Adam -- a handsome, dark-skinned robot who enjoys composing haikus -- should be considered a conscious being and treated accordingly but also whether he will make the same kinds of bad decisions that humans make, with our cognitive defects. "When we come to build an artificial human," says Mr. McEwan, "we'll be able to fill it with our best side, so it's perfectly possible that we might build beings morally superior to us." In that case, should Charlie let Adam make decisions on his behalf -- even ones he doesn't like? How will our moral universe change when we live among machines?
Scientists like Stephen Hawking have warned that artificial intelligence might spell the end of mankind. Mr. McEwan demurs from such views, however. "I don't think it'll be one thing. I think it'll be a blessing and a curse, rather like the internet." For most of us, he points out, artificial humans may not be such a shock; we're accustomed to meeting people who are cleverer than us. ("Maybe Stephen Hawking never met anyone cleverer than him," he adds impishly, "and that's why he was against it.")
"I'm not cherishing this future, but it does fascinate me morally," says Mr. McEwan. "Novelists will have a field day with it." At its core, as he points out, the novel is a device for investigating human morality. The genre may be a 17th- and 18th-century invention, but Mr. McEwan believes it will be "perfect to help us" navigate moral conundrums in the coming age of artificial intelligence.
"We're already in transition," says Mr. McEwan. We're learning to talk to devices like Alexa: "I say, 'Alexa, play Mozart's G Major Trio.' I don't even say please," he admits, though he is intrigued by parents who teach their children to use good manners in addressing Alexa. Then there are autonomous vehicles, which will make moral decisions for us, like whether to swerve in a collision and risk killing a pedestrian. "One hundred and eighty people died because they were sitting in a brain!" he says, referring to the crash of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302 on March 10. "That's an early, tragic, transitional moment of human-machine interface. We're sort of in the stone age of this."
If it weren't for a trace of horror in his voice, Mr. McEwan's fascination with artificial intelligence might be mistaken for enthusiasm. Science is a recurring subject in his novels. "Enduring Love" features a science writer who diagnoses a mental disorder in his stalker; "Saturday" follows a turbulent day in the life of a neurosurgeon; and "Solar" flashes through the career of a Nobel Prize-winning physicist as he pursues a solution to climate change. Mr. McEwan is thorough in his research. For "Saturday," he shadowed a neurosurgeon, taking notes on surgical procedures. "Solar" was inspired by a hiking expedition along a frozen fjord in the Arctic Ocean with artists and climate scientists.
"Machines Like Me" didn't require any field trips, but Mr. McEwan has been interested in artificial intelligence for many years. He quotes Alan Turing, the pioneering computer scientist who developed the Turing test: "The moment you can't tell the difference between a machine and a conscious being, you must confer humanity on the machine." Turing, who died in 1954 at the age of 41, lives on in the counterfactual world of the novel, ushering in the new age of intelligent machines.
For Mr. McEwan, setting the novel in Thatcher-era Britain was a way to avoid the "vague, predictive air" that often plagues science fiction. Besides, he notes, technological progress depends on an unpredictable combination of historical circumstances, deliberate decisions and talented individuals. If Turing hadn't committed suicide, how differently might machines have progressed? Having changed the history of science, Mr. McEwan also shifts the politics of the 1980s, imagining a world in which Britain loses the Falklands War and decides to exit the European Union. The effect is uncanny -- a parallel history that is not ours and yet one that we may be approaching.
"It's so irresistible," says Mr. McEwan of technology's inexorable pull. "We can't stop it. We'll become suckers for anthropomorphizing a halfway-intelligent machine, as long as it gestures and looks like us." This is Charlie's struggle throughout the novel -- the tension between knowing that Adam is only a cluster of algorithms and feeling obliged to respond to him as though he's real. One version of the Turing test, which plays out in the novel, is whether a machine can fall in love. But the ultimate sign of humanity, says Mr. McEwan, would be if a machine could write a good novel -- not the haikus Adam churns out but an expansive work showing a full understanding of what it means to be human. "That would be a very good test."

Credit: By Elizabeth Winkler
