WASHINGTON -- The White House is preparing to crack down on what it says are improper Chinese trade practices by making it significantly more difficult for Chinese firms to acquire advanced U.S. technology or invest in American companies, individuals involved in the planning said.
The administration plans to release on Thursday a package of proposed punitive measures aimed at China that include tariffs on imports worth at least $30 billion.
But the tariffs won't be imposed immediately. Rather, U.S. industry will be given an opportunity to comment on which products should be subject to the duties. As part of the package, the White House will announce possible investment restrictions by Chinese firms in the U.S. and will direct the Treasury Department to outline rules governing investment from China.
Final details of the plan, including the amount of imports to be hit by tariffs, remain in flux, those involved with the discussions said. While the rough amount and rationale for the tariffs are expected to be disclosed on Thursday, the final decisions will come once U.S. industry has had its say, they said.
A White House spokeswoman declined to comment.
The effort stems from a monthslong investigation by the administration into Chinese intellectual property practices that found the damage to U.S. companies from forced technology transfer is $30 billion annually.
The administration has warned Beijing that it risked tariffs if it didn't significantly liberalize its market and eliminate practices that disadvantage foreign firms.
While the administration's plans to put tariffs on China have received most of the attention, it is considering other significant penalties, especially those aimed at state-owned Chinese firms. It plans to argue that Chinese state-owned firms buy U.S. technology not for commercial purposes, but to apply for military use and otherwise gain an edge in the race for global technological dominance.
The administration believes that Beijing, in requiring U.S. companies to form joint ventures to do business in China, then pressures them to transfer important technology to their Chinese partners. The U.S. also contends Beijing improperly subsidizes Chinese companies looking to overtake U.S. rivals in such advanced technologies as semiconductors, artificial intelligence and robotics.
Chinese officials have said that they are improving their protection of intellectual property and liberalizing their economy. They also complain that the U.S. hasn't given them a specific list of demands that they need to meet to head off tariffs.
The country's responses to challenges from President Donald Trump loomed large as China's leaders closed out an annual political gathering Tuesday.
Premier Li Keqiang, the titular No. 2 leader, struck a conciliatory tone on trade with the U.S. At a news briefing in Beijing's Great Hall of the People, Mr. Li said "there are no winners" in a trade war between the world's two largest economies, and appealed for calm.
People involved in the planning say the Trump administration is looking at making reciprocity the core of U.S. investment relations with China, meaning that the U.S. would impose restrictions on Chinese investment similar to those that U.S. firms face in China. That could mean the U.S. would insist that Chinese firms form joint ventures before doing business in the U.S., unless China dropped those restrictions.
The U.S. has already made it more difficult for Chinese companies to invest in the U.S. by blocking Chinese bids to purchase U.S. semiconductor firms. That is done by an interagency review of foreign acquisitions by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S. Congress is looking to broaden CFIUS reviews of acquisitions so they include joint ventures too.
The expansion would include reviews of technology transfers to foreigners and could apply to joint ventures both outside and within the U.S. But CFIUS looks solely at national security concerns. The administration wants to address economic harm as well, according to these people.
Any imposition of tariffs, without going first to the World Trade Organization, is sure to prompt a chorus of criticism not just from Beijing but from U.S. industry, which has opposed tariffs as counterproductive. The WTO adjudicates trade cases and has the power to authorize tariffs in cases where a losing party doesn't change its practices. The administration is also considering bringing a case against Chinese trade practices that are covered by the WTO.
Oregon Sen. Ron Wyden, the senior Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee, said he opposes the broad imposition of tariffs. "American producers who haven't gotten a fair shake in the past aren't going to get that back by just have tariffs slapped on imports indiscriminately," he said.
Tariffs are bound to cause China to retaliate, said Clement Leung, Hong Kong's representative in the U.S. Chinese officials "cannot show any weakness" at a time when the country's leader, Xi Jinping, has just been confirmed for his second term, Mr. Leung said. Hong Kong, a trading center that operates somewhat independently from the rest of China, would be hurt by limits on trade.
Whatever the political blowback, Harvard law professor Mark Wu, a trade expert, says the White House has authority to impose tariffs under section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974.
"In situations where the U.S. Trade Representative deems unfair trade practices to fall outside the scope of a WTO-covered agreement, then the statute permits the executive branch to take action directly without first seeking recourse through WTO dispute settlement" procedures, he said.
---
William Mauldin contributed to this article.

Credit: By Bob Davis
