TAIWAN SEMICONDUCTOR MANUFACTURING CO.
TSM -8%
Former President Donald Trump took aim at Taiwan's dominance in semiconductors, which weighed on chip stocks Wednesday. In a Bloomberg Businessweek interview published Tuesday, the Republican presidential nominee said Taiwan should pay for U.S. military support and questioned U.S. subsidies for a TSMC factory. He said the country took "about 100% of our chip business." The comments sparked a selloff in shares of Taiwan's TSMC, the biggest contract chip maker in the world. The following day, TSMC raised its sales outlook and posted better-than-expected quarterly profit, as demand for its advanced chips continued to surge amid enthusiasm for artificial intelligence. American depositary shares of TSMC sank 8% Wednesday.
GOLDMAN SACHS
GS +2.6%
Goldman Sachs on Monday posted a 21% increase in investment-banking revenue in the second quarter, joining many of its peers with double-digit gains as dealmaking recovers. Since the firm decided to wind down its consumer-lending business, Goldman has refocused on its Wall Street operations. The bank's overall profit increased 150% from a year ago -- when it took losses from its consumer-lending exit -- to $3.04 billion. Goldman shares advanced 2.6% Monday.
CROWDSTRIKE
CRWD -11%
A massive tech outage swept the globe Friday. A software update from cybersecurity firm CrowdStrike disrupted millions of users of Microsoft Windows devices, with the widespread outages affecting financial firms, media companies, airlines and other businesses globally. In the U.S., many 911 and nonemergency call centers were affected by the outages. CrowdStrike Chief Executive George Kurtz said that a fix had been deployed. CrowdStrike shares declined 11% Friday.
TRUMP MEDIA & TECHNOLOGY
DJT +31%
Donald Trump's social-media company rallied during the first trading session that followed the July 13 assassination attempt on the former president. Trump Media & Technology shares surged roughly 31% Monday. The rally was part of a resurgence of the so-called "Trump trade," affecting assets linked to the former president as investors digest the odds of a Trump victory in the November presidential election.
DOMINO'S PIZZA
DPZ -14%
The world's biggest pizza chain warned that it would open substantially fewer new locations this year than previously anticipated, slashing its forecast for store openings worldwide by up to 25%. The Australia-based master franchisee Domino's Pizza Enterprises said Wednesday it was closing dozens of stores in Japan and France, as it reviews the performance of its entire business. Domino's shares plummeted 14% Thursday, and the stock was the worst performer in the S&P 500.
MACY'S
M -12%
Macy's ended months of discussions with Arkhouse Management and Brigade Capital Management, which had offered to take the company private for about $6.9 billion. Companies like Macy's and Nordstrom have been battling shrinking sales for years. Macy's said the investors' latest proposal "fails to provide compelling value" to its shareholders and distracts management from turning the company around. Macy's shares plummeted 12% Monday.
Generate image description

Credit: By Francesca Fontana
