The entertainment company behind "The Hunger Games" and "Twilight" plans to start using generative artificial intelligence in the creation of its new movies and TV shows, a sign of the emerging technology's advance in Hollywood.
Lions Gate Entertainment has agreed to give Runway, one of several rapidly evolving AI startups, access to its content library in exchange for a new, custom AI model that the studio can use in the editing and production process.
The deal -- the first of its kind for Runway and one that could become a blueprint in the entertainment industry -- comes as creatives, actors and studio executives debate whether to use the new technology and how to protect their copyright material. Advocates say generative AI can enhance creators' work and help a cash-strapped industry save time and money.
Michael Burns, vice chairman of Lionsgate Studio, expects the company to be able to save "millions and millions of dollars" from using the new model. The studio behind the "John Wick" franchise and "Megalopolis" plans to initially use the new AI tool for internal purposes like storyboarding -- laying out a series of graphics to show how a story unfolds -- and eventually creating backgrounds and special effects, like explosions, for the big screen.
"We do a lot of action movies, so we blow a lot of things up and that is one of the things Runway does," Burns said.
Lionsgate, like many Hollywood studios, had been hesitant to engage with generative AI tools given concerns among creators that the technology could replace them. How entertainment companies use generative AI was a major sticking point in negotiations during last year's Screen Actors Guild and Writers Guild of America strikes.
Burns said the studio realized in recent months that if it didn't move quickly, it could fall behind its competitors. Other companies, like Walt Disney and Paramount, have had discussions about teaming up with generative AI providers, The Wall Street Journal reported.
"It went from treading softly to 'Let's get into this people,'" Burns said.
Companies that control creative works, in particular, have grappled with how best to license their intellectual property and ensure they benefit from the arrangement, either financially or operationally.
Runway and other generative AI startups have been sued by groups representing visual artists who allege that the tech companies violated copyrights by using their work to train their AI models. A spokeswoman declined to comment on the pending litigation. The company has filed a motion to dismiss the case.
While many entertainment companies are discussing signing deals with generative AI providers, few have actually allowed these firms to use their film and TV libraries to create proprietary models, said Jeff Katzin, a partner at Bain & Co., which has worked with Lionsgate on its AI strategy.
After the actors' and writers' strikes ended last fall, more studios and production companies started exploring how to use the new tools for marketing and distribution. "Now they are looking at 'How do I maximize the value of the library I have got,'" Katzin said.
Lionsgate and Runway are discussing potentially licensing the generative AI model to other entertainment companies in the future.
Runway's tools aren't yet able to generate video or images for movies or TV, in part because creators don't yet have the ability to precisely direct the cinematography of generated scenes.
Runway is refining the tools it makes available to creators and hopes to give them more granular control over each scene in a movie in the next 12 months, said Cristobal Valenzuela, chief executive of Runway.
For now, Runway's models are likely to save time and money on preproduction work, like storyboarding or showing scenes to audiences of internal executives, said Brianna Domont, who oversees visual effects for Lionsgate's motion picture group.
For example, Lionsgate could use Runway to show what a scene could look like rather than have different executives interpret what it could be. The new Runway tool is expected to become a game-changer for Lionsgate's lower-budget films because it will give them access to the same resources as bigger ticket movies, Domont said.
Credit: By Jessica Toonkel
