Ford Motor Co. has wooed back a senior engineer who had left to develop autonomous vehicles at Uber Technologies Inc., underscoring the auto maker's determination under new leadership to compete with Silicon Valley on new technologies.
Sherif Marakby returns to Ford as vice president responsible for self-driving and electric-car businesses, the auto maker said Thursday as it announced a raft of management changes under new CEO Jim Hackett. Mr. Marakby will oversee companywide profits and losses for those business lines, part of a broader effort by Ford to highlight for investors the earnings potential of the company's emerging technologies.
Mr. Marakby's departure from Ford in 2016 for Uber was seen as a stark example of traditional auto makers losing top talent to Silicon Valley in the race to develop robot cars. The promise of autonomous vehicles, though still unproven, threatens to upend the estimated $2 trillion of annual revenue tied to the automotive industry in the U.S.
With Mr. Markby's return, Mr. Hackett has succeeded at installing a prominent engineer in a key role designed to bridge various departments and execute Ford's vision for self-driving cars.
The 114-year-old auto maker also announced that product and technical chief Raj Nair will take over North American operations, a region responsible for nearly 90% of the company's profits. He succeeds Joe Hinrichs, Ford's new global operations chief. Also, Steven Armstrong, Europe's operating chief, will be elevated to run the region, replacing Jim Farley, who was named global markets president on Monday.
Ford announced earlier this year plans to invest $1 billion in startup Argo AI that was co-founded by Bryan Salesky, a leader in autonomous development from Alphabet Inc. Ford is aiming to put an autonomous vehicle for commercial use on the road in 2021.
"The problem was that there was no one to communicate how Argo could evolve into a revenue stream for Ford," said Dave Sullivan, an analyst for consultancy AutoPacific. "Marakby will have to work on communicating on all of the items Ford has invested in since he was last there in regards to how they can translate into revenue in the future."
Mr. Marakby wasn't available for comment.
Mr. Marakby's tenure at Uber likely educated him on how some of the leading developers of self-driving cars work, and could help him smooth differences between the corporate suite in Dearborn, Mich., and the upstart tech culture at Argo AI.
Peter Rander, Argo's co-founder and chief operating officer, worked at Uber on its self-driving test vehicles. And as Argo has pushed hiring, it has drawn from the ranks of the ride-hailing company, especially its Pittsburgh operations, according to LinkedIn bios.
Mr. Marakby left Uber in April as the company's autonomous-vehicle program was beset by trade-secret allegations from Google parent Alphabet Inc. Uber is contesting the lawsuit, which alleges the company conspired with a former Google engineer, Anthony Levandowski, to steal self-driving-car secrets to jump-start its own efforts. Mr. Levandowski, who hasn't commented about the allegations, has since stepped aside as head of Uber's autonomous-vehicle program, putting its future in doubt.
As Detroit and Silicon Valley race to develop self-driving technology, they are competing fiercely for talent -- especially among the small pool of engineers and programmers with expertise in areas of computer vision and machine learning. "There are more jobs for those people than there are people who can do them," said Max Brown, co-founder of Silicon Beach Talent, a recruiting firm that specializes in automotive-tech hiring.
Sebastian Thrun, the so-called Godfather of Google's self-driving car project, created a stir when last fall he told Recode that the going rate for self-driving talent is $10 million per person.
Among other Ford moves Thursday, longtime marketing executive Peter Fleet will take over Asia-Pacific operations, a vital region including China, from Dave Schoch, who is retiring after 40 years. Purchasing chief Hau Thai-Tang will add global product development to his role, the company said.
The changes highlight how Mr. Hackett, less than a week in the new job, is restructuring the management team to be more agile with him having fewer direct reports than his predecessor. Many of these executives will now report to either Mr. Farley or Mr. Hinrichs.
Credit: By Christina Rogers and Tim Higgins
