HONG KONG -- Ideology is driving China's economic policy to a degree not seen since the country's opening to the West nearly half a century ago, deterring its leaders from taking steps to spur the sputtering economy.
Economists and investors have been calling on Beijing to make bolder efforts to boost output -- especially by promoting consumer spending, if necessary, by offering cash handouts, as the U.S. did during the pandemic.
Accelerating China's transition to a more consumer-led economy -- such as that of the U.S. -- would make growth more sustainable in the long term, economists said.
But top leader Xi Jinping has deep-rooted philosophical objections to Western-style consumption-driven growth, people familiar with decision-making in Beijing said. Xi sees such growth as wasteful and at odds with his goal of making China a world-leading industrial and technological powerhouse, they said.
Xi believes Beijing should stick to fiscal discipline, especially given China's deep debt. That makes stimulus or welfare policies akin to those in the U.S. and Europe less likely, the people said.
Also unlikely are major market-oriented changes, or a dramatic reversal in the multiyear shift toward more centralized control of the economy. Although Beijing has eased off efforts to clamp down on consumer internet firms and other private companies -- a campaign that led to weaker private investment -- it remains skeptical of their unregulated expansion.
Meanwhile, China's economic outlook continues to darken.
Manufacturing activity has contracted, exports have fallen, home prices are weakening and consumer prices have dipped into deflation. Youth unemployment has reached record highs.
Xi signaled Beijing's intent to avoid more Western-style stimulus in a speech published on Aug. 16 by the Communist Party's premier journal, Qiushi. He urged "patience" and the need to avoid following a Western growth model.
Timing of the publication was intentional, according to two of the people familiar with Beijing's decision-making. Xi gave the speech in February, but it was made public only after China released new data showing continued economic weakening.
By publicizing the speech now, the people said, the leadership intended to push back on voices at home and abroad urging Beijing to do more to help the economy, particularly with a fiscal package targeting households rather than government projects.
Another party journal, Study Times, published an article that specifically argued against handing out cash to consumers. "While such measures could work in stimulating consumption to some extent, the cost of doing so is too great and it is absolutely unfeasible in China's case," the publication said.
The State Council Information Office, which handles media inquiries for senior leaders, didn't respond to questions.
Beijing might eventually back more-aggressive stimulus, especially if it risks significantly missing the government's growth target of 5% or so for this year. Some economists note how Beijing initially refused to abandon tough Covid-control measures, only to abruptly change course when costs grew too high.
More likely options now include greater spending on infrastructure and other government-favored projects, as well as further credit loosening following several recent interest-rate cuts economists and people familiar with Beijing's thinking said.
Such moves reflect Beijing's preference for having the government play the central role in goosing growth, either by investing in infrastructure or by channeling funds to selected sectors such as semiconductors and artificial intelligence that can advance Communist Party aims.
The Aug. 16 Study Times article emphasized the benefits of the longstanding investment-led model, saying "investment not only generates immediate demand, but also serves as the true driving force for growth."
But many economists worry more is needed to get China clicking again. Investment in roads, factories and other hard assets to drive growth has been yielding diminishing returns as the government runs out of useful projects to build.
Consumption remains a smaller part of the economy, and could drive years of growth if properly encouraged, economists said.
The longer China waits, the more it risks slipping into prolonged stagnation, some economists warn, potentially turning the country from a reliable source of global growth into a risk to the world economy.
"Investors are waiting for signs that Beijing will adopt significantly more forceful and effective stimulus policies," said Michael Hirson, head of China Research at New York-based consulting firm22V Research. "The latest signals suggest continuation of a conservative approach despite the risks that it is insufficient to address China's current challenges."
Beijing's stimulus options are further constrained by high debt levels, especially among local governments. The people familiar with Beijing's decision-making said Xi and his team believe they must be careful with stimulus so they don't undermine efforts to limit debt and curb speculation, especially in the property sector.
What stimulus Beijing has provided has come in dribs and drabs, and to limited effect. Several interest-rate cuts have failed to expand activities because of tepid demand for credit.
Beijing's reluctance to bet more heavily on consumption goes back years. Chinese officials resist policy changes that would encourage people to save less and spend more, such as expanded health and unemployment benefits. The lack of spending on social welfare runs counter to some stated goals of China's Communist Party, which has staked its legitimacy on delivering continued prosperity.
Chinese households' cash benefits from the social-security system make up 7% of the country's gross domestic product -- about a third of the ratio in the U.S. and the European Union, according to Bert Hofman, head of the National University of Singapore's East Asian Institute.
"In terms of concrete measures aimed at expanding demand, nothing much has been done," said Hofman, the World Bank's former country director for China. "The principal reluctance to do so is ideological, and Xi Jinping has repeatedly said that China should not create a Western-style welfare state."
People familiar with Beijing's thinking said Xi made his feelings on the matter known as far back as 2016. "Our country does not have insufficient demand," Xi said in a speech that year, shortly after launching overhauls meant to expand Chinese industry.
Chinese officials told their counterparts at multinational institutions that the many hardships Xi survived during the Cultural Revolution -- when he lived in a cave and dug ditches -- helped shape his view that austerity breeds prosperity, the people said.
"The message from the Chinese is that Western-style social support would only encourage laziness," one person familiar with the meetings said.
Credit: By Lingling Wei and Stella Yifan Xie
