The head of the country's largest senior-housing owner stepped down unexpectedly last week, the latest setback for an industry that has been among the hardest-hit during the pandemic.
Welltower Inc. Chief Executive Thomas DeRosa, who pioneered changes in senior housing through new uses of technology, said in a statement released by the company that "now is the right time" for a leadership change.
Shankh Mitra, the company's chief investment officer and vice chairman, takes over as CEO of a company that owns about 1,300 senior housing communities. Mr. Mitra, 40 years old, joined the firm in 2016 and was widely viewed as the heir apparent.
Still, the departure of the 62-year-old Mr. DeRosa, who led the company since 2014, puzzled some analysts. Welltower had recently extended his contract until 2023. "The timing was unexpected," said Michael Carroll, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets.
The company declined to provide detail beyond the statement, which included no explanation for the sudden change. Mr. DeRosa didn't respond to requests for comment.
His exit comes as senior housing is under unprecedented pressure from Covid-19. A rise in death rates related to the coronavirus at some facilities has eroded demand. Fearing contagion, the industry has imposed restrictions on tours and family member visits.
Total returns of health care real-estate investment trusts that own senior housing companies are down about 27.5% on average from what they were before the pandemic, according to commercial real estate analytics firm Green Street. The total return for REITs overall is down 17.5%, the firm said.
In recent weeks, the rate of occupancy decline in senior communities has slowed as the spread of the virus has been better contained. Welltower reported that its vacancy rate increased 0.3 percentage point in September, down from 0.6 in August.
But many senior housing complexes are cutting rents to boost occupancy. About half the respondents to a recent industry survey said they were offering new residents rent concessions, up from one-third for the last two weeks in July. The survey of owners and senior executives by the National Investment Center for Seniors Housing & Care was conducted in the last two weeks of September.
The industry turmoil could continue for months. Many would-be residents and family members continue to worry about whether visitation restrictions, which have eased at many communities, might be reimposed.
"One of the things that family members are asking about is whether they will be able to see their loved ones during the holidays," said Lana Peck, a senior principal at NIC.
Mr. DeRosa joined Welltower as a director in 2004. He had a reputation for innovation in the senior housing industry, which was under stress even before the pandemic from an oversupply of units and changing technology that was enabling seniors to age at home.
Welltower divided the U.S. into millions of submarkets and used artificial intelligence to predict future health care demand. The company used this research to invest $18 billion since 2015 in expanding and upgrading its portfolio.
In an effort to make senior housing more affordable, Welltower in February announced a new brand of housing designed for seniors -- with accessible bathrooms and wider stairways and doorways -- with monthly rents in the $1,000 to $1,500 range.
The average senior housing that Welltower offers costs about $6,000 a month and only is affordable to the most affluent tier of the senior population. "That's not acceptable," Mr. DeRosa said at an investor presentation. "Eighty-five percent of seniors live on an income of less than $50,000 per year."

Credit: By Peter Grant
