SEOUL -- Samsung Electronics Co. said Thursday that it would buy U.S. cloud services company Joyent Inc. for an undisclosed sum, underscoring its willingness to snare outside companies as it beefs up the software and services around its core mobile-phone business.
Samsung's acquisition of San Francisco-based Joyent signals the Korean technology giant's burgeoning interest in "big data," part of a broader effort to use powerful remote computers to bolster its data analysis and the computing capabilities of its devices.
Samsung said in a statement it will integrate Joyent into its mobile division,though the 11-year-old company will retain both the Joyent nameand its top management, andoperate at an arm's length from its new parent company.
Joyent, which counts Silicon Valley investor Peter Thiel as an early backer, is Samsung's third major acquisition of a U.S. startup in the past two years. It struck deals to acquire SmartThings, a startup that helps connect home appliances to one another, for about $250 million,and LoopPay, a developer of mobile payment technologies, for about $160 million. LoopPay now forms the basis for Samsung Pay, the Korean company's mobile payment system.
Joyent competes with Amazon.com Inc.'s Amazon Web Services and Microsoft Corp.'s Azure in renting out the use of computer servers and data centers to third-party companies.
While the deal would bring revenue streams from Joyent'soutside clients under Samsung's roof, Samsung didn't make the acquisition to generate sales from web services, said Injong Rhee, chief technology officer of Samsung's mobile division, who oversaw thedeal.
Mr. Rhee said in an interview that Samsung is acquiring Joyent as a growing user of cloud computing services itself, and will effectively become Joyent's largest client. Samsung currently relies heavily on Amazon and Microsoft for cloud services, and adding Joyent would give it another source of processing power, while giving Samsung a direct stake in the field of cloud services, he said.
"We've traditionally been more focused on hardware, but you're going to see more focus on software and services," Mr. Rhee said.
Technologies like virtual reality and artificial intelligence, which require more computational muscle than many smartphones and other mobile devices can handle, are increasingly being powered by remote cloud services, with the handset itself becoming a mere "interface device," Mr. Rhee said.
Samsung's forays into virtual reality include a partnership with Facebook Inc.'s Oculus unit, which uses Samsung smartphones that strap into headsets.
Samsung also sees value in using cloud services to collect and analyze data generated by its devices, which Mr. Rhee said could be used to make personalized recommendations for its users,which would make Samsung's products more attractive to potential consumers.
"Big data is going to be a huge initiative for Samsung," Mr. Rhee said. "Samsung devices will be increasingly intelligent, and big data is really a key component of intelligence and personalization."
Even so, the immediate benefit to Samsung in making the acquisition is to boost device sales, Mr. Rhee said.
He compared the deal to Samsung Pay, which the company rolled out in a sixth country, Singapore,on Thursday as a freeservice, and which it doesn't yet have plans to profit directly from.
Credit: By Jonathan Cheng
