China's Ministry of Commerce said Monday it has filed a complaint against the U.S. at the World Trade Organization in response to new controls from Washington on semiconductor trade with China, describing the action as a response to trade protectionism.
Beijing will use the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism to challenge U.S. export controls on products such as chips to China to defend its rights and interests, its Ministry of Commerce said in a statement posted to its website.
The rules being challenged require U.S. chip makers to obtain a license from the Commerce Department to export certain chips used in advanced artificial-intelligence calculations and supercomputing.
Biden administration officials have said the rules are needed to prevent China from building up its military and developing new, state-of-the-art weaponry.
In its statement, the Chinese Commerce Ministry said that in recent years the U.S. has expanded its concept of national security, abused export-control measures, hindered the normal trade of semiconductors, threatened the stability of the global industrial supply chain, and taken other steps that disrupt the international economy. It said the U.S. actions violate international trade rules and laws, harming global peace and that the U.S. has conflated economic development and trade protectionism with its activity.
The statement urged the U.S. to abandon what it called zero-sum thinking and correct its mistakes in a timely manner and take steps to put trade between the countries on a normal footing and add stability to international supply chains.
A spokesman for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative confirmed the U.S. has received a request for consultations from the People's Republic of China related to certain U.S. actions affecting semiconductors. "As we have already communicated to the PRC, these targeted actions relate to national security, and the WTO is not the appropriate forum to discuss issues related to national security," he said.
The filing of the new complaint follows a ruling by WTO panels last week that the U.S. violated international trade rules with its tariffs on imported steel and aluminum. The U.S. hinted it would appeal the decision.
Credit: By Yuka Hayashi and James T. Areddy
