The tentative labor agreement between Hollywood studios, streamers and writers opens the door for actors to negotiate their own accord and is raising hopes in the industry that film and TV production will resume before long.
After a nearly five-month strike, the writers came away with several hard-fought victories in the three-year deal, including increased royalties, mandatory staffing for television "writing rooms" and protections regarding the use of artificial intelligence, people familiar with the pact said.
WGA's leadership is aiming to vote as soon as Tuesday on a final deal, if language can be settled.
AI has also figured heavily in the negotiations with the Screen Actors Guild, the performers union that has been on strike since mid-July. It marked the first time both unions went on strike since 1960. Their solidarity put acute pressure on studios.
The WGA said it was suspending picketing pending member approval of the agreement, but encouraged members to join SAG protests.
For consumers, progress in labor negotiations is a step toward resuming work on shows whose schedules have been upended by the strikes, from broadcast hits like "Abbott Elementary" to streaming fare like "Severance" and "Stranger Things."
Daytime talk show "The Drew Barrymore Show" is looking to return next month, according to a person familiar with the matter. ABC said Monday that "Dancing With the Stars" would premiere Tuesday night, as scheduled; there were pickets outside a rehearsal for the show this weekend.
While a tentative agreement is good news for Hollywood and consumers, the strike has already done a lot of damage to the industry. Movie studios began delaying major film releases, networks changed fall prime-time lineups, and entertainment companies put talent deals on hold. Some executives began questioning the viability of the 2023-24 television season and planned theatrical releases early next year if the strike dragged on into October.
Jeremy Zimmer, CEO of talent agency UTA, said in a memo to employees, "The impact to our business and throughout our industry has been severe, and the time to recover may be significant. Yet, standing up for fairness is a critical responsibility in a free society."
The labor fights have exposed deep tensions over the industry's dramatic pivot to streaming, fault lines that could remain after the strikes are over. Many writers, producers and actors said entertainment companies have taken a wrecking ball to the traditional business of movies and TV and replaced it with a system that offers less stability and financial security.
Streaming companies will have to balance wage increases for talent with promises to Wall Street that they will keep their overall content costs from growing as they try to improve streaming profitability.
Neither side would address the terms of the accord. The Writers Guild of America said it is still finalizing the memorandum of agreement with the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, a coalition representing movie and TV studios, networks and streamers.
After the WGA leadership votes on a deal, the union will release details on the agreement. Writers have been instructed not to return to work until authorized by the union.
Both sides agreed to terms just after reaching a self-imposed deadline of Sunday evening. The deal comes after five consecutive days of talks that involved Warner Bros. Discovery CEO David Zaslav, Disney CEO Bob Iger, Netflix co-CEO Ted Sarandos and NBCUniversal Studios Group Chairman Donna Langley.
Getting both strikes resolved could salvage at least some of the 2023-24 television season and the summer movie season. Typically in television it takes at least two months of outlining and writing episodes before production starts.
The WGA went on strike May 2, closing writing rooms industrywide. The strike quickly shut down late-night TV shows and stalled work on scripted television shows and films. Members of the union, which represents 11,500 writers, mobilized to form picket lines outside productions with finished scripts to disrupt those shoots.
In a statement Monday, President Biden applauded the deal. "This agreement, including assurances related to artificial intelligence, did not come easily," Mr. Biden, a Democrat, said. "But its formation is a testament to the power of collective bargaining."
The Los Angeles economy has been severely hurt by the strike: A spate of productions ground to a halt, and thousands of other Hollywood workers dependent on the industry for their livelihoods have been sitting on the sidelines. The Milken Institute, a nonprofit think tank, has projected the hit to California's economy to be in the billions of dollars. Other states feeling the pinch from the shutdown include Georgia and New Mexico.
Among the WGA's demands were a minimum number of writers per television show and guaranteed employment for those writers from conception to postproduction. They also wanted additional residuals from streaming programs and more transparency around how streaming shows fared with viewers.
The use of artificial intelligence and the staffing mandates were particularly difficult areas to find common ground.
In recent weeks, the Alliance gave ground on the staffing issues as well as exploring the idea of changing formulas for streaming residuals that would reward success more than the current model.
In a statement, the Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists applauded the tentative pact.
"SAG-AFTRA congratulates the WGA on reaching a tentative agreement with the AMPTP after 146 days of incredible strength, resiliency and solidarity on the picket lines," it said. "While we look forward to reviewing the WGA and AMPTP's tentative agreement, we remain committed to achieving the necessary terms for our members."
While the WGA talks have been the primary focus of the AMPTP, there have been some talks with the actors guild in the hopes of wrapping up a deal as quickly as possible, people close to the Alliance said.
Credit: By Joe Flint
