Amazon.com Inc. is positioning Alexa, its artificial-intelligence assistant, to track consumers' prescriptions and relay personal health information, in a bid to insert the technology into everyday health care.
Seattle-based Amazon says Alexa can transfer sensitive, personal health information using software that meets health-privacy requirements under federal law. Five companies, including insurer Cigna Corp., diabetes-management company Livongo Health Inc. and major hospital systems, said they developed new Alexa features for consumers using the federal protocol. The features let Alexa perform tasks such as scheduling urgent-care appointments, tracking when drugs are shipped, checking health-insurance benefits or reading blood-sugar results.
For developers of digital health services, the move is an avenue to expand the use of voice commands. Smart speakers have proliferated rapidly since their 2014 introduction, with one in five adults reporting they owned at least one in a 2018 national survey by Edison Research and NPR.
But voice technology has been slow to take hold in health care because of patient-privacy concerns. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, known as HIPAA, requires that health-care companies and their contractors, like Alexa, take steps to keep patient information confidential, ensure it can be accessed when needed and prevent tampering. HIPAA violations can expose health-care companies to penalties and criminal charges.
Consumers have been measured in their willingness to use Alexa for all but basic tasks, raising questions about whether the new features will be used widely. Alexa, too, has stumbled publicly on privacy. Last year, it recorded and shared a private conversation after miscues.
With the new health-care features, Amazon will be able to further expand Alexa's offerings as it battles technology giants with competing voice assistants, including Alphabet Inc.'s Google Assistant and Apple Inc.'s Siri. Amazon's smart-speaker market share fell to about 40% last year from 59% the previous year, according to technology-focused, venture-capital firm Loup Ventures.
A spokeswoman for Google said the company's developers aren't allowed to create features that transmit information protected under federal privacy law. Apple declined to comment.
Health-care executives said they see promise in voice commands as an easier alternative in some circumstances to typing or tapping a screen.
"We were waiting for this level of privacy and security to be complete because it's obviously critical," said Richard Roth, head of strategic innovation for Chicago-based CommonSpirit Health, one of the nation's largest hospital systems. The system, which operates 142 hospitals in 21 states, is developing its own Alexa option for appointment scheduling, he said. It wasn't among those unveiled last week.
Still, while health-care companies might be ready to connect with consumers via voice, consumers might not be.
New York hospital system Northwell Health launched a service on Alexa roughly two years ago that searches for wait times at local emergency rooms and doesn't require HIPAA compliance. It isn't used widely, said Emily Kagan, Northwell's vice president of digital and innovation strategy. "It's been tepid," she said of demand.
That hasn't dimmed hopes for the use of voice, she said, and younger adults are far more comfortable with the technology than older generations.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Nurse Alexa Needs an Ethical Foundation" -- WSJ April 20, 2019)

Credit: By Melanie Evans
