Given Britain's dismal economic performance, no one should have been surprised that the ruling Conservatives lost to Labour in a landslide this past summer.
Yet the public's willingness to entrust the economy to Labour might have only been possible thanks to a policy pivot engineered by Keir Starmer when he became leader in 2020. Under predecessor Jeremy Corbyn, the party had moved sharply to the left, embracing nationalization of several industries and vastly increased taxes and spending.
"After we lost the 2019 election very badly, my first task was to change the Labour Party and to turn it into, amongst other things, a pro-business party," Starmer said in an interview in New York last week, where he attended the United Nations General Assembly. "We got the reward of a huge mandate from the voters to bring about the change they desperately want to see."
Whether Starmer succeeds at revitalizing the British economy of course matters hugely to Brits. But there might be lessons for Americans, too, specifically Democrats. Like Labour before Starmer, Democrats in the past four years have drifted leftward, and that could cost them the White House. Polls show voters think Vice President Kamala Harris, now the Democratic nominee for president, is too liberal.
Harris has sought to reset the narrative, describing herself in a speech last week as "pragmatic" and "a capitalist" who believes in an "active partnership between government and the private sector." Yet after hearing from Harris and Starmer in the same week, I am struck more by the differences than similarities.
It starts with economic growth. Starmer calls it his "No. 1 mission." Addressing the Labour Party earlier in the week, he called it "the driving purpose behind everything we do."
This shouldn't seem noteworthy, yet President Biden and Harris don't put much priority on growth, preferring to talk about how income is distributed, between companies and workers, the rich and the middle class, and prosperous and poor communities.
Of course, the differing priorities might reflect the fact Britain has grown a lot less than the U.S., averaging an annual 0.5% since the end of 2019, second-lowest among the seven largest industrial economies and a fraction of the U.S., at 2%.
The root cause is investment, which has been lower in Britain as a share of GDP than in other G-7 countries for years. Starmer's one word explanation for this: instability. Since 2019, Britain has had five prime ministers and seven chancellors of the Exchequer (finance ministers). That of course followed years of tortuous Brexit negotiations.
"I have spent quite a bit of the last two years talking to global investors, just to say, 'Well, look, we've got world-leading universities, we've got high skills, we've got infrastructure, why are you not investing?'" Starmer said. "And their answer to me was, 'Because it's too unstable.'"
Starmer says his parliamentary majority alone provides some stability since "our decisions can be measured in years, not months." The public has turned against Brexit, but Starmer won't relitigate it, instead focusing on improving relations with the European Union. His chancellor, Rachel Reeves, has said her budget due in October will raise some taxes, but the corporate rate will stay at 25%. (Harris wants to raise the U.S. corporate rate, to 28% from 21%).
In pursuit of investment, Starmer is happy to play the pitchman. In the U.S. he met with executives from Blackstone, Carlyle Group, Bank of America, Citigroup, Microsoft, Boeing and Lockheed Martin, among others. His government will host an international investment summit in October and a summit on artificial intelligence in Silicon Valley in November.
Like Biden and Harris, Starmer has embraced industrial policy: the use of government resources to promote favored industries. Labour has set up a National Wealth Fund to invest alongside private investors in "industries of the future" and Great British Energy, a state-owned vehicle to build low-carbon energy projects across the country.
Yet the combined $21 billion earmarked for these funds pales next to what the U.S. has done under Biden: $53 billion for semiconductor fabrication and up to $1 trillion for renewable energy in the Inflation Reduction Act. Harris last week proposed $100 billion in tax credits for advanced manufacturing.
The modest sums are a reflection of Labour's concern about the budget deficit, a concern that Harris and Biden (or GOP nominee Donald Trump) don't seem to share, though the U.S. deficit is actually bigger than Britain's as a share of GDP.
In any case, money isn't the biggest obstacle to British investment; policy uncertainty and planning restrictions are. "Capital is just tied up for far too long here, and people give up and move on," Reeves said last week.
Labour has zeroed in on this, quickly lifting a moratorium on onshore wind and reopening applications to build data centers in the Green Belt surrounding London that local authorities had previously rejected. Starmer will propose a "passporting" system to automatically approve apartment buildings in high-density urban areas.
For now, Labour is saying the right things to revive investment and growth. Whether it works is another question. Business is worried about Labour's moves to increase some regulation, such as on worker conditions. The government plans to nationalize railways and limit new oil and gas exploration in the North Sea. Starmer's majority won't insulate him from blowback to unpopular decisions, such as greenlighting capital projects in places that don't want them.
Starmer insists he's ready for that. "We're going to have to do the tough things. . . . Let's have an honest conversation about the trade-offs."
And even if Starmer ends up governing as Tony Blair did as a "New Labour" centrist, the outside world has changed. Then, Britain could sell its expertise to the world.
Globalization today is in reverse, China and the U.S. are increasingly tilting the playing field in their own favor, and Britain has lost the appeal that had come with being part of the world's second-largest economic bloc. If Trump, whom Starmer met with last week, returns to the White House, he has threatened to impose tariffs on everyone. That would hardly be conducive to the stability Starmer has promised.
Credit: By Greg Ip
