"Alexa, which Echo should I buy? Echo Dot, Echo Spot? Echo Look, Echo Show? Echo Plus? Or just plain, vanilla Echo -- I mean, the new one?"
Alexa doesn't have these answers ("Sorry, I don't know that"), but after testing the new $100 Echo -- herein referred to as "the Echo" -- I have some.
1. The Echo is the smart-speaker sweet spot. It's the one to buy if you're just trying out the idea of living with an always-on microphone. There is nothing quite like the simplicity that started it all. No screens or cameras -- just bark your commands at Alexa, and "she" will talk back.
2. If you're one of the millions of people who bought the original Echo, no need to upgrade. The new Echo is a lot like the old Echo, just prettier, with slightly better mics and sound.
3. Software, not hardware, is the source of speaker smarts. And since that software mostly lives in the cloud, not on the device, we can upgrade speakers less frequently than we upgrade our PCs.
Three years since its debut, the Echo's new hardware may not appear that different, but the world around it is. While some remain cautious about placing always-listening microphones in their homes, many millions of people are now comfortable talking to Amazon's cylindrical computer. They ask it to do everything from warming up the car to planning scuba dives.
This new cylinder, boosted by a lower price and Alexa's evolving smarts, is enough to maintain Amazon's lead.
Best thing about the Echo's hardware? You can change its clothes -- yes, like a Barbie doll. You can choose from six different outfits (sorry, decorative "shells") or order extra ones for $20 to $30. Is your Echo feeling relaxed? Sandstone. Sophisticated? Oak finish, for sure. Of course, Google's Home had similar fashion sense at its debut last year.
There are actual engineering improvements, too. The speaker is about half the size of the original (going from tennis-ball can to Jif jar), yet it's just as loud -- still adequate to fill a kitchen or bedroom. To really hear the difference between the old and new speakers, I had to listen to a few songs side by side. The new Dolby signal processor does deliver a crisper tone.
Now with seven mics, Alexa's ears have gotten better -- but again, not drastically. The new Echo seemed quicker to light up to my voice in quiet environments.
The real reason to buy an Echo has nothing to do with good looks or mics. It's all about invisible Alexa. In the AI-assistant race against Google and Apple, Amazon has kept its early lead in some key areas:
A deep ecosystem. With over 25,000 voice apps, or "skills," and multiple hardware partners integrating Alexa, Amazon's AI platform has become the most advanced voice operating system. Google has made some headway with third-party apps, but Alexa still has the edge with more news, ride-hailing, to-do list and kitchen-friendly apps. Google's Assistant, however, does excel at answering random questions better. Come on, Alexa, you should know wool doesn't go in the dryer.
A smarter smart home. Amazon still has Google beat in smart-home control. Case in point: Alexa devices work with more connected thermostat brands than Google Home does. If you are especially interested in smart home, check out the $150 Echo Plus. It has all of the new Echo's refinements, plus built-in wireless technology for home control without the need for third-party hubs.
A stream of new features. Earlier this month, Echos got the ability to recognize multiple voices; your voice becomes a password. When I want to reorder breath mints, Alexa knows me and doesn't ask for a PIN. Back in May, Amazon turned Alexa into a telephone operator: You can call others with the Alexa app or with an Echo. In June, Alexa got the ability to name different kitchen timers (one for the Brussels sprouts, one for the chicken). Reminder: Google Home has a number of these features as well. And Siri still can't set multiple timers.
If you're looking for a way to experience Alexa, or to bring other Echos into your house, the new Echo is arguably the best way -- at least until December, when the Echo Spot shows up.

Credit: By Joanna Stern
