BERLIN -- Germany is considering scaling back plans to step up government scrutiny of Chinese investments, the latest example of how a country deeply intertwined with -- and increasingly conflicted about -- China is pulling its punches as others get tougher on Beijing.
People familiar with the plan said a decision to defang a planned foreign-investment-screening law had become likelier because of fears it could hurt Berlin's parallel efforts to re-energize Germany's stagnating economy.
The backtracking could raise concerns among Western allies that Beijing is whittling down Western support for increasingly aggressive U.S. and European Union efforts to rein in China's global influence. After hosting German Chancellor Olaf Scholz in Beijing this month, Chinese leader Xi Jinping is preparing to visit France, Hungary and Serbia in May.
The diplomatic rapprochement comes despite mounting alarm in Germany about the extent of Chinese espionage. Last week, German prosecutors detained four alleged spies for China.
"We are seeing a rise in clandestine interference in politics, companies and scientific institutions," Sinan Selen, deputy head of Germany's domestic-intelligence agency, said at a conference on China's growing security threat in Berlin last week. "Companies are no longer just facing industrial espionage from unfair competitors, but the full power of the [Chinese] state."
On Friday, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin pushed back at the spying allegations, calling them baseless. "China firmly rejects the vilification of China and urges Germany to watch out for attempts to damage bilateral relations and restrain such attempts. . .and take concrete actions to keep bilateral relations on a steady and sound course."
After Scholz's election in 2021, Berlin started pushing back against Chinese influence, marking a departure from years of friendly policies under former Chancellor Angela Merkel, who saw China become Germany's largest trading partner.
As part of this pivot, the government tightened export controls for sensitive technologies, capped state guarantees on German foreign investments and exports, and banned a number of Chinese investments on security grounds.
Last summer, the government unveiled Germany's first China strategy document, which called the country a "partner, competitor and systemic rival" and urged Germany to "derisk" by reducing its dependence on the Chinese market and imported components and raw materials.
Around the same time, Berlin started work on a new investment-screening bill.
The plan, described last summer in an economics ministry paper seen by The Wall Street Journal, proposed giving the government new powers to screen foreign investments for security risks and to extend its purview to new types of investments. While China was only obliquely mentioned, officials and analysts said it was the implicit target.
New investment types that could come under scrutiny included greenfield investments -- which go into creating new businesses rather than acquiring existing ones -- in "quantum technology, sophisticated semiconductors, artificial intelligence and critical infrastructure," the paper said.
The ministry also suggested adding a catchall provision allowing the screening of cooperation projects between German research institutions and foreign partners in critical areas.
Now, people familiar with the discussions say that while no final decision was made, both ideas will likely be dropped. Some officials said the government might not draft a new bill but rather amend the broader rules that currently define the government's investment-screening powers.
The officials said this approach would likely still give the government new powers, for example, to scrutinize certain internal corporate restructurings or the transfer of patents to foreign investors.
A German government spokesman declined to comment on the deliberations but said "investment screening is designed to avoid risks to security and public order in Germany. At the same time, it is important to remain open to foreign investments."
A spokesman for the economics ministry, which is shepherding work on the legislation, said that while current screening rules were effective, "recent experience has shown that [they] should be reformed to reflect the changing security situation. . . .This work is currently under way."
Credit: By Bertrand Benoit
