Google's advertising sales growth slowed in the second quarter, putting a damper on parent Alphabet's primary revenue engine as it pours more money into artificial-intelligence investments.
Alphabet reported that its Google division generated $64.6 billion in ad sales from April to June, an increase of 11.1% from a year earlier. That represented a slowdown from the previous quarter, when ad sales rose 13%.
Shares in Alphabet were down 1.4% during after-hours trading after Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat indicated third-quarter operating margins would be crimped by investments in technical infrastructure and the cost of launching new hardware products, such as the Pixel phone.
Google has sunk resources into AI since the late 2022 release of ChatGPT kicked off an arms race among tech companies to build powerful cloud-computing infrastructure.
Alphabet's capital expenditures were $13.2 billion in the second quarter, up 91.4% from the same period last year. Porat said the company expects to spend at least $12 billion a quarter on capital expenditures through the end of this year.
"When you go through a curve like this, the risk of underinvesting is dramatically greater than the risk of overinvesting," Chief Executive Sundar Pichai said on a call with analysts.
Total revenues rose 13.5% to $84.7 billion, a slowdown from the first quarter growth rate. Alphabet reported $23.6 billion of net income in the second quarter, an increase of 28.6% from a year earlier. Wall Street analysts expected Alphabet to report revenue of $84.2 billion and net income of $22.9 billion.
The Wall Street Journal reported Monday that Google's talks to buy cybersecurity startup Wiz for roughly $23 billion had fallen apart. The acquisition would have been Google's largest by a wide margin and provided a boost to its efforts to catch up to Amazon and Microsoft in cloud services.
On a call with reporters, Porat declined to comment on why the talks fell apart. She said Google had strong opportunities to organically grow the cloud business.
Growth in Google's cloud business, the potential beneficiary of the canceled Wiz deal, sped up slightly in the second quarter, coming in at 28.9%. The unit recorded $10.3 billion of sales in the most recent quarter.
Google's YouTube reported a slowdown in growth. YouTube made $8.7 billion from ad sales in the most recent quarter, a rise of 13% from a year earlier.
Porat said Alphabet made a new $5 billion multiyear investment in Waymo. She said the funding was consistent with Alphabet's past investments in the self-driving car unit. Alphabet also said it would pay a dividend of 20 cents per share in September. It did the same last quarter, in its first ever cash dividend.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
