Mark Mitchell spent more than $100,000 to make his family's home in California's Santa Cruz Mountains more resilient to wildfires after it suffered damage when a nearby redwood growth burned in 2020. Despite his efforts, he couldn't find an insurer that would cover the home for more than two years.
That is until Friday, when Mitchell signed a contract with Stand Insurance.
"They are the only company that has been able to figure out how much we've done to protect our house and that it's a reasonable risk to insure," he said.
Stand is a new insurance startup that seeks to cover homes in areas other insurers are abandoning because of risks from natural disasters like wildfires and floods. The company says its simulation software allows it to better predict risk and identify improvements homeowners should make to increase resiliency.
Mitchell's home is the first policy written by Stand, according to Dan Preston, the company's co-founder and chief executive. Preston previously led auto-insurance provider MetroMile, now part of publicly traded Lemonade.
Although venture funding for insurance startups has dwindled, Stand has raised $30 million in Series A financing led by Lowercarbon Capital and Inspired Capital, with participation by Equal Ventures and Convective Capital.
The financing valued Stand at $95 million, Preston said.
Stand uses software to simulate the physical effects of a wildfire on a home and to identify changes a homeowner should make to decrease risks. The goal is to find targeted alterations that don't, for example, turn a home into a bunker or require clearing all trees on a property, Preston said.
"Traditional ways to price insurance don't work in an environment that's so unpredictable," he said, referring to climate risks.
Coverage for a $3 million home in a high wildfire risk region could cost $12,000 to $15,000 in annual premiums with Stand, Preston said.
Mitchell said he is paying significantly more for insurance with Stand than he did before the 2020 fire. "For us, it's much better to have expensive insurance than no insurance," he said. "It's peace of mind."
Mitchell's previous insurer paid more than $1 million in claims for repairs from the wildfire damage before dropping coverage, he said. Mitchell then invested in an advanced sprinkler system, cut down vegetation and made other improvements.
Preston said he expects Stand to insure hundreds of homes worth more than $2 billion over the next year in wildfire risk zones in California.
Stand is focusing on homes valued at $2 million to $10 million.
Almost 1.3 million homes in California are at moderate to very high wildfire risk, according to data provider CoreLogic.
Stand is structured as a managing general agent, a type of insurance broker that can underwrite, price and take on risk. It works with Concert Group, an insurance carrier backed by highly rated reinsurers, Preston said.
Stand plans to expand to other states and other types of catastrophe insurance, such as wind and convective storms and floods, Preston said.
Natural disasters have contributed to poor performance in the U.S. property and casualty industry. Insured property losses from natural catastrophes totaled $78.8 billion in 2023, compared with $109.6 billion the previous year, according to Insurance Information Institute.
Insurers have been trying to change how they assess natural-disaster risk with varying success. Startups have been introducing technology, including geospatial analytics and artificial intelligence, to help make better predictions.
Funding for insurance technology startups in the U.S. totaled $3.8 billion in the first three quarters of this year, compared with $5.8 billion in all of 2023, which was the lowest annual total since 2018, according to research provider PitchBook Data.
Equal Ventures has been looking for years for a startup that could help address risk from climate change in insurance, said Rick Zullo, co-founder and managing partner.
"There is a $100 billion opportunity for whoever figures this out and we are confident that if anyone can, it's this team" at Stand, Zullo said.
Credit: By Yuliya Chernova
