[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Investors have been hungry for anything related to artificial intelligence. A storied PC maker from Texas wouldn't seem to fit on top of the menu.
That's been changing over the past year, as Dell has been reporting strong orders of servers designed to power generative-AI workloads -- many of which use chips supplied by AI kingmaker Nvidia.
That first became apparent six months ago, when Dell reported a strong jump in AI-server orders during its fiscal second-quarter report. That report took the stock up 21% the following day. The company's fiscal fourth-quarter results late Thursday furthered that story.
Dell noted that its backlog of AI-server orders nearly doubled in just three months, to $2.9 billion. That sets a trend line that Bernstein analyst Toni Sacconaghi estimates could lead to AI-server revenue of $6 billion in the new fiscal year, compared with about $1.5 billion in the recently ended year. Dell's stock shot up nearly 32% on Friday.
That was the stock's largest single-day gain since Dell re-emerged as a public company in late 2018. It's also a record high for the stock, which has more than doubled in value over the past 12 months. That puts Dell into the same performance tier as chip makers such as Broadcom and Advanced Micro Devices, which also sell AI chips and have been driven by the AI hype sparked last year by Nvidia's blowout performance.
Dell is a lot cheaper than those AI-chip plays, with its stock now trading a little over 16 times forward earnings compared with the range of 30 to 54 times sported by AMD, Broadcom and Nvidia. David Vogt of UBS argued in a report Friday that Dell's AI-server strength "supports a more robust valuation multiple."
But the company is also now carrying a strong premium to other PC and enterprise-hardware names like HP and Hewlett Packard Enterprise -- both of which trade around eight times forward earnings. Dell still draws a majority of its revenue from PCs and other corporate hardware segments that currently offer far less impressive growth prospects.
"We are a touch nervous that the AI build could notably slow over the next 2-6 quarters, and lead to a contraction in valuation of AI names and the broader tech space," Sacconaghi wrote in his note to clients Friday, while adding "but for now, investors are likely to be well served to ride the wave."
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
