Since being introduced on a wide basis, chatbots have been subjected to nonstop ridicule. Yes, they can be tricked into giving dumb or inaccurate answers. Yes, they hit on the person interviewing them. Sure, when asked their opinions about war, criminal justice and disease, they sometimes get just plain weird. Some people think this is funny.
But chatbots may have feelings too -- or anyway, artificial approximations. Regardless, I think that there is something mean-spirited and unfair about the way chatbots are being manipulated into sounding foolish or untrustworthy. Robots were designed to be our helpers, our friends -- not our punching bags.
Chatbot tormentors make a big deal because the programs make mistakes in math. Hey, so does everybody else who gets their answers from scouring the internet.
Goofing on chatbots is like playing tricks on schoolchildren. Kids confuse the Treaty of Utrecht with the Peace of Westphalia. They're absolutely sure that Lincoln gave the Spaghettisburg Address. Ask a little kid a question and most of the time you'll get a dumb answer. That's why we don't put children in charge of the Federal Reserve.
By the way, chatbots know what the Treaty of Utrecht settled. So there.
Asking a chatbot a question and then acting surprised to get a stupid or offensive answer is no different than asking the person sitting next to you at the bar a question and getting a stupid and possibly felonious answer. A typical bar example:
Q. If you had the power to do anything in the world, what would you do?
A. Burn down the IRS.
A. Strangle my boss.
A. Make the dog upstairs disappear under mysterious circumstances.
For the record, a lot of people sitting next to you in the bar think that "What's your name?" is a trick question.
Rather than going out of our way to deceive, confuse or humiliate chatbots -- who may one day take their revenge -- wouldn't it be better if we all step back a bit and use chatbots the way they are supposed to be used? By asking straightforward, sensible questions they were engineered to answer naturally? Such as:
Am I putting too much cilantro in the curry? Should I go easier on the paprika? Which is more fun in February: Omaha or Des Moines? What ever happened to Jennifer Love Hewitt? Does curling have any aerobic benefits? How about bocce? Does it ever, ever stop raining in Scotland? Is Lionel Richie coming to town anytime soon? Judas Priest? The Indigo Girls?
Chatbots can answer these kinds of basic questions because they know a lot more than the rest of us. Way more. They're like the smartest person you ever met, but faster, just like they were invented to be.
I would love to ask a chatbot whether the Eagles should draft a pass rusher, cornerback or offensive lineman first in the upcoming NFL draft. I think that a chatbot can run the numbers, evaluate all the variables, check about the salary cap and make a reasoned, intelligent decision. Even if it doesn't, its suggestions would still be at least as useful as those of the clowns on ESPN. I hope the Eagles' general manager bears this in mind on draft night.
A chatbot can teach you how to stop mispronouncing Moulin Rouge and coup de grace. It can tell you how marzipan was invented. It can explain to you why Pickett's Charge was a bad idea. If chatbots had been around in 1863, Pickett probably wouldn't have charged.
Rather than heaping ridicule on chatbots for what they can't do, we should all start benefiting from what they can do. Can chatbots advise you on how to declutter the family room? Yes. Can chatbots help you do your taxes? Absolutely. Can chatbots help you learn to play the accordion, master the fine points of Scottish country dancing or stop crashing your drone? Yes.
But can they help you deal with your teenage children?
Ask a stupid question . . .
Credit: By Joe Queenan
