There may be a song in our hearts and music we feel in our bones.
In fact, the tunes are at the cellular level.
Scientists are translating genes into melodies, by creating a musical scale based on the amino acids of proteins generated by DNA. Even a lethal virus has provided scientists something to hum.
Bioengineer Markus Buehler at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology recently turned the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus into music, playing the molecular code of the spike protein that makes it so contagious. (It allows the virus to penetrate healthy cells.)
Variations in protein structures usually are too small to be seen, but they can be heard, he says. The music of the coronavirus is an eerie yet oddly soothing medley of plucked strings, resonant reeds and harmonizing horns. "I'm hypnotised" one online listener posted. It's "a little like Zappa," posted another.
By listening, and straddling the boundary between science and art, scientists hope to hear a clue to the coronavirus's virulence -- and perhaps detecta way to make it harmless.
Dr. Buehler and his colleagues devised the musical scale based on proteins, the building blocks of all living things. The music arises from the interplay of each protein's amino acid sequence, its curling corkscrew structure and intricate folds -- the elements of which have variously been assigned pitch, volume, tempo and rhythm.
In this sense, the protein is like an old-fashioned piano roll punch-coded for a player piano.
In the coronavirus's spike protein, "the structural complexity translates into musical complexity," Dr. Buehler says. "There are many, many melodies layered into each other. It has a balance of order and disorder."
It isn't the first scientific foray into the music of molecular biology. It joins a DNA playlist that includes genetic fugues from nitrogen-fixing bacteria, rondos from yeast cells and arpeggios of DNA from the eye of the squid.
From the moment that scientists first started to document the sequence of naturally occurring alphabetic DNA code in single-celled organisms in the 1970s, researchers have been captivated by the parallels between genetic chemistry and conventional musical notation. Any gene can be expressed as a sequence of the four letters A, C, G and T -- shorthand for the molecules that make up the spiral strands of DNA -- while the protein code produced by DNA contains 20 characters representing the 20 amino acids from which so many materials are made.
David Deamer, a research professor of biomolecular engineering at University of California, Santa Cruz who studies the origins of life, was among the first in the 1980s to recognize that base sequences in DNA could be translated into musical patterns. "I noticed that three of the four bases of DNA were musical notes," he says.
He soon discovered that a short stretch of human DNA called the Alu element, a DNA sequence that turns up almost a million times in the human genome, seemed to repeat itself in waltz time. He was inspired. In collaboration with a music theorist, he worked out a microtonal musical scale based on the natural infrared light frequencies of the four DNA base chemicals. Together, they composed a suite of DNA music that could be programmed and played on a Yamaha synthesizer.
Ross King, a professor of machine intelligence at Sweden's Chalmers University of Technology, considers music and genetics a natural pairing. He wrote an algorithm for converting protein-coding sequences into music.
In the 1990s, Dr. King worked with a friend who played in a popular British electronica band called The Shamen to turn the structure of the serotonin receptor, which affects moods and emotions, into a song. The band released it as a track on an album that sold around 100,000 copies world-wide, he says.
Dr. Buehler and his colleagues at MIT are not only translating existing proteins into sound, they are also trying to use melodies to design new proteins to make new materials or useful drugs.
His system employs a scale of 20 unique tones based on the molecular vibrations of each amino acid, more like chords than classical Western musical notes, programmed into a synthesizer.
"You can figure out the melodic and rhythmic patterns that make the perfect protein," he says. "You can edit the sound and change the sound and translate that back into a protein new to nature."
He is developing an artificial intelligence system to convert the sounds into novel proteins.
He plays the coronavirus spike protein with an ensemble of harps and clarinets, accompanied by an oboe, flute, trumpet, fluegelhorn and a 13-stringed Japanese instrument called the koto.
The protein, though, dictates how long its music lasts, he says. The coronavirus spike protein takes an hour and 50 minutes to play because its structure is unusually complex.
The music generated by the coronavirus protein, which he posted on SoundCloud,is a "pleasing relaxing sound," he says. "Of course, the intricate protein principles at the basis of the virus do not all convey the deadly impacts this particular virus is having on the world."
File it under uneasy listening.

Credit: By Robert Lee Hotz
