SINGAPORE -- China's top nuclear-weapons research institute has bought sophisticated U.S. computer chips at least a dozen times in the past 2 1/2 years, circumventing decades-old U.S. export restrictions meant to curb such sales.
A Wall Street Journal review of procurement documents found that the state-run China Academy of Engineering Physics has managed to obtain the semiconductors made by U.S. companies such as Intel Corp. and Nvidia Corp. since 2020 despite its placement on a U.S. export blacklist in 1997.
The chips, which are widely used in data centers and personal computers, were acquired from resellers in China. Some were procured as components for computing systems, with many bought by the institute's laboratory studying computational fluid dynamics, a broad scientific field that includes the modeling of nuclear explosions.
Such purchases defy longstanding restrictions imposed by the U.S. that aim to prevent the use of any U.S. products for atomic-weapons research by foreign powers. The academy, known as CAEP, was one of the first Chinese institutions put on the U.S. blacklist, known as the entity list, because of its nuclear work.
A Journal review of research papers published by CAEP found that at least 34 over the past decade referenced using U.S. semiconductors in the research. They were used in a range of ways, including analyzing data and generating algorithms. Nuclear experts said that in at least seven of them, the research can have applications to maintaining nuclear stockpiles. CAEP didn't respond to requests for comment.
The findings underline the challenge facing the Biden administration as it seeks to more aggressively counter the use of U.S. technology by China's military.
In October, the U.S. expanded the scope of export regulations to prevent China from obtaining the most advanced U.S. chips and chip-manufacturing tools that power artificial intelligence and supercomputers, which are increasingly important to modern warfare.
Most of the chips procured by the academy ranged in size from 7 nanometers to 14 nanometers, many of which are difficult for China to mass-produce. They are widely available on the open market: Versions of Intel's Xeon Gold and Nvidia's GeForce RTX chips purchased by CAEP can be bought off Taobao, one of China's largest e-commerce marketplaces. The purchases didn't include the latest generation of chips launched within the last two years.
Nvidia said that the semiconductors used in CAEP's research were general-purpose graphics chips found in consumer products such as personal computers. With millions of PCs sold worldwide, the U.S. chip maker said no company can monitor or control where every PC ends up. Intel said it complies with export regulations and sanctions and so must its distributors and customers.
"It's insanely difficult to enforce" the U.S. restrictions when it comes to transactions overseas, said Kevin Wolf, a former top Commerce Department official who is now an international trade lawyer. Purchases in China accounted for more than a third of the world's $556 billion in chip sales in 2021, according to the Semiconductor Industry Association.
Founded in the late 1950s, CAEP is based in China's western Sichuan province and employs some of the country's best nuclear-weapons researchers. Physicists there helped develop China's first hydrogen bomb. It conducts research into computer science, electrical engineering and other fields.
Commerce Department officials expanded restrictions in June 2020 on CAEP by adding 10 entities owned or operated by the academy as well as 17 aliases it uses to the entity list for procuring U.S.-origin items in support of Chinese nuclear-weapon activities.
China has been accelerating the expansion of its nuclear force and delivery capabilities in recent years, the Department of Defense said in an annual report to Congress in November. The People's Liberation Army could stockpile about 1,500 nuclear warheads by 2035 if it continues at its current pace, up from over 400 now, the department estimated.
The U.S. Bureau of Industry and Security, which regulates the sale of sensitive and dual-use technologies, said U.S. and foreign parties are responsible for conducting the due diligence to prevent commodities, software and technology from getting to listed entities.
"As mass-market products move through multiple parties in global supply chains, full visibility on ultimate end users is a large undertaking," the Commerce Department agency said, adding that it would vigorously enforce the new rules introduced in October.
China's military and its suppliers can circumvent end-user restrictions by using shell companies and other evasion tactics, said Gregory Allen, a former U.S. Defense Department official who is now a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
A large number of U.S.-designed chips are manufactured overseas, which can place them outside Washington's export-control rules. In November, Nvidia started marketing a replacement for its A100 chip with a narrower bandwidth to send and receive data so that it can be sold in China under U.S. export restrictions.
Beyond chips, the state-run academy in September called for bidders to service its printed circuit boards, which hold chips and other electronic components together, that were designed by U.S. firm Cadence Design Systems, Inc. CAEP also sought to purchase integrated circuits from other U.S. chip makers.
Cadence said it follows all U.S. export-control regulations, including those regarding entity-list companies.
Credit: By Liza Lin and Dan Strumpf
