Divorce can bring out the worst in parents who are already accustomed to bickering with each other. Even an argument about whether a kid should join a soccer team -- and who will pay -- can end up in a courtroom.
To minimize discord and unnecessary court time, family-law judges increasingly order warring parents to use co-parenting apps. The new tools may not solve every problem, but experts say they can ease the stress on children caught in the crossfire.
Created by divorced parents, family-law attorneys and judges who saw a need to create a better way for families to communicate, the apps can allow parents to document their compliance with the parenting plan. Some have a check-in feature so parents can prove that they picked up or handed off their children when and where they were supposed to. Others use artificial intelligence to flag messages written in an aggressive tone, reminding parents to keep their communications civil. Most have calendars that help both parents keep track of their children's activities and appointments -- no matter whose day it is.
Lisa Abrams, a family-law judge in Arizona Superior Court in Pima County, said she's seeing more young parents forgoing marriage -- but even they end up in court, fighting over the kids. Half of American adults were married in 2017, down 8 percentage points since 1990, a trend driven in part by couples getting married later in life, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
She can't endorse any particular app but said she often orders families to choose one so they can keep track of communication and children's schedules. "Even if people don't have laptops or desktops, they have phones and they're accustomed to using apps." And she sees a marked difference when families use them. "When you see parents split and they're effectively able to communicate and not put the other parent down, the kids acclimate so much better."
Some parents like the fact that they can silo all communications with their ex. It's better than having a message pop up in their regular inbox when they're unprepared to deal with it.
"Whenever I get an email from my ex I assume the worst and this way I can leave it in the app and look at it when I'm ready," said Simi Silver, a dentist in Ottawa who uses the OurFamilyWizard app. "If it comes to my inbox, it can ruin my day."
"When you get an email from the other side, you want to throw up," said her ex-husband, Stephen Silver. But he said when he gets an email notification that an in-app message has arrived, it triggers the same response.
The apps aren't a panacea. Mr. Silver admits he doesn't always respond to the messages Dr. Silver sends him in the app. "The court order says we have to use OurFamilyWizard to communicate, but it doesn't say we have to communicate," he said.
Another complaint: When emailing doctors or teachers about their children, Mr. Silver can't copy in his ex-wife since he's supposed to communicate with her only through the app. Although OurFamilyWizard allows parents to add third parties, Mr. Silver said school administrators have told him they don't want to get involved.
Whatever the drawbacks, there's evidence that these apps help the people who need it most: the children themselves.
David Handler, now 23 and living in Savannah, Ga., recalls a day when he was about 5 years old and living in Southern California. His mother came to pick him up at his father's house. His father told her it wasn't her day to have him.
"I remember them arguing over me and I decided on the spot to stay one more night with my dad," he said.
That was before his parents began using OurFamilyWizard, a service that originated on the web in 2001. Once his parents began keeping track of his schedule on the app, Mr. Handler said he was no longer put in the middle.
"It took away a lot of stress from me as a kid," he said.
---
Apps Have Emerged As
A Tool For Divorced Parents
-- OurFamilyWizard, ourfamilywizard.com
Plans start at $99 a year
The founders of this app partnered with a semantic analysis firm to develop a "ToneMeter." Not only does it look for swearing but red bars at the bottom of the message window increase as the words become increasingly aggressive. "It's like a spell check for your attitude," says CEO Jai Kissoon.
-- Cozi, cozi.com
Free, but $30 a year for ad-free version
Targeted at all families -- not just those going through divorce -- this app is geared around its calendar, which can be shared with up to 16 people.
-- Talking Parents, talkingparents.com
Free, but downloads cost extra
Parents who use this app can get a copy of every event created, edited or deleted on the calendar. "If a dad posts soccer practice is at 5 p.m. on Tuesday and at 4:45 p.m. he modifies it and then tells the mom she's late, she can see that," said CEO Stephen Nixon. "Knowing that will hopefully encourage people not to do that and be more civil."
-- coParenter, coparenter.com
Plans start at $120 a year
This app, co-founded by a retired judge, has six retired judges, therapists and attorneys on hand. They are available 24/7 to mediate conflicts with parents via text, without going to court.
-- AppClose, appclose.com
Free
Parents can submit requests for child-care expenses and can make payments to each other through the app, which also has a calendar and messaging. "At some point we might charge for the transaction, but we're debating that right now," said founder and CEO Igor Litinsky.

Credit: By Julie Jargon
