Votes by Tesla shareholders to reinstate Elon Musk's pay package and approve the company's reincorporation in Texas aren't only a victory for Mr. Musk over the Delaware judge who invalidated the CEO's compensation deal in January. They are also a stinging rebuke to the proxy advisory firm Glass Lewis and the left-wing agenda it pushes on public companies.
Proxy advisory firms have considerable influence over public companies. They advise institutional investors -- which formally own most shares in public companies -- on casting proxy votes concerning CEO pay, director elections and other important proposals. Two firms -- Glass Lewis and Institutional Shareholder Services -- dominate the business.
After Delaware Court of Chancery Chancellor Kathaleen McCormick threw out Mr. Musk's pay package, Glass Lewis and ISS opposed the company's plan to reinstate it. Glass Lewis also weighed in against Tesla's proposal to reincorporate in Texas.
Glass Lewis, which has approved other companies' reincorporations, should have seen that Tesla had legitimate reasons for leaving Delaware. The trial lawyers who challenged Mr. Musk's 2018 compensation deal asked for $5 billion in fees -- an egregious example of the legal shenanigans that have become all too common in Delaware. Such developments have driven other public companies, including Tripadvisor, to reincorporate elsewhere.
Instead, the proxy advisory's hidebound opposition elicited a classic Musk response. In building Tesla, Mr. Musk skipped the traditional middlemen for selling cars -- franchised dealers -- and sold directly to consumers. To rebut Glass Lewis, Tesla similarly went straight to the audience that matters: its investors.
In a scathing point-by-point takedown, Tesla blasted the proxy adviser's recommendations as "absurd" and based on "faulty logic," "speculation," and "scaremongering." Tesla's letter to shareholders noted that "conspicuously absent from the Glass Lewis report is the over $735 billion in value" that Mr. Musk created for shareholders. In a vote last week, Tesla investors sided with Mr. Musk over the proxy advisers by a wide margin.
Tesla isn't the only company pushing back against Glass Lewis. Last month, Exxon Mobil called out the proxy advisory's "undisclosed actual or potential conflicts of interest" in opposing the re-election of the company's lead independent director, former State Street CEO Joseph Hooley. The proxy firm came out against Mr. Hooley not because of Exxon Mobil's performance during his time on the board but "to strongly signal dissatisfaction with the Company's recent approach to omitting shareholder proposals" -- a reference to the energy company's decision to file a lawsuit to exclude a climate proposal shareholders already had rejected.
As Exxon pointed out, however, Glass Lewis neglected to mention that it is a member of the Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility, a group that "has led the media opposition" to Exxon's lawsuit. ICCR members include one of the defendants in the case. In light of the undisclosed connections among the proxy firm and activist environmental, social and governance investors, Exxon asked whether Glass Lewis was giving advice or "superimposing its personal policy preferences over the voice of nearly 90% of shareholders and accompanying SEC regulations." Shareholders agreed and overwhelmingly reappointed Mr. Hooley.
Campaign-finance records and social-media posts indicate that Glass Lewis's leadership is solidly progressive. The firm's annual guidelines for proxy voting advance conventional liberal views. Despite the Supreme Court's admonishment against "stereotyping" in last year's Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard ruling, the guidelines continue to propose demographic targets for boardrooms but say nothing about the value of recruiting directors with expertise in artificial intelligence or other emerging technologies.
Companies should keep this in mind the next time Glass Lewis opposes a proposal that's in shareholders' best interests. As Tesla and Exxon showed, proxy advisers may be living in glass houses.
---
Mr. Toth is a founding partner of PNT Law, based in Austin, Texas.
Credit: By Michael Toth
