Another year's end beckons, which means we've arrived at List Season: the time for self-styled experts of all stripes to offer unsolicited, allegedly well-considered Top 10s in movies, television, books, sports, art, food, business, technology, automobiles, fashion, mindfulness, gardening, wine, cigars, travel, UFO abductions, unusually shaped vegetables and, if we're lucky, tiny dog pillows.
I'll let you in on an industry secret, which is this: Top 10 lists are baloney. They're a ruse created by the media industry to allow staffers to peel off for the holidays. In a week or so, newspaper reporters and editors throughout the land will be boarding their lavish private jets for their Caribbean idylls, content in the knowledge that they can unplug for at least a week without interruptions from the office.
Fun fact: Most Top 10s are written by the author in a limousine to the airport. A large proportion of the rest are automated, written by AI or very skilled robotic stuffed animals. You may already know all this.
But the thing that should really bother you about Year End Top 10 lists is this: They're all so superlative. Every list is a Best of, a Greatest, a Finest, a Most Amazing. The positivity can be suffocating, like the guy who's always trying to sell wheat germ at the supermarket. They're also misleading. If you read enough of Top 10s, you start to believe we live in wondrous times. I'll say just this for 2018: These are not wondrous times.
The truth is, a big chunk of life is unremarkable. For all of the beautiful and inspirational events we experience -- if we're lucky -- there are plenty of mundane ones, and we never seem to recognize those.
With this in mind, I'd like to offer My First Ever Top 10 Unmemorable Moments of the Year:
10. That Cheese Sandwich I Bought at the Airport. I was in a rush. I saw the line at Starbucks, and I knew there was zero chance of making my flight if I stood there. So I found an empty newsstand with a cooler, and my eye migrated from the $7.99 cup of grapes to the $4.99 hard-boiled egg to a cheddar cheese on whole wheat for just $15.99. Halfway through my flight, I remembered I had it. It was not great, but not terrible, either.
9. Pants. I didn't wear one set of pants I truly liked in 2018.
8. A Story About Shortening Attention Spans. I read it at the doctor's office. It was Time or Newsweek. I think. Some longitudinal study of Swedes. Or Norwegians. I think I also read a story about Jennifer Aniston buying a horse. Or a shower curtain.
7. Everything I Watched on Cable News in 2018. Everyone on cable news acts like their pants are on fire. And yet, minutes later, I can't remember a single thing I watched. I did enjoy watching "Fleabag" and "Bodyguard." Oh no, this is turning into a Top 10 television list.
6. Conversation About Wind I Had With That Guy in the Post Office. It wasn't even that windy out.
5. The 2018 NBA Finals. You don't even remember who won, do you? That's right: The Minnesota North Stars.
4. That Podcast. Everyone told me to listen to That Podcast, that it was soooooooo good, and you know what? It was OK.
3. That Ferry Ride. Don't fly, they said. Take the ferry, they said. I enjoyed it. But it wasn't like some crazy skydiving adventure or something.
2. The Cat's Performance. Another lackluster year for our ambivalent house cat, who seldom shows love or interest in us. Yet it expects us to praise it in print? Get real, buddy.
1. This Column. If they gave out Pulitzers for mediocrity . . .

Credit: By Jason Gay
