Mutual-fund managers are suddenly living a chatbot's dream: They're posting big gains from artificial-intelligence stocks and other techs.
A year ago in July -- in the midst of a bear market that left investors with losses from both their stock and bond portfolios for the first time in nearly half a century -- only a handful of actively managed U.S.-stock funds posted gains for the rolling 12-month period. And only a single fund eked out a double-digit gain, according to data from Morningstar Direct. Most of those that managed positive returns featured words like "value" or "dividend" in their monikers.
Fast forward to the just-ended 12 months, when more than a thousand of the 1,242 funds tracked in The Wall Street Journal's Winners' Circle survey made double-digit gains; the average fund returned 15.6%; and only seven registered declines.
The winner: Virtus Zevenbergen Innovative Growth Stock Fund (SAGAX), which trounced its rivals to capture the laurels for the second quarter with a 44.6% gain in the rolling 12 months ended June 30. And the next 20 funds behind it racked up gains of 30% or more. Meanwhile, some value-stock funds that outperformed last summer are among this summer's biggest losers.
That's not all, say many of the ecstatic growth portfolio managers whose funds are leading the pack. Nvidia, the chip maker that has posted a nearly threefold gain in its share price in the past 12 months, was easily the worst-performing holding a year ago. But when OpenAI unveiled its artificial-intelligence chatbot in November, it ignited a scramble to own stocks in potential beneficiaries of the AI gold rush -- and Nvidia, with its lightning-fast graphics processing units, has been a stock sensation.
"People were caught offside" by the speed and magnitude of the AI stock boom, says Anthony Zackery, co-portfolio manager of the Virtus Zevenbergen fund, which has owned Nvidia since 2017. "We are long-term investors; we try to figure out what is going to happen next," he adds, explaining why he wasn't tempted to boot Nvidia out of the fund in the wake of a decline of nearly 50% last year.
The explosion in interest in AI wasn't something that he predicted would happen as rapidly or explosively, but he argues that it happened precisely because too many Wall Street analysts and investors had been too wary about this new technological transformation.
"Now we see a combination of rising forecasts and expectations for earnings and revenues, improving sentiment -- and that is being reflected in people being willing to pay higher multiples for every dollar of those higher earnings and free cash flow," Zackery adds.
"Looking back at 2022, it was a year in which stocks took a healthy but indiscriminate pummeling," says Zackery's colleague, Joseph Dennison, co-manager of the Virtus Zevenbergen fund.
Sonu Kalra, manager of Fidelity Blue Chip Growth Fund (FBGRX), the retail share class of the No. 3 finisher, Fidelity Blue Chip Growth K-6 Fund (FBCGX), describes the market environment that propelled his funds to returns of nearly 36% for the just-ended 12 months as being characterized by a blend of relief and exhilaration.
"Investors had expected further earnings disappointments" after a dire 2022 characterized by plunging growth rates and soaring expenses, Kalra says.
Growth stocks -- and their market valuations -- have also been given a boost by the perception that investors are approaching the end of a string of interest-rate increases. The icing on the cake? "ChatGPT has been having an iPhone moment; just as the iPhone was the first smartphone to break through and be adopted by everyone, ChatGPT has brought AI into the mainstream," Kalra says.
Kalra watched the way that the launch of the user-friendly Netscape browser transformed the internet in the 1990s, decades after the latter's birth, and compares that event to what's happening now in artificial intelligence. "Whenever you look at these big previous waves in innovation -- the personal computer, the internet, mobile, the cloud -- you see similar patterns," he says.
To qualify for the Winners' Circle survey, funds must be actively managed U.S.-stock funds with more than $50 million in assets and a record of three years or more, as well as meet a handful of other criteria. The survey excludes index and sector funds, funds that employ leverage strategies and most quantitative funds.
As always, this quarterly competition isn't designed to create a "buy list" of funds, but to demonstrate the ways that specific investment strategies benefited from recent market trends.
This summer's swing from laggards to leaders is made even more pronounced by another phenomenon that investors should heed: the perils of year-over-year comparisons. That helps mutual-fund companies rapidly transform one-year losses to outsize gains, notes Daniel Wiener, chairman of Newton, Mass.-based Adviser Investments. "Performance numbers like this are simply snapshots at a point in time, and tell you nothing about a fund's longer-term performance," he cautions.
Oberweis Micro-Cap Fund (OBMCX) ranked No. 5 in this quarter's survey, up 35.7%, as its overweight holdings in smaller technology companies and other growth stocks benefited from the AI wave. "Investors can be rewarded by investing directly in a company like Nvidia, or more indirectly by owning a microcap industrial company that will be using AI to help it manage inventory," says Ken Farsalas, the fund's manager. And it's those indirect beneficiaries that he expects will continue to buoy the fund's returns.
The No. 2 and No. 4 finishers for the just-ended period -- Loomis Sayles Growth Fund (LSGRX), up 40.1%, and Nationwide Loomis All Cap Growth Fund (NWZMX), up 35.7% -- are managed by Loomis Sayles, a division of asset-management giant Natixis. A spokesperson for Loomis Sayles declined to comment on the funds' strategy or holdings.
---
Suzanne McGee is a writer in New England. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Suzanne McGee
