There once was a time when college football was so flush with cash that it could afford to turn up its nose at partnerships with "sin industries" -- alcohol, cannabis and sports gambling. The pandemic changed that.
Universities are throwing their moral qualms out the window as they struggle to recover from the massive financial blow dealt by truncated seasons and fanless football games in 2020. The result is a lot more booze for sale in stadiums and a lot more betting partnerships in college sports.
More universities have started selling alcohol in their stadiums on game days as a means of milking more concessions revenue out of patrons. UCLA and Washington, for example, both announced they would start selling beer and wine everywhere in their stadiums in 2021.
"We heard the fans loud and clear that this will enhance the game day experience," said UCLA athletic director Martin Jarmond.
Other universities are bringing booze back after a hiatus. That's the case at USC, which announced earlier this month that it would sell wine and beer at select concessions areas at the Coliseum until the end of third quarter. The university has not sold alcohol at football games, outside of a select few club areas, since 2005, when then-president Steve Sample cut Trojans off because of "increased surliness."
Some schools are opting for more potent partnerships. In December, New Mexico State added Pistol Pete's Six Shooter rye whiskey to its arsenal of official athletic department beer and wine. Wake Forest debuted "Deacon Brew," a craft beer brewed specifically for the university by local outfit R&D Brewing, at its first home game in September.
"Everyone is looking for ways to add revenue streams right now," said Rhett Hobart, associate athletic director of fan experience at Wake Forest who helped spearhead Deacon Brew.
Even athletic conferences are getting in on the party. In August, the Pac-12 named an "official craft beer" partner in Deschutes Brewery, which is based in Bend, Ore.
Another "sin industry" universities are embracing appears to be cannabis, particularly in states where marijuana has been legalized -- 19 and counting. The financial crunch caused by the pandemic is a big reason why the University of Colorado dipped its toes into the space this spring, about nine years after the state legalized weed.
"We had to get creative and look at how we could increase our revenues," said Lance Gerlach, the university's assistant vice chancellor of advancement.
Colorado became one of the first major universities to add a cannabidiol purveyor as a corporate sponsor in April, signing a multiyear partnership with Synchronicity Full-Spectrum Hemp Oil, a local supplier of CBD products.
"[CBD] is acceptable, it's been around, people have a comfort level with it," said Gerlach. "There was not one bad reaction to that whatsoever."
College football is also cozying up to sports betting, as states increasingly legalize sports gambling. Last September, a few months after Colorado gave residents the greenlight to bet on sports, Colorado made gambling company PointsBet an athletic department sponsor.
"We felt like this was on the same path and that same trajectory as . . . the beer or spirits category within sponsorship," said Gerlach.
The university lobbied for Colorado's law to prohibit player prop-bets, as a means of discouraging bad behavior on its sports teams. As part of its deal with PointsBet, students and faculty are not allowed to place bets and there will not be a dedicated betting lounge inside Folsom Field.
Several other colleges have deals with sports books. The University of Nevada has partnerships with betting companies for its campuses in Reno and Las Vegas. And earlier this month, the University of Denver struck a deal with SuperBook Sports.
The Fiesta Bowl, one of the six rotating hosts of the College Football Playoff semifinal, hopped on the betting bandwagon this week. With gambling legal as of Sept. 9 in Arizona, where the game takes place, organizers struck a partnership with Caesars Entertainment Inc. that will allow fans to place bets on their phones or from inside the stadium during the game.
"That negative stigma and taboo is slowly fading away, because it's so common right now. You can't watch an NFL game without seeing somebody promoting [sports betting]," said Jose Moreno, the Fiesta Bowl's chief marketing officer. "This is going to be the wave of the future."
This week, DraftKings launched a partnership with Simplebet, which uses machine learning to set odds, that will allow fans in seven states to place in-game "micro-bets" for college football games on things like whether a scoring drive will be successful and whether the next play will be a rush, pass or punt. These types of in-game bets are new in the U.S. but make up the majority of sports gambling activity in Europe, where betting has been legal for longer.
With the 2021 college football season under way, sports betting is legal in 21 states plus the District of Columbia. About 20 more have bills in front of their legislatures.
"We may have been the first," said Gerlach of the PointsBet sponsorship. "I can promise you we will not be the last."
Credit: By Laine Higgins

ERIC Subject: Team Sports; Universities
