CVS HEALTH
CVS -17%
CVS's Medicare business pushed down its latest earnings. The healthcare giant posted weaker-than-expected first-quarter earnings and cut its 2024 guidance for the second time as higher medical costs among seniors weighed on its Medicare business. CVS has made a big bet on its Aetna Medicare plans, as private Medicare offerings have long been a major source of growth and profits in the industry. But the timing of CVS expanding enrollment was inopportune and coincided with an unexpected rise in seniors' healthcare use and regulatory changes. Earlier this year, rival insurer Humana, which focuses on Medicare plans, reported a steep quarterly loss on medical-cost increases, which the company called "unprecedented." CVS shares plummeted 17% Wednesday, the stock's worst one-day drop since 2009.
AMAZON.COM
AMZN +2.3%
Amazon's quarterly revenue rose 13% to reach its record high of $143.3 billion, and its profit surged to $10.4 billion, bolstered by the performance of its cloud business, Amazon Web Services. Chief Executive Andy Jassy said that the explosion of demand for generative AI resulted in strong sales for Amazon Web Services, or AWS. The division's sales increased more than 17% in the first quarter, and its operating profit jumped nearly 84%. Amazon shares gained 2.3% Wednesday.
PARAMOUNT GLOBAL
PARA +13%
Sony Pictures and private-equity giant Apollo Global Management on Wednesday submitted a $26 billion all-cash offer for the entertainment giant, The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday. Paramount has been weighing a merger with production company Skydance Media, entering an exclusive negotiating window with Skydance that had an expiration date of May 3. The new offer is the second time Apollo has made a bid for Paramount. Paramount shares jumped 13% Thursday.
APPLE
AAPL +6%
Sluggish iPhone sales took another bite out of Apple. The tech giant on Thursday posted its fifth revenue decline in the past six quarters, as the company's key smartphone business continues to face slowing demand and increased competition overseas. Apple's strategy of steering consumers toward its more expensive "Pro"-designated phones isn't bolstering overall revenue as much as it once did. Apple shares rose 6% Friday.
TESLA
TSLA +15%
Tesla clinched a key victory overseas. Chief Executive Elon Musk won Beijing's tentative approval to roll out the electric-vehicle maker's advanced driver-assistance service in China, Tesla's second-largest market, The Wall Street Journal reported Monday. Musk is pushing to expand use of its controversial "Full Self-Driving," or FSD, software feature globally, as the company attempts to reignite sluggish demand for its electric cars. Tesla shares soared 15% Monday.
STARBUCKS
SBUX -16%
Starbucks reported a sharp slowdown in visits and weaker-than-expected sales and profit in the latest quarter. The company also cut its sales outlook for the second time this year. Chief Executive Laxman Narasimhan said the company is working to speed up morning service to better meet customer demand, as too many customers abandon their app orders due to long wait times and menu-item unavailability. Starbucks shares sank 16% Wednesday.
Generate image description

Credit: By Francesca Fontana
