NESTLE
Talks Consider Deal
With Ice-Cream Firm
Nestle SA is in advanced talks with European ice-cream maker R&R Group to form a joint venture for ice cream in Europe and Africa with an annual revenue of three billion Swiss francs ($3.1 billion).
The world's largest packaged-foods company said the proposed joint venture with R&R, owned by French private-equity firm PAI Partners, would help its ice-cream business grow.
It expects the tie-up to be implemented next year and to be chaired by Luis Cantarell, Nestle's executive vice president for Europe, the Middle East and North Africa. R&R said the chief executive of the combined business would be its CEO Ibrahim Najafi.
Switzerland-headquartered Nestle will contribute its ice-cream businesses in Europe, Egypt, the Philippines, Brazil and Argentina to the new joint venture and transfer its European frozen-food businesses, excluding the pizza operation.
Nestle holds roughly 10.8% of the global ice-cream market, while R&R has 0.8% according to research firm Euromonitor. The new joint venture would help Nestle better compete with archrival Unilever PLC, which has a 22.8% share of the global ice-cream market and which last week said it had agreed to buy Italian ice-cream maker Grom.
-- Saabira Chaudhuri
---
TELENOR
Company Divests
VimpelCom Stake
Telenor ASA of Norway said Monday it has decided to divest its one-third interest in VimpelCom Ltd., the Amsterdam-based telecommunications operator facing accusations of corruption by U.S. and Dutch authorities.
Based on VimpelCom's closing price on Friday, Telenor's 33% stake is worth approximately 20 billion Norwegian kroner, or roughly $2.4 billion. That compares with Telenor's overall market value of 233 billion Norwegian kroner.
Telenor said selling the asset could take some time, adding it expected to record a noncash impairment of 7.5 billion Norwegian kroner against its third-quarter earnings to reflect Vimpelcom's lower value in its books.
Shares in VimpelCom, one of Russia's largest telecom companies, have lost 67% of their value in the past two years.
-- Dominic Chopping and Jens Hansegard
---
HTC
Smartphones Maker
Posts Quarterly Loss
HTC Corp. said Monday that it swung to a net loss for the third quarter as the company continued to struggle in the competitive smartphone market.
Taiwan-based HTC said its net loss totaled 4.48 billion Taiwan dollars (US$137 million) for the three months ended Sept. 30, compared with a net profit of NT$600 million a year earlier. The company's revenue dropped 49% to NT$21.4 billion from NT$41.9 billion in the same period last year.
The downbeat results came as no surprise as HTC has issued a profit warning and announced a series of restructuring efforts, including job cuts, in response to sluggish demand and weak sales in China.
Once the world's top smartphone maker by volume, HTC in 2013 fell out of the top 10 largest handset vendors by shipments.
-- Lorraine Luk
---
SUNCOR
Takeover Bid Made
For Oil-Sands Firm
Suncor Energy Inc. on Monday said it launched an all-stock takeover offer valued at 4.3 billion Canadian dollars ($3.3 billion) for struggling oil-sands producer Canadian Oil Sands Ltd.
Suncor, Canada's largest crude-oil producer, said its offer of 0.25 of a share for each Canadian Oil Sands share represents a 43% premium based on closing share prices on Friday. ,
Suncor, which is based in Calgary, Alberta, values its unsolicited offer at C$6.6 billion, including Canadian Oil Sands debt.
The offer for Canadian Oil Sands, which owns 37% of the Syncrude oil-sands mining consortium, comes as the oil producer struggles with a slumping stock price due partly to low crude prices.
Suncor recently said it was looking at selling some of its future production amid slumping oil prices and a expanding debt load.
For Suncor, the deal would give it a growing presence in the Canadian oil sands.
-- Judy McKinnon
---
APPLE
IPhone Maker Buys
Startup VocalIQ
Apple Inc. has purchased an artificial-intelligence startup that could help make iPhone users' interactions with the virtual assistant Siri more natural.
Apple bought VocalIQ Ltd., a U.K.-based software maker working on ways to improve computers' ability to understand human speech, and to "speak" more naturally. The terms of the deal weren't disclosed.
An Apple spokesman confirmed the deal with the company's standard statement after an acquisition, saying Apple "buys smaller technology companies from time to time, and we generally do not discuss our purpose or plans."
VocalIQ didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.
-- Jack Nicas
---
GOOGLE
Group Adds Funding
For Messaging Firm
Google Inc. has invested in a new round of funding for Symphony Communication Services LLC that values the Wall Street-backed messaging company at roughly $650 million, people familiar with the matter said.
Google's support adds a technology-industry stalwart to the list of banks and investment firms -- such as Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Morgan Stanley and BlackRock Inc. -- that have backed Symphony and its fledgling communications software.
Symphony's latest funding round is expected to close this week, the people said.
Representatives for Google and Symphony declined to comment.
Symphony was created as an alternative to Bloomberg LP's terminals, which have long been a hallmark of trading floors but are viewed as a significant cost center for financial firms.
-- Sarah Krouse
---
BOC AVIATION
EVA Airways Gets
Two Airbus Planes
BOC Aviation, the aircraft-leasing arm of Bank of China Ltd., has arranged a long-term lease of two Airbus A330-300 jets to EVA Airways Corp. of Taiwan.
The placement of the twin-aisle planes, in addition to two Boeing Co. 777-300ER jets already flying with EVA Air, reflect the continued growth and maturity of the Singapore-based firm's leasing business.
The smaller single-aisle jets such as the Airbus A320 or the Boeing 737 are easier to place with airlines and preferred by leasing firms. BOC Aviation has a portfolio of 256 owned and managed aircraft operated by 61 airlines.
-- Gaurav Raghuvanshi
