Order a package? AI researchers are hunting for the best way to get it to your doorstep.
In the next few years, AI promises to transform the logistics of consumer deliveries with a number of new technologies and improvements to old ones. Here's a look at some of the most intriguing innovations on the way.
Smarter drones
One of the most expensive and resource-intensive parts of delivery is the last mile -- getting packages from warehouses or stores to customers' homes. Delivery drones promise to make the process more efficient, bypassing the traffic and parking issues that often plague delivery trucks.
The idea isn't entirely new, of course. Amazon, for one, has been testing drones since 2013, and has delivered packages via drones since 2022.
Now a range of companies are using AI to beef up the capabilities of drones. Wing, a delivery-drone company owned by Alphabet, uses AI to let devices decide the best place to leave packages, bypassing obstructions. For example, if a package is supposed to be delivered to a driveway, but the drone spots something blocking the space, it may choose to leave the item on the doorstep instead.
Wing is focusing on last-minute items for nearby customers, like drinks and medication, where the small aircraft can outpace a delivery truck driving out or a customer heading to the store. The average flight time for a Wing drone to customers is under 30 minutes.
The company has plans to enter more retail deals, pending approval to fly in new areas from the Federal Aviation Administration. The drones fly a few hundred feet above the ground, then descend down to about 20 feet to lower packages. The company is also testing a system where drones can do self-assessments, such as battery checks, with little human intervention.
Sending robots to your door
Other companies are tackling the "last 50 feet" -- the time-consuming process of getting packages from the delivery truck to the customer's door. According to research by the University of Washington Urban Freight Lab, this leg of the process accounts for 20% to 50% of overall transportation supply-chain costs.
Vault Robotics, a spinoff from the Princeton University Safe Robotics Lab, is designing robots that can climb curbs and stairs. The robot has a combination of legs and wheels, and a platform with grips on the side to hold a package.
The goal, says Robert Shi, co-founder and chief executive of the company, is to deploy the robots from vans without having to park, eliminating the time spent idle. So, while a van is still moving at a cruising pace, robots can move in and out of the vehicle to deliver parcels to doorsteps.
Predicting parking spaces
Drones and robots are designed to be largely autonomous when making deliveries. But some AI works in tandem with human delivery workers.
For instance, researchers have been looking into the time-wasting process of parking. Giacomo Dalla Chiara, lead researcher at the Urban Freight Lab, says that about 28% of drivers' time during delivery is used searching for spots.
In a project sponsored by the Energy Department, the lab deployed curb sensors in a Seattle neighborhood, transmitting real-time information about available parking spaces. Combining machine learning and sensor information, the system can predict when the spaces will be available -- and direct drivers toward spots that are opening up while drivers are in transit.
Optimizing routes
Delivery drivers already use software to find the best routes. Researchers are looking to beef up that capability with AI for that job.
Matthias Winkenbach, director of the MIT Megacity Logistics Lab, is working on a model that can take into consideration complex real-world constraints. For example, drivers can choose a route that may not be the shortest but allows them to park more conveniently or unload packages in safer spaces.
---
Lindsey Choo is a writer in Southern California. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Lindsey Choo
