KYIV, Ukraine -- At the end of a bare hallway, a dozen men hunched over desks assembling pieces of black carbon fiber and soldering on computer chips. A gyroscope whirred, testing the final product: an explosive attack drone.
Sparrow Avia is one of dozens of startups producing cheap weapons to help Ukrainian troops against the Russians. Short on ammunition as aid from the West stalled, Ukraine is trying to produce an army of explosive FPV, or first-person-view, drones.
It would take years -- and billions of dollars -- before Kyiv could produce the kind of artillery and missile systems it needs on a large scale. But drones assembled from parts available on the commercial market are easy to make and cost just a few hundred dollars. Makeshift factories popping up all over Ukraine are churning out thousands a month.
Soldiers at the front attach explosives. The drones are guided by an operator wearing goggles to see what the drone's camera sees.
With Ukraine now on the defensive, FPV drones have become crucial in efforts to hold the Russians back. They can't do as much damage as artillery shells or mortar bombs. But Ukrainian forces are using drones to immobilize armored vehicles, and targeting Russian trucks and even soldiers on foot.
Ukraine pioneered the use of drones on the battlefield early in the war. But in the almost two years since, Moscow has made a huge investment in drones of all kinds, and is converting shopping malls into drone factories, according to local activists.
Because of frequent Russian missile strikes, Ukrainian drone producers keep their operations smaller. Still, they aim to produce on a mass scale. Mykhailo Fedorov, Ukraine's minister of digital transformation, said the country is on pace to meet the goal President Volodymyr Zelensky set of producing at least a million drones this year.
The Wall Street Journal visited one of Sparrow's three facilities, which collectively make about 3,000 FPV drones a month. Chief Executive Mykola Havryluk and a partner invested roughly $500,000 to get the company off the ground, and late last year it turned this empty building in western Ukraine into an FPV factory. Sparrow purchases some parts -- like carbon fiber, cameras and engines -- but manufactures most and designs the drones in-house.
In one room, a 20-year-old engineer tweaked his design on a screen. Behind him, several 3-D printers cranked out plastic parts. In the next room, workers welded together battery packs.
The drones were assembled at the end of the hall. Workers screwed, glued and welded parts together, among hundreds of drones in various states of assembly stacked on shelves and on the floor. There wasn't yet a ventilation system, and the welders covered their noses with scarves.
The finished drones look bare-bone compared with ones available online: a thin carbon-fiber body with four sets of propellers and a battery pack.
The Ukrainian government buys about half the drones, Havryluk said. Volunteers and local governments buy up the rest and deliver them to military units. Fedorov, the minister of digital transformation, said the government is "offering big contracts for producers to scale up."
Sparrow has only 70 employees. Havryluk said it planned to add 130 over the next two months. He said employees have an unofficial exemption from conscription, a significant perk when the military plans to add up to 500,000 new soldiers.
"Not everyone can fight or wants to fight, but this is a way I can still be useful and help the army," said Serhiy Khluhonets, a 35-year-old former construction worker who now works as a welder.
Out of each batch of 30 drones, one gets a test run at a nearby range. On a cold, cloudless January day, a test pilot guided a 10-inch FPV drone into the air and then zipped it back and forth above the tree line at 80 miles an hour.
Of the 11 models Sparrow makes, its 7-inch drone (measured by the size of propellers it can use) is the most popular. Though it doesn't fly as far as larger models and can carry only about 3 pounds of explosives, it is more maneuverable and, crucially, cheaper, said Andriy Vuhovskiy, head of Sparrow's FPV department.
"While we're defending and the Russians are assaulting, [soldiers] don't need such a long range," Vuhovskiy said.
Still, Ukraine is developing drones with longer and longer ranges, which its forces have used to strike oil refineries inside Russia this year. Sparrow is working on models that use artificial intelligence to hit the target, even if jammers cut off contact with the pilot.
"For now, the skills of the pilot are important," Vuhovskiy said. "In the future, you won't need as much skill."
---
Nikita Nikolaienko contributed to this article.
Credit: By Ian Lovett
