Are prospects for a U.S.-China trade deal fading? That was the conventional interpretation of President Trump's Sunday tweet, in which he said he'd raise tariffs from 10% to 25% on $200 billion of Chinese exports at the end of this week. Mr. Trump's announcement shocked China's leaders because they underestimated the strength of American hawks' influence, just as Americans once underestimated the influence of Chinese hawks. But the president's tough line now -- heading into the final stretch of negotiations -- will reduce friction later. China is less likely to cheat on any future agreement if it needs to comply to earn a reduction of these tariffs. China will cheat if the U.S. has no tariffs to enforce it.
As trade watchers around the world armchair-quarterback this week's negotiations, it's useful to assess the likelihood of success in each key area of the deal to determine whether it has indeed fallen apart.
First, cyber intrusions into U.S. business networks have helped Chinese companies gain advantages in key high-tech areas, including artificial intelligence, electrical vehicles, jet engines and nuclear reactors. America can't maintain its technological supremacy if this continues, but China is loath to give up the hacking and espionage that help its entrepreneurs pillage America's intellectual property and technological crown jewels. My forecast is no deal in this area. For Beijing, crime pays too well.
Second, it's difficult to monitor and restrict China's efforts to force the transfer of American technology in exchange for access to Chinese markets unless tariffs remain to aid enforcement. It's almost as difficult to police China's intellectual-property theft effectively. Besides, the hawks in Beijing will likely work overtime to scuttle this part of the deal. Agreement can be found here only if the U.S. takes a leap of faith that China will do what it has never done before -- fulfill its commitment to a trade deal.
China has a long history of quickly breaking promises to the West. From refusing to abide by the rules of the World Trade Organization after it joined in 2001 to abandoning President Xi Jinping's promise to President Obama not to militarize the South China Sea, Beijing's record makes strong enforcement mechanisms a necessary precondition to any U.S. agreement to a deal. But seen through the lens of Chinese history, strong monitoring and enforcement look like humiliation at the hands of the West.
Third, China's state-owned enterprises represent a critical cog in its mercantilist machinery. SOEs roam the globe with massive subsidies, running circles around private-sector corporations. There is no reason a Chinese corporation should be the largest producer of railroad cars in the world other than subsidies and stolen technology. But any agreement that commits China to reining in its SOEs is a nonstarter in Beijing. The SOEs are too powerful politically and too important economically.
Fourth, Beijing's currency manipulation has harmed the trade balance. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin is dovish on this issue -- he hasn't branded China a currency manipulator, as Mr. Trump promised to do during the 2016 campaign -- so the U.S. may not press Beijing too hard. A deal is possible here, although it's likely not in the U.S. long-term interest because it wouldn't be enforceable. Even so, Sen. Bernie Sanders is hitting the president on the broken campaign promise. Mr. Trump may pay a political price for inaction.
Given these challenges, it's hardly surprising that the long-negotiated deal appears to be falling apart. China has been busy in these final three weeks trying to weaken the deal. That's Beijing's modus operandi: String the West along, then renegotiate and take back earlier concessions from the gullible "barbarians."
Mr. Trump should be applauded for demanding that China go straight. Regarding tariffs, the long-term goal should be total elimination, but the president was right to promise an increase in response to China's bad-faith negotiation. A tough U.S. policy is necessary to prepare a better defense against Chinese economic aggression. U.S. officials should send a clear message to Beijing's bureaucracy: No more theft or outrageous subsidies, or else the tariffs remain.
Sustained Chinese compliance could reduce tariffs to zero on both sides and end trade friction once and for all. It would be dangerous to build in inevitable trade friction year by year, which is to be expected if America's tools for enforcement don't crack down on any cheating.
China has a clear strategic choice: establish a real accord that will lead to better growth for both nations, or continue its predatory mercantilist reliance on national champions, beginning the descent into a cold war that portends security concerns and slower growth rates for all.
---
Mr. Pillsbury is director of Chinese strategy at the Hudson Institute and author of "The Hundred Year Marathon: China's Secret Strategy to Replace America as the Global Superpower."

Credit: By Michael Pillsbury
