JANUS HENDERSON GROUP PLC
JHG -0.3%
The "bond king" has left the building. Renowned investor Bill Gross, who won his royal moniker for bold predictions as head of what was once the world's largest bond mutual fund, said Monday that he would retire from Janus after a stormy four-year run. His tenure was marked by uneven investment returns and distracting legal battles with Pacific Investment Management Co., the firm he co-founded in 1971. Mr. Gross leaves with his flagship Janus fund controlling less than $1 billion, down from a peak above $2 billion. Janus shares eased 0.3% Monday.
PAPA JOHN'S INT'L INC.
PZZA +9%
Activist investor Starboard Value LP is working up an appetite for pizza. The firm plans to invest $200 million in Papa John's and appointed its chief executive, Jeffrey Smith, as chairman of the pizza chain's board. Papa John's ousted founder and former CEO, John Schnatter, made a competing offer of $250 million after learning of Starboard's investment, but it was rejected by the company's independent board members and withdrawn. Starboard's deal with the pizza chain comes after more than a year of tumult marked by declining same-store sales. Papa John's shares rose 9% Monday.
BB&T CORP.
BBT +4%
BB&T agreed to buy SunTrust Banks Inc. in a $28.2 billion all-stock deal, the largest union of U.S. banks since the financial crisis led to an era of ramped-up regulation and chilled merger activity in the industry. The tie-up of regional bank powerhouses would create the sixth-largest U.S. retail bank and could mark the start of consolidation among smaller lenders. BB&T shares rose 4% Thursday, while SunTrust shares jumped 10%.
ALPHABET INC.
GOOGL +0.9%
Google's parent reported a 22% jump in fourth-quarter revenue after Monday's closing bell, but the tech-industry bellwether also showed just how expensive it has become to maintain its dominance: research-and-development costs leapt 40%. Against this backdrop, Alphabet notched per-share earnings of $12.77, beating Wall Street expectations, but profit margins fell to 21% from 24% a year earlier. Analysts expect R&D costs to rise, but the company declined to elaborate on its spending on advanced technologies like artificial intelligence. Alphabet shares rose 0.9% Tuesday, rallying after early declines.
SPOTIFY TECHNOLOGY SA
SPOT -2.8%
Spotify is looking to do for podcasts what it did for music streaming. The Swedish company said Wednesday that it is acquiring podcast producer Gimlet Media and publisher Anchor, part of a strategy to capture more of users' listening time with better curation, customization and recommendation services. Spotify also turned in strong results, featuring the streaming platform's first operating profit. But the company's guidance that it expects to spend heavily this year, including as much as $500 million on multiple deals, spooked investors. Spotify shares fell 2.8% Wednesday.
TWITTER INC.
TWTR -9.8%
Twitter posted a full year of profitability for the first time in its almost 13-year history. Also a first: Twitter disclosed its total number of daily users, 126 million, and said it would stop reporting its tally of monthly active users. While daily users grew 1.6% from the previous quarter, the 321 million monthly active users fell 1.5% as Twitter steps up its policing of abuse that occurs on the site. Marketers have cheered Twitter's cleanup efforts, but investors fret that it's coming at the expense of user growth. Shares sank 9.8% Thursday amid concerns over waning user growth and mounting costs.
WELLS FARGO & CO.
WFC -2.3%
Wells Fargo customers were unable to access online banking and mobile applications Thursday after a system failure at one of the bank's facilities caused nationwide outages. This is the second time this month that the bank has experienced issues with mobile and online banking. Wells Fargo previously received a warning from the Office of the Comptroller of Currency over issues with its technology oversight, The Wall Street Journal reported late last year. Wells Fargo shares fell 2.3% Thursday.

Credit: By Laine Higgins
