President Biden issued an executive order late last year to improve government oversight of artificial intelligence. But there's a lot of disagreement about how much -- if any -- oversight is best for both AI and the world, as myriad AI developments promise to transform industries and daily life.
We wanted to know, as part of our series on ethical dilemmas posed by AI, what the government's role should be in enhancing benefits and reducing risks from artificial intelligence.
We asked WSJ readers these questions:
Given AI's potential for harm (such as being inaccurate or biased), should there be a government evaluation and approval process for major new AI developments, as there is for medications? What if this significantly delays the release of new AI tools?
Here is some of what we heard in response:
What has social media taught us?
Yes! Even if the process delays the release of new AI tools, we need to regulate AI now in its infancy rather than later. I would happily defer using AI tools in exchange for a thorough evaluation process and meaningful regulation. If even AI creators believe it could be detrimental to humanity, it's time to listen. We're seeing now how a lack of an early social-media regulation has opened a floodgate of conversation around technological safeguards. We need to learn our lesson and get a handle on AI before it's (potentially) too late.
-- Tory Wicklund, Washington, D.C.
Follow the internet model
There should be minimal to no government regulation of AI. The rapid innovation in the internet we all enjoy was achieved under minimal regulation. I have found ChatGPT to be a game changer for my work in data science and the thought of the technology being blocked just because it could be prompted to say something inappropriate or inaccurate would be terrible.
-- Beecher Adams, Dublin, Calif.
Why the hurry?
Why should we be in such a hurry to release new AI tools? Silicon Valley has contributed to an enormous amount of physical waste by "upgrading" its products too quickly, as well as huge psychic waste by forcing consumers to keep up with constant patches to software that was probably released too soon to begin with. ChatGPT was flawed upon release; even a brief experimentation quickly proved it spits out delusional "facts." Obviously, we simply need to slow down and try to get AI right so that it benefits humankind instead of causing yet more anxiety as well as wasteful new services or products that simply will be discarded.
-- Xu Xi, Morrisonville, N.Y.
We need a USDAI
Given the sheer complexity of this technology, there should be a USDA (call it "USDAI") that can provide some oversight. Unfortunately, the government doesn't have the skills needed to police this development. But the government could prevent AI from displacing massive amounts of humans in the workplace, which is by far the worst outcome of AI. Anyone who has called a company for help lately has experienced the absence of a real human at the other end of the line who can properly respond to the unique problem you have that doesn't fit the "press 1 for. . ." menu.
-- Hugh Jamieson, Dublin, Ohio
The U.S. is not the EU
No. In the EU, sure, because that culture is more accustomed to regulation and not primed for innovation. Regulation like that won't work in the U.S. However, the FTC should be especially aggressive in bringing actions against companies that release generative consumer artificial intelligence that leads to harm, and tort rights of actions should be given considerable leeway in federal courts against companies that can be found to be the proximate cause to certain harms.
-- Tracy Beth Mitrano, Penn Yan, N.Y.
Yes, in some industries
As with most things in life, it depends. If AI is being used to diagnose and treat disease, it is functioning as a medical device and logically would be regulated by the FDA. Banking and investment decisions are other areas that seemingly call for controls. In both these cases, the basic regulatory mechanisms already exist. Perhaps the most concerning area, because of its potential to affect a large number of us, would be the use of AI by the IRS and state taxation authorities to audit returns. Who will regulate them?
-- Joyce L. DeYoung, Devon, Pa.
Educate, don't regulate
Rather than government regulation, money and effort would be better spent educating the public about AI's limitations and encouraging people to think critically about what they get from AI. Same goes for social media.
-- Carl C. Hagen, Fallon, Nev.
Fox and the henhouse
Letting government Ministry of Truth drones be the fact-checker or analysts for new AI technology is letting the blind lead the blind, at best. At worst, a true fox-guarding-the-henhouse situation, as AI might directly impact the government's power.
I have somewhat more faith in the general public to read opinions, consider sources, evaluate who stands to gain from any crimes, and to come to a conclusion. Users will quickly discover any shortcomings and report them on public media.
-- William Llewellin, Littleton, Colo.
Too big to regulate
Regulation is a fool's errand. As well-intentioned as it might be, it will be increasingly difficult to manage as the discipline matures. It is akin to regulating data structures or coding techniques. It isn't likely to be effective.
AI technology will soon be ubiquitous. The number of IT professionals who understand the inner workings of AI is growing exponentially. What would you regulate? How would you know exactly what the code is doing? There will be many abuses, including that those advocating for regulation will often be industry leaders looking to erect barriers to entry and otherwise thwart competition.
We should be focused on how to identify and protect against those who would exploit and do us harm with this technology.
-- Gordon Davis Jr., West Chester, Pa.
Test. And then test again.
I think the government, in consultation with leaders in the AI field, should design parameters and triggers that would alert developers to an AI program that is not working as expected or getting out of control. The developers would test their AI programs using these parameters to determine whether the AI program is performing as expected before being released to the public.
Since the parameters and triggers would be established in advance, the normal "government slowdown effect" should be mitigated so that important advances could be achieved by allowing AI to grow organically, but with guardrails.
-- Terry McCarthy, Millwood, N.Y.
Compounding the problem
"Given AI's potential for harm (such as being inaccurate or biased), should there be.. . ." You mean, let an often inaccurate or biased organization such as the government decide what inaccuracies or biases are acceptable and what are mal- or misinformation? Oh yes, that's just what we need.
-- David Hufford, Spokane, Wash.
Don't handicap AI
Concerns about bias and misinformation in content produced by generative AI are both too early and too late. By too early, I mean a real lack of understanding of how these models work will very likely result in suboptimal regulation, hindering the technology. (Copyright protection of software is one example of this.) By too late, I mean that once a model is trained, it cannot unlearn -- any undesirable influence in its training data cannot be subtracted from the model's parameters.
Between the two, I'd rather have too little protection than too much. My concerns about encumbering the technology with ill-conceived regulation surpass my concerns about inaccuracy, bias or misinformation in content produced by generative AI -- these have always been artifacts of communication between humans, and humans learn to use critical-thinking skills to filter and interpret the information received based on what is known of the source and on one's own biases.
To be fair, this will become more challenging as more businesses integrate generative AI into their consumer-facing products without consumers realizing it. Even so, I neither want nor need this administration or any other regulating this nascent technology under the guise of protecting me for my own good.
-- Ann DeFranco, Superior, Colo.
Let the market manage risks
Keep the government out of it. Let the companies that come up with and sell AI chatbots to consumers be monetarily liable for the harm and damages they inflict. That will force them not to release a product that is dangerous and unreliable. If they do, they'll go broke.
Our government being what it has become with its politicization, review would lead to delays that would give global bad actors like China and Russia the opportunity to catch up and surpass the lead we presently enjoy in artificial intelligence to our detriment. Keep the government away.
-- Edwin Vizcarrondo, Wellington, Fla.
---
Demetria Gallegos is an editor for The Wall Street Journal in New York. Email her at demetria.gallegos@wsj.com.
Credit: By Demetria Gallegos
