Two years ago, on the subject of the public's disturbing preference for fictionalized "news," I doubted the legal merits of voting-machine claims against Fox News but suggested the lawsuits nevertheless "represented a healthy impulse to get the evidence before a forum where evidence still matters."
Voila. Fox opinion hosts, at least in the one-sided evidence presented so far, are shown to have been privately scathing about Donald Trump's election claims even as they gave air-time to Trump allies Fox viewers plainly wanted to hear.
The moment isn't an exact analog to a prominent podcaster admitting the lie about Hunter Biden's laptop being a Russian plant because he also approved the lie, but it's close.
It's pleasant at least to know that Fox opinion hosts, such as Tucker Carlson and Laura Ingraham, had their wits about them on the evidence and the requirements of evidence. If as much attention were paid to revelations about other news outlets' faulty handling of the Russia-collusion farce, Hunter Biden's laptop or the FBI's actions in the 2016 election, we might be getting somewhere now.
Fox can comfort itself that its on-air sources took responsibility for their own allegations, unlike so many collusion stories where anonymous sources were allowed to advance their false claims under the imprimatur of major news organizations.
Fox viewers were also left in no doubt they were hearing a widely criticized, highly questionable, minority viewpoint about the election outcome. Fox's own news anchors told them so. So did almost every other news outlet.
A question this column has wrestled with more than once: When are the lies of a disreputable and widely discredited figure like Mr. Trump a bigger danger to the republic than lies that receive the near-universal endorsement of the establishment and its institutions?
The moment is bigger than it seems. Harvard's Martin Kulldorff and Stanford's Jay Bhattacharya have lent their names to a growing call for a Covid commission, also endorsed by this column, albeit for the limited purpose of examining the government's pandemic messaging, though it may be a distinction without a difference.
All the questions Profs. Kulldorff and Bhattacharya ask could also be asked of the media, starting with the one at the bottom of it all: Why ignore or downplay the reality of mild and asymptomatic spread and its visible corollaries? From this mistake flowed so many misguided, inefficient pandemic actions aimed at protecting the least-at-risk, which almost certainly did more harm than good. From this also flowed so much of the false and manipulative messaging now rightly being criticized, about masks, natural immunity, vaccine risk and benefit, and even the likelihood of dying from Covid.
In one way, I dissent from the critique of our health-care absolutists: The demand for their ministrations bubbled up from below. On Dec. 28, 2020, the New Yorker magazine devoted almost a whole issue to investigating the pandemic -- not the pandemic in front of its face, the pandemic of media myth, in which competent government officials somehow can stop a new, easily transmissible, world-wide respiratory virus from spreading.
In an in-house publication of the Fred Hutchison Cancer Center, virologist Jesse Bloom was speaking of the lab-leak hypothesis but his words strike me as having a wider applicability. He noted the strange spectacle of scientists and others caring less about finding the truth than about rooting for "one or the other possibility to be true."
Yes, and this collapse of respect for evidence is making society stupid. Social media is blamed at least by those who don't blame Mr. Trump for the lies of his enemies as well as his own. But the mechanism is unspecified. The mechanism, it seems to me, is "operant conditioning," or the simplest form of learning, the kind that paramecia do, in unconscious response to rewards and punishments in the environment.
Thanks to the very implausibility of the Trump claims, in the crisis at Fox News the unconscious became conscious. Participants aired their cognitive dissonance in anguished internal exchanges that are now part of the public record. The Trump allegations were newsworthy. The audience wanted to hear them. But they were also false. The moment is strikingly reminiscent of the secretly recorded lament four years earlier of a New York Times editor in front of his entire staff about the paper's failure to deliver the Trump collusion story its readers wanted.
The algorithms guarantee our future won't be without news sites that try to please their audiences. But the opportunity is obviously present also for news outlets to be a resort and refuge for consumers who want disciplined, rational, evidence-respecting claims that self-respecting reporters and editors have vetted and put their imprimatur on.
The ChatGPT moment, as almost everyone has realized in the past few weeks, makes even more important the survival of news businesses that maintain respect for evidence and standards of evidence.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
