An international trio of scientists shared the Nobel Prize in physics on Tuesday for pioneering ways to find the order hidden in complexity, laying the foundation for computer models that explore how human activity is changing global climate.
Half of the coveted prize was awarded to Giorgio Parisi of Italy's Sapienza University of Rome for his discovery of patterns in the interplay of order and disorder, on scales ranging from molecules to entire planets. His work makes it possible to describe seemingly random phenomena in areas from physics and neuroscience to machine learning, said the Royal Swedish Academy of Science, which announced the annual prize.
Dr. Parisi had his phone close at hand when the Nobel committee called early Tuesday. "In some sense I was not expecting it, but I knew there was some chance, so I kept the phone near me," he said. "I was very happy."
The other half of the prize was shared by Syukuro Manabe, a senior meteorologist at Princeton University, and Klaus Hasselmann at Germany's Max Planck Institute for Meteorology in Hamburg for their independent work on modeling the Earth's climate.
Taken together, the prize awards theory and practice.
"You think you will drown in complexity, but this science can show that simplicity can emerge and you can get an insight into the true behavior of these complex systems," said physicist Robbert Dijkgraaf, director of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. "It is difficult to think of something more complex than the world's climate."
Dr. Manabe's research, dating back to the 1960s, demonstrated how increased levels of carbon dioxide can lead to increased temperatures on the surface of the Earth, laying the foundation for the creation of climate models used today.
"The whole field of climate modeling originates with Suki," said Gabriel Vecchi, deputy director of Princeton's Cooperative Institute for Modeling the Earth System. "The idea that you can take something so complex as the climate system and code the equations that govern it and put them in a computer and use that to simulate the climate system started with him."
In the 1970s, Dr. Hasselmann in Hamburg created a model tying together weather and climate, helping to remove uncertainty over the reliability of climate models, despite weather being erratic and inconsistent, the academy said. His work, which includes methods for attributing the various impacts on climate from both human activity and natural phenomena, has been used to show how human carbon-dioxide emissions can cause increases in temperatures.
"I'm completely surprised," Dr. Hasselmann told the Nobel officials. "It is difficult for somebody not actually working in climate to recognize that we are actually changing climate until it has become quite obvious," he said.
Most scientists have coalesced around the idea that greenhouse-gas emissions from human activity have contributed to a warming climate since preindustrial times. The decision to honor the work of Messrs. Manabe, originally from Japan, and Hasselmann came a little less than a month before a United Nations summit on climate in Scotland.
Credit: By Robert Lee Hotz and Benjamin Katz
