The Pentagon is intensifying efforts to decouple U.S. defense companies' sprawling global supply chain from China, executives and department officials said.
The Defense Department said it has started using artificial intelligence to improve the way it analyzes whether aircraft parts, electronics and raw materials used by U.S. military contractors originate in China and other potential adversaries.
Defense contractors, encouraged by the Pentagon and lawmakers, have said they are weaning themselves off microelectronics and specialized metals from China, one of the biggest global suppliers. In the U.S., new facilities are under development to process rare-earth minerals, most of which remain widely sourced from China.
The Pentagon has identified China's rapidly expanding military as its main threat driving policy and, by extension, the Pentagon's own spending. China's defense budget has climbed 72% between 2012 and 2021, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.
That growth is helping drive increased U.S. spending on high-end weaponry including long-range missiles and nuclear submarines, and Defense Department leaders have said the U.S. is losing its technological advantage in key areas such as satellites and missiles. U.S. defense companies also expect additional military spending in coming years, in part because of the arms shipped from Western countries to help Ukraine.
Relying on China for circuit boards or Russia for titanium makes no sense if sanctions or conflict cut off supplies, Pentagon leaders have said. The recent heightening of tensions over Taiwan has added to the unease.
The Defense Department earlier this month stopped accepting new F-35 combat jets made by Lockheed Martin Corp. after being informed they contained magnets sourced from Honeywell International Inc. with metal alloys produced in China.
Honeywell disclosed to the Pentagon in recent weeks that engine components it made for the jets contained two alloys sourced from China that were turned into magnets. The company said it had identified an alternative supplier but didn't give details. Honeywell said it remains committed to supplying high-quality products, and Lockheed Martin said production continued at its plant in Fort Worth, Texas. The Pentagon said it expects a waiver will be issued to allow F-35 deliveries to resume.
Bill LaPlante, the Pentagon's acquisition chief, said a continuing probe is expected to show that the use of the Chinese alloys -- stretching back over a decade -- doesn't affect the security or airworthiness of the F-35. However, he said, the incident has highlighted vulnerabilities in the defense supply chain.
"Any company that says they know their supply chain is like a company that says it hasn't been hacked," Mr. LaPlante said at a media briefing on Sept 9.
The F-35 incident was a setback for the Pentagon's efforts to manage contractors' supply chains and identify potential vulnerabilities. Air Force and Army acquisition officials had said in recent months that efforts to minimize or eliminate Chinese content hadn't interrupted any programs.
Pentagon leaders have for years recognized potential vulnerabilities arising from Chinese-supplied raw materials and microelectronics. Those concerns gained prominence during the Trump administration, with a number of Pentagon studies identifying increasing reliance on China and other overseas suppliers. Pentagon officials said the Covid-19 pandemic exposed how fragile supply chains have become, even for high-end weapons, and the extent to which China remains the source for materials and components, including computer chips and rare-earth minerals used to make magnets and the chemicals used in explosives.
One of biggest concerns, said Pentagon and industry leaders, is with the U.S. reliance on China for 80% of rare-earth elements, sometimes called technology minerals, which are used in magnets for weapons-guidance systems as well as commercial applications such as electric-vehicle batteries. China has invested heavily in mining and refining rare earths over the past decades, and dominates the global supply chain.
Defense contractors and lobbyists said they agree with the broad thrust of the Pentagon's efforts to boost domestic production and require traceability of all materials. However, some said they have reservations about the added cost of compliance and how long the effort will take.
Credit: By Doug Cameron
