The stock market's slide early this past week left many investors reeling. Jeff Garrett, a 41-year-old lawyer in Texas, started buying.
Garrett used the Monday Aug. 5 selloff to load up on index funds. The strategy worked for him before. He bought into the Covid panic and stocks soon rebounded to new highs. "It takes a strong stomach," he said. "On the whole, markets have a tendency to go up."
The recent meltdown and subsequent ricochets are testing an investing tactic that carried U.S. stocks higher time and again in the past 15 years: buying the dip. In the years after the 2008-09 financial crisis, investors were rewarded for trying it. The longest bull market in history turned it into a rallying cry. The internet coined a shorthand term: BTD.
Generally, financial advisers say people should continue to invest through the market's swings, particularly those rooted in arcane trades originating halfway around the world. Since 1980, after a 5% drop from a recent high, the S&P 500 has generated a median return of 6% over the following three months, according to Goldman Sachs.
But just because a Wall Street strategy has worked for a long time doesn't mean it will forever. After the tech bubble burst, the S&P 500 took seven years to regain the heights of 2000. The Nasdaq Composite needed 15 years. And the pandemic era brought surprising changes to inflation and the economy -- the kind that can shift market dynamics for years.
Joe Meyer, a 39-year-old event coordinator on Long Island in New York, said he has no problem buying at a discount. He tends to pick up shares of popular index funds and well-known brands when prices fall. On Aug. 5, he purchased Nvidia, Walt Disney and CVS Health shares. "I don't panic at all. It's a long-term thing," said Meyer, who is investing for retirement.
For much of 2024, stocks seemed as though they would march ever higher. Investors hungry for a piece of an AI-powered future rushed into the market's tech giants. They drove the S&P 500 to 38 record closes and briefly made the chip maker Nvidia, a darling of the artificial-intelligence trade, the world's most valuable listed company.
Then the recent tumult arrived. The monthly jobs report revealed a slowdown in hiring, stoking fears of recession. A hawkish turn by Japan's central bank upset Wall Street's popular carry trade, through which investors borrow yen at ultralow interest rates to buy riskier assets like U.S. stocks. The S&P 500 fell 3% and the Dow Jones Industrial Average lost more than 1,000 points in the worst day for both in nearly two years. The S&P 500 ended the week down less than 0.1%.
The turmoil sent individual investors rushing to their trading accounts. So many tried to check their portfolios or to place trades on Aug. 5, Charles Schwab, Vanguard Group and Fidelity Investments experienced outages.
Buying the dip hasn't always reaped immediate benefits. In 2022, down days in the market were often followed by more declines, walloping investors again. The S&P 500 dropped 19%, its worst year since 2008.
Wall Street bears have a list of reasons to stay on alert, from signs the economy is slowing to a presidential election to intensifying conflict in the Middle East.
And stocks look relatively pricey. Companies in the S&P 500 are trading at about 20 times their projected earnings over the next 12 months, above a 10-year average of roughly 18, according to FactSet.
Generate image description

Credit: By Hannah Miao and Karen Langley
