BEIJING -- Chinese ride-sharing platform Didi Chuxing Technology Co. raised $4 billion in fresh funding, pushing its valuation closer to rival Uber Technologies Inc. and giving it ample money to spend on self-driving vehicles and other artificial-intelligence systems.
Investors in Didi's new funding include Japanese mega-fund-manager SoftBank Group Corp. and Mubadala Investment Co., an Abu Dhabi state fund, people familiar with the matter said Thursday. The company announced the funding without naming the investors.
The injection gives Beijing-based Didi $12 billion in cash reserves and a valuation of $56 billion, these people said. It also means that added together Didi has raised about $19 billion, the most venture capital ever raised by a startup, according to Dow Jones VentureSource.
While Uber's valuation was roughly $68 billion based on its last funding round in June 2016, a current SoftBank offer to purchase a sizable stake at a large discount would lower the U.S. ride-sharing company's valuation in the range of about $50 billion.
With its new financial power, Didi is in a better position to develop intelligent driving technologies against deep-pocketed competitors such as Alphabet Inc.'s Waymo LLC, Tesla Inc. and Chinese internet company Baidu Inc., industry analysts and consultants said. Didi, they said, is escalating its efforts, aided by the data it collects from its more than 450 million active users.
"The penetration of the average user is so much greater in China than in the U.S., so you actually could argue Didi is much better positioned from a perspective of training autonomous vehicles," said Chris DeAngelis, general manager of consultancy at Alliance Development Group.
Two years ago Didi's cash reserves totaled $3.5 billion. Much of the new cash Didi raised will be used to develop autonomous vehicles, such as self-driving buses, and developing public-transportation management programs to dispatch buses, subway trains and taxis based on traffic patterns, according to people familiar with the matter.
Didi faced a bruising subsidy-fueled battle with Uber for dominance in China, before the Chinese company acquired the U.S. rival's China operations last year. While Didi has invested in other ride-sharing platforms including GrabTaxi Holdings Pte., which operates in Thailand, Indonesia and other Southeast Asian countries, it has primarily focused on the domestic market.
In March, Didi opened a research-and-development lab in Silicon Valley, which focuses on intelligent driving technologies and AI-based security. The lab now has about 100 employees.
Some of the new funding will also be spent building an electric-car charging network.

Credit: By Alyssa Abkowitz
