LONDON -- Beijing is conducting espionage on what Western governments have said is an unprecedented scale, mobilizing security agencies, private companies and Chinese civilians in its quest to undermine rival states and bolster the country's economy.
Rarely does a week go by without a warning from a Western intelligence agency about the threat China presents.
In September alone, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said a Chinese state-linked firm hacked 260,000 internet-connected devices, including cameras and routers, in the U.S., Britain, France, Romania and elsewhere. A Congressional probe said Chinese cargo cranes used at U.S. seaports had embedded technology that could allow Beijing to secretly control them. The U.S. government alleged a former top aide to New York Gov. Kathy Hochul was a Chinese agent.
U.S. officials launched last week an effort to understand the consequences of the latest Chinese hack, which compromised systems the federal government uses for court-authorized network wiretapping requests.
Western spy agencies, unable to contain Beijing's activity, are raising the alarm publicly, urging businesses and individuals to be on alert in their interactions with China. But given the country is deeply entwined in the global economy, it is proving a Sisyphean task, said Calder Walton, a national-security expert at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government. Western governments "are coming to terms with events, in many ways, after the events," he said.
The Chinese government's press office, as well as the ministries of state security, public security and defense, didn't respond to requests for comment. Beijing has previously denied allegations of espionage targeting Western countries while portraying China as a frequent target of foreign hacking and intelligence-gathering operations.
Chinese leader Xi Jinping since taking power in 2012 has increasingly emphasized the importance of national security, calling on officials and ordinary citizens alike to ward off threats to China's interests. The result is a sweeping information-gathering effort whose scale and perseverance dwarfs that of Kremlin espionage during the Cold War and has jolted Western spy agencies.
China-backed hackers outnumber all of the FBI's cyber personnel at least 50 to 1, the U.S. agency said. One European agency estimates China's intelligence-gathering and security operations might comprise up to 600,000 people. "China's hacking program is larger than that of every other major nation, combined," FBI Director Christopher Wray said this year.
Complicating the West's response: Unlike with autocracies such as Iran or Russia, trade with China has for decades supported Western economic growth, which in turn underpins the West's long-term security. Most countries simply can't afford to slap China with sanctions and throw out its diplomats. "China is different," said Ken McCallum, the head of the U.K.'s domestic-intelligence agency, MI5.
The malign-activity risks intensifying as China's economic growth slows under Xi's increasingly authoritarian leadership. Beijing's intelligence apparatus will come under pressure to pilfer the innovation needed to bolster the economy and silence critics at home and abroad, officials said. "It all boils down to the security of the regime," said Nigel Inkster, a former director of operations at the British foreign-intelligence agency MI6.
Chinese activity ranges from the absurd to the hair-raising. In September, U.S. prosecutors alleged that five Chinese University of Michigan graduates were found in the middle of the night taking photos just feet away from military vehicles in a U.S. National Guard training exercise that included Taiwan military personnel. The men claimed to be stargazing.
This year, the U.K. government said Chinese-linked hackers had accessed the nation's voter-registration records, which include around 40 million people's home addresses. The U.S. government is investigating whether a Chinese state-linked hacking group burrowed into major U.S. broadband providers, potentially accessing U.S. law-enforcement wiretaps. Intelligence officials fret China is stealing swaths of private data to train advanced artificial-intelligence models.
As China becomes more assertive militarily, including increasing support for Russia in its war in Ukraine, its covert action also poses greater threats. Xi has ordered his military to be ready to invade Taiwan by 2027, the centenary of the founding of the People's Liberation Army, Western officials said. A war over Taiwan could draw China into conflict with the U.S., which is committed to ensuring the democratically self-ruled island can defend itself.
The FBI said this year that China had hijacked hundreds of routers and used them to infiltrate U.S. water and energy networks, raising concern of a pre-emptive attack on U.S. infrastructure if Washington were to intervene in a Chinese attempt to claim Taiwan. Congress in December banned the Pentagon from using any seaport worldwide that deploys the Chinese cargo-data platform Logink, out of fear classified information could be disclosed.
China also prepositioned malware on Indian power grids amid a border dispute in 2021 and on telecommunication networks in Guam, home to a large U.S. air base, analysts and officials said.
Central Intelligence Agency Director William Burns recently said he had visited China twice in the past year "to avoid unnecessary misunderstandings and inadvertent collisions."
There is worry of a dangerous mishap. Spy agencies in authoritarian states often tailor information to meet their bosses' world views. If Xi received faulty information, or didn't believe the information he was given, China could pre-emptively strike at vital foreign infrastructure.
China doesn't play by the old-school spy rulebooks, intelligence officials said. It doesn't seem to care if it is caught red-handed and, unlike Russia, it rarely makes efforts to swap its spies when they are arrested.
Another factor hampers a Western intelligence response: It is hard to spy on China. Beijing's intelligence operations are decentralized, stretching across myriad agencies and private-sector companies. They operate largely autonomously, making the system difficult to penetrate, and their methods appear haphazard, with a mix of private and state actors seemingly loosely guided by overarching aims laid out by senior officials. China also purged a whole cadre of officials working as U.S. spies a decade ago.
Underpinning China's activity is Xi's desire to consolidate his grip on power. He has cited the Soviet Union's sudden collapse in 1991 as a warning of what could befall communist rule in China if ideological controls are loosened. He created a national-security commission to centralize control over security work, and set an expansive definition of national security that spans the party's political dominance as well as China's economic strength and food sufficiency.
"Security is the prerequisite for development, and development is the guarantee of security," Xi told officials. "Security and development must be promoted simultaneously."
---
Chun Han Wong and Bertrand Benoit contributed to this article.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Why Do We Tolerate Beijing's Belligerence?" -- WSJ Oct. 22, 2024)
Credit: By Max Colchester and Daniel Michaels
