Small-cap stocks are expected to be among the great beneficiaries of any interest-rate cut. That isn't happening this time.
The small-cap-focused Russell 2000 index has slipped 1.1% since the bold interest-rate cut by the Federal Reserve two weeks ago, trailing the 1.2% advance of the large-cap S&P 500. That interrupted a rally among shares of small, domestically focused companies that kicked off in July, when a surprisingly cool inflation report bolstered investors' confidence that the central bank had achieved its goals.
The stocks' lackluster response to the Fed's September rate cut suggests there are lingering doubts about the economy's trajectory. Small caps are expected to rally when rates fall -- they typically outpace large-cap stocks in the six months after the first rate cut in a cycle, according to Bank of America Global Research.
That is because many small stocks are closely tied to the health of the economy. They tend to be sensitive to changes in interest rates because they have more floating-rate debt than their large-cap peers.
Shares of smaller companies across industries have tumbled of late. The digital-media company LiveOne is down 53% since the Fed's rate cut, the fashion company Stitch Fix has fallen 34%, and the vacation rental management company Vacasa is off 37%.
Although there are many signs that the economy remains on a strong footing, some investors worry that the growing optimism that the Fed will bring down inflation without a sharp rise in unemployment is misplaced.
"Investors are a little too dismissive of something that's worse than that," said James Ragan, director of wealth management research at D.A. Davidson. "It's a lot of confusion, and to me, it suggests that below the surface, the soft landing outcome is still a little bit in question."
All eyes will be on Friday's jobs report for clues about whether hiring is rebounding after a summer slowdown. Weak data in the coming months could force the Fed to ease policy more aggressively.
Sentiment surveys already suggest that jitters are building. Last week a measure of consumer confidence suffered its biggest one-month decline in more than three years. And a recent survey of confidence among small-business owners fell more than expected in early September, keeping the gauge below its 50-year average for 32 consecutive months, according to the National Federation of Independent Business.
"We're in a Goldilocks moment for the U.S. economy," said Rich Nuzum, chief investment strategist at Mercer. "But Goldilocks moments are rare, and they tend not to last long. So when does something go bump in the night?"
Small caps have trailed other major stock indexes this year. The Russell 2000 -- composed of companies with an average market cap of $3.43 billion -- is up 7.6%. Enthusiasm over generative artificial-intelligence technology has propelled the S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite to gains of 19% each.
The recent underperformance makes small stocks look relatively cheap. Companies in the Russell 2000 are trading at 15.8 times their projected earnings over the next 12 months, below their 10-year average multiple of 16.4, according to FTSE Russell. In comparison, the S&P 500 trades at a multiple of 21.5.
Small caps were expected to see some relief from lower interest rates.
About 36% of the debt held by companies in the Russell 2000, excluding financial firms, is floating-rate, BofA data shows. That means their loan payments will come down as benchmark rates decline.
Rates are still higher than they were for most of the past decade. And the bulk of small-cap debt will mature over the next five to six years, according to BofA strategists. If rates stay higher for longer, their borrowing costs could increase when they refinance.
Small caps face other challenges, too. About 42% of the companies in the Russell 2000 are unprofitable, compared with 6% in the S&P 500, according to data from Torsten Slok, chief economist at Apollo.
"It's profits that matter, and the profits are not being generated by the Russell 2000 companies," said Michael Rosen, managing partner and chief investment officer at Angeles Investments. "They're being generated by these big megacap companies, and that's why they're the market leaders."
Credit: By Hardika Singh
