Millions of consumers are using their smartphones to shop instead of lining up at stores after chowing down on turkey this year, accelerating a fundamental change in retailing as more people spend online.
Better mobile e-commerce sites and easy one-click payment options -- as well as earlier deals -- are making the 24 hours that started Thursday evening the biggest online spending period of the year, according to retail experts. The period is expected to eclipse Cyber Monday three days away and give brick-and-mortar stores new competition for Black Friday.
Software company Adobe Systems Inc. reports that online sales as of 5 p.m. Thursday grew 17% to $1.52 billion, while traffic from smartphones increased 15% year-over-year.
Consumers last year spent 19% more online on Black Friday than on Cyber Monday, according to Salesforce.com Inc.'s Commerce Cloud, which analyzes data from 500 million shoppers world-wide across more than 2,750 retail sites. Salesforce expects the pattern to repeat this year. Over Thanksgiving weekend last year, an estimated 109 million people shopped online, compared with 99 million in stores, according to a National Retail Federation survey.
The ease of shopping on phones has helped push that trend, prompting consumers who previously just researched deals online to actually click the buy button, said Rob Garf, vice president of industry strategy and insights at Salesforce, which works with companies including L'Oreal SE, Adidas AG and PetSmart Inc. Mobile devices have helped "equal the playing field as technology caught up with demand."
More than half of Amazon.com Inc.'s shoppers last Thanksgiving used their mobile, the company said.
"Honestly, I think there's a time during Thanksgiving festivities where you're a little burnt out on too many people, too much conversation," said Dorion Carroll, vice president of mobile shopping at Amazon. People sneak off to do a little gift shopping. He admits, "I do that."
So did Rachel Guffey. After her Thanksgiving dinner and a round of family trivia, the 33-year-old dog treat baker from Lawrence, Kan., started shopping on her phone "right here in my pocket" for cheap videogames and DVDs on Amazon and Target Corp.
"It's just a lot more convenient," she says.
Amazon is the largest beneficiary by far of the boom in mobile e-commerce starting on Thanksgiving. It has captured about 42 cents of every dollar spent online this year on average, according to market research firm Slice Intelligence, which tracks a panel of more than 5 million U.S. shoppers.
Traditional retailers are hoping to get in on some of the action. Companies including Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and Target are spending heavily on e-commerce by improving shipping speeds or website infrastructure. But they haven't given up on foot traffic. Lower prices and different deals in store -- as well as offers to pick up online orders -- are among the tactics brick-and-mortar retailers are attempting this holiday season.
Physical stores are also adding mobile perks, including notifying sales associates of shopper preferences, pinging customers with deals and using in-store beacon technology to direct shoppers to express checkout lines. This helps secure purchases as customers check prices on their phones.
"Even if you go to the store, you are still shopping on mobile," adds Nitin Mangtani, founder and chief executive of mobile commerce platform PredictSpring and former head of Google Shopping. He works with retailers including Calvin Klein and Charlotte Russe.
As more people shop online earlier in the holiday weekend, stores are adapting. Some stores, like outdoor retailer Recreational Equipment Inc., are closed for Thanksgiving and Black Friday, while others have cut back on or changed hours.
Improved technology is driving the shift in spending behavior. Employees no longer wait to get back to the office on Monday for better computers and faster internet access. Smartphones suffice.
Kat Furtado, a mother of two young children, now does most of her shopping on her Samsung S7. "It's infinitely easier for me to check out deals on my phone," she says.
The San Diego resident is in the market this weekend for bigger ticket items including a crib mattress and an elliptical machine, as well as some smaller gifts from sites like Etsy Inc. and Sephora. It's a hassle to pull out the computer, but her phone is always there.
That helps explain why on Thanksgiving last year, the mobile share of online browsing peaked at 62% at 6 p.m. in local time zones as shoppers finished up their meals, according to Salesforce. Purchases conducted on phones peaked in the early morning on both Thursday and Friday as shoppers woke up.
Traditional and e-commerce retailers alike are working to improve shopping by phone, making websites that better fit the smaller screen size and apps that make it easier to see items and purchase them. Many now employ artificial intelligence technology that makes better product suggestions and limits the need to browse.
As retailers have improved the mobile shopping experience, payment options have also caught up. Apple Pay, PayPal, Amazon Pay and other mobile payment options have removed the need to enter payment and shipping information, greasing the process. Salesforce this holiday season expects as many as 10% of all orders placed on iPhones to use Apple Pay versus almost nothing last year when the service was still new.
Brandon Intelligator, a Los Angeles-based attorney, expects to browse deals on his phone this weekend. He downloaded Amazon's app a year ago, something that has fundamentally changed the way he shops.
"As soon as I downloaded the app, I was like: 'I can do this from my phone,'" Mr. Intelligator said. He estimates he makes 80% of his purchases on Amazon, excluding groceries. "My credit card information is saved in there. My shipping information is saved in there. It seems foolish not to do it that way."

Credit: By Laura Stevens
