We're constantly told that one of the potentially biggest benefits of artificial intelligence is in the area of health. By collecting large amounts of data, AI can create all sorts of drugs for diseases that have been resistant to treatment.
But the price of that could be that we have to share more of our medical information. After all, researchers can't collect large amounts of data if people aren't willing to part with that data.
We wanted to see where our readers stand on the balance of privacy versus public-health gains as part of our series on ethical dilemmas created by the advent of AI.
Here are the questions we posed . . .
AI may be able to discover new medical treatments if it can scan large volumes of health records. Should our personal health records be made available for this purpose, if it has the potential to improve or save millions of lives? How would we guard privacy in that case?
. . .and some of the answers we received.
Rely on nonpartisan overseers
While my own recent experience with a data breach highlights the importance of robust data security, I recognize the potential for AI to revolutionize healthcare. To ensure privacy, I would be more comfortable if an independent, nonpartisan body -- overseen by medical professionals, data-security experts, and citizen representatives -- managed a secure database.
-- Sam Garcia, Laguna Beach, Calif.
Executive-level oversight
I think we can make AI scanning of health records available with strict privacy controls. Create an AI-CEO position at medical facilities with extreme vetting of that individual before hiring them.
-- Dawn Taggblom, DeLand, Fla.
Anonymity cuts both ways
Yes. Simply sanitize the health records of any identifying information, which is quite doable. Although there is an argument to be made that AI may discover something that an individual needs or wants to know.
-- Jeff D. Emerson, Portland, Maine
Well worth it
This actually sounds like a very GOOD use of AI. There are several methods for anonymizing data which would allow for studies over massive cross-sections of the population without compromising individuals' privacy. The AI would just be doing the same things meta-studies do now, only faster and maybe better.
-- Leon Serfaty, Westport, Conn.
Human touch
My concern is that the next generations of doctors will rely more heavily, maybe exclusively, on AI and lose the ability or even the desire to respect the art of medicine which demands one-on-one interaction with a patient for discussion and examination (already a dying skill).
-- Rebecca Bechhold, Daniel Island, S.C.
Postmortem
People should be able to sign over rights to their complete "anonymized" health record upon death just as they can sign over rights to their organs. Waiting for death for such access does temporarily slow down the pace of such research, but ultimately will make the research better. Data sets will be more complete, too. Before signing over such rights, however, a person would have to be fully informed on how their relatives' privacy may also be affected.
-- Nicola Pohl, Bloomington, Ind.
Pay me or make it free for all
As long as this is open-source and free, they can use my records. I have a problem with people using my data to make a profit without compensation.
-- Michael E. Dziubinski, Hood River, Ore.
Privacy above all
As a free society, we value freedoms and privacy, often over greater utilitarian benefits that could come. AI does not get any greater right to infringe on that liberty than anything else does.
-- Jeff Schloemer, Menlo Park, Calif.
Privacy doesn't exist anyway
If it is decided to extend human lives indefinitely, then by all means, scan all health records. As for privacy, there is no such thing. All databases, once established, will eventually, if not immediately, be accessed or hacked by both the good and bad guys.
-- Wister Smith, Scottsboro, Ala.
The data's already out there
I think it should be made available. We already sign our rights for information over to large insurance companies. Making health records in the aggregate available for helping AI spot potential ways to improve medical care makes sense to me.
-- Eric Nilson, Shaker Heights, Ohio
Overarching benefit
Of course they should be made available. Privacy is no serious concern when the benefits are so huge for so many.
-- Michael Esser, Los Angeles
---
Demetria Gallegos is an editor for The Wall Street Journal in New York. Email her at demetria.gallegos@wsj.com.
Credit: By Demetria Gallegos
