Many banks have blamed rogue traders for big holes in their books. A once-highflying tech firm is blaming a rogue salesperson.
WANdisco PLC, a U.S. and U.K.-based data firm and a rising star of Britain's tech scene, said Thursday that a single, senior sales employee was responsible for what it described as "significant, sophisticated and potentially fraudulent irregularities" related to purchase orders and their related revenue and bookings.
It didn't name the individual. Shares of WANdisco, which have risen sharply over the past year amid a flurry of announced big orders, were suspended on the U.K.'s AIM stock exchange, a marketplace for smaller companies.
WANdisco said the irregularities would significantly affect the company's cash position and leave uncertain the company's overall financial position and ability to continue operating as a going concern.
It said it now expects anticipated fiscal year 2022 revenue to be as low as $9 million, instead of the $24 million it previously reported.
The company also said Thursday it had no confidence in its announced fiscal year 2022 bookings expectations.
Outside of finance, it is relatively rare for a company to blame such a large accounting issue on a single individual. That isn't the case in the banking world, where the term rogue trader has become a part of industry vocabulary.
One of the earliest and most famous examples: Nick Leeson's unauthorized trades led to the bankruptcy of Barings Bank in the 1990s, earning a prison sentence in Singapore. Mr. Leeson now works as a consultant advising companies on trading risk management.
In the case of WANdisco, some analysts raised concerns about internal controls at the company generally.
"The idea that a single person has managed to inflate the revenue by significantly more than management now believes it will report goes to show there is something very wrong with how the business is run," said Russ Mould, investment director at brokerage AJ Bell.
A representative of WANdisco said the company was unable to comment beyond the statement disclosing the issues early Thursday.
WANdisco, which has joint headquarters in San Ramon, Calif., and Sheffield, England, is a relative minnow in the global tech ecosystem.
Until Thursday, it was seen as a budding tech standout in a country that hasn't produced many.
David Richards, its chairman, chief executive and co-founder, was honored last year by the late Queen Elizabeth II.
It describes itself as a "data-activation platform," helping companies upload their data to the cloud to affect internal improvement and to feed artificial intelligence-led projects.
It has said customers include Advanced Micro Devices Inc., and it lists on its website partners including Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Amazon.com Inc.
Its share price had risen more than fourfold in the past 12 months, before Thursday's suspension.
In a sign of its recent ascendancy, it created a buzz in London earlier this week when it said it was investigating a potential listing in New York, one of several European companies that have floated the idea as they seek deeper capital markets.
WANdisco said it made the disclosure after an investigation by the company's chief executive and chief financial officer and said the possible fraud may have given rise to a material misstatement of the company's financial position.
The company said it was conducting a probe with its external legal and professional advisers into the irregularities and into the company's financial position as a result.
Credit: By Kyle Morris
