Jeff Blau
CEO, Related Cos., the real-estate developer of New York's Hudson Yards
One category that drives significant changes [in the real estate industry] is demand for flexibility. WeWork is the perfect example. It woke up landlords and told us what our customers actually want: shorter-term leases and no upfront capital. And they're willing to pay a lot more for that flexibility. Skills for our employees won't change that much. But as our tenants demand new environmental standards, there's going to be a lot of mechanical engineering demand and changes in that role. High-rise construction itself hasn't really been automated; you might see some things like apartment walls that come prefabricated, with electricity, plumbing, utilities built into the wall system.
David Baszucki
CEO and co-founder, Roblox Corp., the maker of an online gaming hub with 100 million active monthly users
Just as the movie industry in the 1910s and '20s went through a blossoming of tools and types of work, gaming is at the very early phase of that. Jobs will be more varied, and teams will continue to get larger and more distributed. A [game development] team may be situated in Lithuania with an artist in Vietnam and coders in Argentina. The developers may be 15 years old, as it's easier to get into the digital economy than a traditional job [at that age]. We'll see [more] companies where there is no central office: All communication is digital and employees come together once a year for an off-site. Additionally, digital civility will sit side by side with the quality of the tech and experience. To get the industry to a point where it's just as safe to digitally watch or interact as it was to read a book, there will be a huge growth in technical roles like machine learning, natural language processing and image classification, as well as moderation, filter-training and, further up the stack, corporate digital ethicists and corporate policy makers -- the people who decide what's okay and what's not okay.
Alma Har'el
Director, "Honey Boy,"; founder, Free the Work, a database of emerging and underrepresented talent in creative industries
Right now, [businesses and creators] that are looking to hire new talent come up against agencies, production companies, managers. In the same way that Spotify has changed how we discover music, Free the Work is trying to change how we discover talent. You can share a reel with your co-producer the same way you can share a playlist. The middle men will have more accountability for the talent they are bringing to the front. When you work on a set and with actors, it's all about exploring the human condition. I have discovered a few things that I haven't been able to do before, thanks to technology. My cinematographer managed to build a system that relied on Wi-Fi and connected all the lights in the room to an iPad which she could DJ in real time outside of the room while actors were moving in it. But at the end of the day, the heart of the work is really about connecting on a human level, and that's never going to change.
Christina Tosi
Two-time James Beard Award winner; chef and owner, Milk Bar, a dessert and bakery brand
You will see a lot more [in the food world] the equivalent of a stylist for fashion: someone who is helping connect your idea with reality. I can see that happening in the grocery store: [this new food service worker] standing near the checkout aisle asking, "Oh, you're roasting a chicken? Are you rubbing it? Brining it? What are you stuffing in it?" We're going to see a lot more of this connectivity. Some of it could be digitally enabled and others in real life: helping people talk through what they're looking for and how they're going to achieve it. I also think it will be a lot easier [to enter the restaurant industry], because people are getting creative about not only the food they're making but how they feed people. You think of the world of the pop-up; people are just hosting dinners at their home and finding moments and opportunities to get the word out. Your restaurant will no longer just be that you make great food. The food businesses that stay around will have to understand the business.
Esther Choo
Emergency physician and associate professor of emergency medicine at the Oregon Health & Science University; founding member, Time's Up Health Care
One thing I anticipate is the very firm barriers between different parts of care being increasingly dismantled. There used to be this sense that you come into the emergency department, and you get emergency care. Technology will allow us to continue monitoring outside the walls of the hospital so that you're virtually in the hospital. Now we're experimenting with telemedicine, like portable monitors on your chest that can capture cardiac events. You will see a lot more options for communicating with patients, monitoring them, connecting them to needed care, bringing them into a healthcare facility only when necessary and streamlining things so there isn't as much of an administrative burden. I also expect to see more integration of electronic and telehealth platforms. Right now, we have one system for electronic health records, another for ultrasounds, a different system for clinical decision-making. I have half a dozen apps on my phone. The emerging workforce we need can figure out how to get these systems to talk to each other and feel seamless from the patient and healthcare provider's perspective.

Credit: By Michelle Ma
