Uber Technologies said continued demand for its ride-share and delivery services boosted its revenue in the first quarter, offsetting weak results from its smaller freight division.
The San Francisco-based company said Tuesday that revenue for the three months through March rose 29% from a year earlier to $8.82 billion. It also increased the number of consumers and trips, and the value of transactions, on its platform. The sales expansion was in line with Wall Street's expectations.
While Uber posted a loss during the quarter, one of its most closely watched financial metrics -- adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization -- hit $761 million, beating Wall Street's expectations.
That figure strips out some expenses that executives consider outside a company's core operations. Uber has long pointed to it to signal a path to profit.
Uber shares climbed 12% on Tuesday. Its stock has risen 17% over the past 12 months.
Uber projected continuing growth and said it expects adjusted earnings of between $800 million and $850 million in the current June quarter, above what analysts surveyed by FactSet had been expecting.
That outlook signals that the company is "well positioned to improve our competitive position" even as "the operating environment adjusts to a period of tighter capital availability and higher interest rates," Chief Executive Officer Dara Khosrowshahi said.
The company narrowed its quarterly loss to $157 million from $5.93 billion a year earlier when its bottom line was hit by plummeting stock prices and the diminishing value of Uber's investments in other companies.
Uber's rides and delivery expansion offset weak results from its smaller freight division, whose revenue declined 23% during the quarter. The unit cut about 150 people, or roughly 3% of its staff, earlier this year. Uber hasn't made widespread layoffs as other tech companies have in recent months.
"We now expect to hold head count flat to down through the coming quarters," Mr. Khosrowshahi said.
Uber's delivery business became its lifeline during the pandemic, as people ordered restaurant food and groceries delivered to their homes. That business has continued to expand even since restaurants reopened and, though growth has cooled from pandemic peaks, Uber Eats has improved its margins by rolling out ads on the platform, raising people's order totals by expanding into higher-value items such as alcohol and lowering delivery costs by combining those items with food.
The company said its advertiser base grew more than 70% year over year to cover more than 345,000 businesses, most of which advertise on Uber Eats.
Uber's ride-share business had struggled with a yearlong driver shortage since the U.S. reopened after pandemic lockdowns.
But the company was quicker to invest in driver bonuses and roll out new features to entice gig workers, gaining market share and drivers at the expense of rival Lyft.
Lyft's stock has fallen more than 60% in the past 12 months. The company cut 26% of its staff last week, its second round of cuts in recent months. Last month, it also hired a new CEO. Lyft is scheduled to report its first-quarter results on Thursday.
Mr. Khosrowshahi said the company added more than one million active drivers during the quarter worldwide, resulting in a 35% year-over-year jump in active drivers.
He didn't disclose how many ride-share drivers the company has in the U.S. but said that driver engagement was up in the U.S. and Canada even as Uber had pulled back on bonuses compared with the same quarter a year earlier.
Being better supplied, Mr. Khosrowshahi said, led fares in the region to decline 7% from highs in the second quarter of 2022.
The number of rides and delivery trips on Uber grew at a faster pace than the booking value of those transactions during the quarter, which executives said shows that growth was led by trip volume rather than higher prices.
Mr. Khosrowshahi said North American customers who started using Uber after the pandemic spent more time and money on the app than users before the pandemic.
The CEO added that the company plans to leverage artificial intelligence to try to build better chatbots for support and to make it easier to book an Uber to or from the airport.
Credit: By Preetika Rana
