Tech investor David Sacks has built a reputation as a combative contrarian. With his appointment as White House AI and crypto czar, he suddenly finds himself near the center of political power, with an opportunity to shape policies key to Silicon Valley and himself.
Sacks, with more than a million followers on X, has been one of the loudest Silicon Valley voices supporting Republicans, putting his money, contacts, home and social-media muscle behind President-elect Donald Trump.
As co-founder of venture firm Craft Ventures, Sacks's investment portfolio is dotted with crypto and artificial-intelligence companies, including a stake in Elon Musk's AI startup, xAI. Sacks didn't respond to requests for an interview.
While the exact responsibilities for the new, part-time position are still unclear, it could create conflicts of interest with his fund.
He might need to divest from his AI and crypto investments to take a position in the Trump administration unless he gets a waiver from the president, said Richard Painter, who served as a chief ethics counsel for former President George W. Bush.
After Trump won the election, Sacks said he looked forward to the end of a Biden administration marked by plans to increase regulation of crypto and other tech.
"Those days are about to be over," he said on his podcast.
Sacks was born in South Africa in 1972 and moved to Tennessee with his family when he was a child.
He has been a rhetorical brawler since his undergraduate days at Stanford University in the early '90s, when he honed the persona that he has displayed to larger audiences on X and his podcast as his wealth has grown.
After enrolling, he joined the Stanford Review, a conservative libertarian newspaper founded by Peter Thiel. In those days, the paper attacked multiculturalism and political correctness on campus.
One column Sacks wrote in 1993, when he was editor in chief, was headlined "Homosexuality on Campus: Too Much of a Bad Thing." In the article, viewed by the Journal, Sacks referred to some homosexual behavior as "deviance." He alleged that anonymous gay sex was occurring in Stanford bathrooms, something, he said, lent credence to the American Psychiatric Association's prior classification of homosexuality as a mental disorder.
Sacks reveled in the minor stir this caused on campus.
"My last column established two things. First, that I have balls the size of Cleveland," he wrote in the Review the next week. "Second, that I have become the champion of the heterosexual ethic on campus (if not its most highly successful practitioner)."
After the Journal inquired about his college writings, Sacks responded on X: "If Legacy Media is still combing through your college writings 30 years after you graduated, you probably did something right."
In 1995, Sacks and Thiel co-wrote a book, "The Diversity Myth," that drew on reporting from their newspaper.
The Review proved fertile ground not just for conservative thought but also for entrepreneurship.
Sacks and Thiel teamed up with Review alum Keith Rabois and others to launch a tech startup that would become PayPal. First, it merged with another startup, X.com, founded by Musk, another South African immigrant.
When eBay bought PayPal for $1.5 billion, its founders made a fortune, but not before Sacks helped lead a coup to push Musk out of the company. Any hard feelings between the two didn't last.
Sacks took his profits to Hollywood, an infamous money sink for interlopers. He defied the odds, producing the successful satire "Thank You for Smoking" in 2006. That same year, he founded another startup that became Yammer, which he sold to Microsoft for $1.2 billion in 2012. During these years, he made prescient angel investments in startups such as Palantir, SpaceX, Airbnb, Uber and Lyft.
His success in picking and leading companies has been powered by his ability to synthesize large amounts of information, develop clever strategies, and act quickly, said a business associate who has worked with him for years.
Sacks flaunted his wealth in 2012, throwing a Marie Antoinette-themed 40th birthday he called the "Let Them Eat Cake" party. Guests were fitted for 18th-century French costumes at local Los Angeles shops.
Though pugnacious in debate, Sacks is an introvert, said people who know him. While an executive at benefits startup Zenefits, he sometimes avoided riding elevators with others and walked to an apartment across the street from the office where he could make calls and use the bathroom, said these people.
Credit: By Rolfe Winkler and Angel Au-Yeung
