The use of a robot by Dallas police to kill a gunman after he'd shot a number of police officers appears to have been the first time U.S. law enforcement intentionally used a robot lethally, experts said.
Dallas officials said Friday that officers decided to use a bomb-disposal robot jury-rigged with C-4 explosives after negotiating with the suspect for several hours and then exchanging gunfire with him. as Micah Xavier Johnson, a 25-year-old Army veteran who served a tour in Afghanistan.
"We saw no other option but to use our bomb robot, and place a device on its extension for it to detonate where the suspect was," Dallas Police Chief David Brown said at a news conference. "Other options would have exposed our officers to grave danger. The suspect is deceased as a result of detonating the bomb."
Law-enforcement officials, security researchers and robot manufacturers said Friday that the robot's use was a first for U.S. law enforcement, opening a new chapter in how police deploy technology to combat threats, including active gunmen.
Militaries around the world have robots intended for combat, including armed drones. But few, if any, police departments own such technology, researchers and robot makers said.
Many local law-enforcement agencies own robots designed to inspect dangerous situations or disarm explosives. Such robots typically include a movable arm, a microphone and several cameras or sensors. Authorities control the devices remotely so they can see around a corner, inspect suspicious packages or disarm explosives, often by shooting pressurized water or clay at a bomb, robot makers said.
Mark Lomax, executive director of the National Tactical Officers Association, a group for members of SWAT and similar teams, said authorities have used such robots to monitor a gunman behind a barricade, communicate with him, or deliver a requested item.
"But this is the first time it was used as a means to terminate the actor," said Mr. Lomax, a former major with the Pennsylvania State Police.
The lethal use raises new questions about deadly force.
"Police are permitted to use deadly force to protect themselves or others, but what does it mean...when the police may be far away?" said Elizabeth Joh, a criminal law professor at the University of California Davis. "Do we want lethally armed police robots to become an ordinary part of policing? Do we want such robots to have artificial intelligence? The Dallas incident shows that these aren't just fanciful hypotheticals."
Former Boston Police Commissioner Ed Davis said police rules allow officers to be creative. The rules governing use of force "don't speak to the type of weapon," he said. Once police have authority to use fatal force, "you can use it in any way you need to." Most U.S. bomb squads have access to C-4, a deadly explosive, he noted.
Seth Stoughton, a University of South Carolina law professor who focuses on police regulation, said the Dallas incident could prompt other police to use robots similarly, including in situations that aren't justified. "We might see instances where [robots] are used lethally and they shouldn't be, because they are easy to use and because they may seem safer than other options," he said. "We have to at least acknowledge some risk of overuse."
The incident also could add to the debate around robotic warfare. Dozens of top technologists and scientists signed a letter last year of autonomous weapons.
Peter Singer, a defense-technology researcher at the New America Foundation, said connecting the Dallas incident to that debate is misguided because the police robot was manually controlled and used in an ad-hoc fashion.
Makers of police robots said they don't expect law-enforcement clients to begin clamoring for the devices for use as a weapon against suspects.
Jack Vongdouangchanh , an executive at police-robot maker Icor Technology Inc., said there is some talk in his industry about putting tasers on robots, "but that's a wish list, mostly."
QinetiQ PLC sells tactical robots armed with shotguns to law enforcement, intended to blow open doors, not to harm people. Dan Deguire, Qinetiq's U.S. head of tactical robots, said his police clients have never discussed using a robot lethally.
"That's not why they would buy a robot," he said. "I have a feeling [Dallas] was a very desperate situation."
Eric Ivers, president of tactical-robot maker RoboteX Inc., said his law-enforcement clients have never seriously asked him about using the robot as a weapon. "In jest someone said, 'Can you put a gun on it?'
"Well, you can put a gun on anything," Mr. Ivers said. "If someone asked us to sell to them for that purpose, we would almost certainly refuse."
Jon Kamp contributed to this article.
Write to Jack Nicas at jack.nicas@wsj.com
Credit: By Jack Nicas
