A Delaware judge upheld her earlier ruling striking down Elon Musk's multibillion-dollar pay package, plunging Tesla's board into more uncertainty over how to compensate its superstar chief executive for a decade of work.
The court's decision follows a shareholder vote earlier this year approving the pay package for a second time. Tesla had argued that the vote addressed many of the court's criticisms that Musk's compensation deal had been flawed, partly because of insufficient disclosures to shareholders.
The judge, Chancellor Kathaleen McCormick, had in January ordered the entire package be rescinded, saying directors were beholden to Musk and the approval process for the pay deal was tainted and lacked transparency.
McCormick said in her latest opinion that she wasn't swayed by the second shareholder vote. Lawyers for Tesla and Musk "got creative" with their arguments to overturn her prior ruling, but ultimately their position wasn't backed up by legal precedent, she added.
She also said there were no grounds to reverse a ruling based on evidence occurring after the trial's end and that Tesla's disclosures to shareholders in June contained "multiple, material misstatements" that made it ineffective.
The judge additionally ruled on the legal fees for the plaintiffs attorneys in the case, saying their original request for $5.6 billion was "a bold ask" in a case about excessively high executive compensation. Instead, McCormick said the lawyers, representing Tesla shareholder Richard Tornetta, are entitled to $345 million in either cash or Tesla shares.
"The court's decision is wrong, and we're going to appeal," Tesla posted on its official account on the social media platform X. Musk also responded to the ruling in an X post, saying that shareholders, not judges, should control company votes.
The ruling marks another setback for Tesla's directors, who have said the record stock-option deal was necessary to ensure Musk stayed focused on the carmaker at a time it is facing slower growth in its automotive business.
Musk oversees five other companies besides Tesla, including artificial-intelligence venture xAI which has raised billions of dollars from private investors. In recent weeks, Musk's attention has been further divided after agreeing to help President-elect Donald Trump audit government regulations and expenditures through a proposed Department of Government Efficiency.
Bernstein Litowitz Berger & Grossmann, the law firm representing Tornetta, said in a statement that it hopes the "well-reasoned decision will end this matter for the shareholders of Tesla." The firm added that it will look forward to defending the ruling on appeal. Tesla, Musk and the other current and former directors named in the suit didn't reply to a request for comment.
The ruling is the latest development in a legal dispute that dates to 2018 when shareholders ratified an unusual compensation package for the Tesla chief executive. Musk agreed to forgo a cash salary and instead would be issued stock options in return for hitting milestones tied to Tesla's market value, revenue and profitability.
---
Becky Peterson and Erin Mulvaney contributed to this article.
Credit: By Sean McLain
