Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. and Snap Inc. are embracing the much talked-about artificial-intelligence technology popularized by OpenAI's viral ChatGPT chatbot.
Meta is establishing a generative AI group aimed at accelerating adoption of the technology across the company, Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said Monday. Meta, which also owns Instagram and messaging app WhatsApp, is centralizing staff that are working on the AI technology from across the company to achieve faster breakthroughs it can apply to different products, Mr. Zuckerberg said.
"In the short term, we'll focus on building creative and expressive tools," the CEO said on Instagram. "Over the longer term, we'll focus on developing AI personas that can help people in a variety of ways."
Snap on Monday also signaled it was making a bet on OpenAI's technology. The company known for its popular Snapchat app, said it had begun rolling out its own AI experimental chatbot to users who subscribe to its $3.99 a month subscription service, Snapchat+.
Tech companies more broadly have moved swiftly to embrace generative AI developments in recent months after the San Francisco-based AI research firm OpenAI launched a chatbot called ChatGPT in November that went viral. Tools like ChatGPT and others allow users to ask written questions and receive responses in a conversational format as opposed to seeing a list of search results.
Microsoft Corp., which has invested in OpenAI, announced this month that it was adding the technology behind ChatGPT to its Bing search engine to chip away at Google's dominance in the search market. It has given a select group of users access to the new Bing to try the system. Alphabet Inc.'s Google also said this month that it was rolling out its own conversational AI service, called Bard, to an early group of testers.
Meta said its team initially is looking into ways to use the technology to enhance WhatsApp and Messenger, as well as with Instagram filters and video.
Snap said it is making its chatbot, called My AI, available only to Snapchat+ subscribers as social-media companies are trying to drive users to their paid services amid upheaval in the digital ad market. Twitter Inc. and Meta both have also launched subscription offerings, trying to lure customers with blue check-mark verification badges and promises of increased customer support in the case of the latter. Snapchat+ has reached more than 2.5 million subscribers since its launch last summer, Snap said. The Verge earlier reported on Snap's AI technology rollout.
Snap has been one of the companies hardest hit by ad-market turmoil, driven both by companies pulling back on spending amid economic downturn concerns and changes Apple Inc. made that made it more difficult to track users and target ads. Its subscription service is an attempt to diversify its revenue, though the company has indicated it doesn't fully expect to replace ad revenue with earnings from its subscriptions.
The social-media company late last month said revenue growth had stalled in the last three months of 2022 and that sales were likely to drop in the current quarter.
The AI technology isn't without flaws. Within a week of launch, users of Microsoft's new Bing called out the technology for providing inaccurate information, such as giving the results of last year's SuperBowl when asked about this year's. It also sometimes has given disturbing responses.
Microsoft responded by saying that the search engine is still a work in progress and that it would limit the amount of questions users could ask it a day.
Snap, in its announcement, said mistakes could occur with its chatbot that uses OpenAI technology customized for Snapchat.
"My AI is prone to hallucination and can be tricked into saying just about anything. Please be aware of its many deficiencies and sorry in advance!" the company said, also warning: "Please do not share any secrets with My AI and do not rely on it for advice."
Mr. Zuckerberg has embraced hot technology trends before. In 2021, he renamed Facebook to Meta Platforms as part of his bet on the metaverse, a futuristic, more immersive vision of the internet that largely hasn't materialized yet. The company has struggled financially since then, in part because of the same disruptions to the digital ad business that have challenged Snap.
After posting three consecutive quarters of declining sales, Meta said in its most recent earnings report that market conditions were improving, and interviews and internal documents viewed by The Wall Street Journal show that the company has begun to see a path to recovery through using AI tools to improve ad-targeting and user engagement with its TikTok competitor, Reels.
Credit: By Meghan Bobrowsky
