GLAXOSMITHKLINE
Drugmaker to Sell
Its Horlicks Brand
Drug and health-care products company GlaxoSmithKline PLC said Wednesday that it plans to sell its Horlicks drinks brand in the U.K. and cut about 320 jobs in the country.
Glaxo said it would seek to sell Horlicks in the U.K. and close the site in Slough, England, where the malted drink is made.
It also plans to sell its MaxiNutrition brand in the U.K. and outsource some manufacturing activities currently undertaken at its site in Worthing, England.
The combined annual U.K. sales of Horlicks and MaxiNutrition are around GBP 30 million, or roughly $39 million, Glaxo said.
Glaxo also sells Horlicks in other markets, including India.
The proposed sales and outsourcing are likely to result in 320 job losses over the next four years, the company said.
-- Rory Gallivan
---
IBM
Firm Posts Declines
In Profit and Sales
International Business Machines Corp. on Tuesday reported falling quarterly profit and sales, adding to doubts about Chief Executive Ginni Rometty's lengthy effort to reinvent the 106-year-old technology company.
The 4.7% drop in second-quarter revenue, to $19.3 billion, marked the 21st consecutive quarter of declining sales at IBM. Profit margins also narrowed across all business units, including the divisions for the company's main cloud-computing and Watson artificial-intelligence operations -- two areas Ms. Rometty is counting on to propel the company's turnaround.
Profit fell 6.9% from a year earlier. Earnings results exceeded analysts' expectations. Still, revenue came in below forecasts.
-- Ted Greenwald
---
UNITED
New Fares and Fees
Push Revenue Higher
United Continental Holdings Inc. said profit and revenue rose in the second quarter, the latest airline to find success offering a wider range of fare categories and fees.
The U.S.'s No. 3 airline by traffic said Tuesday that despite higher fuel and labor costs, its net income rose 39% from a year earlier. Excluding items, United said earnings came to $846 million on a strong 6.4% gain in revenue. United's unit revenue was up 2.1% in the June quarter year over year.
-- Susan Carey
