The joy of writing about markets is the struggle to piece together a puzzle with moving parts. Often they neatly fit together. Right now, not so much.
The latest issue is the relationship -- or not -- between bonds and stocks. On Monday, the 10-year Treasury yield closed above 4.5% for the first time since 2007, and then rose more. On Tuesday, the equal-weighted version of the S&P 500 fell back enough to leave it down for the year so far.
The obvious explanation is that stocks fall as bond yields rise -- duh! The problem is that the normal, value-weighted version of the S&P 500 is up 12%, thanks to a handful of giant stocks that earlier this year rose a lot.
The gains came from excitement regarding generative AI lifting Big Tech. Those stocks are now such a big part of the index that they can move the market independently of what's going on in the rest of the economy. Because the equal-weight version of the index treats the giants Apple and Microsoft the same way it does tiddlers like the flooring manufacturer Mohawk Industries, it shows that the average stock has gone nowhere as rates rose. Puzzle solved.
The explanation is alluring, but leaves some parts out. Since the end of July, investors in the 10-year Treasury note lost 4.6% as yields rose, and the S&P 500 is down 6.6%. The problem is that the equal-weight index fell harder, dropping 8.5%, even more than the Big Tech-dominated Nasdaq-100. It should be the other way round. AI isn't a great explanation for tech outperformance this time, because AI excitement has waned since July. This is clear from the plunge in smaller stocks that benefited from the theme, such as the robotic-warehouse company Symbotic (off 47% in August and September) and the software supplier C3.ai (down 39%).
So what gives? Some of it is just that the markets puzzle has lots of company-specific moving parts in the short run. Apple suffered from concern about its access to the Chinese market, while Amazon has just been slapped with an antitrust lawsuit. Several of the Big Tech stocks are now big enough to be akin to asset classes, so something stock-specific can overwhelm the macroeconomic factors that drive bond yields.
Some of it is that the explanation needs nuance. Sure, higher yields should hit growth and Big Tech more than the rest of the market. Making secure income from bonds more appealing naturally makes promised profits far in the future less appealing -- and tech stocks are highly valued precisely because investors see a bright future for them.
But higher yields are the result of two things that can be good for at least some stocks. A stronger economy pushed the Fed to predict that rates will be higher for longer. Meanwhile, more government borrowing, in part to spend on industrial subsidies, pushes up the supply of bonds, and so their yields.
Investors like the strong economy and the government spending; they just don't like the higher rates and the extra borrowing. The confused causes might explain why there is no relationship between how expensive a stock was on a forward price/earnings multiple at the end of July and how it has moved since.
This is the latest example of a bigger problem for those of us trying to figure out markets.
For most of the past two decades, higher bond yields meant higher stock prices -- the opposite of "duh." I think that's because investors focused on the profit-boosting growth that caused the higher rates, and inflation was low enough to ignore. At the moment, investors are focused on inflation instead, so higher growth is bad.
The bond markets that really matter for stocks aren't Treasurys, but corporate debt. Companies that borrowed at floating rates have been hit hard, and borrowing costs are much higher than at the start of last year. But corporate bond yields provide another piece of the puzzle: While borrowing costs for the best companies have risen this year, junk-bond yields are only back up to where they stood at the start of January, and both are lower than last October. This is because investor concerns about creditworthiness have waned somewhat.
Finally, the economy hasn't behaved the way economists expected. Higher rates haven't proven much of a drag on growth -- yet. As recession predictions were pushed back, earnings expectations rose, further confusing the recent selloff. (Wall Street forecasts for next year's earnings have risen continuously since July, even as shares dropped.) A fall in shares driven by falling valuations, rather than falling earnings, ought to hit stocks with the highest valuations the hardest, but didn't. Huh.
I still fall back to a super-simple explanation for all this. Bond yields are up a lot this year, and the average S&P 500 stock has gone nowhere as a result, while smaller stocks are down. Some of the moving parts don't fit perfectly, but accept the outline and investors should remain worried about rising yields.
I expect higher rates to slow the economy, making 10-year Treasurys attractive at 4.5%, despite my worries about long-run inflation pressures. But this partial solution to the puzzle doesn't make stocks overall look like a great buy, even if their pullback makes them a bit cheaper than they were.
Credit: By James Mackintosh
