In the months before last year's NFL Draft, Minnesota Vikings general manager Rick Spielman wanted to beef up the team's backroom staff. The Vikings had a network of reliable scouts, but what they didn't have was much of an analytics department.
"I was always curious about what we could do with all the data we have on players," said Spielman. "Could we spin it in a way that would help us predict how a guy would play at the NFL level?"
The individual he hired to answer that question was Jared Lander, a 34-year-old adjunct professor at Columbia and a rising star in the field of data science.
The answer, as far as the Vikings were concerned, was yes. The team's 2015 draft class was given an "A" by ESPN draft expert Mel Kiper after their first season and NFL personnel guru Gil Brandt placed two Vikings on his All-Rookie team -- linebacker Eric Kendricks (45th overall) and receiver Stefon Diggs (146th overall).
"In terms of analytics," Spielman said, "Jared took us from first grade to college."
Working with Mike Band, then an assistant in the Vikings scouting department, Lander used hundreds of variables to assess each player. He ran those variables thousands of times through an ensemble of machine-learning algorithms, allowing him to evaluate them in comparison to players over the last 10 years.
"I heard him speak at the MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference," said ESPN NFL analyst John Clayton. "The thing that Jared does, he crunches everything. He was talking so far above my head and everyone else in the room. What I do know is that the Vikings had a terrific draft."
His company, Lander Analytics, in which Lander oversees a team of seven data scientists, has consulted for some of the world's top investment banks, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the United States Department of Defense, among others.
"The bottom line is, if you have enough data, you can come pretty close to predicting almost anything," Lander says. Such was the case with the $1.6 billion Powerball jackpot in January. After crunching the numbers, Lander predicted on his website that there would be three winners. There were three winners.
Lander is not consulting for an NFL team this year, but the Vikings say they will continue to use the principles he implemented last year. Lander also said his company is in talks to do consultations for NBA and NHL teams.
Although neither Lander nor Band will be in the Minnesota war room Thursday, here's their take on this year's draft class, including 10 prospects that can't miss, five second-day sleepers that could become stars and five that don't meet the hype.
Credit: By Lenn Robbins
