Salesforce.com Inc. Chief Executive Marc Benioff's effort to buy Slack Technologies Inc., which is valued at $17 billion and would be his biggest acquisition yet, positions the company to take on Microsoft Corp. in key areas.
Salesforce has thrived for years as a niche business-software vendor. The company is in advanced talks to buy Slack, The Wall Street Journal reported on Wednesday. The potential tie-up suggests that Mr. Benioff, who has positioned himself as a prominent voice in American business, has the industry's biggest player and long-time rival, Microsoft, in its sights, some analysts say.
Salesforce and Slack could reach a deal within days, people familiar with the matter said, possibly by the time Salesforce reports its third-quarter financial results Tuesday. The deal would mark the company's most direct attack on a market Microsoft has identified as critical to its growth.
There is no guarantee the companies will reach an agreement. If they do, it would add fuel to Salesforce's ambition to become the go-to software platform for business customers to use for everything from data analysis to managing customer relationships to even daily communication.
The pandemic has amplified Salesforce's efforts. When Covid-19 broke out, Mr. Benioff quickly launched Work.com -- a suite of applications that companies could use for contract tracing, mental-health checks and shift scheduling.
A deal for Slack could heat up a simmering rivalry with Microsoft. About five years ago Microsoft was in talks to buy Salesforce, but the deal fell apart over price. Salesforce lost out to Microsoft in 2016 in bidding for LinkedIn Corp., the business-focused social-media network. The loss stung. Salesforce responded by urging regulators to examine Microsoft's proposed purchase on antitrust grounds; the deal passed regulatory scrutiny.
Landing Slack, which Microsoft also once tried to acquire, could amount to a bit of revenge for Mr. Benioff.
San Francisco-based Slack makes instant-messaging software that it pitches as a solution to what it says is cluttered and intrusive office email. It launched in 2009 as a gaming company called Tiny Speck, but pivoted to the messaging app it had developed for internal use.
Microsoft in 2016 launched its own workplace collaboration tool, Teams, spurring a sometimes heated battle between the two companies. "They want to kill us," Slack CEO Stewart Butterfield told the Journal this year. This summer, Slack filed a complaint with the European Union over alleged antitrust behavior by Microsoft in using its dominance to push Teams.
Slack "extends the footprint of what Salesforce goes after," Jefferies analyst Brent Thill said. "Not everyone uses a sales system, but everyone can use collaboration. "
Mr. Benioff has a history of deal making since he co-founded Salesforce 21 years ago and turned it into one of the most successful companies in the then still nascent market of providing software as a service. Salesforce completed its biggest-ever purchase last year, paying around $15 billion in stock for data-analytics platform Tableau Software Inc.
A year earlier, it splashed out more than $5 billion for cloud-application provider MuleSoft. Inc. This year Salesforce said it was buying cloud-software provider Vlocity Inc.
Salesforce has a market value of some $230 billion after years of big gains and its rich stock price -- which trades at nearly 100 times its trailing-year profits -- gives the company a valuable currency to use for takeovers. Shares of Slack rose 38% to $40.70 each on Wednesday, while Salesforce retreated 5.4% to $246.82.
Mr. Benioff has long been among the highest-profile and most outspoken executives in tech, using venues like the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, to champion causes and burnish his profile. He set up Salesforce with a pledge of corporate giving and bought himself an even larger platform with his acquisition of Time Magazine two years ago.
The San Francisco-based company also has made a big push into the emerging field of artificial intelligence, developing tools to help customers make better use of their data.
Breaking into the market of workplace collaboration has long been on Salesforce's agenda. In 2010, it launched Chatter, a private social network for companies to collaborate. And in 2016, it bought cloud-document collaboration app company Quip Inc. for more than $500 million. Neither product attracted a wide following. Acquiring Slack, which Salesforce had previously explored buying, would immediately make the company a big player in the workplace-collaboration market. Slack has more than 130,000 paying customers.
Salesforce is pursuing Slack as competition in its core business of customer relationship- management soft ware is intensifying. Adobe Inc. this month said it would buy Workfront, a platform for marketers, for $1.5 billion. Microsoft also has been pushing its rival product, called Dynamics. Salesforce still has the largest share with 20.1% of the world-wide market in 2019 compared with 2.6% for Microsoft Dynamics, according to research firm Gartner Inc.
Slack's Mr. Butterfield has been trying to turn Slack into more than a communications tool for business. Slack has partnered with other software vendors to transform itself into a platform through which companies can access a variety of services they need to run their operations, offering interfaces for other business-tool providers such as Workday Inc., cloud-storage vendor Dropbox Inc. and Salesforce.
Even with Slack, Salesforce would remain comparatively small next to Microsoft. The Redmond, Wash., company had sales of $143 billion in its latest financial year, generated by business enterprise software, its cloud-computing infrastructure, and consumer-facing businesses, such as videogaming. Its sales are roughly nine times Salesforce's annual revenue. Microsoft's market valuation tops $1.6 trillion, about six times that of Slack and Salesforce combined.
Last year, Salesforce said it was seeking to reach $28 billion in annual sales in the 2023 financial year. It had $16 billion in sales in its most recent year.
---
Dana Cimilluca and Maureen Farrell contributed to this article.

Credit: By Cara Lombardo, Aaron Tilley and Liz Hoffman
