Japan's SoftBank Group and Saudi Arabia's sovereign-wealth fund on Saturday launched the world's largest technology fund, a nearly $100 billion vehicle that will steer capital to cutting-edge technologies in U.S. startups and other global firms.
In a statement, SoftBank said the fund secured $93 billion of committed capital. The SoftBank Vision Fund is targeting a total of $100 billion within six months. The fund's creation coincides with U.S. President Donald Trump's two-day visit to Saudi Arabia, where he attempted to cement ties with a key counterterrorism ally and drum up business for American firms.
SoftBank Chief Executive Masayoshi Son has previously promised Mr. Trump that he would invest $50 billion of the fund in U.S. startups and create 50,000 jobs. Mr. Trump cited this as evidence of his presidency bringing jobs back home.
SoftBank said it would invest $28 billion in the fund, including $8.2 billion worth of its stake in chip architecture firm ARM Holdings Inc. SoftBank's announcement didn't specify the investment of its main partner, Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund. Earlier the PIF said it would invest as much as $45 billion in the fund.
"We can make a lot of new initiatives and make entrepreneurs take off a lot quicker, much bigger," Mr. Son said Saturday on the sidelines of a business forum in Riyadh.
Mr. Son is rushing to invest in key technologies ahead of what he predicts will be a robotic revolution and a rush of investment into areas such as deep learning and robotics. The fund enables SoftBank to invest in emerging technologies as artificial intelligence surpasses human capabilities.
The fund is looking to acquire minority and majority interests in private and public companies, according to a statement. It would consider not only emerging technology businesses but also more established, multibillion-dollar companies requiring substantial funding, it said.
SoftBank has negotiated about a dozen deals for the fund, among them deals to invest $1.4 billion in Indian mobile-payments startup Paytm and $1.2 billion in U.S. satellite-internet startup OneWeb Ltd. SoftBank also has led a $502 million fundraising in U.K. virtual-world startup Improbable and an additional $130 million fundraising in Bay Area microbe-designing robot firm Zymergen. All investments of more than $100 million, with the exception of those in ride-hailing firms, will go to the fund, people familiar with the matter have said.
Ahead of the fund's launch on Saturday, Mr. Son said it would focus on investing in sectors including artificial intelligence, smart devices and semiconductors. "We already have lots in the pipeline," he said. "We are investing into genome sequencing. We are investing in virtual-reality simulations, the games, and so on."
The fund marks the entry of a mammoth player in a field of investment traditionally dominated by Western bankers and private-equity groups. The sheer scale of the fund could decide winners and losers in capital-intensive areas, such as in autonomous driving or in biotechnology.
It also follows months of negotiation and delay as SoftBank and Saudi Arabia's PIF wrangled over who would control investment decisions. Mr. Son announced the fund in October with a launch as early as December in mind. It took a further five months for the fund to come together.
Credit: Margherita Stancati, Mayumi Negishi, Nicolas Parasie
