Scammers are capitalizing on the rush of consumer interest in artificial-intelligence tools to steal U.S. small businesses' social-media-account passwords, Google alleges in a new lawsuit.
The lawsuit, filed Monday, targets unnamed individuals in India and Vietnam. Google said the hackers have been tricking small-business owners into clicking on Facebook ads that offer to download Google's Bard artificial-intelligence chatbot. When they do, the ads hit them with malware that steals their social-media credentials.
The ads are false: Bard is a free web-based platform and isn't available through download. Posting the official-looking ads is an organized group of hackers operating through accounts and pages with phony names such as Google AI, AIGoogle.Plus, AIGoogle Bard FB and AIGoogleBard, according to Google.
The lawsuit, which seeks to enjoin the scam and secure damages, is thought to be the first such lawsuit aimed at protecting users of a major tech company's flagship AI product, Halimah DeLaine Prado, Google's general counsel, said.
The scam has been showing up in ads, pages and posts on Facebook, according to the lawsuit.
Once users click on the offer to download Bard, their devices are hit with malware that sends their social-media credentials to the hackers. The hackers then use the information to take over their victims' social-media accounts and spread more malware-linked ads, according to the lawsuit, which was filed in federal district court in northern California.
It wasn't clear what was motivating the alleged scheme and the lawsuit aims to obtain more information about how it operates. Google says the intended victims include small businesses with Facebook business or advertiser accounts.
The malware-linked ads seek to confuse Facebook users because Google has advertised its Bard product on Facebook, according to the lawsuit.
The exact number of victims of the alleged scam isn't known. Google officials say they filed about 300 takedown requests to have the ads removed. Facebook and others have generally been responsive to the takedown requests, according to Google.
The alleged scheme appears to be related to a range of malware scams aimed at businesses that Facebook parent Meta Platforms has flagged in newsroom posts.
For example, Meta said in a post in May that it had blocked more than 1,000 malicious URLs offering ChatGPT-based tools from being shared on its platforms. ChatGPT is another free artificial-intelligence service. Many of those attacks originated in Vietnam, according to Meta.
Credit: By John D. McKinnon
