Film
"Back to Black" (May 17)
The British singer-songwriter Amy Winehouse, a blinding talent with personal demons who died tragically young at age 27, is played by Marisa Abela ("Industry") in Sam Taylor-Johnson's much-awaited biopic.
"IF" (May 17)
A troubled young girl gains the ability to see people's imaginary friends who have been forgotten by the folks they helped. John Krasinski wrote, produced and directed the live-action/animated comedy (in which he also has a supporting role) that stars Ryan Reynolds and Cailey Fleming and features a voice cast beyond imagining: Steve Carell, Phoebe Waller-Bridge, Emily Blunt, Matt Damon, Maya Rudolph, Jon Stewart, Matthew Rhys and George Clooney are just a few of the very real stars on the roster.
"Babes" (May 17)
Pamela Adlon makes her feature directorial debut with this comedy, written by Ilana Glazer and Josh Rabinowitz, about an independent single woman (Ms. Glazer) who finds herself pregnant after a one-night stand and reaches out to a married friend (Michelle Buteau) for help.
TV
"Bridgerton," Season 3 (Netflix, May 16)
The first half of this two-part season of the steamy period piece features many familiar faces -- Nicola Coughlan and Luke Newton among them -- along with newcomers like Sam Phillips and Daniel Francis. The second part of the season waltzes into view on June 13.
"The Big Cigar" (Apple TV+, May 17)
Andre Holland stars as Huey P. Newton in this series about the Black Panther's escape to Cuba during an FBI manhunt. Alessandro Nivola plays Bert Schneider, the Hollywood producer who helped him, in this six-parter adapted from an article by Joshuah Bearman.
Music
Billie Eilish, "Hit Me Hard And Soft" (May 17)
The pop star's third studio LP, again produced by brother Finneas O'Connell, is a 10-track offering that the artist's site describes as "bending genres and defying trends."
Opera
"The Crucible" (The Old Red Church, Standish, Maine, May 17-19)
Opera in the Pines stages a new adaptation of the work by Robert Ward (music) and Bernard Stambler (libretto) based on Arthur Miller's allegorical play.
"Turandot" (The Grand Opera House, Wilmington, Del., May 17-19)
While it became a classic, Puccini left this opera unfinished at the time of his death, sparking controversy over various attempts by his circle to finish it. Now Derrick Wang ("Scalia/Ginsburg") steps into the fray with his own take on the ending, which is being given its premiere in a production by OperaDelaware.
Art
"KAWS + Warhol" (The Andy Warhol Museum, Pittsburgh, May 18-Jan. 20, 2025)
Marking the museum's 30th anniversary, this show is the first to explore the darker themes in both Pop practitioners' work: one a contemporary descendant of the movement, the other the founder of the genre. The art created by both, while often cheery, is frequently tinged with grimmer elements, from electric chairs to skulls.
Last Call
"Harold Cohen: AARON" (Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, through May 19)
A show featuring work made with a long-running artificial intelligence program shows that creativity and technology needn't be enemies. Reflecting on the show and AI software, our critic wrote "that the hand of a true artist will always be felt, even when mediated by countless bits and bytes."
---
For additional Arts Calendar listings visit wsj.com. Write to brian.kelly@wsj.com.
Credit: By WSJ Arts in Review Staff
