The U.S. and China are in a trade war -- and not talking. Last week Beijing quashed the Qualcomm-NXP merger, a major escalation. That move followed a Group of 20 summit where Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin failed to hold substantive discussions with his Chinese counterpart, Liu Kun. These developments show exactly what's wrong with U.S. trade policy toward China.
Tariffs are only a means to an end, a way to get leverage in talks. President Trump has raised legitimate concern about unfair Chinese trade practices, and he's hit the country hard. Washington is about to finish placing tariffs on $50 billion worth of Chinese goods, and by this autumn another $200 billon could be covered. The U.S. also will put major new restrictions on Chinese investments in American companies next month.
China initially sought to avoid escalation. We recently met with officials and well-connected academics in Beijing. They are concerned and confused over how to proceed, but the death of the Qualcomm deal shows nationalism is gaining on pragmatism in China's approach. The Chinese will keep responding with more tariffs on American goods and other informal measures, such as harassment of U.S. businesses in China.
If this conflict continues to develop, stock markets around the globe would take a hit. The U.S. economy would become vulnerable to higher inflation and lower investment rates. The World Trade Organization would become less effective in its role as a governing body for trade. Protectionism would metastasize around the globe. It would become a global disaster. It's time to sit down and negotiate.
U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer and other senior officials should concentrate talks on the two issues at the center of this trade war. First is the U.S. trade deficit with China, which reached $375 billion last year. The Chinese government already has offered to buy more U.S. goods to reduce the deficit. The Trump administration is right to insist that China follow up with reductions in tariff and nontariff barriers. While this is the banner rhetorical issue for the president, it isn't the most important.
The more important issue is Chinese industrial policy. The U.S. and China are fighting for pre-eminence in next-generation technology -- artificial intelligence, supercomputing and robotics. The winner of this battle will have a leg up in the international economy for decades.
Despite Beijing's denials, forced technology transfer is a frequent and unfair price U.S. firms pay for access to China's massive market. The U.S. should continue demanding that Beijing give unequivocal instructions to all players in China's system to end the practice.
China also continues to subsidize its tech sector and other favored industries. Chinese interlocutors repeatedly asked us what the U.S. wants it to do. State aid is a key component of Chinese and other emerging market economies. But Beijing must recognize that it can no longer view itself as a developing economy. Its size and political influence are too great for that. China must abide by more of the accepted international norms for developed markets. The U.S. should work with like-minded countries to pressure China to bring its subsidies in line with WTO standards -- and to reform those standards as necessary.
Yet these negotiations can't happen until tensions ease. The Trump administration should take three concrete steps to make that happen. First, it should set up a structured negotiating format by establishing time-based working groups on the trade deficit, market access and industrial policy. If China fails to produce results or negotiate in good faith, Mr. Trump can always pick up the stick again.
Second, the Trump administration needs to speak with one voice. Talks so far have been ad hoc and included a rotating and discordant cast of participants. The U.S. can do better. Mr. Trump needs to corral his warring advisers into a unified negotiating position. If he can't, he should negotiate directly with Chinese President Xi Jinping.
Finally, the U.S. needs to remember that the Chinese have domestic political considerations too. Overly moralistic American rhetoric, especially from trade adviser Peter Navarro, is making it easy for hawks in Beijing to call for a hard-line approach against the U.S. It's time to take a breath, split the difference on key issues, and avoid an outcome where both countries lose big-time.
---
Mr. Kupchan is chairman and Mr. Hirson is director for Asia at Eurasia Group.

Credit: By Cliff Kupchan and Michael Hirson
