Corrections & Amplifications
Intel Corp.'s 3D XPoint computer memory technology is 10% the speed of dynamic random-access memory. A Technology article on Monday about new Intel storage drives incorrectly said 3D XPoint is 1% the speed of DRAM.
(WSJ March 25, 2017)
Intel Corp. is starting to ship the first products based on new technology it hopes will reshape the market for computer memory and help it profit more from the tech world's data explosion.
The new storage drives, which Intel made widely available on Sunday, are based on technology called 3D XPoint. The company bills the technology, which it says it spent more than a decade developing, as a new memory category, bridging the gap between speedy conventional memory in which computers hold data for immediate use and the flash memory used for longer-term storage.
"It blurs the line between system memory and storage," said Diane Bryant, an executive vice president who oversees Intel's Data Center Group. She said 3D XPoint, pronounced "three-dee cross point," can help accelerate tasks such as fraud detection, retail purchase recommendations, and autonomous driving.
Intel claims the raw 3D XPoint technology is 1,000 times faster than the NAND flash commonly used in storage drives, though still about 1% the speed of temporary memory called DRAM, or dynamic random-access memory. The storage drives Intel is initially shipping can't take full advantage of the new technology's speed because of the way they connect to computers.
Intel, facing challenges in its core business making processors for personal computers and servers, hopes the new technology can expand its memory business, which reported revenue of $2.6 billion in the past year. That is 3% of total global memory sales, which amount to roughly $80 billion a year, according to Jim Handy, an analyst with Objective Analysis.
Intel expects 3D XPoint to account for 10% of the memory division's revenue in 2017, "ramping much more into 2018," Intel Chief Executive Brian Krzanich told investors in January.
Intel also hopes 3D XPoint will spur growth throughout its portfolio. The company is looking to data-intensive tasks such as artificial intelligence to drive sales of processor chips and other products, and it is betting on 3D XPoint to make those products more attractive.
Realizing Intel's goals, though, will mean manufacturing the new technology profitably at an attractive price. Intel has said 3D XPoint chips can be made in conventional chip fabrication plants. But doing so in volumes high enough to make the technology affordable will be "a herculean effort," Mr. Handy said.
Credit: By Ted Greenwald
