The Defense Department wants to bring Silicon Valley's top talent deeper into the folds of the military by offering technology executives positions as part-time military officers.
The department is considering asking chief technology officers and other senior tech professionals to take up high-ranking positions in the reserves. The tech reservists would be periodically summoned to help with short-term projects in cybersecurity, data analytics and other areas.
"We're creating this people industrial base that is going to help us solve our national-security problems and national-security challenges in the decades to come," said Brynt Parmeter, the department's chief talent management officer.
The Marines and some states have created recruiting programs for civilians with cybersecurity skills, and the armed forces have reserve programs for medical and legal professionals. This latest initiative, however, would be the first time the armed forces bring in private-sector technology professionals as uniformed, paid reservists to leverage their know-how. The plans haven't been previously reported.
Parmeter, who is spearheading the effort, hopes to have an initial group of tech professionals in their military service roles by September. He aims to start with dozens of reservists and wants to expand the program to thousands over the next couple of years.
He said he is still sorting out the details, including identifying the right organizations within the military in which to place the reservists and how to determine their ranking once they join. He said he can't guarantee when the program would start, but he has the authority to launch it and the buy-in on the concept from his superiors.
It is another indication of the tech industry's deepening relationship with the Pentagon and Silicon Valley's about-face on the U.S. military. Once disdainful of defense work, tech startups and their financiers now often embrace national-security opportunities.
Parmeter has been canvassing Silicon Valley and other tech hot spots for possible recruits with help from Shyam Sankar, chief technology officer of data-analytics firm Palantir Technologies, which sells artificial-intelligence software to militaries.
Sankar said he "would be first in line to join" a reservist program and has encouraged others to do the same.
"This new talent program creates an opportunity for America's elite technical leaders to serve," Sankar said.
This initiative aims to augment the Defense Department's efforts to improve its capabilities by tapping the country's top-tier technical minds.
The U.S. government has sometimes struggled to retain elite talent, as the private sector often offers higher pay and moves faster.
Much of Silicon Valley had until recently considered doing business with the Pentagon to be anathema. For much of this century, tech startups viewed building tech for lethal force unpalatable and having the government as a customer a poor way to make money.
"Ten years ago," Parmeter said, "you never led with 'I work with the DOD.'"
That attitude changed in recent years for many, as the wars in Ukraine and the Middle East, the threat of a conflict with China and the need for more commercially developed tech such as AI in battle have created new business opportunities.
Investment in venture-backed defense tech grew to $35 billion last year from $2 billion in 2013, according to data from PitchBook.
Parmeter imagines the tech recruits would come into the reserves at a mid- or high-ranking appointment, major or lieutenant colonel in the Army and Air Force reserves or lieutenant commander or commander in the Navy Reserve.
The military has more than 700,000 reservists who attend training one weekend a month and two weeks a year. They can be called up to active duty. Silicon Valley reservists could expect to have similar weekend and other time commitments and won't likely be called to battle, Parmeter said.
"It's not like 'Put down your keyboard and pick up a rifle,'" he said.
Parmeter, who has Army experience and worked for Walmart before becoming the Defense Department's inaugural chief talent-management officer in 2023, has a mandate that includes rethinking how the department can attract talent and facilitate people's transition between the military and private sector.
Parmeter hopes to extend the specialist-reserves concept to logistics, aerospace and other sectors where the Defense Department could benefit from private-sector expertise.
Credit: By Heather Somerville
