A new kind of present is gaining acceptance this holiday season. More consumers are picking secondhand items to gift each other, finding it to be an environmentally and budget-friendly option.
Thrift stores that sell used clothes and goods are springing up online and on street corners. Goodwill Industries International, the nonprofit behind the familiar chain of thrift stores, is ramping up its online efforts. Fashion brands are developing their own resale offering to keep up with clothing-reseller sites such as Depop and Poshmark. Roughly 17% of gifts this holiday season will be a resold item, according to software firm Salesforce.
"Consumers are choosing resale first because of the incredible value, the unique merchandise, and the incredible sustainability benefit," said Matt Kaness, chief executive of GoodwillFinds, the nonprofit's online e-commerce platform run in partnership with Salesforce.
Secondhand clothes, once seen as frumpy and embarrassing, are now keenly sought out by the fashion conscious. A popular vintage aesthetic dovetails with consumer calls for goods that do less harm to the world. About 85% of American shoppers have bought or sold preowned items over the past year, nearly one-third for the first time, according to online marketplace OfferUp's Recommerce report. In apparel alone, some 10% of the global market will be secondhand by next year.
GoodwillFinds is the only major nonprofit player in resale.
GoodwillFinds' online platform allows a smarter operation than the traditional bricks-and-mortar store, said Kaness, formerly an executive with retailers including Walmart and Urban Outfitters. The platform uses artificial intelligence and large data sets to more accurately price and categorize items, creating a much more efficient system, Kaness said.
"In a store, it's a human looking at the item. They have paper sticker tickets for the price and they have to process such a volume that it is somewhat random," he said. In contrast, the company's online system uses computer vision to take a picture, identify the item, create a listing and price it.
Moving online is the logical choice for secondhand sellers, said 25-year-old Brooke Bowlin, who runs lifestyle blog Nuance Required. "Secondhand stores just can't sell enough," said Bowlin, who started her own thrift store in Siloam Springs, Ark. "By moving online and expanding the audience, there is an opportunity to rehome more clothes," she said.
Major fashion brands also are increasingly recognizing that secondhand is as much a necessity as it is an opportunity. The fashion industry is responsible for up to 8% of global emissions, relying on resource-intensive raw materials and fast-moving trends that have contributed large amounts of waste. Around 11.3 million tons of textile waste go to landfills in the U.S. every year, according to environmental organization Earth.Org.
Outdoor-clothing retailer Patagonia established its Worn Wear platform in 2017, one of the first resale channels by a major brand.
As much as adapting to trends, Patagonia Worn Wear aims to change consumer behavior, said Asha Agrawal, managing director of the Patagonia venture fund that runs the platform.
"A lot of our messaging is around -- 'you don't need to buy something new,'" she said.
Worn Wear buys back used brand gear from consumers by paying higher prices than peer-to-peer apps or other marketplaces, Agrawal said.
This strategy contributes to the bulk of the platform's costs but also boosted its inventory fourfold this year alone, she said, adding Worn Wear has been profitable for the past two years.
Worn Wear is now integrated into the Patagonia brand. "You can now do your main shopping with Patagonia with our resale business in the U.S.," she said. "That's a huge evolution for us."
Resale by brands and third parties is expected to outpace traditional thrift sales and donations in the U.S., rising to 60% of a $70 billion total by 2027 from 15% of the $20 billion secondhand market in 2017, according to online thrift store ThredUp's recent resale report.
Other fashion players have their versions. Sweden's Hennes & Mauritz launched H&M Pre-Loved in the U.S. this year, in partnership with ThredUp. Inditex-owned Zara has launched a preowned platform that offers repair services, customer-to-customer sales and donations of used garments in the U.K. and France, with plans for a U.S. rollout by 2025.
Resale remains an imperative for fashion brands as a way to control distribution and retain the trust of shoppers increasingly alert to the fate of their old clothes. However, scaling up resale generates a raft of operational challenges such as authentication, returns and ensuring that secondhand doesn't look like an afterthought, said Anita Balchandani, fashion lead at consultant firm McKinsey & Co.
Credit: By Joshua Kirby
