After I wrote a column on my son and stuttering, I got a call from William Wesley, an executive with the New York Knicks. "Do you know my friend Michael Kidd-Gilchrist? He wants to talk to you."
I certainly knew of him, having watched Kentucky win the 2012 National Collegiate Athletic Association's basketball championship and seen him picked No. 2 in the NBA draft, behind his teammate Anthony Davis. What I didn't know was that MKG, as announcers and fans liked to call him, stutters. I soon met MKG on a Zoom call, and we talked about his life experiences. Then he said, "It's nice to talk to you, but I really want to talk to your son." That was three years ago.
MKG, now 30, has stuttered since he was young. After retiring from professional basketball in 2020, he decided to help others who stuttered, including those who were bullied or wrongly considered slow because of speech disfluency. MKG is a one-man advocate for stutterers. I encouraged him, but how was he going to help?
Children who stutter often avoid speaking, so half the battle to help is screening early in schools. It should be mandated. Mr. Kidd-Gilchrist's idea is to get insurance companies to pay for screening and speech therapy. Why is this important? John Hendrickson, author of "Life on Delay: Making Peace with a Stutter," told me: "Many studies suggest that identifying stuttering and starting speech therapy as early as possible will yield the best results. Some kids may find fluency, others will continue to stutter into adulthood. The goal is to help a stutterer manage their relationship to the disorder."
As he was during his NBA days, MKG is certainly hardworking. He told me that since 2021, he has met with 18 U.S. senators -- including Mitch McConnell, Cory Booker, Mitt Romney, Sherrod Brown, Bill Cassidy and Ted Cruz. He has also met with 25 U.S. representatives, 137 state representatives, aides to President Biden, various interested parties at 62 universities and 12 children's hospitals. He has appeared at 26 special events. That's commitment.
I had a courtside seat watching Mr. Kidd-Gilchrist's journey unfold. Every week or so since our first call, I get a morning text from him that starts "What up my man?" followed by details of what he's been doing and requests for advice. My answers are simple: Work both sides of the aisle, aim for their hearts, and be patient. Congress is slow.
I also suggested he get his picture taken with each politician. "I can't do that, I'd be too embarrassed to ask," MKG told me. "Oh no, the pictures aren't for you, they're for them," I said. "Trust me, no one will say no." So far, I've been right.
The other problem: Passing a law mandating school screenings and insurance-company speech-therapy payments is a classic unfunded mandate, and it's hard to pass any bill that costs money.
To tackle the problem, at a lunch at Clyde's of Georgetown last fall with MKG, I started drawing pictures on a napkin, an old habit from my analyst days. I drew boxes and arrows flowing between information about stuttering, school screenings and speech therapy. I told MKG he needed a path to low- or no-cost screenings. I wondered if screening could be automated -- perhaps an app with artificial intelligence to identify stutters. And eventually, since it's mostly audio, perhaps another app to augment speech therapists, offering words and phrases to repeat and provide feedback. Yes, I know therapy does much more than that.
It didn't take long -- a couple of weeks -- for another "What up my man?" text, followed by "I'm talking to IBM." He moves fast. MKG is in discussions with IBM's Watsonx AI group about the potential for tools and speech models to screen for speech disfluencies. The same models might help with speech therapy. I suspect other AI companies will find this to be a great use of their technology.
Mr. Kidd-Gilchrist got pushback in Congress over a stuttering bill and was told to try at the state level and then come back with a demo of technology. Last month MKG got his first victory, in Kentucky appropriately enough, where Bill 111 was passed "to require health insurance coverage for speech therapy as a treatment for stuttering." MKG is a winner, and he has since made contact with representatives in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Utah and California for similar bills. So it's back on the road for Mr. Kidd-Gilchrist, but this time he's suiting up in a jacket and tie rather than a uniform.
I once asked MKG: Why he was doing all this. He said: "I know that I have a platform to help others who struggle with this, to turn it upside down, change the stigma and help others."
More than three million Americans stutter. Insurance pays for so many things, and speech therapy should be one of them. Technology can help lower costs, but policy needs to recognize that early intervention is critical for overlooked and often stigmatized stutterers. MKG is working overtime to make that happen.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
