Federal auto-safety regulators are investigating Tesla's automated-driving software after the system was linked to several crashes, the latest probe into the safety of the electric-vehicle maker's technology.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said Friday that it had identified four crashes involving Tesla's driver-assistance system, which the company markets as "Full Self-Driving," including one in which a Tesla vehicle fatally struck a pedestrian.
The agency said the crashes occurred in reduced-visibility conditions, often caused by sun glare, fog or airborne dust. It is looking into whether the Tesla system can appropriately respond in such scenarios.
The probe, described by NHTSA as a preliminary evaluation, represents a new round of scrutiny of Tesla's automated-driving technology, which Chief Executive Elon Musk has said is critical to the company's growth prospects. Tesla this past week unveiled ambitious plans for a driverless robotaxi, which would have no steering wheel or accelerator pedal.
This new action by NHTSA, the U.S.'s top auto regulator, underscores the regulatory hurdles that Tesla will face as it seeks to roll out driverless robotic cars on the roads.
Tesla had previously recalled millions of vehicles after officials scrutinized its Autopilot driver-assistance software following a yearslong investigation.
The investigation announced Friday covers an estimated 2.4 million vehicles, NHTSA said. That includes all Tesla models that can come equipped with the optional driver-assistance software, such as certain versions of Model 3, Y, X and S, as well as the Cybertruck.
The agency said the probe will assess whether any other crashes have occurred in similar circumstances, as well as any updates to Tesla's FSD system that may affect its performance in low-visibility conditions.
Tesla didn't respond to a request for comment.
Shares of the EV manufacturer fell less than 0.1% Friday. The stock is off about 11% this year, compared with a 23% rise in the S&P 500.
The company's driver-assistance technology has previously sparked at least a dozen lawsuits against Tesla.
Musk has said repeatedly in recent years that the company was close to fully autonomous vehicles, though the automaker's system still requires drivers to actively monitor the road while the software is engaged.
The probe from NHTSA comes a week after Tesla's long-awaited robotaxi event, meant to lay out the company's path to becoming primarily a robotics and artificial intelligence-focused business.
That event, though, largely disappointed investors, who were looking for more financial details on Tesla's plan.
Musk said the company would offer its driverless-taxi service only where it was allowed, but didn't give details on how the company would approach regulatory hurdles.
Credit: By Ben Glickman and Don Nico Forbes
