A top Microsoft Corp. executive is calling for the U.S. government to regulate facial-recognition technology, an area in which Microsoft as well as tech rivals Apple Inc., Alphabet Inc.'s Google, and Facebook Inc. have invested.
Brad Smith's advocacy marks the latest controversial topic that Microsoft's president and chief legal officer has taken on. Mr. Smith recently challenged the Trump administration over the immigration travel ban and the separation of children from parents at the Mexican border. He also has weighed in on the role of artificial intelligence in society and tangled with the government over law-enforcement efforts to secretly search customer data on Microsoft servers in the U.S. and abroad.
Facial-recognition technology has become deeply integrated in tech giants' products, whether as the key feature for unlocking Apple's iPhone X or identifying people in Google's photos app.
In a blog posted Friday, Mr. Smith tackles the potential "sobering" uses for facial-recognition technology, such as creating a database of everyone who attended a political rally.
"The only effective way to manage the use of technology by a government is for the government proactively to manage this use itself," Mr. Smith wrote Friday.
But he also challenged the notion that companies could regulate themselves individually. Change won't occur, he said, if a few companies adopt new standards while rivals ignore them.
Microsoft has developed its own facial-recognition technology, called Face. Among its customers is Uber Technologies Inc., whose drivers take selfies to verify their identity when they launch the app to start picking up passengers. Microsoft declined to say whether any law-enforcement agencies use Face.
Facebook's use of facial recognition in photos uploaded to the platform drew a complaint from consumers to federal regulators earlier this year.
Amazon.com Inc. in May found itself embroiled in the contentious issue of government surveillance when dozens of civil-rights organizations called on the company to stop selling its facial-recognition technology, called Rekognition, to law-enforcement organizations. In its response at the time, Amazon said the quality of life would be diminished "if we outlawed new technology because some people could choose to abuse the technology."

Credit: By Jay Greene
