A good day for tech shares helped support stock indexes even while Treasury yields climbed to new decade-plus highs.
Fresh off its third straight week of declines, the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite was the top-performing major index, rising 1.6%. The S&P 500 climbed 0.7%, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average slipped roughly 37 points, or 0.1%.
Stocks have been pressured by rising bond yields but were largely able to withstand a further jump in yields -- wavering a bit in early trading and ultimately finding their footing again.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note settled at 4.339%, up from 4.251% Friday. That surpassed its nearly 16-year high set last Thursday to again mark its highest close since late 2007.
As has been the case all month, the rise in yields appeared to be driven by optimism about the economic outlook, which has caused investors to scale back bets on future Federal Reserve interest-rate cuts.
Higher yields reflect falling bond prices and can weigh on stocks by forcing them to compete with an alternative in Treasurys that are essentially risk-free if held to maturity.
"There's a point that we're probably already in right now, this zone where interest rates provide some competition for stocks," said George Mateyo, chief investment officer at Key Private Bank.
Still, investors were mostly willing to look past that on Monday, venturing back into some of the year's most popular stocks.
Chief among those was Nvidia, the chip making giant that will report earnings on Wednesday. Its shares rose 8.5%, putting their year-to-date gain at 221% and fully erasing their month-to-date losses.
Also bouncing back from tough weeks were Tesla, which jumped 7.3% and Meta Platforms, which rose 2.3%.
Some analysts have said that the importance of Nvidia's earnings will stretch beyond its own stock. The company's blockbuster earnings report three months ago has since been seen as a turning point for the market, having sparked a surge in investor optimism about demand for artificial-intelligence technology and its potential to transform the economy.
This time around, the company is less likely to surprise.
"Expectations now compared to then are much higher for Nvidia, and, of course, the stock is up a lot so they better give us a good number," said Bob Doll, chief investment officer at Crossmark Global Investments.
Investors are also looking at this week's gathering of central-bank officials and economists for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's annual symposium at Jackson Hole, Wyo., as another event that could affect markets.
Since the theme of the meeting will be "structural shifts in the global economy," investors are prepared for discussion about the neutral interest rate that officials think is sufficient to neither slow nor speed up the economy.
Any hint that officials think that rate is higher than it used to be could provide further cause for longer-term Treasury yields to rise, investors say, while suggestions to the contrary could lead to a rally in bond prices. The meeting will start on Thursday, but investors will be particularly focused on Fed Chair Jerome Powell's remarks that are scheduled for Friday morning.
Overseas, Europe's Stoxx 600 rose 0.1%. Early Tuesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index were each up 0.7%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.1%.
Credit: By Sam Goldfarb
