TOKYO -- Samsung Electronics Co.'s planned $8 billion acquisition of U.S. auto-parts supplier Harman International Industries Inc. has exacerbated fears in Japan that its makers of cars and car parts will get left behind in the auto-technology race.
"This is an industry that is changing very rapidly," industry minister Hiroshige Seko said Tuesday when asked about the South Korean electronics company's deal.
"Alliances are being forged across industries," he added. "Japan needs to work on this technology with a clear strategy in mind."
Japan is spooked by its poor record in dealing with technology shifts that disrupt industries. Its companies once were leading cellphone makers, but Apple Inc.'s iPhone decimated Japanese handset makers that made a belated and largely unsuccessful push into the smartphone business.
Japan's chip makers, while still strong in some areas, no longer rule the world as they did a quarter-century ago.
As the home of Toyota Motor Corp., Nissan Motor Co. and Honda Motor Co., Japan can ill afford to let companies in nations such as the U.S. and South Korea get control of the core technologies behind self-driving and internet-connected vehicles. Exports of cars and their parts accounted for 20% of Japan's exports last year.
"The fate of the Japanese economy depends on the ability of the automobile and electronics industries -- the two pillars of the nation's economy -- to continue to produce high-value-added products," said a report this year from the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry.
"If these industries become mere subcontractors for global software giants that supply and operate platforms for other companies to build their businesses on, Japan would be stuck with manufacturers without any high-value-added content," the report said. In October, METI secured about $195 million in funding to help companies study artificial intelligence for uses such as autonomous driving.
Recent deals show Toyota's key suppliers are trying to ramp up their abilities in the same areas spotlighted by the Samsung-Harman deal.
In September, Renesas Electronics Corp., which is majority-owned by a Japanese government-backed fund, said it would buy U.S. chip maker Intersil Corp. for about $3.2 billion, a deal executives said was aimed at strengthening the automotive business.
Mr. Seko said in a recent interview that the government might keep control of Renesas to ensure that its autonomous-driving technology stays in Japanese hands. "The government will have to take the lead if Japan wants to compete with behemoths like Google."
Credit: By Mitsuru Obe and Sean McLain
