ENERGY
Deals Show Discipline
In Strategy, CEO Says
BP PLC's recent moves to invest in oil and natural-gas fields off Africa, Egypt and in Indonesia and Abu Dhabi highlight the company's push to be selective about new investments as the industry recovers from the two-year price rout, the company's chief executive said.
Bob Dudley, speaking in an interview on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum meeting, cited the string of deals as well as BP's deal to buy a stake in the Trion oil field in the Gulf of Mexico as examples of a more disciplined investment strategy that will seek to maintain the cost-cutting strategies the company adopted during the downturn.
"We'll be very selective," he said. "What we don't want to do is lose the discipline we've built in. . . . There are some things we're just not doing," he said.
For example, expensive projects such as deep-water exploration will be undertaken only if infrastructure is in place to serve them, he said.
Some of the most carbon-intensive projects, such as Canadian oil sands, would also not meet the bar, he said.
-- Elena Cherney
---
U.S. PRESIDENCY
Business Leaders Are
Bullish on Trump
U.S. business leaders are optimistic that President-elect Donald Trump will boost economic and job growth, said John Chambers, executive chairman of Cisco Systems Inc.
Speaking on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum, Mr. Chambers brushed aside anxiety over the antiglobalization movement that helped propel Mr. Trump to the presidency. That sentiment, he said, was a symptom of anemic U.S. wage growth in recent years that can be fixed by focusing on digital jobs.
"I've been amazed at how short-term-focused the world has suddenly become," Mr. Chambers said. "You don't focus on symptoms, you focus on the underlying issues."
He said that anxiety over some of Mr. Trump's positions on trade and his volatile Twitter persona should be set aside: "Give the new administration time. Let them learn."
Many executives at Davos this year have expressed optimism about the economy under a Trump administration, but have been nervous about a rising antiglobalization sentiment that threatens to erect trade barriers of the type championed by the annual gathering. Among the worries: That the fast pace of economic change is displacing workers faster than they can find new jobs.
-- Sam Schechner and Jason Anders
---
TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION
HP CEO: Join Forces
To Ease Job Impact
Hewlett Packard Enterprise Co. Chief Executive Meg Whitman said the pace of change from technological advances will only accelerate, and the corporate and academic worlds need to better collaborate to address the problem of eliminated jobs.
"Think about the current technology we have and add robotics, more automation, artificial intelligence," said Ms. Whitman, a former eBay Inc. chief executive and Republican California gubernatorial candidate, at a news conference in Davos.
Ms. Whitman said technological innovations would solve climate-change, medical and agricultural issues, but would also eliminate jobs regardless of the age and class of workers.
Ms. Whitman said last year's vote in Britain to leave the European Union and in the U.S. to elect Donald Trump president showed that many people felt left behind by globalization.
She said it was "up to business and academia to manage the transition" and that the current American educational system was "out of step of what's required."
One of the hardest parts of the transition, Ms. Whitman said, is that the new jobs created by technology might not be where people live. "What do we do with the places where [artificial intelligence] is not going to be an employer, autonomous-driving vehicles aren't going to be there?" she said.
-- Stu Woo
---
BANKING
Deutsche CEO: Banks
Are Too Complicated
Big banks are too complicated to manage properly rather than too big too fail, Deutsche Bank AG Chief Executive John Cryan said.
Major global banks "Didn't apply common sense in the past," he said, adding Germany's largest bank was more careful now. "We apply a lot of common sense. We ask ourselves what could go wrong,"
Mr. Cryan is leading a broad restructuring of Germany's largest lender, designed to cut costs and restore long-term stability to the embattled bank.
Speaking at the World Economic Forum, Mr. Cryan also said central banks' low interest rate policies were tough on banks. Large bond buying programs distort bond and other market price signals, he said.
-- William Wilkes and Jenny Strasburg
