Google conquered internet search. It is having a tougher time winning the rapidly growing cloud-computing industry.
Google is pitching potential corporate customers on its vast network of computers and artificial-intelligence tools, and often undercutting the prices of the two incumbents that dwarf it, cloud-computing pioneer Amazon.com Inc. and corporate-tech veteran Microsoft Corp.
But to catch those rivals, analysts say Google must build more credibility among corporations wary of running their businesses on the servers of an internet-search company with little experience supporting the technology needs of big companies, other than its own.
In response, Google has been expanding its sales, marketing and customer-support staff in an effort to cater to traditional industries.
But Google Cloud chief Diane Greene says the company's technology, and not its business fundamentals, will help it succeed. "The business-side stuff is not rocket science. It is blocking and tackling," she said. "The part that is rocket science, that's the part I like coming to the party with."
Google, a unit of Alphabet Inc., touted its progress at its cloud conference in San Francisco on Wednesday and announced new customers, including global bank HSBC Holdings PLC. HSBC, which also uses Amazon's and Microsoft's cloud services, said it is using Google's technology to improve its money-laundering detection, run simulations and make complex calculations.
The shift to cloud computing threatens to displace billions of dollars of technology spending as companies from corporate giants to hot startups store their data and run their digital businesses on other companies' computer servers.
Google faces an uphill battle against Amazon and Microsoft. The industry juggernaut, Amazon Web Services, had $12.22 billion in cloud revenue last year, while Deutsche Bank estimates $2.42 billion for Microsoft's Azure cloud service and $900 million for Google. Those numbers don't include sales of cloud-based productivity tools, such as Microsoft's Office 365 and Google's Gmail and Google Docs.
Ms. Greene said Google is gaining traction, winning most of the time when competing with Amazon or Microsoft for new companies moving to the cloud.
Amazon and Microsoft rebuff that suggestion. "We rarely see [Google] among the last two finalists for big deals -- especially when it comes to larger customers or enterprises," said Ariel Kelman, vice president of marketing for AWS.
Google is only included in about one in 20 of Microsoft's sales engagements, said Judson Althoff, Microsoft's executive vice president of world-wide commercial business. "And when they do, most customers chose Microsoft."
---
Rachael King contributed to this article.
Credit: By Jack Nicas and Jay Greene
