The price of bitcoin soared to a fresh record on Tuesday, exceeding its Covid-era high and putting an exclamation point on a rally that has taken Wall Street by storm.
The largest cryptocurrency by market value climbed as high as $69,208.79, capping off a surge that tripled its value over the past year. Bitcoin's momentum, fueled in part by regulatory approval this year of a new wave of retail-oriented bitcoin funds, has energized the crypto faithful and puzzled skeptics who pronounced digital currencies dead after FTX's 2022 bankruptcy.
The risks of the wild and woolly crypto market were evident even on a milestone day. Soon after surpassing its November 2021 high near $69,000, bitcoin traded as low as $59,706.50, marking a nearly 14% retreat from the peak in a single session.
The whipsaw trading took place on a day in which U.S. stocks retreated after a strong early-2024 advance, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropping more than 400 points, or 1%, and the Nasdaq falling 1.7%. Many of the leading decliners were shares that had risen strongly earlier this year.
Analysts scrambling to pinpoint a catalyst for the rally point to two factors: robust flows into the new exchange-traded funds holding bitcoin and a market rally that boosted the prices of riskier assets, from small-cap stocks to giant technology shares to gold.
"It's a vote of confidence from two main groups: institutional investors, for the first time in bitcoin's history, and regulators," said Josiah Hernandez, chief executive of Satoshi Capital Advisors, a crypto investment and advisory firm.
The spot ETFs, which were approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission in January, allow everyday investors to buy the digital asset through brokerage accounts, without having to go to a crypto exchange or to funds that track bitcoin's price through futures contracts.
The funds have been a success, with total assets in the 10 ETFs on the market climbing to nearly $50 billion. BlackRock's iShares Bitcoin Trust is leading the pack. It eclipsed $10 billion in assets Thursday, the fastest a new ETF has ever reached that milestone.
Trading activity accelerated in recent weeks. About $10 billion of bitcoin ETF shares changed hands on Tuesday, the biggest day yet, according to Bloomberg Intelligence. As of Friday, about 4% of the global circulating supply of bitcoin was tied up in the new ETFs, according to crypto-asset manager Galaxy Digital.
Not all asset managers consider the products appropriate for individual investors, given bitcoin's boom-and-bust history. Vanguard said it has no plans to offer a bitcoin ETF and won't offer crypto-related products on its brokerage platform. The asset-management giant called bitcoin "more of a speculation than an investment" in a recent blog post.
And the SEC rejected the funds repeatedly, going back to 2017, before a federal appeals court late last year forced its hand. The agency long argued that bitcoin is susceptible to fraud and market manipulation.
For now, some analysts said the funds and bitcoin prices might have more room to run.
Registered investment advisers, who are influential in directing capital to ETFs, have limited access to the bitcoin funds, for now. The wealth-management platforms at Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch, UBS and Wells Fargo offer the funds on an unsolicited basis: Advisers can't actively pitch them to clients but can buy them for a client who asks. Morgan Stanley has been doing due diligence on spot bitcoin ETFs and evaluating whether to add them to its brokerage platform, according to people familiar with the matter.
Bitcoin's rally has coincided with a surge in riskier assets. Growing optimism that the economy will stave off a recession and the Federal Reserve will soon pivot to cutting interest rates has propelled major stock indexes to repeated highs to kick off 2024.
And a frenzy over artificial-intelligence technology has turbocharged the rally in recent weeks. Shares of Nvidia, the chip maker at the heart of the mania, have climbed more than 70% this year after more than tripling in 2023. Microsoft's market value topped $3 trillion for the first time in January. The S&P 500 is up 6.5% in 2024 and has hit 15 record closes along the way.
Crypto-related stocks and other tokens have been along for the ride. Shares of Coinbase Global have surged 25% this year, even after falling 5.4% on Tuesday. Coinbase serves as the custodian for most spot bitcoin ETFs. It is listed as the custodian on most applications by asset managers in the race to launch ether ETFs.
MicroStrategy, a software intelligence firm that has transformed itself into a bitcoin-buying entity, has risen 66% this year. The company, led by bitcoin advocate Michael Saylor, holds 193,000 bitcoin worth more than $12 billion. Shares declined 21% Tuesday.
Market sentiment has come a long way since 2022, when hedge fund Three Arrows Capital, lender Celsius and exchange FTX collapsed one after the other. By the time FTX filed for bankruptcy in November 2022, bitcoin traded just above $16,000. Prices were hovering around $23,000 a year ago and ended 2023 near $40,000.
Some crypto bulls point to bitcoin's coming "halving" as another driver of the rally. The adjustment, which happens every four years, cuts in half the number of bitcoin that can be unlocked by miners. The theory is that the halving would limit the supply of bitcoin, making it more of a store of value.
After the rally of recent weeks, the level of belief across the market is clearly high. "I've been surprised by the volume of inflows we've seen," said Alex Thorn, head of research at Galaxy Digital. "Wall Street is getting involved. The ETFs are a clear marker."
---
Alexander Osipovich contributed to this article.
Credit: By Jack Pitcher, Caitlin Ostroff and Vicky Ge Huang
