When the Justice Department filed an antitrust lawsuit against Google three years ago this month, it was at my direction. The complaint argued that for many years, Google had been using anticompetitive tactics to squeeze competitors out and establish monopoly power in the markets for general internet searches and search advertising. The Justice Department has asserted that Google accounts for nearly 90% of all general search-engine queries in the U.S. and almost 95% of queries on mobile devices.
The trial in U.S. v. Google finally started in September. The public is getting its first glimpse behind the curtain to see Google for what it really is: a threat to the free market and free speech.
Outside the courtroom, Google supporters have portrayed the company as the victim of overzealous antitrust enforcers in the Biden administration who are bent on interfering in the free market and punishing the tech giant for just for being big. Poppycock. Not only was the case brought under President Trump, but 27 out of 28 Republican state attorneys general have either joined the case or brought their own parallel suits against Google.
Republicans understand that protecting free markets sometimes requires confronting companies that use anticompetitive tactics. While I believe antitrust enforcement has gone too far under President Biden, particularly at the Federal Trade Commission, the Google case isn't an example of this excess. On the contrary: If one believes in preserving free markets, it is hard to imagine a more necessary case.
After working as attorney general under President George H.W. Bush, I was the general counsel for a major telecom company, where I experienced firsthand the digital revolution that transformed our economy. When I returned to the Justice Department in 2019, I saw that what once were upstart innovators in the nascent online ecosystem had become giants ruthlessly entrenching their market dominance.
Ironically, it was the last major federal antitrust prosecution against a tech company, U.S. v. Microsoft in 2000, that helped new tech monopolies like Google emerge by giving third-party applications access to Microsoft's ecosystem. But Google didn't merely benefit; it learned. Google has reused Microsoft's playbook from the 1990s and to much greater effect.
Google executives would have you believe that the company's search engine is successful simply because it is the best. Its actions belie this. In its 2020 complaint, the Justice Department demonstrated that Google has paid tens of billions of dollars to industry partners to make it as hard as possible for users to go anywhere else -- as Microsoft made it almost impossible to avoid Internet Explorer in the late 1990s.
Google is the default search engine on most computer browsers and phones. Google executives argue that it is easy to change to a different search engine on your phone or browser and that users strongly prefer Google to other options. But if this is true, it means that Google is paying kingly sums of money for something it could get free. If Google search is so great, why not let users choose it on their own and save the money?
Google knows that default status is incredibly valuable precisely because users rarely change it. Even if most users would choose Google anyway, buying up the default status on most every phone and browser in the country ensures that no other search engine will have a chance to attract many users. Locked out from critical market access, rival search engines are deprived of the data and scale they need to improve and compete. Google is happy to use its monopoly profits to pay equipment manufacturers to use Google as the default because it means avoiding competition.
Because it isn't worried about competitors, Google has manipulated its search product in ways that increase its revenue but degrade the experience for users. Companies across the economy have likely raised their prices to cover the ever-increasing cost of advertising on Google, while users have found it harder to find reliable news and information.
Google's control over access to online information doesn't only hurt our free-market economy, it also threatens free speech. In one document shown at trial, Google lists "social fairness" as a component of search quality. The same document warns employees to "discuss social fairness in search results with great caution" and asks them to think about how their emails might look to the public.
"Social fairness" is an Orwellian phrase that means political censorship. While censorship issues are beyond the scope of antitrust enforcers, Google's power to censor is the result of its economic power, which is built on the anticompetitive conduct the antitrust laws prohibit. To imagine a world in which Google can't control what we read and say is to imagine a world in which consumers have real choices. The government's lawsuit is showing that Google has worked tirelessly to prevent just that.
Looking ahead, we can see how Google's conduct also threatens the next wave of innovation: artificial intelligence and machine learning. AI promises to revolutionize how we use technology, but if Google extends its dominance into AI, it will further insulate the company from competition. Google's dominance in search gives it unrivaled access to user data, which in turn confers a massive advantage to its AI offerings. Worse, Google's financial dependence on advertising means that Google-dominated AI will likely accelerate the trend of tech companies pushing clickbait and sensational content that users aren't actually looking for.
Google holds effective gatekeeper power over perhaps the most sensitive marketplace there is in a democratic republic -- our digital "village green," the place where people receive and disseminate information. If we are not going to enforce our laws against monopolization here, where will we?
---
Mr. Barr is a co-founder of Torridon Law PLLC, a distinguished fellow at the Hudson Institute and author of the memoir "One Damn Thing After Another." He served as U.S. attorney general, 1991-93 and 2019-20.
Credit: By William P. Barr
