[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
As China prepares to accelerate public investments to kick-start its economy following the shutdowns, "new infrastructure" has become a buzzword for brokers to sell investment ideas.
Beijing has suggested it could take the opportunity to push for a technology-driven structural upgrade of its economy, boosting productivity and innovation. So-called new infrastructure encompasses a range of sectors, from 5G to data centers. The idea has merit: The new areas seem likely to offer a better return on investment than building more roads and bridges on top of China's excellent infrastructure.
It is true China will likely ramp up infrastructure spending this year, after a lull as it tried to contain debt growth. Local governments have issued more than 1 trillion yuan ($141 billion) of "special bonds" this year, with most of the money likely earmarked for infrastructure spending.
However, investors need to treat the new-infrastructure pitch with caution. While spending on the new areas will likely grow at a faster rate, conventional infrastructure will still do the heavy lifting. Goldman Sachs estimated total investment in new infrastructure would reach 2.3 trillion yuan by next year, but would make up 10% of total infrastructure spending.
Moreover, a big chunk of the new-infrastructure spending will go on projects that previously counted as conventional infrastructure, like subways, intercity rail and ultrahigh voltage electricity transmission. For areas like data centers and artificial intelligence, the government may offer favorable policies, but private companies will play a crucial role in determining the level of investments. New or not, the scale of projects will still be limited by stretched household and bank balance sheets.
Nevertheless, the theme has been good for investors so far. CSI New Infrastructure Theme Index, launched last month, rose 13% this year. Some of the stocks did much better: Nasdaq-listed data-center services provider 21Vianet surged 124%, while Shanghai-listed China XD Electric gained 82%.
Investors trying to play China's latest infrastructure push need to be good at seeing through hope and hype.

Credit: By Jacky Wong
