Companies preparing for the easing of lockdowns have new artificial-intelligence tools that can help enforce social distancing and other safety measures in the workplace.
The number of new Covid-19 cases continues to increase in the U.S.; a vaccine and therapies are far from ready; and widespread testing remains elusive. That means behavioral safeguards are crucial as a handful of states lay the foundations for opening their economies.
AI companies such as Smartvid.io Inc. and Drishti Technologies Inc. provide tools that might help companies in a range of industries, such as construction and automotive parts manufacturing, get ready for the reopening of plants and offices.
Earlier this month, Smartvid.io, which has an AI-powered enterprise software product that assesses risk and safety at work sites for construction companies, released a new capability that detects if two people are closer than one-person length apart and if more than 10 individuals are gathered.
"We're working hard to help our customers to stay open and in a safe manner," said Josh Kanner, its founder and chief executive officer.
The Cambridge, Mass., company, whose customers include large national firms such as Clark Construction and Shawmut Design and Construction, has technology that uses cameras and various deep-learning approaches for computer vision, an area of artificial intelligence where machines are trained to analyze images.
Over the past five years, it built a library of construction imagery and project data. That imagery allowed the company to build more than 60 construction-focused machine learning models that look for specific indicators of risk in imagery, said Mr. Kanner of Smartvid.io.
For example, is a worker on a ladder or working at heights? Aggregate data leads to an overall picture of risk.
Drishti, based in Mountain View, Calif., provides an end-to-end AI-driven computer vision solution to manufacturing companies, including automotive parts maker Denso Corp.
The Drishti system analyzes the entire manual assembly process. There is a camera pointed at each station and video is fed into Drishti's cloud. Proprietary neural networks that include action recognition analyze a full video stream rather than focusing on single frames and can measure how far apart workers are from one another.
"We can ping a line person giving them instant feedback much like how spell check works," says Prasad Akella, Drishti's founder and chief executive officer.
Landing AI and PricewaterhouseCoopers are developing new AI-powered distance monitoring tools for the workplace.
Landing AI has built a deep learning prototype it is testing that would analyze real-time video streams. The software would be integrated into security camera systems. It would issue an audible alert if people pass too closely to each other on the factory floor and a nightly report that can help managers make relevant changes such as rearranging the workspace, Andrew Ng, founder and chief executive, said.
Consulting firm PwC developed what it calls an Automatic Contact Tracing tool, which uses AI that helps aggregate millions of wireless signals into a graph that can then be interpreted.
Smartvid.io's Mr. Kanner says in construction, changes such as decreasing the number of workers on site on a given day by 50% or a maximum number of people who can be up in a buck hoist -- those external elevators that carry workers up a building -- have been in effect for several weeks.

Credit: By Vinod Sreeharsha
