MISSOURI
Alumnus Gives School
$300 Million Donation
A 91-year-old New York native who moved to Missouri to finish college and made a fortune building hospitals gave $300 million to his alma mater, the Missouri University of Science and Technology, the school said Monday. It is one of the largest private gifts to a university on record.
Fred Kummer graduated from Missouri S&T, in Rolla, Mo., in 1955 after transferring from City College in New York. In 1960 he started HBE Corp. near St. Louis, which designs, builds and renovates health-care facilities. The gift comes from him and his wife, June.
The public university said it would use the money to build a new laboratory for research and development focusing on advanced manufacturing, infrastructure, artificial intelligence and environmental and resource sustainability.
It will also help build a new school of innovation and entrepreneurship and fund scholarships and faculty.
The gift is among the 30 or so largest ever given to an institution of higher education, according to a list kept by the Chronicle of Higher Education.
"I owe much of my success to the education I received at Rolla," Mr. Kummer said.
"My Rolla experience taught me how to think, how to work hard and how to manage my own career," he added.
-- Douglas Belkin
---
MINNESOTA
Votes Received 7 Days
After Election Allowed
A federal judge upheld a Minnesota state court agreement that allows the counting of absentee ballots received up to seven days after Election Day.
Republicans had asked U.S. District Judge Nancy Brasel to block the seven-day extension that said ballots postmarked on or before Election Day must be counted.
Judge Brasel ruled late Sunday night that the plaintiffs in the case -- state Rep. Eric Lucero and another Republican who serves as an elector in the presidential election -- don't have standing, and denied their motion for a preliminary injunction. She said giving voters conflicting information after absentee ballots have gone out would create confusion.
Messages left Monday with Mr. Lucero and the Republican Party weren't immediately returned, but attorneys for the plaintiffs filed a notice saying they will appeal.
-- Associated Press
---
MICHIGAN
Court Won't Delay
Ruling Voiding Law
The Michigan Supreme Court on Monday rejected Gov. Gretchen Whitmer's request to delay by 28 days the effect of its decision striking down a law she had used to keep intact sweeping orders designed to curb the spread of the coronavirus.
Justices voted 6-1 against halting the precedential effect of the court's Oct. 2 opinion until Oct. 30. They also reaffirmed their initial 4-3 ruling that declared the 1945 emergency powers law unconstitutional, this time in a lawsuit brought by the Republican-led Legislature.
Executive orders issued under the law "are of no continuing legal effect. This order is effective upon entry," the court wrote.
Ms. Whitmer, a Democrat, had asked the justices to give her administration, lawmakers and local health departments 28 days to transition in the wake of the major decision.
Her administration last week quickly reinstituted mask requirements, gathering limits and other restrictions with orders issued by the state health department under a different law.
-- Associated Press
---
CONNECTICUT
Baby Abandoned
In Trash Found Alive
An abandoned baby was found alive in a trash bin at a New Haven apartment complex Monday, prompting an investigation by police who later found the child's mother.
Officers responded to the Presidential Gardens complex in the Newhallville neighborhood at about 2 p.m. and called in emergency medical responders to care for the 8-month-old girl, police Capt. Anthony Duff said.
Police found the baby's mother, he said, and the investigation was continuing. The mother's name wasn't disclosed, and no charges had been announced.
The girl was taken to Yale New Haven Children's Hospital. Her condition wasn't immediately released.
-- Associated Press
