Robots that can see are key to the future of self-driving cars, humanoid robots and autonomous drones.
Right now, they are serving their apprenticeship by sizing up sausages.
Food manufacturers are combining advances in laser vision with artificial-intelligence software so that automated arms can carry out more complex tasks, such as slicing chicken cutlets precisely or inspecting toppings on machine-made pizzas. At a sausage factory, more powerful cameras and quicker processors enable robots to detect the twisted point between two cylindrical wieners fast enough that they can be cut apart at the rate of 200 a minute.
Companies world-wide are investing in computer vision-based technology. Chip maker Intel Corp. bought Mobileye NV for $15.3 billion in March 2017, in part for the Israeli company's vision-based driver-assistance technology. In April, Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. led a $600 million funding round in startup SenseTime Group Ltd., which specializes in facial- and image-recognition technology.
The sensing and imaging market will grow about 10-fold to $18.5 billion by 2023, market-research firm Yole Developpement forecasts. That is being driven by worker shortages, rising labor costs and robots' performance edge over humans.
A high-speed system may have a process time of 10 to 30 milliseconds, or about 100 times as fast as a human, said Bob Hosler, chief operating officer of the U.S. subsidiary of Osaka, Japan-based Keyence Corp., one of the biggest companies in the vision-products field.
"You can do more with a robot that can see," said John Keating, a senior director at Natick, Mass.-based Cognex Corp., which makes vision sensors used by global manufacturers, including food processors.
Vision-sensing devices can be used all through the sausage-making process, from measuring to inspecting for defects to quality control on the final product, Mr. Hosler said.
Food manufacturers have been early adopters of new technologies ranging from canning devices to bread slicers, and vision automation has been used for tasks such as reading bar codes and sorting packaged products. Some companies now are finding the technology valuable because robot eyes outpace the human eye at certain tasks.
For years, Tyson Foods Inc. used sensors to map chicken fillets so they could be cut to the precise specifications required by restaurants that need them to cook uniformly. But exposure to the high pressure, high temperature water kept causing equipment failures.
Now technical improvements, tougher materials and declining prices mean the company can integrate vision technology in facilities including the new $300 million chicken-processing plant in Humboldt, Tenn., said Doug Foreman, who works in technology development at the Springdale, Ark.-based food company. The technology could help optimize the use of each part of the bird, he added.
Tyson is investing in a manufacturing automation center to further explore the application of vision technology, the company said.

Credit: By Natasha Khan
