After a year of right-sizing, employers are looking in the mirror and concluding there is still fat to lose.
Companies including Amazon, Citigroup, Xerox, Google and BlackRock this month have announced plans to trim their workforces. Some of the companies now cutting jobs conducted larger-scale layoffs over the past year or so.
In messages announcing the layoffs, many executives stressed the need for companies to be smaller. "I know many of you are wondering why this is happening," Dan Clancy, chief executive of streaming platform Twitch, wrote in a memo to staff, noting previous work to reduce costs at the company. "Unfortunately, despite these efforts, it has become clear that our organization is still meaningfully larger than it needs to be given the size of our business."
Amazon, which owns Twitch, said this month that it was eliminating hundreds of jobs across its film and television studio and the streaming platform to rein in costs. Audible, an audiobook platform Amazon owns, is also laying off 5% of its staff, according to an internal memo.
Citigroup on Friday said it plans to cut 20,000 jobs from its workforce by the end of 2026 as the bank continues a multiyear restructuring.
Executives and analysts say that beyond the budget-tightening that often happens at the beginning of the calendar year, there is a growing sense that the work of slimming down isn't over. The emergence of artificial intelligence is accelerating that push because AI can perform more of the tasks handled by white-collar workers and because companies are diverting resources to develop the technology. Corporate roles are also being newly scrutinized following massive hiring sprees earlier in the pandemic.
"It seems like the layoffs we saw last year were the beginning of a process," said Nick Bunker, director of North American economic research at the jobs platform Indeed.
By several measures, the labor market is strong. The U.S. economy is still producing jobs at a faster pace than it was just before the pandemic, and unemployment is low. Many companies also are reluctant to get rid of workers after struggling so long to find and keep them.
Still, the climate for job seekers is cooling. The Federal Reserve's campaign of interest-rate increases raised borrowing costs, prompting businesses to scale back expansion plans. Employers have slowed hiring and handed out smaller raises. The job-hopping that reached a frenzied pace early in the pandemic has quieted.
"It's a buyer's market for talent right now," said Aaron Terrazas, chief economist at employee review website Glassdoor. The big tech companies can recognize the talent market has radically shifted from a year ago, and they aren't going to struggle for talent, he said.
As companies make investments in AI, they are looking for efficiencies elsewhere, Terrazas added. High interest rates have made taking risks more expensive, he said, so part of the cuts is about reallocating resources in a more targeted way.
Companies kicked off the new year with a string of layoff announcements.
Xerox Holdings said it would reduce its workforce by 15%. The printer maker had 20,500 employees at the end of 2022, a reduction of about 12% compared with the previous year, according to regulatory filings.
Unity Software, a San Francisco-based maker of tools for creating videogames and other applications, said it plans to lay off about 25% of its workforce, or about 1,800 employees.
Google laid off hundreds of employees across multiple divisions on Wednesday, as it works to reduce costs and direct resources toward developments in AI.
Universal Music Group plans to lay off around 100 to 300 employees globally this year, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Others hinted at new technologies on the horizon, poised to reshape companies. When BlackRock CEO Larry Fink and President Rob Kapito wrote a message to staff this week, noting the firm would cut 3% of its roles, the executives said "new technologies are poised to transform our industry -- and every other industry."
"We are going to see more layoffs this year, but there will also be a spike in hiring," said Martha Heller, who runs a tech-focused executive-search firm, Heller Search Associates.
---
Sarah E. Needleman and Sebastian Herrera contributed to this article.
Credit: By Chip Cutter and Natasha Khan
