Nvidia's stellar quarter boosted the chip maker's shares Thursday but failed to lift the broader stock market.
The S&P 500 declined 0.7%. The Nasdaq Composite pulled back 0.4%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average slid about 600 points, or 1.5%, its worst one-day percentage drop since March 2023. It was the second straight day of declines for all three indexes.
Investors had been eagerly awaiting Nvidia's results because its heavy weighting in benchmark indexes like the S&P 500 gives the chip maker the potential to move the broader market. The company's performance is also seen as a test of the artificial-intelligence frenzy that has powered the stock market for the last year.
Shares of the chip maker jumped 9.3% on Thursday after the company reported record quarterly revenue and profit that beat Wall Street's expectations. But the performance wasn't enough to push the major indexes higher.
Ten out of 11 sectors in the S&P 500 fell on Thursday. Only the information-technology sector, which includes Nvidia, eked out a 0.6% gain.
"Underneath the hood, the market has a really risk-off tone," said Adam Phillips, managing director of investments at EP Wealth Advisors.
In recent months, investors have been recalibrating their expectations on inflation and when the Federal Reserve might cut interest rates. A string of hotter-than-expected inflation reports dashed investors' hopes for as many as six or seven rate cuts this year, but more encouraging data in recent weeks have kept hopes alive for cuts in 2024.
The S&P 500 is up 4.6% in May and 10% for the year.
On Thursday, however, worries about inflation were rekindled when a business report showed U.S. economic activity picked up pace this month. The S&P Global Flash U.S. Composite PMI -- which measures activity in the manufacturing and services sectors -- rose to 54.4 in May from 51.3 in April, its highest level in more than two years.
The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note -- a benchmark for mortgages and other boring costs -- rose to 4.474% from 4.433% on Wednesday.
"That's taking some of the enthusiasm out of the rest of the market," Todd Jones, chief investment officer of Gratus Capital, said of the move in the Treasury yield.
Among other individual stocks, shares of Boeing dropped 7.6%, weighing on the Dow industrials.
The plane maker said it expects to burn through a further $4 billion in the current quarter and be cash-flow negative for the full year.
Comerica's stock lost 5.7% after regulators issued an enforcement action against one of its business units, saying it found "unsafe or unsound practices" related to its risk governance and internal controls.
In commodities, copper futures fell about 1%, coming off their biggest one-day percentage decline in almost two years. The slide follows a massive run-up driven in part by the prospect of all the wiring needed to power AI data centers.
Gold futures pulled back 2.3% in a third-consecutive day of declines, putting a rally that has mystified some traders into reverse.
The Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.1%. At midday Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 1.2%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was off 1.4% and South Korea's Kospi was down 1%. S&P 500 futures were up 0.2%.
Generate image description

Credit: By Hannah Miao
