Venture firms are knocking on more doors in search of capital. It can be a tough sell in today's slumping venture market, but some investors are happy to answer the call, seeing a chance to get into successful venture funds.
About a quarter of limited partners expect to deploy less capital to venture capital in the next 12 months, while a third expect to commit more than in the prior 12 months, according to a November survey of nearly 400 investors by research firm Preqin. The share of those planning to invest more has grown since a year ago, according to the data provider.
Among the limited partners seeking venture-capital exposure is San Francisco-based GREE LP Fund. The fund-of-funds manager recently closed on $52.75 million to back U.S.-based venture funds.
The majority of GREE LP Fund's capital comes from Tokyo-based publicly traded gaming and media company GREE Inc. Other investors include Japanese corporations and a Chinese family office.
GREE LP Fund has already invested in funds from Khosla Ventures, Upfront Ventures, NFX, Hustle Fund, Behind Genius Ventures and others since it began deploying its fund in 2021. It backs both established and emerging funds. In the emerging category, GREE LP Fund is looking to gain access to startups working on crypto, climate, defense and other technology sectors, in addition to traditional software. Emerging venture firms are younger firms, sometimes defined as those with fewer than four funds.
The Wall Street Journal spoke with Youngrok Kim, partner and head of investments for GREE LP Fund, about the firm's approach. The interview has been edited for clarity and length.
WSJ: What is it like to deploy capital into venture funds now for you as a new LP?
KIM: [In the past] established firms weren't open to new LPs. Some of their LPs decreased their allocation or some decided not to reup. That opens the door to new LPs like us. We can start a relationship with them. Everything is cyclical. Now it's a little bit easier.
Two years ago, emerging managers were able to raise capital in a month or two and everyone wanted to invest in those top-tier emerging funds. Now, we have time to evaluate these opportunities. In the next two to three years, they will become the top brands.
WSJ: Many venture funds today say they are investing in artificial intelligence. Do you believe they are likely to succeed or is it a difficult sector for venture capitalists to make money?
KIM: You see what they say in the pitch decks. Two years ago they all said 'Web3.' The same thing is happening for AI, now a lot of the managers squeeze AI into their investment strategy. That's what LPs want to hear. The investments venture funds make today will become something meaningful in the next five years. AI is happening now, maybe. Now people are talking about [artificial general intelligence] in five years.
We invested in Khosla Ventures, which invested in OpenAI in 2018. In 2018, everyone, including myself, thought AI is old. AI was an innovation that hadn't had much impact back then. But [Founder and Managing Director] Vinod Khosla sent a huge amount of capital into this thing. It turned into something huge. That's venture capital. Because of that I try to invest in funds with a more contrarian idea of what's happening in the next five years.
WSJ: There is a lot of dry powder still in venture, as firms slowed their deployment into startups after raising a lot of capital. Why are we still seeing some very large venture funds get raised?
KIM: The market is not ideal, but it doesn't mean LPs won't invest in venture capital as an asset class. They had a little more room to explore new strategies, now they don't have that luxury. What they have to do is make a safe bet, which is the big brands. If we break it down VC firm by VC firm, it makes sense. One of the funds we know decided not to raise their growth fund this year, they are still deploying their previous growth fund. But they raised a fund for seed and Series A deals. If there's a fund that still has 50% of dry powder, no one will invest in them. But if you break it down by fund, by VC firm, they raise capital for the fund that they are ready to deploy.
Credit: By Yuliya Chernova
