FRANCE
Macron Advances
Pension Overhaul
The French government cleared the way for Parliament to review President Emmanuel Macron's plan to make sweeping changes to the pension system, a revamp that sparked the longest transport strike in the country's history.
On Friday, French Health Minister Agnes Buzyn and Secretary of State for Pensions Laurent Pietraszewski officially presented the bill to Mr. Macron and his cabinet, allowing Parliament to begin debating the overhaul next month. Parliament is widely expected to pass the measures by the summer because Mr. Macron's party has a strong majority.
Meanwhile, unions made a final push Friday to oppose the bill. Thousands of train drivers, teachers and lawyers took to the streets of big cities, severely disrupting traffic and forcing many schools to close.
-- Noemie Bisserbe
---
MEXICO
Guardsmen Break Up
Migrant Caravan
Eight hundred Central American migrants were rounded up and put on buses by Mexican national guardsmen and immigration agents after crossing into the country early Thursday and walking for hours along a rural highway.
The migrants had stopped for the day when hundreds of national guard troops advanced their lines to within 100 yards. A brief negotiation stalled after Mexican authorities said the migrants "demanded permits for free transit through Mexico to the United States."
National guardsmen in riot gear advanced and engaged the migrants. Many of the people allowed themselves to be escorted to 20 waiting buses without resistance.
-- Associated Press
---
UNITED KINGDOM
Facial-Recognition
Cameras Will Be Used
Scotland Yard said it would begin using live facial-recognition technology in London to help identify criminal suspects, drawing criticism from privacy advocates who say such tools give the government too much power to track and monitor citizens.
The equipment, developed by Japan's NEC Corp., will be deployed in neighborhoods where intelligence suggests officers are likely to find serious offenders, police said. Live facial-recognition technology uses artificial intelligence to instantly recognize people in surveillance footage. Its detractors say the technology is unreliable and opens a new front in the global tussle between privacy and security.
Big Brother Watch, a civil liberties group, said it would challenge the technology's use in court. The Metropolitan Police said its equipment will be clearly marked and won't be hooked up to London police officers' body-worn cameras, traffic cameras or closed-circuit TV systems.
-- Jason Douglas
---
BREXIT
EU Officials Sign Deal
In Private Ceremony
The leaders of two of the European Union's main institutions on Friday signed the divorce agreement governing Britain's departure from the bloc next week, sealing the penultimate step in Brexit at a ceremony held without media access.
European Council President Charles Michel tweeted photos of the overnight signing with the president of the EU's powerful executive commission, Ursula von der Leyen, in the presence of their Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier. The EU Parliament is expected to ratify the deal Wednesday.
-- Associated Press
