OpenAI has embedded a search engine in its popular ChatGPT chatbot, entering a space long dominated by Alphabet's Google as technology companies compete to use artificial intelligence to improve search results.
The San Francisco-based company on Thursday announced what it calls "ChatGPT search." The latest version of the AI chatbot will allow users to search up-to-date information from across the internet, such as sports scores, stock prices and weather, powered by real-time third-party search providers and content partners.
The search tool will summarize the information found on websites, including news sites, and let users ask follow-up questions, just as they can currently with ChatGPT.
ChatGPT can automatically search the web based on what the user asks, it said. Users also can manually choose to search by clicking the web search icon. OpenAI said it plans to improve the search function in areas like shopping and travel and add voice capabilities.
Skeptics have raised concerns about the reliability of AI-based results, since the machines don't always explain their recommended answers. The machines can sometimes hallucinate by making up answers or misattributing information. OpenAI's new search engine will include links to sources, such as news articles and blog posts, to provide context for the results.
The function will be rolled out gradually over the coming months, starting with some paid users on Thursday. The search function will be available on its website and desktop and mobile applications.
ChatGPT Plus users can install a Google Chrome extension to make ChatGPT the default search engine within the web browser.
OpenAI said it collaborated with news partners such as the Associated Press, Financial Times, Reuters, News Corp, Time and Vox Media.
The new technology positions the AI startup to compete with search engines by other U.S. tech companies. Google this year widely rolled out its own AI search feature that synthesizes information from multiple web sources. Other AI companies are also entering the search battle, including Perplexity, which is backed by Amazon.com Executive Chair Jeff Bezos and founded by a former OpenAI employee. OpenAI's biggest investor, Microsoft, has also added AI to its search engine, Bing.
News Corp, owner of The Wall Street Journal and Dow Jones Newswires, has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI.
Credit: By Kimberley Kao
