Microsoft's revenue growth slowed last quarter amid sluggish corporate demand even as excitement around artificial intelligence bolstered its business.
The tech titan on Tuesday said that revenue in the quarter through June, the last in its fiscal year, rose 8% to $56.2 billion, edging out analysts' expectations. That was down from growth of 12% a year earlier.
The deceleration was stark in the cloud-computing business -- the engine of Microsoft's growth for years -- which recently has suffered as tech customers have pulled back spending. Revenue for its Azure and other cloud services rose 26% in the latest quarter, still rapid by many measures but sharply slower than the 40% clip a year earlier and the growth rates of 50% or more that it posted in boom times.
Microsoft, among the first big tech companies to report quarterly results, has had a mixed year. Like other tech giants, it has cut staff and other costs as demand for digital services ebbed after years of red-hot growth when work and life shifted online during the pandemic. After earlier layoffs that affected some 10,000 employees, Microsoft in recent weeks laid off more than 1,000 additional employees.
It is also among the companies at the forefront of a surging interest in AI services, which require significant computing power. Sparked by the popularity of OpenAI's chatbot ChatGPT, companies have poured billions of dollars into what is known as generative AI, which can generate sophisticated images and text from simple prompts.
Microsoft also has special access to some of the powerful and popular AI technology through its investment in OpenAI.
"There's this complete new world of AI driving a set of new workloads," Microsoft Chief Executive Officer Satya Nadella said in a call with investors.
Microsoft shares fell about 3% in after-hours trading following its results. As of the close of regular trading Tuesday, the stock had jumped 46% this year, outpacing a 35% gain in the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index. Both measures have been buoyed in part this year because investors are bullish on the prospects of artificial intelligence.
The Redmond, Wash., company's net income in the latest quarter rose 20% to $20.1 billion. Analysts surveyed by FactSet had predicted the company would announce revenue of $55 billion and profit of $19 billion for the quarter.
For the current quarter through September, the company projected revenue of between $53.8 billion and $54.8 billion, slightly below analysts' expectations of $55 billion, according to FactSet.
Demonstrating how AI could lift growth, Microsoft last week announced plans to charge businesses $30 a month per person for access to an AI-powered assistant for Microsoft 365, its popular workplace software that includes Word and Excel. The fee is more than double what Microsoft charges for the least expensive version of the software.
The company has just recently launched many of the AI products so investors won't see much impact on sales, though early customer interest is strong, said Kendra Goodenough, director of investor relations at Microsoft.
"The demand signals and customer conversations are very real," Goodenough said.
Customer demand for Microsoft's other businesses, including its workplace software and Windows operating system, continues to be slow. Sales of personal computers, which took off during the pandemic, have slipped in recent quarters. Worldwide PC shipments have been down since the height of the pandemic, as some workers began returning to the office.
Microsoft's Windows licensing business to PC vendors fell 12%. Its device business, which includes Surface computers, dropped 20% for the quarter.
The company's videogaming business grew 1%.
The company made its biggest bet ever on the sector last year with its $75 billion bid to acquire gaming giant Activision Blizzard. The Federal Trade Commission had sued to block the acquisition. The company has fought back in court and the FTC last week said it was pausing its efforts.
For the full fiscal year through June, Microsoft's revenue grew 7%. That is down from 18% the previous fiscal year and the slowest rate in seven years.
---
Tom Dotan contributed to this article.
Credit: By Aaron Tilley
