One might say Elizabeth Warren got her robot. The Massachusetts Senator has prodded antitrust regulators to block Amazon's acquisition of Roomba manufacturer iRobot. On Monday the two companies called off their deal amid opposition from competition regulators. What a coup -- for the Chinese.
Progressives opposed Amazon's $1.7 billion bid for iRobot the moment it was announced in August 2022. They claimed without evidence that Amazon would undermine Roomba rivals selling in the company's online marketplace and use the smart vacuum to spy on American homes. But they mostly worried that the acquisition would make Amazon more powerful.
It wasn't a secret that Amazon wanted to hoover up iRobot's engineering talent. Expanding its use of robotics could make Amazon's retail operations more efficient and help expand in new markets. But progressives want to stop big tech companies from growing.
"Amazon has fully leveraged its monopoly power and is 'almost universally recognized' as the leader in warehouse and fulfillment robotics space," Ms. Warren and other progressives wrote to Federal Trade Commission Chair Lina Khan in September 2022. The deal "would open up a new market to Amazon's abuses."
The FTC around that time began reviewing the deal. In July 2023 the European Commission opened its own investigation, focusing on dubious concerns that Amazon would favor iRobot over rivals. Yet the U.K.'s competition regulators cleared the deal last year and said Amazon wouldn't have an incentive to undercut Roomba competitors.
European law prohibits tech platforms like Amazon from favoring their own products. Yet European regulators refused to consider possible concessions from Amazon to allay their concerns about "self-preferencing." So Amazon and iRobot scrapped the deal.
"During our investigation, we have been in close contact with the US Federal Trade Commission," European Commission Executive Vice-President Margrethe Vestager said Monday. She said its investigation found "Amazon would have had the incentive to foreclose iRobot's rivals because it would have been economically profitable to do so."
Europe's theory of potential harm to competitors wouldn't fly in U.S. federal court under the consumer welfare standard. Ms. Khan made similar arguments when she sued to block the Microsoft-Activision Blizzard and Meta-Within Unlimited deals. She lost both. Did Ms. Khan suggest that her European friends scuttle Amazon's acquisition?
Sen. Warren and Ms. Khan have won a pyrrhic victory. iRobot said Monday it is cutting about 31% of its workforce and research and development spending by "offshoring of non-core engineering functions to lower-cost regions." iRobot said it will also pause "all work related to non-floorcare innovations."
It's hard to see who benefits from the deal's collapse besides Beijing, which aims to dominate robotics and mass-produce humanoid robots by 2025. The iRobot rivals progressives are worried about are Chinese firms.
As Amazon general counsel David Zapolsky noted in a statement, "mergers and acquisitions like this help companies like iRobot better compete in the global marketplace, particularly against companies, and from countries, that aren't subject to the same regulatory requirements in fast-moving technology segments like robotics."
Regulator opposition to the deal could also chill U.S. investment and innovation more broadly by sending a signal to venture investors that bigger companies won't be allowed to acquire startups. Acquisitions are one way venture firms earn a return on their early investments, which they can then plow into other startups.
Last Thursday Ms. Khan launched a review of "the investments and partnerships being formed between AI developers and major cloud service providers." The agency plans to scrutinize investments by Microsoft, Amazon and Google in artificial intelligence startups OpenAI and Anthropic.
The Biden Administration is subsidizing semiconductor and green-energy companies in the name of competing with China, even as antitrust regulators make it harder for U.S. companies to compete. Call it degenerative artificial government intelligence.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: European-Style Regulation For American Dynamism" -- WSJ January 8, 2024)
