Microsoft, Procter & Gamble and Coca-Cola are among the household names set to report their quarterly results in the coming week, offering insights into consumer and corporate spending as inflation cools.
Others scheduled to issue updates include Meta Platforms and Google parent Alphabet, Exxon Mobil and Chevron, Visa and Mastercard, and Chipotle Mexican Grill and McDonald's.
Overall, 166 S&P 500 companies, including 12 Dow Jones Industrial Average components, are scheduled to report this week, according to FactSet.
Together, their results will offer a clearer picture of the pace of the economy and the financial health of the American consumer as economic growth slows. Companies continue to hire, fueling a hot job market, and the pandemic-era inflation appears to have subsided; meanwhile, Fed officials recently signaled that more interest-rate increases are coming.
So far, almost a fifth of S&P 500 companies have reported this quarter, with earnings on track to fall 9% from a year earlier, according to FactSet.
Microsoft and Alphabet, reporting Tuesday, as well as Facebook and Instagram parent Meta, reporting Wednesday, are expected to update investors on artificial-intelligence investments even as efforts develop to rein in the nascent technology. Investors added billions of dollars to big tech companies' market values on news of AI advancements, sending stocks surging. Google and Microsoft backed their own AI chatbots to compete with ChatGPT in recent weeks.
Intel on Thursday will give clues about the state of semiconductor production and its search for big-name customers for its chips, amid tensions between the U.S. and China.
Reports from Southwest Airlines on Thursday, Alaska Air Group on Tuesday and hotel chain Hilton Worldwide on Wednesday are expected to highlight the strength of travel demand in the busy summer season and how companies are handling a surge of vacation demand. American Airlines and Delta Air Lines have signaled in recent weeks that travelers are back in force, especially internationally, but the airline industry has faced hurdles from summer storms and personnel shortages.
Earnings from payment companies Visa and Mastercard on Tuesday and Thursday, respectively, will point to whether Americans are still spending big on credit cards. Americans are struggling to pay back credit-card debt, a problem pressured by the resumption of federal student loan payments.
Earlier this month, big-bank earnings showed that consumers were largely resilient, with customers raising their credit-card spending and loan defaults remaining historically low.
Credit: By Ben Glickman
