Here's the good news about killer robots: Despite their near ubiquity in science fiction, they aren't inevitable.
The bad news is that stopping them is going to be much harder than simply banning government-sponsored research on them, as frequently proposed by technologists and nongovernmental organizations. Understanding why tells us a great deal about the massive impact that robotics and automation will have on every part of the 21st century.
But let's start with some myth-busting. The most important misunderstanding about killer robots is that they will require military contracts to develop them. That's because, unlike, say, stealth technology, much of what enables autonomous weapons is consumer tech being developed for the use of civilians by the likes of Google Inc., Amazon.com Inc. and drone makers such as 3DR.
"People often miss the military robotics forest for the drone strike trees," says Michael Horowitz, a senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security, a nonpartisan think tank. "We think of robotics technology as good for drones, and drones are good for striking insurgents -- and then miss the massively commercially driven diffusion of these underlying technologies around the world."
Imagine the following scenario: It's 2025, and self-driving cars are widely available. Turning such a vehicle into a bomb isn't much harder than it is to accomplish the same thing with a conventional vehicle today. And the same goes for drones of every scale and description.
It's inevitable, say the experts I talked to, that nonstate actors and rogue states will create killer robots once the underpinnings of this technology become cheap and accessible, thanks to its commercial use.
"I look back 10 years, and who would have thought people would be using cellphone technology to detonate IEDs?" says retired Rear Admiral Matthew Klunder, who as chief of research spent four years heading up the Navy's work on autonomous systems.
And what about killing machines driven by artificial intelligence, which could learn to make decisions themselves, a fear that recently bubbled to the surface in an open letter signed by the likes of Elon Musk and Stephen Hawking. The letter warned that an arms race was "virtually inevitable" between major powers if they continue to develop these kinds of weapons.
Mr. Klunder told me emphatically that the U.S. doesn't create weapons systems where the decision to kill isn't made by a human being.
"If there are any lethal implications [of a weapons system] -- I call it a red button -- if there's any red button that's going to be pressed to create a weapons effect, there's always going to be a human doing it," says Mr. Klunder, who is now vice president of DoD strategy at Harris Corporation, a defense contractor. In 2012 the Department of Defense issued a directive banning the use of fully autonomous offensive systems.
Mr. Klunder did allow that the military is a fan of automation in general, because of its potential to save both money and lives. For example, in 2009, Deloitte calculated that for every 24 fuel resupply convoys in Iraq and Afghanistan, one soldier was lost. Imagine if those convoys were all self-driving?
And Mr. Klunder says that much of the research in the area of automation is happening whether or not the military asks for it, and whether or not it can be used on the battlefield. "People in industry will continue to develop those systems with all the proper safeguards, and then when government policy allows you to use those systems in certain missions you can go and say 'is it ready?'" he says.
The movement to ban research on possible killer robots -- which focuses on research with direct military application -- is honorable in its intentions. America's warfighters aren't prepared to hand control over firing of offensive weapons to artificial intelligence, no matter how much better it might be than humans at discriminating between targets in the chaos of battle.
If we are serious about the moral, psychological and ultimately existential dimensions of preventing wars in which machines have full authority to kill humans, we might want to think about export controls on commercial robotics and drone technology. We already control the export of countless other technologies with potential for "dual use" in both civilian and military applications.
There is something ironic about scientists cosigning Messrs. Musk's and Hawking's letter urging policy makers to ban research on killer robots while continuing to pursue research into artificial intelligence and autonomous robotics.
"It's not like anybody is like, 'Oh great I can't wait to create Skynet [the self-aware defense computer in the film 'Terminator'] -- that will be sweet when the machines turn against us," says Mr. Horowitz.
But just because leaders in the U.S., the world leader in autonomous technologies, are willing to publicly declare that they aren't interested in realizing something like the "Terminator" doesn't mean that there isn't a danger of creating some version of that dystopia without ever intending to.
---
Follow Christopher Mims on Twitter @Mims or write to christopher.mims@wsj.com
Credit: By Christopher Mims
