Pick a theme, any theme, and there's probably a way to invest in it.
Interested in space? There's an ETF that invests in companies in space-related industries. How about AI or cybersecurity or clean energy or cannabis or cloud computing or blockchain technology or Covid-19? There are funds for all of them.
There are more than 800 thematic funds in global markets with assets totaling more than $183 billion, as tallied by Morningstar Inc. According to Morningstar, the number of thematic funds just in the U.S. recently stood at about 150, up from fewer than 80 three years ago. Assets have about doubled to nearly $40 billion over the past three years.
The interest in thematic investments isn't hard to understand. Investing in developments that could transform humanity, or that just align with your beliefs and interests, is a lot more compelling than owning a broad index.
More interesting, that is, but usually not more lucrative. Among thematic funds in existence between 2010 and this year, only about a fourth beat the MSCI World Index, a broad gauge of global stocks.
That's partly because many don't do a good job of delivering themes or they hit the market after investors already have bid up the valuations of stocks they own, says Ben Johnson, Morningstar's head of global ETF research. "Investors need to approach this category with a healthy degree of skepticism, given its track record," he says.
In addition, buying a thematic fund is by definition abandoning the principle of having a diversified portfolio. That increases the riskiness of a portfolio, as well as the volatility.
This isn't to say that all thematic investing is bad -- some funds have delivered sparkling performance during certain stretches. Still, anyone considering a thematic play should look carefully at its design and ask the following questions, professionals say.
1. Is a theme really a good investment?
It may take a crystal ball to tell which themes will succeed in the future, but the rearview mirror shows that many haven't. Less than half of the thematic funds created more than a decade ago still exist, Morningstar says. Undaunted, fund firms continue to roll out new offerings at a pace of more than 150 a year globally.
It isn't that the theme's relevance necessarily fades. It's just that for some reason, not enough investors are interested, or companies within that theme don't do all that well. For instance, there was the ETF with the trading symbol SLIM, which owned shares of companies with products designed to combat obesity. Or DIET, which focused on companies with disruptive, plant-based food products. Those two closed earlier this year after failing to sustain investor interest.
If an ETF has less than around $50 million in assets after its first three years, there's a reasonable likelihood that it will be shut down.
Among others that closed were Spirited Funds/ETFMG Whiskey & Spirits ETF (WSKY), and Republican Policies Fund (GOP) and Democratic Policies Fund (DEMS). The latter two tried to target stocks that were expected to benefit from policies of the respective political parties.
A theme that has worked so far is automation, as illustrated by the success of Robo Global Robotics & Automation Index ETF (ROBO). Launched in 2013, it has around $1.4 billion in assets. Morningstar says water and alternative energy funds also have shown durability. Invesco Water Resources ETF (PHO), launched in late 2005 and, with around $1.2 billion in assets now, invests in companies that conserve and purify water.
2. Are you already late to the party?
Markets are quick to discount expectations. So, sometimes by the time a fund appears, the valuations of the stocks it owns already may have reached lofty levels, damping potential for further appreciation.
To reduce the risk of missing the best gains, check a fund's literature for its overall price-to-earnings ratio, or P/E, a common yardstick for valuations. Also look at what is known as the PEG ratios of the largest individual positions in a fund's portfolio -- the P/E divided by the growth rate of earnings. A PEG smaller than one is usually considered more attractive than a larger figure.
Examine growth forecasts for a fund's largest holdings, which are available on financial and brokerage websites. If they are 15% a year or more, maybe paying a higher P/E for a fund is worth it, says Todd Rosenbluth, head of ETF and mutual-fund research at CFRA, a financial-data provider.
Mr. Rosenbluth adds: "At the end of the day, you want to own something that someone else wants to buy tomorrow." He and others also warn against investors buying thematic funds in hope of making a quick killing, because it often takes years for a theme to play out.
3. How true is the portfolio to a fund's theme?
It can be challenging to mirror a theme with a basket of stocks, because in building an index, it's sometimes difficult to find enough companies that get a large portion of their revenues from a certain theme.
"An investor may not be getting pure-play exposure to a theme, but just a bunch of companies that have a small part of their business in some theme," says Andrew Chanin, a veteran ETF creator and chief executive of ETF sponsor ProcureAM.
So while a purer play is narrower and not very diversified, owning companies that get only a small part of revenue from a theme ensures that portfolio performance is going to be influenced by things that have nothing to do with the theme.
Among popular thematic ETFs, Robo Global Robotics & Automation owns 86 stocks with varying degrees of pure thematic exposure. Larger holdings average around 87% of revenue from the theme, while others may get more than a third of revenue there, says Travis Briggs, chief executive of Robo Global LLC, the fund's sponsor.
Holdings include Deere & Co., which is involved in agricultural automation, but whose prospects also are influenced a lot by year-to-year swings in the farm economy.
An investor considering a thematic fund needs to do as much homework on the ETF as that person might do on any individual stock, the professionals say. It's important to look closely at the financial reports of the fund's largest holdings and check whether they get a reasonably large amount of revenue from a certain theme. If half of a fund's holdings are marginal players in a theme, it might make sense just to buy several of the individual companies that are the biggest players.
4. Can an investor stomach the ride?
Many thematic ETFs have a narrow focus, and that can result in a lot of volatility.
In 2017, Global X Robotics & Artificial Intelligence ETF (BOTZ) rewarded investors with a 58% gain. It then suffered a 28% reversal the following year before rebounding in 2019. ETFMG Alternative Harvest ETF (MJ), the largest cannabis fund, gained 39% in 2017 but has had double-digit negative returns since.
Investors should recognize the risks, says Morningstar's Mr. Johnson. "If these funds have a place at all in their portfolios, it should be a small one, a more tactical allocation," he says.
5. Could higher management fees erode performance?
Fees vary, but many thematic funds charge around 0.75 percentage point of assets annually or more, nearly the same as many actively managed mutual funds. Morningstar cites higher fees as one of the most important reasons that certain funds underperform.
Slightly broader funds enable investors to play themes at lower cost. In tech, Vanguard Information Technology ETF (VGT) charges only 0.10 percentage point in fees, while Technology Select Sector SPDR Fund (XLK) has fees of 0.13 point.
Someone who isn't averse to doing a little homework also could buy individual stocks that fit a theme and forgo fund fees. However, that requires scrutinizing financial metrics and figuring out how much of its revenue a company gets from a theme, says David Giroux, a senior equity strategist and fund manager at T. Rowe Price.
Also important is listening to what management is saying about the company's future direction, as covered in financial news publications or in analyses of a stock that an investor might find online.
Mr. Giroux prefers less-glitzy themes that have reliably benefited investors over many years, such as consistency of earnings. "It's about trying to find durable themes that generate very high returns over a long period of time, not the theme of the day," he says.
---
Mr. Pollock is a writer in Pennsylvania. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Michael A. Pollock
