Amazon is eliminating hundreds of jobs across its film and television studio and Twitch streaming platform in an effort to rein in costs.
Mike Hopkins, senior vice president of Amazon's Prime Video and Amazon MGM Studios, announced the studio and video-division layoffs in an email to staffers Wednesday.
The company cut back on certain areas while focusing on content that delivers the most impact, Hopkins said. The e-commerce company has invested billions of dollars into building out its Prime Video service, and acquired MGM for $6.5 billion in 2022.
Twitch, Amazon's videogame streaming platform, is also cutting about 500 roles.
"It has become clear that our organization is still meaningfully larger than it needs to be given the size of our business," Dan Clancy, chief executive of Twitch, said Wednesday in a blog post.
Amazon had 1.5 million employees worldwide as of December 2022.
The tech industry is shifting from prioritizing growth to keeping costs in check. Videogame developer Unity Software said earlier this week that it plans to lay off roughly 25% of its workforce, or about 1,800 employees. Printer maker Xerox Holdings said it would cut its workforce by 15%. Duolingo, a language-learning software company, said it would slash 10% of its contractors and use artificial intelligence to replace some of that work.
For years, the tech sector favored growth, with companies competing for talent by offering lucrative pay and investing in new projects. The pandemic accelerated this trend as companies sought to capitalize on increased demand for their products.
Inflation and a weaker economic outlook prompted change, and the tech sector eliminated hundreds of thousands of jobs in 2022 and 2023, according to industry tracker Layoffs.fyi. Amazon laid off thousands of corporate employees last year across several business units, including Twitch and in its profitable cloud-computing and advertising businesses.
Now tech companies such as Alphabet's Google, Microsoft, Facebook parent Meta Platforms and Amazon are continuing to cut jobs, although in smaller numbers, to keep a tight grip on expenses.
Amazon has spent big in its effort to be a major player in the entertainment industry. It invested $715 million on the first season of "The Rings of Power," its "Lord of the Rings" show, and has several more seasons planned.
Amazon is seeking to generate more revenue by charging Prime subscribers $2.99 a month to avoid the ads planned for its television and movie service.
Twitch is popular with videogamers and paid out more than $1 billion to streamers last year, the company said. But it has struggled to balance growth with high operating costs.
Credit: By Joseph De Avila
