The Biden Administration's regulations are coming so fast and furious that it's hard even to keep track, but we're trying. On Thursday the Environmental Protection Agency proposed its latest doozy -- rules that will effectively force coal plants to shut down while banning new natural-gas plants.
"With the announcement today, the power sector can make planning decisions with a full array of information," EPA's press release declares. Translation: Get moving with the green-energy transition because we're determined to eliminate fossil-fuel power.
Barack Obama's regulation spurred a wave of coal plant closures. Now President Biden is trying to finish the job by tightening mercury, wastewater and ash disposal standards. EPA is also replacing the Obama Clean Power Plan that the Supreme Court struck down with a rule requiring that coal plants and new gas-fired plants adopt costly and unproven carbon-capture technology by 2032.
Section 111 of the Clean Air Act says the EPA can regulate pollutants from stationary sources through the "best system of emission reduction" that is "adequately demonstrated." Carbon capture is neither the best nor adequately demonstrated. As of last year, only one commercial-scale coal plant in the world used carbon capture, and no gas-fired plants did.
EPA says Inflation Reduction Act tax credits and funding in the 2021 infrastructure bill will "incentivize and facilitate the deployment" of carbon capture. But subsidies would have to be two to three times larger to make the technology cost-effective at a coal plant. Carbon capture reduces a plant's efficiency, which also raises costs.
Because carbon capture uses 20% to 25% of the electricity generated by a power plant, less will be available to the grid. That means more generators will be needed to provide the same amount of power. But new gas-fired plants won't be built because the technology will make them uneconomic. Talk about a catch-22.
Another problem: CO2 must be stored underground in certain geologic formations, largely in the upper Midwest and Gulf Coast. Permitting new wells for CO2 injections can take six years. Pipelines to transport CO2 can take even longer. Green groups oppose pipelines for CO2 as they do for oil and natural gas.
All of this regulatory uncertainty will discourage the development of new gas-fired plants even as coal plants that currently generate about 16% of the country's power are forced to retire. Renewables can't provide reliable power around the clock to fill the gap.
All of this will hit while demand for power is surging amid new manufacturing needs and an artificial intelligence boom. Texas's grid operator this week raised its forecast for demand growth for 2030 by 40,000 megawatts compared to last year's forecast. That's about seven times the power that New York City uses at any given time.
Texas power demand will nearly double over the next six years owing to data centers, manufacturing plants, crypto mining and the electrification of oil and gas equipment. When temperatures in Texas recently climbed into the 80s, the grid operator told power plants not to shut down for maintenance. Americans around the country are increasingly being told to raise their thermostats during the summer and avoid running appliances to prevent blackouts.
By the way, EPA plans to unveil soon another rule to reduce CO2 emissions from existing gas-fired plants, so some of them may also have to shut down. Meantime, China has added about 200 gigawatts of coal power over the last five years -- about as much as the entire U.S. coal fleet. The Biden fossil-fuel onslaught will have no effect on global temperatures.
But it will raise electricity prices no matter what EPA says. Electric rates are already soaring amid the government force-fed green transition, especially in states like California, New York and New Jersey that have done the most to punish fossil fuels.
---
Even some Democrats are noticing the pinch on their voters' pocketbooks. Reps. Marcy Kaptur, Henry Cuellar, Mary Sattler Peltola, Vicente Gonzalez and Jared Golden last weekend urged President Biden to defer finalizing EPA's power-plant rules because they could "inadvertently exacerbate existing problems related to the unaffordability of electricity" and cause "increased risks to electric reliability."
Mr. Biden's new rules will surely draw a legal challenge. But as litigation plays out, the tremendous uncertainty will delay investment in much-needed new gas plants. Americans didn't face energy rationing in Mr. Biden's first term, but they might in a second.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Energy Use Is Simple Math" -- WSJ May 1, 2024)
