Alphabet Inc.'s Google has opened an artificial-intelligence lab in Beijing in a bid to attract China's tech prodigies and build its presence in what has been an elusive market.
The AI China Center, launched Wednesday, will host engineers conducting basic research, aiming to lure top Chinese talent in a globally competitive field, Google said.
"We need to recognize the opportunity and leadership that China has already displayed in the area of technology and AI," said Google Cloud executive Fei-Fei Li, who is co-head of the new lab. "By opening a lab here, we come here to extend our hand out, and show this part of the world we would like to listen to them, work with them."
Google has hired "a handful" of top researchers in deep learning and natural-language processing, and plans to hire others focusing on computer vision, said Ms. Li, who is also director of Stanford University's Artificial Intelligence Lab. Google declined to comment on how big the center would be in the future.
The move by Google is part of what some see as a push by the company to reconnect with China's massive consumer market.
Google's search engine has been blocked in China since 2010, when it refused to submit to government censorship. That has complicated its ability to offer other services -- including Google Cloud, which runs systems and stores data for companies on its computers -- and new smartphones and personal assistants designed to work with Google.
Meanwhile, the race to attract the brightest minds in technology's hottest areas gains pace. Talent is a focus for U.S. and Chinese companies, with firms on both sides of the Pacific opening research labs in the other's backyard.
U.S. companies spent $1.35 billion hiring AI talent between April and September this year, according to a study by recruitment platform Paysa. Google was the fourth-largest recruiter in the field -- behind Amazon.com Inc., Microsoft Corp. and Apple Inc. -- snapping up 142 AI engineers and investing $33.6 million in new talent, according to the study.
China is home to some of the world's most successful internet companies and a growing pool of young AI talent, said Yu Kai, a member of China's strategic advisory board on AI.
The Beijing lab could give Google access to young Chinese mathematicians eager to move into AI, said Mr. Yu, who is also chief executive officer of Chinese computer-chip and self-driving-software startup Horizon Robotics.
Google offered clues about its China plans in September when it posted at least four AI-related jobs on its Beijing career site.

Credit: By Liza Lin
