Last year, when he was a college student majoring in computer science and interning at SpaceX, Luke Farritor began working on a problem that captivated many of the world's brightest young minds, one that could only be solved with machine learning, computer vision and the latest artificial intelligence.
He wanted to read a bunch of 2,000-year-old papyrus scrolls.
These scrolls, known as the Herculaneum papyri, have been unreadable since Mount Vesuvius erupted in 79 A.D. and they were buried under mud and ashes at a private villa near Pompeii. When they were discovered in the 1700s, the carbonized scrolls were too fragile to handle.
Then tech investors, billionaire quants and Silicon Valley luminaries decided to fund the Vesuvius Challenge, a $1 million competition with the crazy goal of using AI to recover a few passages from the Herculaneum papyri. And it actually worked! This week, the Vesuvius Challenge trumpeted a monumental technological breakthrough: The scrolls have finally been opened.
The winning team consisted of three students, including Farritor, 22, who investigated ruins of antiquity from his University of Nebraska dorm room. The three winners still haven't met in person.
And by looking so far into the past, they're offering a peek into the future.
"I think this promises a very exciting future where seemingly impossible ideas will become possible," said another member of the team, Youssef Nader, a 27-year-old machine-learning Ph.D. student at Freie University in Berlin.
I mentioned that to Richard Janko, a professor of classical studies at the University of Michigan, who's been dreaming of reading these scrolls since before the Vesuvius Challenge winners were born. "We couldn't have done this without the tech guys," Janko told me.
The remains of the Herculaneum papyri don't look like anything left behind by ancient civilizations that might contain the secrets of science, math and philosophy. They look more like something your dog left behind on the rug. The burnt scrolls were in such rough shape that they couldn't be physically unraveled, which made them a perfect target for pioneering research by a University of Kentucky computer scientist Brent Seales.
The process of virtually unwrapping the Herculaneum papyri involved three steps: scanning, segmentation and searching for ink. It sounds basic, but it's really bonkers. "It seems like a magic trick," Seales said. First the scrolls had to be scanned at high resolution by a particle accelerator. Then the sheets had to be identified, separated and digitally flattened. Only then could the machine-learning models find ink. This was theoretically possible, but it was unclear how long it would take to convert theory into reality until Seales received an email from Nat Friedman.
Friedman is a tech investor, entrepreneur and the former chief executive of GitHub. In the early days of the pandemic, he fell down a rabbit hole into ancient Rome. When he learned about Seales's effort to read the Herculaneum scrolls, he wanted to help. He pitched an unconventional idea: a contest.
One of the many benefits of contests is that they are magnets for talent -- especially young talent like Farritor. A brilliant college student with interests in both computer science and archaeology, he was exactly the sort of person with the skills to help. But nobody would have ever asked him.
Farritor was an intern at SpaceX last year, listening to Friedman on a podcast while driving to the company's Starbase facility in Boca Chica, Texas, when he heard about the Vesuvius Challenge.
Nader, who is from Egypt, was similarly compelled when he read about the contest, though for slightly different reasons. "The word papyrus struck a chord for me as an Egyptian," he told me.
The third member of the winning team, Julian Schilliger, is a 28-year-old robotics graduate student at ETH Zurich in Switzerland.
"In the sciences, it's the youngest people who are the smartest," Janko told me. "In the humanities, it's the oldest."
The contest dangled a tantalizing grand prize: $700,000 for the first team to recover four legible passages of 140 characters each by the end of 2023.
Friedman believed it would be essential to blend competition with cooperation. That's why the Vesuvius Challenge offered another $300,000 in prizes that rewarded milestones along the way -- an incentive for participants to share their progress and code. He wanted to make that small chance of success much bigger.
When he read about another contestant's discovery of a "crackle pattern" in the shape of Greek letters, Farritor trained his machine-learning model on those characters to look for more of them.
Last summer, Farritor's AI model spotted a string of 10 letters that spelled porphyras -- purple.
This made Farritor the first person in two millennia to read a word in the unopened Herculaneum papyri. It also made him $40,000.
Meanwhile, halfway around the world, Nader was plugging away at his own AI models, which earned him a $10,000 progress prize. He invested in a new computer and the access to cloud-computing power he would need to win the grand prize.
By then, there was an active Vesuvius Challenge community on Discord. Now that the seemingly impossible was becoming probable, Farritor and Nader made the strategic decision to join forces. Instead of competing against each other, they would collaborate with each other. In the days before the Dec. 31 deadline, they also teamed up with Schilliger, whose impressive work extracting sheets from the scrolls fed their models with more data. Their entry stood out among the 18 submissions that the Vesuvius Challenge organizers sent Janko and other papyrologists to review -- and reveal what people had been waiting thousands of years to see.
So what do the scrolls actually say?
Well, as it turns out, they're sort of amazing. Likely written by the Epicurean philosopher Philodemus, they discuss topics we're still talking about today: music, food, pleasure. Basically, how to lead a happy life.
"You can almost see someone writing this on Substack right now," Friedman said.
Everyone involved with the Vesuvius Challenge is already thinking about what they might do next and how they can apply the lessons of this contest to other seemingly impossible tasks.
But knowing a little bit about the papyri also made them want to know a lot more. The first year of the Vesuvius Challenge unearthed 5% of one scroll. There's another six-figure prize attached to this year's goal: recovering 90% of the four scrolls that have been scanned. And they hope that's just the start. Classics scholars also believe there is a bigger library of hidden treasures waiting to be excavated from Herculaneum that could keep them busy for the next 2,000 years.
Farritor plans to keep working on the scrolls, too. But he might not have as much time: He just dropped out of school to work for Friedman.
His first day on the job was Monday -- the day he won the Vesuvius Challenge.
Credit: By Ben Cohen
