In spinning off its healthcare business, General Electric Co. is betting on the fast-growing diagnostic-imaging-equipment market, a sector facing disruption from artificial intelligence and growing competition from startups as well as established players.
GE Healthcare -- which makes MRI, ultrasound and other healthcare equipment -- will be spun off in early 2023, with GE planning to retain a 19.9% stake in the new firm. Already dominant in the sector, as a stand-alone it would be able to move faster and have more capital to scoop up companies and technologies, analysts said.
The changes boosting demand in the industry -- aging populations in the West, growing access to healthcare in emerging economies, new technologies and the Covid-19 pandemic -- present both an opportunity and a challenge for GE Healthcare, analysts said.
The company faces tough competition from established players such as Siemens Healthineers AG and Koninklijke Philips NV, as well as startups focused on AI and fast-growing players in China.
"GE Healthcare will be more nimble because they are no longer hostage to the complexity of decision making that comes with a company like GE," said Michael Abrams, managing partner of health-consulting firm Numerof & Associates. But it would also operate in a crowded market, he added. In the U.S., "GE and Siemens have been running neck and neck. . .Looking internationally, it's going to be more of a challenge for GE," he said.
Besides healthcare, GE also announced plans last week to separate its aviation and power businesses, the culmination of a yearslong process of shrinking the company and focusing on fewer sectors.
Kieran Murphy, GE Healthcare's departing chief executive officer, said last week that as a stand-alone company it would have more freedom to invest in innovation and flexibility to react quickly to changes in the industry.
The global market for equipment for medical imaging -- including ultrasounds, MRIs, X-rays and CT scans -- was valued at around $22 billion in sales globally in 2020, according to healthcare technology data provider Signify Research. The figure doesn't include software and services, a highly profitable add-on.
GE's healthcare unit is the world leader in the medical-imaging equipment market with a share of around 26%, closely followed by Siemens Healthineers with 21% and Philips with 17%, Signify Research said. The GE division, which has more than four million installed units world-wide, generated about $18 billion in revenue last year.
In June, GE named Peter Arduini to lead the division, effective in January. Mr. Arduini joins the company after a stint as the CEO of Integra LifeSciences, a maker of surgical instruments and other medical products. Mr. Arduini's record at Integra suggests he might look to shed products and businesses that aren't core to GE Healthcare, while pursuing acquisitions to build up more promising divisions, Wells Fargo analyst Larry Biegelsen said in a research note.
In splitting up, GE is following a strategy similar to Siemens AG, which spun off its healthcare business in 2018. Philips has sold its lighting, television and entertainment divisions in recent years as the Dutch company focuses on healthcare.
There has been some consolidation in the sector. The six largest suppliers of MRI equipment account for more than 90% of the global market, according to Signify Research.
Of all the changes shaking up the sector, AI has the biggest potential to upend the industry and challenge GE Healthcare, analysts say.
In medical imaging, AI is being used to interpret X-rays, helping radiologists save time and make more accurate diagnoses. For instance, learning algorithms can be fed with large numbers of X-rays and their associated diagnoses until they can recognize signs of cancers that even an experienced doctor might miss. AI is also helping make MRIs more accurate and easier to understand by eliminating the noise that would usually show up in the imaging.
Globally, more than 200 startups are developing medical imaging AI applications, according to Signify Research.
---
Peter Loftus contributed to this article.
Credit: By Georgi Kantchev
