I come from a long line of packrats. When I went through my grandmother's home after she died in 1986, I found some priceless mementos she had stashed away. But I also found that if you insist on keeping every one of those lovely shopping bags you got from Bloomingdale's, you reach the end of your life with a closet that is nothing but shopping bags.
Packrats like us are the fodder for "Swedish death cleaning," a decluttering trend based on the idea of thinning your material possessions in life, so you don't burden your survivors in death. But many people now burden their survivors with nonmaterial possessions, too, in the form of countless digital files and online accounts. (Especially those who believe in archiving every email and file.)
That's why you need a "digital death cleaning" plan -- one that gives you the full benefits of retaining your digital history while you're alive but thinks ahead to what your children are going to do with all that when you're gone.
Here's one packrat's guide to how to proceed:
Label your files
Pick a system for labeling your files so that your survivors know what to look at and what can be ignored. A simple approach is to label them either "relevant," "memorabilia" or "DoD" (delete upon death).
Relevant includes anything of practical use to your family or anyone else. That includes important legal and financial information like your will and the passwords for your accounts. Also any information you've accumulated that would help someone deal with your physical possessions, like the instructions on how to clean the air conditioner.
Documents and emails you would most like to leave for friends or people in your field or community also fall into the "relevant" category. Things like the memos you wrote while developing a fabulously successful marketing campaign, your record of birds seen at your local sanctuary, or notes on your patch in the community garden that would interest whoever takes it over. While you're at it, think of any organizations you can bequeath these files to in your will, to be sure they see them. Or share them with them now.
Memorabilia is stuff like family photos, say, or any work or personal documents you think your children or grandchildren would enjoy reading in 30 years. My bar for what to include was set by an essay my great-aunt wrote in 1953, surveying her former classmates for the 25th reunion of Barnard's class of 1928. Her summary of her classmates' dislikes ("Senator McCarthy, idle women, narrow-mouthed ketchup bottles, dirty clothes, big parties, dogs in the house, and television") is just one of its treasures.
DoD is stuff that is irrelevant to anyone else, or that you don't want anyone to see. It's best to corral all your delete-upon-death files somewhere that they can be quickly, efficiently and definitively deleted. A good option is to store your sensitive files on a separate, physical DoD hard drive that you can lock up and designate for destruction in your will.
It isn't enough to encrypt those files. Even if you encrypt your DoD files with the best encryption available today, there's no guarantee it will resist the decryption technologies of tomorrow.
Leave a guide
All that organizing and labeling won't help much if your survivors don't know where to begin in dealing with your digital legacy. Make sure you have a document -- and that someone knows where to find it -- that explains your labeling system, maps out where your survivors can find key files (either on your computer or as hard copies), and lists of all the accounts you will need them to wrap up or maintain.
This should include lists of all your digital subscriptions, email addresses for all key contacts, and utilities you've switched to paperless billing. In addition, in case you die unexpectedly, you might want to consider writing a final message you would want posted to your blog or social-media accounts. If you do that, remember to keep it up-to-date.
Consider AI alter ego
Rapid advances in generative AI mean we all can consider whether and how to leave our digital files for use by AI. I personally love the idea of having a digital alter ego that makes it easy for my children to ask about what we did on our 2010 family vacation, or how I think they should organize their home media server. Loading up a custom AI with an archive of blog and social-media posts can provide easy, chat-based access to a lifetime of knowledge and memories.
If this idea appeals to you, consider training your own AI with an export of your Facebook posts or email history, so you can see how it works (and what it discloses) before leaving it for your children.
On the other hand, if you hate the idea of your work and communications being incorporated into an AI and you don't want anyone to do that with your data ever, make sure to note in your will that you don't want your digital archives uploaded to any AI service or used as AI training data.
Digitize physical items
One way digital death cleaning is different from physical death cleaning: A lifetime's worth of digital clutter can still fit into a shoebox. So think about where digitization can support the process of physical death cleaning by replacing accumulated papers or mementos with files, scans and digital snapshots. One advantage of digitizing this way: While you can only leave your lifelong collection of National Parks postcards to a single lucky heir, a scan of your collection can go to your whole family.
Digital cataloging is one option for preserving the memories that live in some physical mementos. When I recently re-bound my lifelong Playbill collection, I realized that these shelves full of theater-program binders are my equivalent of my grandmother's closetful of shopping bags. Hunting for binders on eBay, I saw lots of inherited Playbills for sale, and felt suddenly conscious of how my most precious collection will eventually be an albatross for my heirs.
That's when I realized that technology means I don't have to choose between burdening my heirs and totally erasing a lifetime of theatrical memories: Itemizing all my Playbills in a digital database created an online memory book I can enjoy now, and a virtual memento I can share with my children. Now they have my permission to one day dispose of that closetful of Playbill binders.
Credit: By Alexandra Samuel
