QXO, a new player in building-products distribution, has made an offer to acquire Beacon Roofing Supply, according to people familiar with the matter.
Beacon has a market value of about $6.2 billion, with its share price up around 14% so far this year.
A deal could be clinched before the end of the year, according to the people, who also cautioned it is possible the talks could fall apart. The exact terms of the offer being discussed couldn't be learned.
Herndon, Va.-based Beacon is the largest publicly traded distributor of roofing materials and complementary building products in the U.S. and Canada, according to the company's website.
QXO, which is based in Greenwich, Conn., and has a market value of about $6.5 billion, is headed by Brad Jacobs, who has built multibillion-dollar companies in logistics and other sectors through acquisitions.
About a year ago, Jacobs and others agreed to invest roughly $1 billion into a small, publicly traded software company -- SilverSun Technologies -- and renamed it QXO.
The company, which has yet to strike its first deal in the building-materials space, has since raised more than $4 billion in two private placements from investors including President-elect Donald Trump's son-in-law, Jared Kushner, who sits on QXO's board.
QXO has been bulking up its executive ranks, too, and named Ihsan Essaid, former global head of mergers and acquisitions at Barclays, as its chief financial officer, and more recently named an artificial-intelligence chief.
Jacobs has told The Wall Street Journal he anticipates QXO's revenue growing to $50 billion over the next decade.
QXO earlier this year had been eyeing a deal for Paris-listed Rexel, which distributes electrical supplies for the industrials sector, but those talks are no longer active, a person familiar with the matter said. The company has had its eye on several targets as it seeks to scale.
Jacobs previously built transportation-and-logistics company XPO through a series of more than a dozen deals before splitting it into three separate publicly traded companies. Before XPO, he assembled companies in the waste-disposal and equipment-rental businesses, including United Rentals.
Credit: By Lauren Thomas
