Ernst & Young recorded global revenue of $31.4 billion in its latest fiscal year, up 6% from the previous year in U.S. dollar terms, the Big Four accounting firm said Monday evening.
Revenue in the year ended June 30 rose 7.8% when measured in local-currency terms, the way major accounting firms prefer to measure their growth. Last year, revenue at Ernst & Young, which brands itself as EY, rose 3.4% in U.S. dollar terms and 9% in local-currency terms.
EY said its revenue growth in the latest year had been aided by its investments in increased hiring and advanced technologies like analytics, artificial intelligence and robotics.
EY's workforce grew 7.3% during the year to more than 247,000, and the firm now employs 18,000 data and analytics professionals.
Growth was also boosted by increased demand for the firm's work among companies seeking help in coping with the continued slow-growing global economy and the rapid pace of technological and business change, EY said.
"It's clear just that businesses need our services," said Mark Weinberger, EY's global chairman and chief executive, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal. "I think the demand for digital and data strategies and operating improvements, the demand to use that in growth across the world, will continue."
EY and other major accounting firms are international networks of private partnerships that disclose only their revenues, not their earnings.
The firm's U.S. revenue rose 6.7% in the latest year. Geographically, the firm's strongest growth came in the Asia-Pacific region, where revenue rose 11.3% in local-currency terms.
Emerging-markets revenue rose nearly 9%.
As in the past several years, EY's consulting businesses showed much stronger growth than its more-mature core auditing business. Revenue at the firm's transaction advisory services unit jumped 15.5% in local-currency terms, and advisory revenue rose 10.4%, compared with a 4% revenue increase in the assurance unit, which handles auditing. Revenue in EY's tax-services business rose 7.9%.

Credit: By Michael Rapoport
