The Memphis police use the surveillance cameras to scan the streets for crime. The U.S. Army uses them to monitor a base in Missouri. Consumer models hang in homes and businesses across the country. At one point, the cameras kept watch on the U.S. embassy in Kabul.
All the devices were manufactured by a single company, Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology. It is 42%-owned by the Chinese government.
Hikvision (pronounced "hike-vision") was nurtured by Beijing to help keep watch on its 1.4 billion citizens, part of a vast expansion of its domestic-surveillance apparatus. In the process, the little-known company has become the world's largest maker of surveillance cameras. It has sold equipment used to track French airports, an Irish port and sites in Brazil and Iran.
Hikvision's rapid rise, its ties to the Chinese government and a cybersecurity lapse flagged by the Department of Homeland Security have fanned concerns among officials in the U.S. and Italy about the security of Hikvision's devices.
"The fact that it's at a U.S. military installation and was in a very sensitive U.S. embassy is stunning," says Carolyn Bartholomew, chairwoman of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, which was created by Congress to monitor the national-security implications of trade with China. "We shouldn't presume that there are benign intentions in the use of information-gathering technology that is funded directly or indirectly by the Chinese government."
Some security vendors in the U.S. refuse to carry Hikvision cameras or place restrictions on their purchase, concerned they could be used by Beijing to spy on Americans. The General Services Administration, which oversees $66 billion of procurement for the U.S. government, has removed Hikvision from a list of automatically approved suppliers. In May, the Department of Homeland Security issued a cybersecurity warning saying some of Hikvision's cameras contained a loophole making them easily exploitable by hackers. The department assigned its worst security rating to that vulnerability.
The concerns about Hikvision are reminiscent of the controversy surrounding Chinese technology giant Huawei Technologies Corp., whose telecom gear was effectively banned in the U.S. after a 2012 congressional report raised fearsits networking equipment could be used to spy on Americans. The company has repeatedly dismissed such concerns.
Hikvision says its equipment is safe and secure, that it follows the law wherever it does business and that it worked with Homeland Security to patch the flaws the agency cited. It says it "cannot in any way access and control the content of the video cameras." It says the vast majority of its products are sold through third-party vendors, meaning it often doesn't even know where they wind up.
"Hikvision is a business," said Chief Executive Officer Hu Yangzhong. "It would be impossible for us to add a backdoor to our cameras, as that would damage our business."
Vulnerabilities in surveillance cameras have become more of a concern as internet-connected devices become more prevalent. Cameras can be a weak link in an organization's information-technology network, potentially opening "backdoors" -- ways to gain access by bypassing security mechanisms -- for hackers, including state-backed ones.
Last year, hackers took control of hundreds of thousands of cameras, including many made by a Chinese rival of Hikvision, to launch a huge "denial of service" attack that security experts said made sites run by Amazon.com Inc., PayPal Inc. and Twitter Inc. unavailable for hours.
Hikvision grew out of a government laboratory started a half-century ago. Its largest shareholder is China Electronics Technology Group Corp., or CETC, a state-owned defense and military electronics manufacturer. Its biggest individual shareholder is Gong Hongjia, a Hong Kong billionaire and university classmate of top Hikvision executives. Some executives are Communist Party members also employed by subsidiaries of CETC, according to securities filings in China.
Mr. Gong said in an interview that he provided capital to help found Hikvision in 2001, in an arrangement that gave the government-backed lab a 51% stake. Although the size of that stake has since declined, the government only began to more actively aid the company in the past few years.
CETC didn't respond to a request for comment.
Contracts from Chinese government agencies propelled the company's rise. It helped with security at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. In 2011, the company said the value of contracts for its "safe city" camera project in Chongqing, a large city in China's southwest, reached $1.2 billion. Its cameras are now ubiquitous on the city's streets.
China's President Xi Jinping, who has made high-tech security a priority, visited the firm's headquarters in 2015. Since that year, Hikvision has received major loans from two of China's three policy banks, which finance state development goals.
Zheng Yibo, a Hikvision vice president, says CETC has no role in Hikvision's day-to-day operations.
Hikvision's head of research, Pu Shiliang, holds a leadership position at a Hangzhou laboratory run by the Ministry of Public Security, China's police force. The lab explores ways authorities can leverage data gathered by the company's cameras and other sources to improve policing, according to the lab's website.
China has been rolling out new technologies to monitor its people in ways that would unsettle many in the U.S. and the West. Unfettered by privacy concerns or public debate, Beijing's leaders have introduced facial-recognition technology and other surveillance measures in a vast experiment in social engineering. Their goal is to influence behavior and identify lawbreakers.
At Hikvision's Hangzhou showroom, walls are lined with monitors and video cameras that employ artificial intelligence to recognize objects and sounds from afar and to produce visible images despite pollution or darkness. Hikvision's "Darkfighter" thermal camera enables it to record under ultralow light conditions, the company says. Its "Blazer Pro" server, it says, allows license-plate recognition. It offers camera-equipped drones and cameras programmed to alert authorities to large gatherings.
The company's consumer camera line, called "EZVIZ," can sync with a smartphone app. One softball-sized device can detect noises -- a dog barking loudly or the sound of a door opening -- and automatically direct its lens at the source of the disturbance, sending an alert to the phone.
Global sales of surveillance equipment has increased 55% in the five years through 2016, according to consulting firm IHS-Markit. By pricing cameras below those made by Western competitors, Hikvision has become the top seller of surveillance equipment in Europe and No. 2 in the U.S., according to IHS-Markit and other industry analysts. Its cameras frequently are sold without the Hikvision name and are rebranded by U.S. distributors -- a frequent practice in the industry.
This year, Hikvision opened research-and-development offices in Silicon Valley and Montreal. It plans to employ 350 people in North America by year's end and 800 by 2022, the company says.
Fort Leonard Wood, an Army base in Missouri's Ozarks, uses Hikvision cameras in its security system, according to the Chinese company and NexGen Integration, a U.S. company that handled the installations. The base offers basic combat training and includes a school for chemical, biological and nuclear-defense drills.
Chris Nickelson, NexGen's owner, says none of his customers have raised any issues about Hikvision gear. The army base referred questions to the U.S. Army's installation management command public affairs office, which said it doesn't discuss equipment or capabilities, but added that "any equipment or software that goes on a military network is thoroughly tested for security vulnerabilities."
At the U.S. Embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan, Hikvision cameras were installed "to monitor nonsensitive electrical closets for theft prevention," says a State Department spokesperson, referring to closets housing electronics equipment.
Last year, the security-industry trade publication IPVM published a procurement order for several dozen Hikvision cameras, revealing their presence in the Kabul embassy. The government canceled the order in September 2016 and removed the Hikvision cameras already in the embassy.
A State Department official says that was because security officials at the department, who are supposed to be notified of new security-related installations, weren't given a heads up about the purchase.
In a written statement, Hikvision said it had no knowledge of the Kabul project's particulars "on the end-user level," and that "accepting or removing particular products is always at the discretion of the end-user."
Shortly thereafter, the General Services Administration removed Hikvision from a list of automatically approved suppliers, companies that make their products in countries that have certain trade agreements with the U.S. The agency says it nixed the firm after it was alerted the products were manufactured and assembled in China, which isn't on the list. U.S. government agencies that want to buy Hikvision gear can't go through the GSA system, but have to take extra steps such as showing the items are fairly priced.
Hikvision says its gear was listed on the GSA by two resellers, which it says it hadn't authorized. Hikvision says it asked the resellers to remove the products from the GSA list.
In January, Italy's government awarded a $49 million contract to a supplier in a deal that included the installation of Hikvision cameras at some state buildings. The deal was publicly questioned in June by Italian legislator Arianna Spessotto, who said the cameras "could pose a risk to national public security."
A spokesman for Italy's government procurement agency said the supplier "guaranteed a level of security appropriate to the risk," but that "no one can be absolutely sure that a participating firm has not surreptitiously inserted backdoor devices and security vulnerabilities for malicious purposes."
Hikvision says the Italian legislator's concerns about security risk are "totally unfounded and absurd."
Nathan Brubaker, an analyst at U.S. cybersecurity firm FireEye Inc., says the software vulnerabilities identified by the Department of Homeland Security could make those Hikvision cameras prone to a hacking attack similar to the "Mirai" denial-of-service attack on the internet last year.
Security experts say backdoors that allow outsiders to bypass security protections are often difficult to identify. Such vulnerabilities can be accidental -- the result of flaws in the software's original design or in updates.
The Hikvision flaws identified by the Department of Homeland Security affected more than 200 camera models and potentially tens of millions of shipped devices, estimates John Honovich, editor of IPVM. They made it possible for outsiders to hack into internet-connected Hikvision cameras in just a few steps, according to Mr. Honovich and FireEye, the cybersecurity firm. Hikvision acknowledged the flaws affected some cameras, but dismisses Mr. Honovich's assertions as "unfounded insinuations and hearsay."
Hikvision says it cooperated with the DHS to fix the problem and directed customers to a software fix. "This issue did not cause a noticeable impact on Hikvision's overseas business," a company spokeswoman says.
Genetec, a Canadian security company with a U.S. presence, requires customers who want to buy Hikvision cameras to sign a waiver disclaiming Genetec of liability in the event of a security breach. Pierre Racz, the Montreal-based company's chief executive, says concern over cameras made by "companies owned or controlled by the Chinese government" and "Beijing's reputation for aggressive cyberespionage" led him to require the waiver.
Hikvision says "linking Hikvision with espionage is simply outrageous and completely unfounded."
Hikvision has been selling cameras to the Memphis police department since 2007. Officers can observe streets from a central command center. Some devices use advanced lighting technology to produce clear images even in the middle of the night.
"We probably make up to 100 arrests every year" because of the cameras, including for car theft, robbery and murder, says Lieutenant Joseph Patty II, who manages the system.
He says the city started using the cameras long before concerns about hacking came into play. The department uses a decentralized network where cameras aren't connected to the police mainframe computer, he says.
"At the end of the day, they are the No. 1 camera manufacturer in the world," says Lt. Patty. "They make a lot of cameras and many people use them, even if they don't say Hikvision on the product."
---
Liza Lin and Wenxin Fan contributed to this article.

Credit: By Dan Strumpf, Natasha Khan and Charles Rollet
