Satya Nadella couldn't help himself.
Microsoft's chief executive was supposed to be singularly focused on saving his prized asset during one of the most chaotic weekends in the history of Silicon Valley. Instead his mind kept drifting to cricket.
He couldn't pay close attention to his native India playing Australia in the Cricket World Cup because he found himself in the middle of another game with more action and a whole lot more at stake. Still, in the midst of frantic negotiating and disaster planning, Nadella kept checking the score and reporting updates about his favorite sport to less fanatical colleagues.
The nuttiest weekend in his nearly 10 years on the job started last Friday, when Nadella learned just minutes before the rest of the world that OpenAI's board had just ousted Sam Altman, its co-founder and CEO. The company behind ChatGPT had recently been seeking a valuation at nearly $90 billion. Rarely has one board decision threatened to destroy so much value in so little time.
Despite the fact that Microsoft had paid billions for a 49% stake in OpenAI, using its technology to power a new generation of software that it promised could revolutionize work, the startup's biggest investor didn't have a board seat.
Nadella found out at more or less the same time as everyone else that his investment -- one that almost single-handedly catapulted Microsoft to the forefront of the artificial-intelligence revolution -- had suddenly gone wrong.
When the board turned on Altman, Altman immediately turned to Nadella. Hours after the boardroom coup last Friday, they were on the phone, discussing how to restore Altman to OpenAI -- or join Microsoft. If Altman wasn't restored to his place atop OpenAI, the former CEO of the glitziest AI company would become an employee of Microsoft.
By the end of the frenetic weekend, Altman had agreed to start a new AI division at the tech giant, so he could keep working with Nadella and take advantage of Microsoft's access to computing power. Soon it became clear that hundreds of researchers were ready to join Altman at a corporation as sexy as soup. Microsoft prepared to give those engineers everything they needed to continue their work: a floor in LinkedIn's offices, plentiful cloud-computing resources, Apple laptops. The trillion-dollar company's employees assured their potential colleagues that they wouldn't even have to use Microsoft's workplace-communications app Teams.
But the ideal outcome for Microsoft was Altman going back to OpenAI as CEO, according to a person familiar with Nadella's thinking. By opening Microsoft's doors to the OpenAI team, Nadella increased Altman's leverage to get his position back, as OpenAI's board faced an exodus. Nadella got what he wanted when five hectic days of negotiations culminated in Altman's reinstatement. In his post on X confirming his return, Altman mentioned the support of one person: Satya Nadella.
How did Microsoft survive a meltdown at Silicon Valley's hottest startup only to emerge looking like one of the unlikely winners?
The answer has a great deal to do with the management and leadership style of Nadella and his trust of Kevin Scott, his chief technology officer and the mastermind of the company's AI strategy. The two were instrumental in reinstating Altman atop OpenAI, protecting their $13 billion investment and saving Microsoft from what could have been a humiliating setback partly of its own making.
The unconventional arrangement between Microsoft and OpenAI has occasionally been awkward. But Nadella's masterstroke was forging a connection with Altman, nurturing the relationship over five years and making himself an essential partner for a restless entrepreneur. Now the ties between their companies are double-knotted: OpenAI owes its continued existence to Microsoft.
Nadella, 56, was born and raised in Hyderabad, India, where his greatest ambition as a mediocre student was to attend a small college, play cricket and work at a bank. After failing his entrance exam for India's most prestigious universities, he majored in electrical engineering at the Manipal Institute of Technology. He'd been fascinated by computers and software since he wrote his first lines of code as a teenager, according to his 2017 memoir "Hit Refresh." (He declined to comment for this article.)
But he wasn't planning to leave India. When he applied to American graduate schools, Nadella hoped they would reject him. Instead, he came to the U.S. for a master's degree in computer science at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.
He moved to California when he was hired by Sun Microsystems in 1990 and spent two years there before getting the call from Redmond, Wash., that would change his life. He was going to work at Microsoft.
Yet he writes in his book that one of his formative moments at Microsoft came before he was even part of the company. During the interview process, a gauntlet of engineering tests and coding scenarios, he was flummoxed by a simple question: What do you do if you see a crying baby in the street?
The answer seemed obvious: call 911.
"You need some empathy, man," his interviewer told him. "If a baby is laying on a street crying, pick up the baby."
As Nadella ascended the corporate ladder, he oversaw multiple parts of Microsoft's sprawling enterprise, like its cloud-computing business Azure and its search-engine Bing. Azure is now the growth engine for the entire company: Microsoft's stock rises and falls based on its performance. And during his tenure, the S&P 500 has returned 215%, while Microsoft has returned more than 1,100%.
Nadella got the job as the third CEO in Microsoft's history in February 2014 after writing a 10-page memo over the Thanksgiving break to answer the board's questions about his vision. This time, he nailed the interview. Nadella explained that his top priority would be fixing the company's internal culture.
"We needed to build deeper empathy for our customers and their unarticulated and unmet needs," he wrote in his book.
His life at home helped Nadella develop his own deeper empathy. The first of his three children, Zain, was born with severe cerebral palsy and required specialized care. He died last year at the age of 26. "Becoming a father of a son with special needs was the turning point in my life that has shaped who I am today," Nadella has said. He called Zain "the joy of our family, whose strength and warmth both inspire and motivate me to keep pushing the boundaries of what technology can do."
Now that he's been in the job for nearly a decade, Microsoft employees know what to expect from Nadella.
He's a leader who recognizes his own limits and delegates to people he trusts. As a manager, he can be kind, but he is cutting when he needs to be. One former executive said Nadella would threaten to fire direct reports if they didn't shape up. Another former executive recalls him sharply telling a grandstanding employee to "sit down."
He does that himself by working relentlessly. One employee traveled to China with Nadella and trudged into the hotel gym for a jet-lagged, bleary-eyed 3 a.m. workout. He arrived only to see the CEO on his way out and starting his day.
He's also not afraid to cut his losses and kill projects that aren't working. He nixed an effort to bring the search engine to Apple Watch, declaring it a waste of time.
"Satya has this unique capability to simplify a task to the most important issue -- and without alienating anyone in the room," said Xuedong Huang, a former Microsoft executive who reported to Nadella.
Nadella is an engineer, but his time as CEO has been marked by huge deals. He paid $26 billion for LinkedIn and then shelled out $75 billion for Activision Blizzard. He also embraced the idea of partnerships more than his predecessors.
He made deals with Amazon, made a tenuous peace with Google and made it known that Microsoft was open for business with startups -- including one called OpenAI.
Nadella and Altman met when they bumped into each other on a stairwell at the 2018 Allen & Co. conference in Sun Valley, Idaho.
Altman left the mountains convinced that Microsoft was the only company with the capital, computing power and clear understanding of AI to work with his startup.
Even after investing $13 billion, Microsoft didn't have a board seat or visibility into OpenAI's governance, since it worried that having too much sway would alarm increasingly aggressive regulators. That left Microsoft exposed to the risks of OpenAI's curious structure. Altman's company was set up as a nonprofit with a board whose primary responsibility wasn't maximizing shareholder value but developing safe AI "that benefits all of humanity." The company was also vulnerable to Altman leaving to start another company and taking employees with him -- or, in a possibility that seemed remote until suddenly it was reality, OpenAI's board firing him without asking for input from its biggest investor.
The deal wasn't universally popular even before the crisis at OpenAI. Bill Gates himself told executives it made no sense for Microsoft to back the company without acquiring it outright, according to people familiar with the matter. He's since come around on the investment, but his concerns weren't unjustified. Microsoft has had to strike a tricky balance with OpenAI: safeguarding its investment while ensuring that its ownership stake remained below 50% to avoid regulatory pitfalls.
Microsoft's problems aren't solved now that Altman is back and OpenAI has a more traditional governance structure. Larry Summers got a seat on the overhauled board, but Microsoft hasn't. It remains unclear what formal role, if any, Nadella desires to make sure this doesn't happen again.
Growth comes with growing pains. AI is wildly expensive, and Microsoft's spending is expected to soar as the company builds out the necessary computing infrastructure. There is some proof that individuals and businesses are willing to pay a premium price for AI assistants like GitHub's Copilot. Many of Microsoft's current and new customers will need to pay up for this bet to pay off.
Nadella is banking on OpenAI's independence leading to innovations that benefit Microsoft as much as humanity.
Earlier this month, when Altman and Nadella appeared together at OpenAI's first developer conference, Nadella glided on stage to a warm introduction from Altman.
"How is Microsoft thinking about the partnership?" he said.
"We love you guys!" Nadella said.
Neither man could have predicted how the events of the next two weeks would bring them closer together.
As for that cricket match that coincided with the OpenAI turmoil? Nadella's company had a better day than his team: India lost on its home turf. He congratulated the Australians on their win and then got back to work looking for one of his own.
---
Satya Nadella
-- Team owner: Nadella owns stakes in the Seattle Sounders (Major League Soccer) and Seattle Orcas (Major League Cricket)
-- Smoked out: He quit smoking as a graduate student in Wisconsin because it was too cold to stand outside
-- Slim resume: Nadella's own page on LinkedIn, his first major acquisition as Microsoft CEO, doesn't include any work experience prior to CEO
-- Stock gains: Microsoft's stock has returned more than 1,100% since he started as CEO
Credit: By Ben Cohen and Tom Dotan
