HONG KONG -- Hundreds of millions of newly connected consumers are giving Asian tech firms a leg up against Silicon Valley in key emerging technologies.
At The Wall Street Journal's D.Live Asia conference on Friday, Asia's top technology investors and companies outlined how information gleaned from a massive and growing smartphone user base has informed the continent's push into artificial intelligence, a type of machine learning that thrives on big helpings of consumer data.
Artificial intelligence, a field that is key to voice-activated digital assistants, driverless cars and robotics, has become a tech-world obsession. But the sheer number of web users in Asia compared with the U.S. and Europe, combined with deeper knowledge of local markets, is creating a dynamic in which user feedback -- as much as raw engineering power -- is driving advances.
"AI is the new electricity," said Andrew Ng, a Stanford University professor and former top AI scientist at Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Chinese internet giant Baidu Inc. "Whatever industry you work in, I think AI will likely transform it."
Mr. Ng's sentiments were echoed by other speakers at the WSJ's D.Live Asia event, where AI was among several attention-grabbing topics. Participants also discussed how doing business in China has changed, competition in mobile-payment services and unparalleled mobile adoption in Southeast Asia.
In the race to harness artificial intelligence, the U.S. had a clear advantage with the first wave of smartphone apps and software. But services like mobile payments, online shopping and messaging appear to be evolving more quickly in Asia, drawing on its greater scale in terms of web-connected users.
Connie Chan, a partner at Andreessen Horowitz, the Silicon Valley venture firm whose investments include Airbnb Inc. and Facebook Inc., sees instances where China's internet titans are leading the way for both major and startup U.S. firms. For instance, Ms. Chan said, Apple Inc. recently added payment services to its iMessage chat service, taking a page from Tencent Holdings Ltd.'s playbook.
"I love this reversal of what 'China copycat' can mean," Ms. Chan said. "It no longer just means a Chinese company copying the States, it can mean a U.S. company copying China."
The time-tested lessons in China are contrasted with the lesser-tapped markets of Southeast Asia, which is undergoing explosive growth in mobile use. In Indonesia, the world's fourth-largest country with a population of more than 250 million, Singapore's GrabTaxi Holdings Pte. Ltd. and Indonesia's Go-Jek are slugging it out.
Go-Jek, the motorcycle-hailing startup, said it was defending its home territory successfully, beating both Grab and Uber Technologies Inc. "In terms of competition, we're clearly number one across verticals," said Nadiem Makarim, co-founder of Go-Jek.
In the region, Grab co-founder Anthony Tan spoke of the company's fast growth since launching in 2012, now covering 55 cities not only in Singapore and Indonesia, but also the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam and Myanmar.
JD.com Inc., China's second-largest online retailer after Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., also has ambitious growth plans for the region. Other Chinese giants will help pave the way as well, said JD.com Chief Executive Richard Liu.
"I believe in the next 10 years, many Chinese brands will become global brands," Mr. Liu said, citing hardware firms Huawei Technologies Co. and Xiaomi Corp. as examples. "It is then that Chinese e-commerce platforms can take these brands overseas and win consumers in Europe and the U.S."
Chinese firms aren't relying simply on their sizable user bases to advance. In China, emerging tech sectors such as electric vehicles, robotics and artificial intelligence are receiving government subsidies and other support as part of China's latest five-year economic plan, said Jenny Lee, managing partner of GGV Capital.
It is only in recent years that China has attained the technology levels needed to join the race in emerging sectors like artificial intelligence and cloud computing, she said. "Ten years ago, there was no cloud infrastructure in China," Ms. Lee said. "Today the story is very different."
---
Eva Dou, Liza Lin and Newley Purnell contributed to this article.
Credit: By Timothy W. Martin and Dan Strumpf
