See an expanded timeline with links to the original Wall Street Journal articles online at wsj.com/yearinreview
Jan. 1: Ukraine Under Fire
As the war enters its second calendar year, Russia attacks with 45 drones.
Jan. 2: On-Field Collapse
The Buffalo Bills' Damar Hamlin goes into cardiac arrest and needs CPR on the field after taking a hit in a nationally televised game, which is suspended. He has returned this season.
Jan. 4: Admitted to Prison
College-admissions cheating mastermind William "Rick" Singer is sentenced to 42 months in prison.
Jan. 9: Deadly Weather
Heavy rains from California's fifth storm since Christmas push through the state. It endures weeks of flooding, landslides, mudslides and record snowfall.
Jan. 11: Airport Chaos
An outage with a pilot-alert system cascades into a nationwide logjam.
Jan. 24: Mass Shootings
Shootings at a dance studio in Monterey Park, Calif., and at two farms in Half Moon Bay add to the debate about gun violence.
Feb. 1: 2023's First Rate Rise
The Fed nudges up interest rates by a quarter percentage point, following seven increases in 2022, in its campaign to fight inflation.
Feb. 2: Spy Balloon Over U.S.
A Chinese balloon has equipment to collect photos, videos and more information, the U.S. says. The Air Force shoots it down.
Feb. 3: Ohio Train Disaster
A Norfolk Southern train derails in East Palestine, Ohio -- causing 11 tankers with hazardous materials to catch fire.
Feb. 6: Turkey/Syria Quakes
Two earthquakes and their aftershocks shake much of the Middle East, killing thousands.
Feb. 12: Super Bowl Shootout
The Kansas City Chiefs prevail, 38-35, over the Philadelphia Eagles in an epic duel between quarterbacks Patrick Mahomes and Jalen Hurts.
Feb. 14: Inflation Moderates
Still-elevated inflation cools slightly at the start of 2023 to 6.4%.
Feb. 15: Reining In Crypto
A rule could make it harder for asset managers to invest customers' money in cryptocurrencies.
Feb. 24: Stocks Slump Again
U.S. stocks notch their worst week of the young year, as hot economic data rekindles worries that the Fed will keep rates higher.
March 7: An Epic Tour
Taylor Swift's "Eras" concert tour kicks off. It becomes the biggest in history, grossing $1 billion --as the market booms for arena and stadium shows from Beyonce, Madonna and others.
March 10: SVB Collapse
Silicon Valley Bank, which catered to venture capital and technology startups, fails after a run on deposits; Signature Bank also closes. The debacle causes weeks of turmoil in the banking sector.
March 14: ChatGPT's Power
Microsoft-backed startup OpenAI rolls out a new version of its artificial-intelligence technology, as regulators, scholars and activists urge technology companies to be careful with generative-AI tools that haven't yet been fully tested.
March 29: WSJ Reporter Is Held
Evan Gershkovich, a Russia correspondent for The Wall Street Journal, is detained while on a reporting trip, accused of espionage -- which he, the Journal and the U.S. government vehemently deny. He has been in a Russian prison since then.
March 30: Trump Indicted
Donald Trump is charged in New York for his role in paying hush money to an adult-movie actress on the eve of the 2016 election -- the first time a former president has faced criminal charges.
March 31: A Wild Quarter for The Stock Market
Markets show resilience in the first quarter, despite economic and banking-sector turmoil. The Nasdaq Composite Index jumps 17%.
April 11: EY Calls It Off
Ernst & Young cancels its plan for a split of its auditing and consulting arms, a costly retreat from a proposal that could have reshaped the accounting profession.
April 12: Inflation Eases
U.S. inflation eases to its lowest level in nearly two years but underlying price pressures are expected to keep the door open for more Fed rate increases.
April 13: A Record NFL Sale
The tumult-racked Washington Commanders nears a deal to be sold to a group led by private-equity titan Josh Harris for record-breaking $6 billion.
April 20: 'Mistake' Shootings
Three shootings in less than a week, all allegedly occurring with victims who mistakenly went to the wrong house or car, ignite a debate over why these types of incidents are happening.
April 20: SpaceX's Starship Explodes
The rocket explodes minutes after launching on an uncrewed test flight.
April 23: Bed Bath & Beyond's Bankruptcy
The once-powerful retailer is short of cash after years of losses and failed turnaround plans.
April 25: Biden to Run Again
The president formally launches his bid for a second term, setting up a potential rematch with Donald Trump.
May 1: First Republic Falls
Regulators seize First Republic Bank and strike a deal to sell the bulk of its operations to JPMorgan Chase, heading off a chaotic collapse.
May 3: Rates at 16-Year High
The Fed again boosts interest rates, its 10th consecutive increase aimed at battling inflation.
May 4: Proud Boys Verdict
A jury finds four leading figures of the Proud Boys guilty of seditious conspiracy, the gravest charge brought in connection with the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol.
May 5: Pandemic Emergency Over
The World Health Organization declares an end to the Covid-19 emergency.
May 6: King Charles
King Charles III is crowned by the archbishop of Canterbury in Westminster Abbey, the first coronation in Britain in 70 years.
May 11: Migrants Throng U.S. Border
A surge of migrants seeks to cross from Mexico into the U.S. before the pandemic measure known as Title 42 ends.
May 17: Overdose Deaths
Federal estimates are released that reflect the continuing fentanyl crisis: Overdose deaths in the U.S. edged higher in 2022 -- the second year in a row that drugs killed more than 100,000 people.
June 2: Debt-Ceiling Saga
Biden signs bipartisan legislation suspending the $31.4 trillion debt ceiling, narrowly avoiding a default.
June 12: Denver Rules NBA
The Nuggets defeat Miami for their first championship.
June 13: Nvidia Joins the $1 Trillion Club
The chip maker, riding the AI boom, becomes the seventh U.S. company to reach $1 trillion in market value.
June 13: Vegas Rules NHL
The Vegas Golden Knights defeat Florida to grab the Stanley Cup in only their sixth season.
June 18: Titanic Explorers Die
Five adventurers on an expedition to the 1912 Titanic wreck die in a catastrophic implosion of their submersible deep in the North Atlantic.
June 23: Mutiny and Death
Yevgeny Prigozhin of the Wagner paramilitary group leads a mutiny in Russia, the most serious challenge to Putin's 23 years in power. Prigozhin and other Wagner commanders would be assassinated via a plane crash in August.
June 30: Stocks Rock Through Six Months
A strong first half for Wall Street is fueled by optimism that inflation is easing. The tech-led Nasdaq index soars 32% on enthusiasm about artificial-intelligence breakthroughs.
July 13: Actors on Strike
TV actors join picket lines alongside screenwriters in what becomes Hollywood's biggest labor fight in decades.
July 24: 'Barbenheimer' Heats Up Movies
The "Barbenheimer" weekend -- the debut of "Barbie" and "Oppenheimer" -- helps to deliver the strongest domestic box-office weekend of the year.
July 25: Twitter Becomes X
The rebranding of Twitter to X elicits excitement as well as exasperation from users as they adjust to Elon Musk's latest change to the social-media platform.
July 26: Hunter Biden's Legal Troubles
The president's son pleads not guilty to tax charges. In September, he would be indicted on gun charges.
Aug. 8: Wildfires in Hawaii
Wildfires tear through Maui, killing 100 people. The historic town of Lahaina is destroyed.
Aug. 15: Trump Indicted Again
Donald Trump and allies are indicted in Georgia over efforts to overturn election results -- the fourth time he is indicted ahead of the 2024 elections.
Aug. 17: 401(k) Millionaires
The number of people with at least $1 million in their 401(k)s grows about 25% -- there are now 378,000 retirement-plan millionaires in Fidelity Investment plans -- thanks to the year's market rally.
Aug. 20: Spain's Soccer Championship Fiasco
In bizarre turns after Spain wins the Women's World Cup, the Spanish soccer federation fires coach Jorge Vilda -- and then federation president Luis Rubiales resigns amid furor over his forcibly kissing a player while celebrating. Vilda now coaches Morocco.
Aug. 20: Moon Crash
Russia's first mission to the moon in nearly 50 years ends in a disaster as its unmanned Luna-25 spacecraft crashes into it.
Aug. 24: Home-Mortgage Rates Soar
Mortgage rates push to a 22-year high, at 7.23%, making it tougher for the housing market to emerge from its slowdown.
Sept. 12: Floods Batter Libya, Kill Thousands
The natural disaster was decades in the making -- a result of years of official neglect of two dams under Gadhafi.
Sept. 15: UAW Strikes
The United Auto Workers union goes on strike against GM, Ford Motor and Chrysler parent Stellantis, the first walkouts to hit all three automakers at same time.
Sept. 19: Armenia-Azerbaijan Conflict
In the space of just over a week, Nagorno-Karabakh -- a self-governing, Armenian region established inside Azerbaijan after the collapse of the Soviet Union -- is effectively dismantled.
Sept. 20: Joint Chiefs Chairman
Air Force Gen. CQ Brown Jr. is confirmed as the 21st chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Oct. 1: Student-Loan Payments Resume
Borrowers start paying up again for the first time since the pause in March 2020 during the early days of Covid.
Oct. 3: History in the House
In a first in U.S. history, the House removes Kevin McCarthy as speaker, after the California Republican battled with GOP dissidents. Three weeks later, Republican Rep. Mike Johnson of Louisiana succeeds him.
Oct. 7: Hamas Attacks Israel
Palestinian militants pour out of Gaza in a surprise assault, rampaging through villages and taking hostages. By Israel's count, 1,400 people are killed, mostly civilians. Israel declares war. President Biden would condemn Hamas's attack as "an act of sheer evil."
Oct. 19: Backlash at Colleges Over Israel-Hamas
Leaders of some of the most high-profile universities re-think their roles as moral arbiters after trying to appease activists on both sides.
Oct. 25: Shooting in Maine
In Lewiston, Maine, a shooter kills 18 people and wounds 13 in a bowling alley and a restaurant; he is later found dead of a self-inflicted gunshot.
Nov. 1: Texas Wins Series
The Rangers claim their first World Series, defeating Arizona 4 games to 1.
Nov. 2: A Crypto Star's Fall
Sam Bankman-Fried, founder of collapsed crypto exchange FTX, is convicted of stealing billions of customers' dollars in one of the biggest financial-fraud cases in U.S. history.
Nov. 13: The FDIC's Toxicity
A Wall Street Journal investigation finds sexual harassment and misogyny pervade the agency.
Nov. 19: Rosalynn Carter Dies at 96
As first lady of the U.S., she was a key adviser to her husband, Jimmy.
Nov. 21: Drama at OpenAI
Sam Altman will return as CEO of the artificial-intelligence startup that he co-founded, days after he was fired.
Nov. 28: Munger Dies at 99
Charlie Munger was Warren Buffett's closest adviser at Berkshire Hathaway, and a celebrated investor himself.
Nov. 29: Kissinger Dies at 100
As an adviser to presidents, he helped forge U.S. foreign policy in Vietnam and the Cold War.
Dec. 1: Sandra Day O'Connor Dies at 93
Reagan appointee was the first woman on the Supreme Court and its most powerful justice for much of her tenure.
Dec. 8: Colleges and Free Speech
Where's the line between free speech and antisemitism? Penn's president, Liz Magill, resigns along with the chair of the trustees -- as debates roil colleges over Israel-Hamas.
Dec. 13: The Fed's Rally
Slowing inflation prompts the Fed to pivot away from raising rates. The Dow is the first index to set a record since the Fed began raising rates in 2022.
