Stocks drifted lower ahead of fresh readings on the economy this week, in a subdued trading session after last week's Nvidia-fueled rally.
The S&P 500 fell 0.4%, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average shed roughly 62 points, or 0.2%. Both were coming off records Friday. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite slipped 0.1%.
All three indexes are on track to finish February in the green, which would mark their fourth straight month of gains. Last week, they each climbed more than 1% after chip maker Nvidia's blockbuster earnings reignited enthusiasm about the potential of artificial-intelligence technology.
There was no such catalyst on Monday. Nvidia shares climbed an additional 0.3% after gaining 17% over the previous two trading sessions. Several other large technology stocks didn't fare as well, with Apple dropping 0.7% and Google-parent Alphabet sliding 4.4%.
It was a mixed bag in other sectors as well. Berkshire Hathaway started the day strong but quickly faded, ending the day down 1.9%. Warren Buffett's annual letter over the weekend divulged $8 billion of gains from bets on Japanese stocks but noted a lack of possible acquisition targets.
Meanwhile, Domino's Pizza rose 5.8% after the delivery chain reported a better-than-expected profit and raised its dividend.
Investors will gain greater insight into the economy on Thursday when the Commerce Department releases data on household spending and income, as well as the Federal Reserve's preferred inflation gauge.
The data are expected to confirm that price pressures increased in January after easing in previous months. Reports on consumer and producer prices earlier this month have already shown inflation running unexpectedly hot to start the year. That has scrambled investors' bets on when the Fed might start cutting interest rates this year.
Still, investors haven't shown too much concern. Many believe that the January readings will prove an anomaly. Other data have also been largely encouraging, with businesses continuing to add jobs and economic growth showing few signs of a significant slowdown.
Elsewhere in markets, falling bond prices drove the yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note to 4.298% from 4.258% Friday.
The 10-year yield started February just under 4% but has climbed following hotter-than-expected jobs and inflation data. It remains well below the 5% level it reached last fall.
In commodities, Brent crude for April delivery gained 1.1%, to $82.53 a barrel.
Overseas, Japanese stocks notched another record Monday, lifted by merger talks between two drugstore operators and praise from Buffett in his letter. At midday Tuesday, the Nikkei 225 was down 0.15% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 0.9%. S&P 500 futures were down 0.1%.
Credit: By Sam Goldfarb
