On a lunch break from his sales job at a construction company in Illinois, Steve Kovacs walked into McDonald's, where he saw a picture of a chicken sandwich on the digital menu. When his time to order came, he pointed at it. But the sign had flipped to a new screen and he was now pointing at a burger.
Mr. Kovacs, 43 years old, couldn't remember the name of what he wanted, and with 20 customers behind him, he just got the burger. When he finished eating it, the McDonald's menu flashed back to the chicken. Mr. Kovacs bolted up and ordered a Hot 'n Spicy McChicken.
"I got my Quarter Pounder, but I got excited for that chicken thing," said Mr. Kovacs.
Digital billboards are now everywhere, and companies love them. The only problem: people have a hard time reading them.
Many establishments have replaced older, static menu boards with dynamic, high-definition screens.The screens let restaurants flash seasonal promotions to guests, advertise for sponsored movies, and create a more lively experience in line, restaurant consultants say.
Sometimes the images can be too fleeting.
Before watching "Avengers: Endgame" at a Regal Cinemas in San Antonio, 30-year-old Zachary Garren spied an ad for Cheetos Popcorn on a digital menu above the movie theater's concession stand. The ad for Cheetos Popcorn would show for only a few seconds at a time on the menu, he says -- before Mr. Garren could get a good look at just what Cheetos Popcorn was.
He says he spent five minutes watching for the ads to cycle back to the specialty dish before deciding that "it just looked like they threw some Cheetos on top of popcorn." He ordered nachos instead.
John Curry, senior vice president of food service at Regal, said the digital concessions board is "a great tool" the company uses to share details about new products. Cheetos Popcorn has been very well received, he said. "One of the biggest challenges has been keeping up with the demand," he said.
McDonald's paid over $300 million for startup Dynamic Yield Ltd. this year and used the company's artificial intelligence technology to have menus showcase products based on factors like weather and time. On a hot day, for instance, a drive-through display could promote a McDonald's ice-cream cone. During the company's recent earnings call, McDonald's Chief Executive Stephen Easterbrook said the new menus had already boosted sales.
In a statement, the company said that "as we continue to modernize our restaurants, we are testing and implementing new innovations to fulfill our promise of making delicious feel-good moments easy for everyone."
Those moments may be gone in a flash. Some special combos will appear on the menu for only a couple of seconds, while other items will stay up for about 15 seconds, according to a timed observation.
Jim Cusson, 54, president of retail marketing agency Theory House, which has worked with PepsiCo Inc. and Starbucks Corp., struggled to order food for his kids at a South Carolina Wendy's because all he saw on the menu were promotions for Bacon Jalapeno Cheeseburgers and special barbecue-flavored products. He wanted to order chicken nuggets, but wasn't sure they were still on the menu. "I consider myself a fairly savvy marketer and customer, and even I'm challenged to keep up with the digital menus of today with their advertising and promotions," he said.
Wendy's declined to comment.
This summer, McDonald's began offering restaurant promotions for "The Lion King" movie. Entire McDonald's menus began periodically transforming into widescreen, animated vistas of the African savanna flanked by advertisements for movie-based Happy Meal toys and Walt Disney World vacation lotteries.
Michael Palmerini, a 19-year-old former manager at McDonald's, said that before leaving his job in November, "one of the most common complaints was that the menu was confusing because these big sweeping animations would show up over the menu advertising new sandwiches." He said he passed on those complaints to the franchise owner.
A McDonald's representative declined to comment on Mr. Palmerini's interactions with his boss.
Premier Mounts, a company that develops digital signs, said the average rise in annual sales attributed to digital menu boards at quick-service restaurants is 3% to 5%, based on industry research. Restaurants began experimenting with digital menus in the 1990s, when plasma-screen displays advanced to become more cost efficient.
Overcomplicating a digital menu can be easy to do -- especially when your customers are in a hunger-addled state. "We tell our clients, don't make too much animation or have too many changing pictures or else you start slowing people down," said Mike Sisco, founder and chief executive of Embed Digital, a company that has programmed digital menus for restaurant chains. Spending more than 30 seconds on any menu's video loop, he said, is too much.
Ann Haddad, a 64-year-old museum historian, was walking through Manhattan recently with her son. She saw a quote on a 55-inch screen of a structure on the street called a LinkNYC Terminal, the monolith-shaped Wi-Fi terminals in New York City. The words on the screen were from novelist Colson Whitehead, and she tried to snap a photo of the quote for her Instagram.
But the terminal's screen changed to a gin ad before she could whip out her phone. "It's so tantalizing to see these wonderful quotes for literature, but you can't get to them in time!" she said.
Ms. Haddad implored her son to wait with her for the quote to return. She couldn't recall what the exact quote was. Ten minutes passed. The screen cycled into subway status updates. Ms. Haddad decided it was time to give up and walked home.
She later looked up the quote. It said: "You are a New Yorker when what was there before is more real and solid than what is here now."

Credit: By Britton O'Daly
