The Wall Street Journal's ranking of the world's most sustainably managed companies was based on a review of more than 5,500 publicly traded companies around the world that met disclosure standards for data showing what programs, policies and performance metrics they have in place for several key sustainability dimensions, including environment, human capital (internal employee and workplace issues), social capital (external social and product issues), and business model/innovation.
Each company was scored by combining up to 165 company-reported data items with an analysis of media coverage by more than 8,800 sources available via Factiva, a database information service owned by Wall Street Journal publisher Dow Jones & Co. The scores were created using a hybrid approach that combined artificial intelligence with human validation by the Journal's environment, social and governance research team.
The scores take a broad view of sustainability that assesses a company's ability to create value over the long term, using criteria considered most financially relevant as defined by the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB), a nonprofit organization that works with companies and investors to create a framework for reporting on sustainability. To qualify for the ranking, companies needed to have publicly disclosed a minimum of 20 material data inputs with at least two inputs per financially material category in their public disclosures reported since 2018.
The 100 most sustainably managed companies were those with the highest overall scores, combining the values for the main dimensions. Only companies on the top 100 list were considered for the subrankings on environment, human capital, social capital, and business model/innovation. Rating high in a subranking was a result of the sustainability category being financially material for that company's industry, and the company having best-in-class programs, policies and disclosure of performance metrics. A company's industry was based on SASB's Sustainable Industry Classification System.
The artificial-intelligence systems supporting the Journal's ranking were co-developed with data-service, advisory and technology provider Arabesque S-Ray GmbH, which also supplied the company data used for the scores. Arabesque S-Ray is majority-owned by investment group Arabesque, with minority shareholders including Allianz X GmbH, Commerz Real AG, DWS Group, Heleba Digital GmbH and the German state of Hesse. Neither the Journal nor Dow Jones owns any shares in Arabesque S-Ray or Arabesque Group.
The ranking scores were created according to the standards and specifications of the Journal, which is solely responsible for the ranking and scores.
For more information on the ranking methodology, please visit wsj.com/sustainability.
