Charles Schwab has named Rick Wurster as its next CEO, promoting an executive who has been primed for years to take the top job and who will be tasked with steering the brokerage through a turnaround.
Wurster, currently Schwab's president, will take over as chief executive officer and join the board on Jan. 1, the company said Tuesday. Longtime CEO Walt Bettinger will retire from the top job and continue to be executive co-chairman of the board alongside namesake founder Charles "Chuck" R. Schwab.
Under Bettinger, Schwab grew from a discount brokerage for amateur investors to a personal-finance juggernaut. Schwab's move to eliminate commission fees on online stock trades in 2019 and its acquisition of rival TD Ameritrade in 2020 shook the industry.
Now, Wurster inherits a company in the midst of a transition.
As interest rates climbed over the past couple of years, Schwab's revenue and profit stalled, bank deposits fell and its investment portfolio declined in value. Schwab's stock is down 7% this year, after a 17% drop in 2023. The S&P 500 has risen 49% over the same period.
Schwab's playbook of making easy money on client cash has been upended and the company is looking to increase the revenue it brings in from more lucrative services like loans and financial advice.
Wurster, 51 years old, said his priority is keeping existing customers happy.
"If we delight them on a day-in-and-day-out basis, with great service, with digital experiences that are intuitive and straightforward and that they enjoy, we're going to have a growing and thriving business with the client base that we have today," Wurster told The Wall Street Journal in an interview.
Other focus areas include bolstering offerings for specific groups like high-net-worth individuals and active traders, and becoming more efficient through the use of artificial intelligence, he said.
Wurster has been viewed as the heir apparent to the chief executive role since becoming president in 2021. Schwab's multiyear succession plan included naming Bettinger as co-chairman of the board in 2022.
Schwab earlier this year named former Citigroup treasurer Mike Verdeschi as chief financial officer, succeeding Peter Crawford.
"When you're in jobs like this, your responsibility is to serve others, not to be served," Bettinger told the Journal. "[Rick] just proved over and over again during the three years he was president that he was the right person to be my successor."
As president, Wurster has overseen investor, adviser and retirement-plan services; asset and wealth management; banking; technology; and operations. Before joining Schwab in 2016, he worked at consulting firm McKinsey and investment-management firm Wellington Management.
Wurster will be the fourth person to hold the CEO post since the company was founded roughly 50 years ago. Chuck Schwab passed the baton to David Pottruck in 2003, but returned to the role in 2004 after Pottruck was ousted by the board. Bettinger became chief executive in 2008.
Bettinger, 64, took the top job in the throes of the global financial crisis. It couldn't have been a worse time to become CEO, Bettinger has often said with a smile.
He focused on growing Schwab's bank, cutting fees and expanding services like financial advice and wealth management. During Bettinger's tenure, Schwab grew from managing about $1 trillion of assets to more than $9 trillion. Its client accounts grew from about nine million to about 43 million. Schwab is the biggest publicly traded brokerage in the country and the 12th largest U.S. bank.
Bettinger joined Schwab in 1995 through the acquisition of the Hampton Co., a retirement-plan provider he founded at age 22. His entrepreneurial background endeared him to Chuck Schwab. Bettinger led the brokerage's individual-investor business in the aftermath of the bursting of the dot-com bubble and had previously been president and chief operating officer.
Bettinger said he made a promise to his wife to retire from his CEO role before turning 65 and he looks forward to spending more time with his family.
Credit: By Hannah Miao
