More workers feeling anxious, stressed or blue have a new place to go for mental-health help: a digital app.
Chatbots that hold therapist-like conversations and wellness apps that deliver depression and other diagnoses or identify people at risk of self-harm are snowballing across employers' healthcare benefits.
"The demand for counselors is huge, but the supply of mental-health providers is shrinking," said J. Marshall Dye, chief executive of PayrollPlans, a Dallas-based provider of benefits software used by small and medium-size businesses, which began providing access to a chatbot called Woebot in November. PayrollPlans expects about 9,400 employers will use Woebot in 2024.
Amazon.com about a year ago gave employees free access to Twill, an app that uses artificial intelligence to track the moods of users and create a personalized mental-health plan. The app offers games and other activities that the workers can play, as well as live chats with a human "coach."
The app "allows you to address mental health concerns the moment they arise and can be used as a supplement to your daily well-being routine," the company said in a blog post. Amazon declined to comment.
About one-third of U.S. employers offer a "digital therapeutic" for mental-health support, according to a survey of 457 companies this past summer by professional services company WTW. An additional 15% of the companies were considering adding such an offering in 2024 or 2025.
Supporters say the mental-health apps alleviate symptoms such as anxiety, loneliness and depression. Because they are available at any time, the apps can also reach people who might not be able to fit traditional therapy into their schedules or can't find a therapist who has an opening.
Yet some researchers say there isn't sufficient evidence the programs work, and the varied security and safety practices create a risk that private information could be leaked or sold.
"The companies are well known to be overextending claims about what they can do," said Dr. John Torous, director of the digital-psychiatry division at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, in Boston. "Employers offering it, in some ways it is tokenism, saying we're offering something for mental-health support."
In March, the Federal Trade Commission alleged BetterHelp, an online counseling service that uses a digital app, shared users' personal information with Facebook, Pinterest and others for advertising purposes. BetterHelp, a subsidiary of Teladoc Health, settled the case this year for $8 million without admitting wrongdoing. The company has said its "technology, policies, and procedures are designed to protect and secure our members' information so it is not used or shared without their approval and consent."
The AI has gone rogue: Earlier this year, the National Eating Disorders Association disabled an AI chatbot that gave dieting tips to users with eating disorders. The organization, which didn't respond to an email seeking comment, said at the time that it was "investigating this immediately and have taken down the program until further notice for a complete investigation."
Replika, which offers consumers companion apps aimed at easing loneliness, updated its app earlier this year after some users complained that the AI bot engaged in overly sexual discussions and harassed them.
Eugenia Kuyda, founder and creator of Replika, said the technology is in its early days and her company is "constantly talking to users, regulators and platforms to allow people to communicate with their Replika's in safe, private and emotionally authentic ways."
For years, some employers didn't offer much mental-health help as part of their health benefits. The struggles of workers with isolation and other mental-health issues during the pandemic prompted employers, insurers and some Medicaid and Medicare programs to up their offerings.
Over the past three years, 94% of large employers made new investments in mental-health care, according to benefits consulting firm Mercer. About two-thirds added classes or access to apps that promote mental health.
The apps vary in how much they incorporate AI -- and in how much leeway they give AI systems. U.K.-based Limbic offers a mental-health support app that uses a so-called large language model similar to ChatGPT, the bot that became world famous for its ability to hold free-flowing, humanlike conversations.
Limbic Chief Executive Ross Harper said the company filters the bot's responses through another layer of AI to ensure they are safe, but people find the bot more interesting to interact with than other chatbots that only display responses prewritten by humans.
Travelers Insurance is providing to all its workers'-compensation clients a modified version of a therapist-like chatbot called Wysa that focuses on getting workers who were injured on the job back to work, said Dr. Marcos Iglesias, vice president and chief medical officer at Travelers.
Credit: By Stephanie Armour and Ryan Tracy
