Does the U.S. need more nuclear power? Miss America thinks so.
So do Oliver Stone, Elon Musk and Sam Altman.
Atomic energy is elbowing its way back into the conversation about future energy supplies, with backers in the Biden administration and oil and gas industries alike.
Grace Stanke, the reigning Miss America, is on a charm offensive for the industry as part of a yearlong publicity tour.
"Why isn't this being shouted from the rooftops?" asked Stanke, a 21-year-old nuclear engineering student at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. She is too Wisconsin-nice to shout, but in more than 20 states so far she has touted clean energy and nuclear medicine at schools, nursing homes, a state legislature and once on a water-skiing podcast.
"It's the industry that saved my dad twice from cancer," Stanke said, referring to radiation and other treatments. "It powers 20% of America."
The youngest of three children, Stanke grew up in Wausau, Wis. She started participating in pageants at age 13 as a way to improve her performance skills for violin and got interested in nuclear science in high school when her dad, a civil engineer, told her not to go into the field because there was no future in it. "I got into it out of spite," Stanke said. "When you're a 16-year-old girl and your dad tells you not to do something, you go and do it."
Stanke spoke at the World Nuclear Association's symposium in London this month and aims to remain an industry voice even after she crowns the next Miss America. She is completing her last elective class online and has accepted a job with Constellation Energy, which owns the nation's largest collection of nuclear-power plants. The job, which will start in 2024, will include a mix of technical work -- as a nuclear fuels engineer -- and public advocacy.
America's nuclear-power sector has for decades faced public-relations challenges, burdened by high costs, long construction timelines, plant closures and concern over disasters such as Fukushima and radioactive waste. Its Hollywood image includes giant mutants, the HBO series "Chernobyl" and the atomic-weapons race in the summer blockbuster "Oppenheimer."
"It's always playing the villain," Stanke said. "It's what created Godzilla."
Godzilla appears in filmmaker Stone's new documentary, "Nuclear Now," though the film argues that nuclear power is an obvious way to reduce the impact of climate change. It is a similar message to Stanke's with a crustier delivery. "We have to build and build fast," Stone said in an interview. "What's wrong with nuclear energy was never wrong. It was a brilliant, brilliant gift that we turned our back on."
Americans hold ambivalent views on the technology and are far more supportive of wind and solar energy, though opinion is shifting, according to the Pew Research Center. Around 57% of Americans favor more nuclear power plants, up from 43% in 2020, according to a Pew survey released in August.
Investors in the dozens of startups pursuing smaller reactor designs include Bill Gates, co-founder of Microsoft; Dustin Moskovitz, co-founder of Facebook; and OpenAI chief Altman, who thinks more nuclear power will be needed in part for artificial intelligence. Tesla CEO Musk has been calling on the utility industry to build more generation and called himself an advocate for fission at The Wall Street Journal's CEO Council in May.
Credit: By Jennifer Hiller
