It's a digital age, and art is no exception.
The market for digital artworks -- which include anything that uses digital technology as part of the creative or presentation process -- is flourishing, thanks in large part to younger collectors, according to industry experts.
Although prices have been rising, one attraction of digital art is that it is still generally cheaper than traditional paintings, sculpture and other collectibles found in galleries and at auctions -- both at the lower end of the market and at the higher end, where prices for digital art mostly top out below $1 million.
"Early digital works cost a few thousand dollars, like any new medium," says Magda Sawon, co-founder of the Postmasters Gallery in New York, which has half of its inventory in digital work. "The artists I work with go up to $30,000 and in a few instances, a few hundred thousand."
The potential for price appreciation is another strong attraction. Marc Glimcher, chief executive of Pace Gallery in New York, says prices for top works have doubled or tripled in the past five years. Christie's made a splash in the market in October with the auction sale of a portrait, generated by artificial intelligence, of a fictitious person for $432,500.
Blockchain technology also is helping to drive the market, as it provides a means to ensure a work's scarcity and its provenance, or history of ownership, says Mac MacLellan, executive vice president at Northern Trust Wealth Management. "That's driving even some traditionalists into digital collecting too," he says.
Blockchain technology is commonly used to create ledgers where digital-art transactions are recorded and art is stored, Mr. MacLellan says. Once an image is embedded in the blockchain ledger it can no longer be modified, he says. The ledger allows the buyer to verify the number of images in existence and trace ownership of a piece back to its creator. Only the current owner can unlock the blockchain ledger entry to view the image or to permit its sale to someone else, he adds.
Even with the security of blockchain ledgers, though, buyers of digital art should be aware of potential problems and be prepared to ask a number of questions, experts say.
Pace Gallery's Mr. Glimcher urges caution in collecting the works of young artists just getting started in digital art production.
"A lot of people are making digital art that's unstable," he says. "You take it home, and it breaks," leaving you unable to view it. For instance, a random software glitch could crop up, causing the monitor that's supposed to display a computer-rendered pig to show a blank screen.
"People need to be prepared for the fact that digital artists are using cutting-edge technologies and novel algorithms," Mr. Glimcher says.
Problems can also crop up in presenting the art, even if there's nothing wrong with the piece itself. Mr. MacLellan recommends that people considering a purchase ask what equipment they need to present the artwork -- some pieces can simply be viewed on a computer, but others might require a projector or a virtual-reality viewer, for instance -- and be certain that they understand how to display the piece.
Prospective buyers should also ask how, or if, the artwork can be protected from technological obsolescence, Mr. MacLellan says. Years from now, replacements or servicing may not be readily available for equipment, such as projectors, that break down. And software needed to view images may go out of date. "An artwork might be cutting-edge technology at a moment, but technology has a tendency to go obsolete," says Tim Schneider, author of "The Great Reframing: How Technology Will -- and Won't -- Change the Gallery System Forever."
Another important thing to ask about, Mr. MacLellan says, is an artwork's rarity -- is it a one-of-a-kind piece, a limited edition, or are there many copies of it on the market or already sold? And if it's limited or unique, how is it protected from replication or piracy?
Mr. MacLellan also suggests that people ask how established the market is for the kind of artwork they're considering. The uniqueness of an artwork contributes to its value. But it's always preferable to know that demand for pieces in the same genre has been demonstrated in the market, so that you can have some confidence that you'll be able to sell the piece when you want to do so.
---
Mr. Weil is a writer in West Palm Beach, Fla. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Dan Weil
