[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Miners of cryptocurrencies may soon stop buying chips from Nvidia and Advanced Micro Devices. But some businesses are more trouble than they are worth.
The graphics processors that both companies make are designed primarily for rendering videogames, as well as providing artificial intelligence capabilities to data centers and automobiles. But they've also proved popular for processing cryptocurrency transactions, an activity otherwise known as mining. The rocketing value of those currencies over the past year has turned such mining into a highly profitable activity. That has sparked a rush on GPU chip cards that boosted sales for Nvidia and AMD.
But that looks likely to end soon. A Chinese venture-backed company called Bitmain announced a new chip last week specifically designed for mining ether, which is the most popular cryptocurrency mined with GPUs. Several analysts believe that system, which ships in July, is likely to pick up the bulk of demand from cryptocurrency miners.
Concerns about the impact of cryptocurrency mining are one of the factors that caused sharp declines in shares of both Nvidia and AMD in the past month. The latter in particular has a smaller revenue base that was likely inflated more by cryptocurrency demand.
Many analysts believe the impact of crypto to be much smaller for Nvidia, amounting to a single-digit percentage of revenue for its fiscal first quarter ending later this month. The company benefits from a robust data center business, new products for gaming and pent-up demand from gamers stymied by the recent GPU shortage.
Morgan Stanley analyst Joseph Moore cited both in upgrading Nvidia to a "buy" rating this past week, adding that he expects crypto demand to "fall towards zero" by the end of July.
Both companies have been wisely cautious about banking on crypto demand. The volatile nature of those currencies as well as potential technical changes in how they are mined have made crypto a dicey prospect for long-term bets. Nvidia and AMD have much less cryptic opportunities to chase.

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
