NVIDIA
NVDA +3%
AI mania lifted Nvidia to new heights on Tuesday. The graphics-chip maker briefly became the first semiconductor company with a $1 trillion market capitalization, joining an elite club that includes Amazon, Apple and Microsoft. Nvidia touched the milestone intraday, but its shares didn't close above the threshold. The stock's recent gains stem from Nvidia's upbeat outlook for artificial-intelligence technology. As the chip industry struggles with slowing sales, a potential AI boom could lead to a surge in demand for the semiconductors that power tools like ChatGPT. Nvidia shares gained 3% Tuesday.
T-MOBILE US
TMUS -5.6%
Amazon may be entering the telecom market, sending shares of T-Mobile and others down Friday. Bloomberg News reported that the tech giant has been talking with wireless carriers about offering low-cost or free mobile to Prime subscribers. The Wall Street Journal reported in May that Dish Network was in talks to sell wireless plans for its nascent mobile service through Amazon. Such a move could challenge rivals like T-Mobile and Verizon as they wrestle with slowing subscriber growth after a pandemic-era boom. T-Mobile shares sank 5.6% Friday.
SOFI TECHNOLOGIES
SOFI +15%
A planned return of student-loan payments gave SoFi shares a boost.
The lender's stock jumped 15% Wednesday after U.S. politicians reached a debt-ceiling deal to avert a looming government default. SoFi's services include student-loan refinancing, and the deal locks in the restart of student-loan payments and interest accrual this summer. Both houses of Congress passed the sweeping bill that suspends the government's $31.4 trillion debt ceiling in exchange for spending cuts.
KOHL'S
KSS -5.1%
Kohl's is the latest retailer facing calls for a boycott this Pride Month. A recent social-media blitz, including TikTok videos tagged with #boycottkohls, stemmed from the department store's Pride Month merchandise. The customer backlash follows a similar controversy at Target due to the chain's assortment of LGBT-themed Pride Month products, including a transgender-friendly swimsuit. The two companies aren't unique in selling Pride-themed merchandise. Walmart, JCPenney and Gap also sell such products and many retailers have done so for years. Kohl's shares declined 5.1% Tuesday.
ADVANCE AUTO PARTS
AAP -35%
Advance Auto Parts hit some speed bumps in its latest quarter. The auto-parts retailer on Wednesday posted a steep drop in quarterly profit after it was forced to slash prices to stay competitive and hold on to professional customers, such as auto-repair shops. Advance Auto Parts lowered its profit outlook for the year and cut its dividend. The disappointing numbers stick out compared with the broader auto industry, as the U.S. car population is growing and Americans are driving more. Advance Auto Parts shares plummeted 35% Wednesday.
DOLLAR GENERAL
DG -20%
Shoppers are spending less and bargain hunting in a tough economic climate, spelling trouble for retailers. Dollar General cut its fiscal year's sales and profit outlook and said its typically lower-income customers are relying more on items priced at $1 or below. Macy's on Thursday cut its outlook as well, citing the economic challenges facing consumers. Its shares fell in earlier trading but recovered, ending 1.2% higher Thursday. Dollar General, on the other hand, sank 20% -- its worst -- ever daily drop.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
