The S&P 500 edged lower, with Nvidia shares extending their recent pullback.
Coming off its third straight week of gains, the broad market index fell 0.3%. The Nasdaq Composite dropped 1.1%, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average, which doesn't include Nvidia, added 0.7%.
Nvidia was a major outlier on an otherwise decent day for stocks. A rally early last week briefly made the artificial-intelligence chip maker the world's most-valuable listed company. But its shares have slumped since then, losing 13% over the past three trading days, including 6.7% on Monday.
Investor enthusiasm about AI found other outlets, with Apple rising 0.3% and Meta Platforms gaining 0.8% after The Wall Street Journal reported that the two had held talks about integrating Meta's generative AI model into Apple's AI system for iPhones.
Stocks rose broadly outside of the tech sector as well, with nine of the 11 sectors in the S&P 500 finishing with gains. A 1.1% rise in U.S. crude prices helped lift energy companies, with Devon Energy climbing 4% and Occidental Petroleum advancing 3.8%.
Still, Nvidia's decline highlighted investors' worries about a handful of technology stocks -- and Nvidia in particular -- playing an outsize role in the performance of major stock indexes. Before it started falling last Thursday, Nvidia had accounted for one-third of this month's gain in the S&P 500 and 44% of the gains since the start of 2022.
"I'm nervous about just the heft of Nvidia's market cap," said Peter Bates, portfolio manager of the global select equity strategy at T. Rowe Price. "We're all kind of learning as we go how big the AI capital equipment spend is going to be."
Bates also said he wasn't sure if the economic outlook was good enough to sustain this year's stock rally if enthusiasm over AI begins to wane. For the year, the S&P 500 is up 14%.
Recent data have pointed to some cooling in the labor market and weaker-than-expected consumer spending. But many economists still believe that the economy is growing at a solid pace. The latest round of inflation data also was encouraging, boosting traders' bets that the Federal Reserve could cut interest rates at least twice this year.
Investors will gain more insight into the economy later this week. Data on new-home sales will be released Wednesday, followed by reports on durable-goods orders and jobless claims on Thursday.
The week's most anticipated report will come Friday, when the Commerce Department will release data on personal income and spending as well as the Fed's favored inflation gauge, the personal-consumption expenditures price index.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note settled at 4.248%, according to Tradeweb, down from 4.256% Friday.
The Stoxx Europe 600 increased 0.7% and the U.K.'s FTSE 100 rose 0.5%. At midday Tuesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index were each up 0.5%. S&P 500 futures were up slightly.
Credit: By Sam Goldfarb
