Shortly after the launch of ChatGPT, the Atlantic drew up a list of the greatest threats to the 166-year-old publication from generative artificial intelligence. At the top: Google's embrace of the technology.
About 40% of the magazine's web traffic comes from Google searches, which turn up links that users click on. A task force at the Atlantic modeled what could happen if Google integrated AI into search. It found that 75% of the time, the AI-powered search would likely provide a full answer to a user's query and the Atlantic's site would miss out on traffic it otherwise would have gotten.
What was once a hypothetical threat is now a very real one. Since May, Alphabet-owned Google has been testing an AI product dubbed "Search Generative Experience" on a group of roughly 10 million users, and has been vocal about its intention to bring it into the heart of its core search engine.
Google's integration of AI is crystallizing for media outlets the perils of relying on big technology companies to get their content in front of readers and viewers. Already, publishers are reeling from a major decline in traffic sourced from social-media sites, as both Meta and X, the former Twitter, have pulled away from distributing news.
As bad as the social-media downshift is, Google's generative-AI-powered search is the true nightmare for publishers. Across the media world, Google generates nearly 40% of publishers' traffic, accounting for the largest share of their "referrals," according to a Wall Street Journal analysis of data from measurement firm Similarweb.
"AI and large language models have the potential to destroy journalism and media brands as we know them," said Mathias Dopfner, chairman and CEO of Axel Springer, referring to the technology that makes generative-AI possible. His company, one of Europe's largest publishers and the owner of U.S. publications Politico and Business Insider, this week announced a deal to license its content to generative-AI specialist OpenAI.
While Google says the final shape of its AI product is far from set, publishers have seen enough to estimate that they will lose between 20% and 40% of their Google-generated traffic if anything resembling recent iterations rolls out widely. Google has said it is giving priority to sending traffic to publishers.
The rise of AI is the latest and most anxiety-inducing chapter in the long, uneasy marriage between Google and publishers, which have been bound to each other through a basic transaction: Google helps publishers be found by readers, and publishers give Google information -- millions of pages of web content -- to make its search engine useful.
Google's embrace of AI in search threatens to throw off that delicate equilibrium, publishing executives say, by increasing the risk that users' searches won't result in them clicking on links that take them to publishers' sites. Most gallingly for publishers, Google's AI search was trained, in part, on their content and other material from across the web -- without payment.
Google's view is that anything available on the open internet is fair game for training AI models. The company cites a legal doctrine that allows portions of a copyrighted work to be used without permission for cases such as criticism, news reporting or research.
The new search features are also a balancing act for Google, which has moved quickly to refashion its flagship product in response to the rising popularity of chatbots like ChatGPT. The changes risk damaging website owners that produce the written material vital to both Google's search engine and its powerful AI models.
"If Google kills too many publishers, it can't build the LLM," said digital media consultant Matthew Goldstein, who was one of the first to sound the alarm about the potential impact on publishers' businesses.
Liz Reid, a Google vice president who works on the search engine, said the company is committed to driving traffic to web publishers. She said Google has had more conversations with publishers than it typically does after introducing substantial changes to search, because "it's a more significant change in the evolution of the space." She offered no timeline for Google's broader rollout of the AI-powered search tool.
"Any attempts to estimate the traffic impact of our SGE experiment are entirely speculative at this stage," Reid said.
All of this has led Google and publishers to carry out an increasingly complex dialogue. In some meetings, Google is pitching the potential benefits of the other AI tools it is building, including one that would help with the writing and publishing of news articles, according to people familiar with the matter. Many news outlets, from BuzzFeed to USA Today owner Gannett, already are experimenting with AI tools.
At the same time, publishers are seeking reassurances from Google that it will protect their businesses from an AI-powered search tool that will likely shrink their traffic, and they are making clear they expect to be paid for content used in AI training.
Credit: By Keach Hagey, Miles Kruppa and Alexandra Bruell
