International Business Machines Corp. is cutting an unspecified number of jobs in the first major workforce reduction under new Chief Executive Arvind Krishna, who is trying to revive growth at the tech company,
IBM said the cuts are aimed at making it more agile, but they come against the backdrop of a major economic slowdown triggered by a coronavirus pandemic that has caused many of its customers to dial back investments and hold off on big software deals.
"IBM's work in a highly competitive marketplace requires flexibility to constantly remix high-value skills, and our workforce decisions are made in the long-term interests of our business," the company said Thursday.
The company didn't disclose the scale of the job losses. A person familiar with the company's plans said they are thought to affect several thousand people. IBM had around 352,600 employees as of the end of last year, according to a January filing.
The cuts add to a growing number of job losses across the tech industry as firms contend with the effects of the novel coronavirus outbreak. Hewlett Packard Enterprise Co, Thursday announced a far-reaching cost-cutting program, including salary cuts, unpaid leave and hiring freezes.
But IBM's growth problems predate the outbreak of the Covid-19 disease. Its share price is little changed from 10 years ago, a period that has seen tech-company stocks surge. Big Blue's stock is down more than 20% during the past three months.
Mr. Krishna took over IBM last month, facing the twin challenges of coping with the pandemic and reorienting a company that has suffered through several years of declining revenue and an anemic share price. He withdrew full-year guidance less than a month into the CEO role, calling the move "a tough decision."
In an interview with The Wall Street Journal this month, Mr. Krishna said he didn't know how long the economic downturn would last and refused to predict whether the company would furlough employees or cut jobs.
The layoffs, which were reported earlier by Bloomberg News, hit several units of IBM, including its Global Technology Services division that offers information technology outsourcing. The company last month said it took a $900 million charge against earnings, largely to cover restructuring costs linked to GTS.
Other parts of IBM also were affected by Thursday's announcement, according to employee postings in an online forum, including its Watson artificial-intelligence unit that was a priority for Mr. Krishna's predecessor, Ginni Rometty, but delivered lackluster results.
The people that said they were laid off worked at a variety of locations and divisions, suggesting the cuts were broad-based.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
