After years of wildfires sparked by its equipment, California's biggest utility, PG&E Corp., faces a safety crisis that has landed it in bankruptcy court and seeded doubts about its ability to survive in its current form.
The Wall Street Journal asked safety specialists, researchers, former regulators and other experts for ideas on what PG&E and regulators should do next. A common message: The company and the state must seize the moment to make big changes.
"Until and unless there are catastrophic incidents, there's an impulse to let things go,"said Michael Bromwich, a member of a federal commission that investigated the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill. After disasters, "Things that didn't even seem possible suddenly become necessary."
Here are the five top suggestions.
1. Stop running equipment until it breaks
Airlines don't fly planes until they fall out of the sky. That is effectively what PG&E does with many of its power lines. Although all utilities perform regular inspections and maintenance, "run to failure" -- the idea that equipment gets replaced only after it fails -- is common.
An analysis by Georgia Tech last year said PG&E is replacing so few old power lines that customers should expect a doubling of outages from distribution-line failures in 15 years.
In a separate analysis, California regulators found that although most utility-related fires begin when trees contact power lines, some start when utility equipment fails. Broken poles, clamps and connectors caused more than half of these equipment firesin California from 2014 to 2016.
The aviation industry takes a more systematic approach to identifying hazards because it couldn't survive regular accidents. On big airliners, engines are continuously monitored for signs of deterioration and taken out of service before they fail.
"Everything in an airplane has a life limit," said John Cox, a retired airline captain and current chief executive of Safety Operating Systems, a consulting firm.
Developing such systems for utilities would be hard because they have millions of devices spread over large areas.
2. Use predictive tools to assess risk
Utilities often incorrectly assume equipment has two states, normal or broken, said Don Russell, a researcher at Texas A&M. In fact, he said, many devices fail slowly. As they degrade, they create unique electrical signals. His lab has developed technology that can pick up the distress calls.
The Power Systems Automation Laboratory, which he heads at Texas A&M, has licensed the diagnostic tool to a startup, Power Solutions LLC, which has pilot projects under way at several utilities, including PG&E and Southern California Edison. For now, PG&E is conducting small-scale experiments.
The nuclear-power industry has been using sophisticated predictive-failure tools for years. Plant operators perform complex assessments that address three questions: What could go wrong? How likely is it? What would be the consequence?
Acceptance of this method, called probabilistic risk assessment, wasn't automatic, said George Apostolakis, a former Nuclear Regulatory Commission member. The NRC staff proposed it in 1975, but there was industry opposition until after the Three Mile Island nuclear mishap in 1979.
The airline industry also has a system of rigorous data collection and risk analysis, mandated by regulators since the 1990s and getting better over time, said Ray Valeika, a safety consultant and retired Delta Air Lines executive.
"Equipment is equipment. If the method works in aviation, it will work in other industries," Mr. Valeika said.
3. Regulate utility safety separately from rates
Some experts say California should form an independent safety agency because the California Public Utilities Commission has to weigh conflicting imperatives: boost spending for safety or hold the line on rates.
Regardless of who is in charge, California needs to spend more on safety analysis and enforcement, said Severin Borenstein, an energy economist at the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley.
Utility regulation, Mr. Borenstein said, is "not like meat inspection or aircraft inspection, where there are inspectors on the ground and in the plants." Too often, he said, the utilities commission issues orders and waits to review compliance reports because it doesn't have enough people to do its own legwork.
4. Manage forests more aggressively
With an estimated 130 million dead trees from a five-year drought, California has a staggering amount of fuel for wildfires.
Two things could reduce the risk, said foresters and researchers: Harvest more dead and dying trees in and around the Sierra Nevada and do more tree thinning and prescribed burns. The goal would be to restore overgrown forests to the health of centuries past so they can better withstand natural or man-made fires.
Prescribed burns are used extensively in Southeastern states. Florida does controlled burns on more than 2.3 million acres a year.
State Forester Jim Karels said Florida had terrible wildfires from 1998 to 2002 that galvanized action. In 2013, the Florida Forest Service won authorization to issue burn permits for the entire state. The result has been dramatic, he said. Prescribed burns have reduced blight such as needle disease in longleaf pine, as well as killed invasive weeds and stimulated rejuvenation of flowering plants that nourish wildlife.
In California, a memorandum signed by forestry agencies and environmentalists in 2015 endorsed wider use of fire for forest health. Last year, the state agency CalFire did controlled burns on 31,000 acres and thinned 15,000. The state's goal is to treat 500,000 acres a year.
5. Threaten PG&E's monopoly franchise
PG&E has "a culture of entitlement" because it feels that its franchise to provide electricity and natural gas to Central and Northern California is unassailable, according to Scott Hempling, a Georgetown University Law School adjunct professor who advises the Public Advocates Office at the California Public Utilities Commission.
The company's franchise appears secure "no matter how many rules it breaks, no matter how much anticompetitive conduct it carries out, no matter how many felonies it commits," Mr. Hempling testified to utility regulators this year.
The solution, he said, is to threaten to take that franchise away or make the company stand for a franchise review at regular intervals such as every 25 years.
In 2018, Arizona regulators took the unusual step of examining whether to take away the "certificate of public convenience and necessity" for Johnson Utilities LLC, a water-and-sewer utility that they were battling over water pressure and sewage-overflow problems. Regulators eventually appointed a Canadian company as interim manager of operations and finances at the utility.
In California, a coalition of more than 100 elected leaders is proposing to buy out PG&E and turn it into the nation's biggest customer-owned utility.
PG&E said its "facilities are not for sale, and changing the structure of the company would not create a safer operation."
The utility said it is making a concerted effort to improve the safety of its electric network by adding more technology.
It said it is beginning to use data analytics and machine learning to glean meaningful information from sensors scattered across its distribution system that will enable it to improve maintenance practices.

Credit: By Rebecca Smith, Katherine Blunt and Russell Gold
