People who develop medical technology have long assumed that Silicon Valley would pioneer smartphone-based devices to make Americans fitter and healthier than ever. To some degree, that forecast is coming true: Tech giants are working with doctors and hospitals on highly sophisticated devices -- automated radiology, supercomputer-based oncology, fitness-tracker-based analytics -- to monitor the sick, provide better automated care and keep people out of hospitals in the first place.
But the biggest gains from mobile medicine will come from deploying it in poor countries across Africa and Asia. In the Third World, mobile health-care tools are a necessity, not a luxury, because treating people depends on diagnosing them at home or wherever they happen to be.
All over Africa and Asia there is an underreported boom in portable diagnostic devices taking place, with uncounted new startups emerging to deliver solutions that are both low-cost and scalable. In India, public-sector initiatives such as Accredited Social Health Activist and private groups like Lal Path Labs have started using mobile-phone-centered diagnostic devices, delivered by foot, bicycle and scooter, to connect doctors and patients at temporary testing centers in remote villages with self-employed certified operators.
In the process they are gathering enormous amounts of information on patients and their health. Soon the volume of this data may dwarf the hospital records in the West -- and it will be even more valuable for evaluating disease because it focuses on identifying illness in patients via mobile phones before they experience severe symptoms.
It is difficult to overstate the size of the opportunity for mobile medicine. China, due in part to its poor environmental conditions, has an estimated 700 million people with chronic diseases, and more than three million die prematurely every year, according to the World Health Organization.
According to a study by the Cardiological Society of India, the average age for the onset of cardiac illness there is 30 -- which has led the government of India to classify heart disease as an epidemic. Africa has a half-billion people suffering from various illnesses associated with extreme poverty, such as tuberculosis and gastroenteritis.
Leaders in these regions are eager not only to provide health care, but also to discover better methods for delivering it. That's where the smartphone comes in. Last year 60% of global sales revenue for smartphones came from Asia and Africa, and because phone prices are discounted there compared with the West, the actual number of units sold is even greater than the dollar figures suggest.
As central as a smartphone is to modern American life, it may be even more so in poor countries. Phones aren't only the center of communication, they are used to make payments and run small businesses.
Adding devices and applications that provide basic tools for monitoring the user's health is the obvious next step. This iterative strategy will be much easier than launching the sophisticated devices Silicon Valley is dreaming up.
One type of mobile device that is likely to appear first in the Far East and be widely adopted there is the digital stethoscope. This device is able to detect changes in pitch and soon will be able to detect asthma in children, pneumonia in the elderly and, in conjunction with low-cost portable electrocardiographs, cardiopulmonary disease.
An additional advantage is that this part of the world has limited regulation, which makes it much easier to launch these kinds of health-care tools. In India and much of Africa, there are few government drug agencies or big insurance companies to throw up barriers.
Companies that make medical devices and their accompanying smartphone apps could establish themselves almost overnight. Then, once they have built a large, profitable base of users, they could consider jumping through the legal and regulatory hoops to bring the technology to developed countries. That sequence has worked well for other technology firms. WhatsApp tested its original application in India and quickly attracted more than 160 million active users there.
In the end, enormous gains will come from scale. Imagine what could happen once these companies have billions of users on multiple continents. Their algorithms could sift through data on millions upon millions of patients, looking for ways to predict and prevent disease. It'll be medical artificial intelligence.
No doubt Silicon Valley also will come up with elegant mobile medical tools, but only on the heels of more basic ones rolled out abroad. That means entrepreneurs in Bangalore and Beijing will have an early lead. Will they use the information they have gathered to beat Silicon Valley to the more sophisticated medical tech disruption?
---
Mr. Malone is dean's executive professor at Santa Clara University.

Credit: By Michael S. Malone
