[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Micron Technology sure picked a great day to deliver good news.
The memory-chip maker's quarterly results late Wednesday beat Wall Street's expectations, as did its projection for the quarter ending in November. That was particularly true for the bottom line -- adjusted operating income of $1.7 billion for the just-ended quarter was 12% ahead of analysts' projections, and the $1.95 billion implied by Micron's forecast for the current period was 21% ahead of the consensus tabulated by FactSet.
Micron's bottom line strongly suggests memory pricing is holding up -- countering one of the major worries that drove the stock down 33% in the three months prior to Wednesday's report. Micron thus logged a strong rebound on Thursday with the stock surging 15%.
A strong uplift across the market helped; the Dow and S&P 500 notched decent gains after revised GDP data and better-than-expected durable-goods orders.
But Micron's report was a good sign for other chip makers and tech hardware companies, as the company gave signals that an inventory buildup among customers like PC and smartphone makers may start clearing earlier than expected, due to better demand.
A focus on AI-enabled devices among manufacturers helps. CEO Sanjay Mehrotra noted AI-enabled Android smartphones are shipping with 12 to 16 gigabytes of DRAM memory compared to the 8GB capacity that was standard in last year's top-of-the-line models.
Micron's artificial-intelligence business remains strong, with Mehrotra noting the company's manufacturing capacity for the high-bandwidth memory used by AI systems remains sold out through the next calendar year.
Tim Arcuri of UBS said "normal seasonal inventory gyrations in PC/smartphone markets are transient and what really keys the durability of this cycle is HBM demand" in a note to clients Thursday morning.
Micron's report proved a strong catalyst for the chip sector on Thursday. Rivals Samsung and SK Hynix jumped 4% and 9% respectively. PHLX Semiconductor Index was up 3.5% on Thursday.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
