Stocks fell after new Labor Department data showed increased job openings in April, reversing three months of declines and renewing investor concerns that the Federal Reserve isn't done lifting interest rates.
The data came on a day that several Fed officials signaled they are increasingly likely to hold interest rates steady at their June meeting before preparing to raise them again this summer.
The S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite both fell 0.6%, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average ended 0.4% lower.
For the month, the Dow lost 3.5%, snapping a two-month winning streak. The S&P eked out a 0.2% gain in May, while The Nasdaq Composite rose 5.8%.
Traders in interest-rate futures have in recent days swung between pricing in a pause from the Fed or an additional rate hike at its June meeting.
They saw a greater than 60% chance of a rate hike after the jobs data Wednesday morning, but that fell to 30% after Fed governor Philip Jefferson said later in the day the central bank could hold interest rates steady at its next meeting but still lift them afterward. Stocks rallied off their lows of the day following Jefferson's comments.
"I see today's report as adding marginally to the case for additional tightening. A strong jobs report on Friday would add to this case further, as the Fed cannot afford to pause prematurely with core inflation well above 5%," said Ronald Temple, chief market strategist at Lazard.
Treasury yields slid, with the yield on the 10-year bond dropping to 3.636% from 3.697% Tuesday.
A rally in the shares of megacap technology firms Nvidia, Microsoft and Google-parent Alphabet helped power the S&P 500 higher for much of the month of May. Some investors were concerned about the market's reliance on just a handful of big stocks. While the S&P 500 is up 8.9% year to date, the equal-weighted version of the index is up 0.2%.
"If you can get some clarity on a recession, its timing, and what the Fed is going to do, hopefully we'll get some greater breadth that will allow the market to push higher. Without those things, we're kind of stuck," said Michael Arone, chief investment strategist at State Street Global Advisors.
"I think there is a limit to how high the megacap tech stocks can go and how much they can contribute," he added.
Hedge funds and other speculators have built up a bet that the S&P 500 will decline, marking their most-bearish positioning since 2007, according to data compiled by Bespoke Investment Group. They are more optimistic about tech stocks, with net bets that the Nasdaq 100 will rally near their highest levels since late 2022, according to the data from Commodity Futures Trading Commission compiled by Bespoke. Investors, however, pared back bets in recent weeks.
Nvidia shares fell 5.7% Wednesday, ending a furious three-day rally that saw the chip maker's market capitalization briefly cross over the $1 trillion mark during Tuesday trading. Investors have been piling into Nvidia shares in a bet that its technology will be in high demand from companies that produce generative artificial intelligence like the ChatGPT platform.
Nvidia rival Intel was the S&P 500's best performer Wednesday after its chief financial officer said Intel is on pace to hit the upper end of its revenue guidance for the second quarter. The shares closed up 4.8%.
Advance Auto Parts was the index's laggard. The retailer's shares plunged 35% after the company reported a sharp drop in quarterly profit.
Global markets were broadly lower following a weak economic data release in China. An official gauge of China's manufacturing activity slipped unexpectedly in May even after the country eased its strict zero-Covid restrictions.
Oil extended its decline after the Chinese manufacturing data. Brent crude futures fell 1.2% to around $72.66 a barrel. China is the world's largest crude-oil importer.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 dropped 1.1%. Early Thursday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.3%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 0.8% and the Shanghai Composite was up 0.4%. S&P 500 futures were flat.
Credit: By Jack Pitcher
