As the academic year winds down, you could be forgiven for thinking American higher education is in an advanced state of moral and spiritual decay.
It has been a dispiriting year. To the familiar noisy intolerance of opinions that deviate from modern ideological orthodoxies, we have added new spectacles of academic shame. The presidents of our most prestigious universities demurred when asked whether calls on their campuses for a Jewish genocide are permissible. Meanwhile, campuses have seen sustained and well-orchestrated demonstrations of support for Islamist terrorists.
Our supposed next generation of leaders spouting hate and drivel in equal measure, while the most privileged class of people in the nation claim victim status, indoctrinated by teachers who for decades have been peddling a dishonest education inimical to American ideals. And all this is paradoxically facilitated by the continuing munificence of wealthy Americans, who are unimaginably successful thanks to the application of those same American ideals but so desperately seek the imprimatur of these academic brands for their progeny that they'll pay any price, tolerate any insult, swallow any lunacy for that coveted Harvard degree.
The graduation season that brings it all to a seasonal climax has only underscored how deep the corrosion is: Commencement ceremonies canceled or noisily disrupted by the Hamasniks; a professional football player hauled through the stocks of public disapproval for daring to suggest that motherhood might be a high calling. And then on Sunday the president of the United States using a commencement address as a platform for abject demagoguery. He told a class full of young black Americans that the country he leads is irredeemably racist and that his political opponents are bringing back Jim Crow, banning black history books and denying water to black people waiting in line to vote.
If this is what our colleges have become, maybe we should junk the whole thing: starve higher education of money, purge the ranks of the administrators, encourage the young to stay away and learn something useful instead like plumbing. Or maybe wait until artificial intelligence has replaced the faculty, administration and students, submitting to the robots' more benign academic and practical tutelage.
Yet grim as it all is, there's another story -- one of teachers and administrators who practice and preach the ideal of a university, of students eager to absorb and participate in a traditional education that deepens the intellect and broadens the mind, exposing themselves to ideas that challenge them.
I'll admit this might be a somewhat subjective and rose-tinted view. But I think it has wider application too. As Mr. Biden was crudely propagandizing at Morehouse College, I was at the University of Notre Dame to see my daughter graduate from the nation's leading Catholic university.
America's class of 2024 has had more than the usual challenges of young adulthood, their high-school senior and college freshman years disrupted or canceled on account of the Covid pandemic. Notre Dame was one of the few major universities that brought students back to campus in the 2020-21 school year, and it did so to predictably shrill accusations from the media and educational establishment that it was putting lives at risk. It was a brave and brilliant move. No one died. An entire critical academic year was saved for a generation of students.
It was a characteristically independent decision, an independence reflected in the school's continuing commitment to intellectual diversity. I have seen three daughters graduate from this great university, with a fourth still enrolled. In an age of narrowing intolerance, Notre Dame continues to champion the virus of open-mindedness.
Father John Jenkins, the university president for the past 19 years, is stepping down this summer. On Sunday he apologized to the graduating class that they had him rather than Taylor Swift or another exciting celebrity as their commencement speaker. Then he turned serious and urged them to pursue the values of toleration and openness to others and to resist the temptation to demonize others: "The invitation to vilify an opponent is so seductive, perhaps because it can seem like a confirmation of our own virtue. If we speak only to those with whom we agree, our contempt for the evil opposition can seem like a sign of our own moral superiority."
This is an essential point: If we want to repair the rifts in our national fabric, we could start by practicing tolerance in our places of learning. Notre Dame is far from alone. In recent weeks we have seen other university leaders and faculty -- and even, most encouragingly, students -- take a stand against intolerance.
It might just be the warm glow of hope a proud father feels watching his child step into the world, but I believe America's greatness lies in the character of its people, and as long as there are places where that character is nurtured rather than corrupted, we all have reason for hope.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: It's Easier Said Than Done" -- WSJ May 23, 2024)
Credit: By Gerard Baker
