"If you put an instructor to sleep 300 years ago and woke him up in a classroom today, he'll say, 'Oh, I know exactly where I am," says Daphne Koller, co-founder of the online-education company Coursera. The same couldn't be said for agriculture, manufacturing and health care, she notes.
The former professor of artificial intelligence at Stanford hopes to change that with Coursera, a platform on which universities such as Princeton, Yale and Stanford share some 1,000 courses free of charge. Later this year, the site, which has over 13 million registered users, will open admissions for its first online M.B.A. program, from the University of Illinois.
Earlier this week, Dr. Koller, 46, was in New York for a rushed seven hours on her way back to San Francisco from Geneva, Switzerland, where she was visiting some of Coursera's university partners. Founded in 2011, Coursera has been making a more global push recently, as well as adding more career-related content. The site has worked to identify the skills that employers are looking for through job-posting websites and then asked university partners to add courses in those areas. There are currently over 150,000 open jobs in data science in the U.S. alone, she says.
Dr. Koller has long been familiar with the academic world. Growing up in Jerusalem as the daughter of two teachers, she skipped several grades and graduated from college at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem at 17 with a major in computer science.
After three years of Israeli military service, she came to the U.S. in 1989 to earn her Ph.D. at Stanford, eventually becoming a professor there in 1995. She discovered the potential of online education almost by accident, she says. In 2011, she and two other professors -- Sebastian Thrun, who has since started rival online education company Udacity, and her current co-founder, Andrew Ng -- offered their computer-science courses online. Each drew over 100,000 students.
The success of those courses inspired her to develop more ideas and prototypes for making Stanford content available online. In 2012 she and Mr. Ng raised a round of venture-capital funding, and Ms. Koller took a leave of absence from Stanford to focus on Coursera full time. She has since left the university. "Leaving Stanford was hard, but leaving Coursera was impossible," she says. Since then, Coursera has raised $85 million.
The company didn't grow easily. "You're asking a university to take the thing that's made them who they are, which is their content, their professors, their brands, and give it to everyone around the world for free," she says.
But around late 2012, she saw that universities were starting to view online education as inevitable. "They thought: If this it, we want to be driving it rather than watching the train go by," she says.
Today Coursera, based in Mountain View, Calif., has 119 university partners and 180 employees, including two contractors in China and India. Their most popular course so far has been a Stanford class called "Machine Learning." Second is "Learning How to Learn" from the University of California, San Diego.
Every course is different, requiring a combination of video lectures, assignments and tests. The average course is designed to take four to six weeks to finish. While anyone can complete a class free, a course certificate, which graduates might list on their resumes, costs $50 to $95. Coursera users recently passed the mark of 2 million course completions. Universities receive 50% of all revenue generated by their own courses.
Even with these advances in online education, Dr. Koller doesn't think that traditional college offerings will become obsolete. "There's something magical about a 12-person seminar at Princeton," she says. In addition, "it's prestige, it's socialization, it's meeting your future spouse and it's making friends for life."
Still, online education is a more effective way to teach basic facts and skills, she says, in part because students can learn at their own pace. Taking classes online "gives people the opportunity to pause and reflect and grapple with the material," she says. It gives helpful feedback to instructors, since they can see which questions on tests don't work for many students and can track when users turn off videos and give up on classes.
Technology can also make it easier to cheat. To prevent students from having others do their assignments, Coursera has developed ways to identify users through their keystrokes. "You and I type the same phrase and you can't forge my typing patterns," says Dr. Koller. The method is used for any student who wants to earn a certificate. If a user is thought to be cheating, the company takes a range of actions, from issuing a warning to blocking the person from the platform.
As expensive as college tuition is these days, Dr. Koller doesn't see the price tag as the main problem with higher education. "To me, what's much more important than the reduction in cost is the improvement in the outcome," she says. "If you're talking about the $1.2 trillion [in] student debt, a lot of that is from people who started degrees and never finished, and that's because their learning outcomes were poor."
She believes that a new model -- in which information is given online and classrooms are used for interactive experiential learning rather than for lecturing -- could help to solve that.
For now, Dr. Koller is looking forward to launching the online M.B.A. program. In it, students can get a full M.B.A. for a targeted cost of around $20,000, or choose blocks of expertise, such as digital marketing or accounting, in which to earn certificates (cost: $79 each). She also plans to continue expanding the company internationally by acquiring courses in different languages.
Ultimately, Dr. Koller wants to make the school experience like "turning the tap -- and great education comes out for anybody." Eventually, "we'll have data from hundreds of thousands, millions of people at a level that's unprecedented," she says. "I think we're at the cusp of a revolution of treating human learning as science."
Credit: By Alexandra Wolfe

ERIC Subject: Science Curriculum; Universities; Experiential Learning
