The circus known as the Democratic National Convention rolls past the Michael Jordan statue and into Chicago's United Center on Monday. The Windy City will be filled with enough hot air to change the climate. Conventions long ago stopped being about selecting a presidential candidate, especially this year. Instead, they are finely scripted, slick Hollywood-style productions of preening, posturing, peacocking, pomposity and propaganda. More coronation than deliberation. Hence, boring as all get out. You might as well watch reruns of "The Golden Girls."
It's time for a change. Over the years, new technology has driven political influence. Newspapers drove convention coverage until radio and television could broadcast messages in real time. Social media bypassed editors and producers and turned the snark volume up to 11. Artificial intelligence is now sneaking into politics with made-up crowd sizes and authentic voice (and soon video) fakes.
Speaking of peacocking, I spent way too much time watching the Olympics using NBC's Peacock streaming app. It was terrific. In addition to the highly produced prime-time coverage with silky-voiced Mike Tirico running us through the major events and up-close-and-personal profiles of athletes, streaming allowed viewers to watch anything and everything. Every sport, all 329 medal events, was available live. Peacock's Gold Zone, patterned after the NFL's RedZone channel, offered bite-size pieces of the games. Octoboxes let you watch eight sports at a time. I devoured chunks of water polo (do the horses hold their breath?) and archery and canoe slaloms that I might not have ever watched.
Political conventions could do the same. Coverage i9s too much like syrupy Olympic prime time, with TV producers cutting away for often meaningless interviews. Give us an octobox. Even better, tap every iPhone in the United Center as a TV camera. I want to know what the Pennsylvania delegation thinks about fracking bans, or what Minnesota thinks about tampons in boys' school bathrooms. I'd watch. As always, when technology exists, it will eventually be used.
And stop making conventions a foregone conclusion. People love a little mystery. Allow delegates to vote after every speech on candidates and issues and post the tallies. Bring back the smoke-filled rooms, where power brokers livestream their arguments. Have the Ohio delegation debate the Michigan delegation about football. Ratings gold! The Democrats introduced superdelegates in 1982 so that party insiders would have more of a say. Get rid of superdelegates so that the best candidate, not the chosen one, can rise to the top.
And during the painfully dull Tuesday night slot, mix it up. Have Tim Walz, perhaps in full National Guard uniform, belay into the United Center, jump on a motorcycle and do wheelies around the convention floor similar to Tom Cruise at the 2024 Olympic closing ceremony. And offer a word bingo game during the Kamala Harris address, with boxes for "burden," "seriously" and "together."
Give us a Snoop Dogg-like roaming celebrity who magically shows up when anything cool is happening. I would've suggested Deadpool's Ryan Reynolds, who is everywhere, but then I learned he's Canadian. Maybe Simone Biles would do it -- appropriate given all the flip-flopping that takes place. Or maybe an AI robot skinned as Walter Cronkite talking to delegates and then calmly explaining the issues to viewers.
And please provide multiple live streams from outside the United Center. Like the polluted Seine, protesting irritants in Chicago will try to disrupt the games. Gonzo journalist Hunter S. Thompson wrote in "Fear and Loathing in America" that protesters in 1968 "stood and fought, and took incredible beatings. I witnessed at least ten beatings in Chicago that were worse than anything I ever saw the Hell's Angels do." In 2024, expect similar coverage on Twitter or TikTok from new enterprising correspondents far away from network television.
So yes, I'm suggesting that we make the conventions more like the Olympics. Sadly, we're headed in the opposite direction. Los Angeles Mayor Karen Bass declared that her city's 2028 Olympics will be "a no-car games" and that she's "working to ensure that we can build a greener Los Angeles." This is the same performative nonsense that political conventions traffic in. Good luck skateboarding from Pasadena to Long Beach when the trains and buses break down or unionized transit workers inevitably strike. What's next? Unisex teams? Trigger warnings for contact sports? Safe spaces for nonmedalists? Please don't make the Olympics as boring and trite and predictable as political conventions, or else interest will drop to the level of Australian breakdancing.
Credit: By Andy Kessler
