Canada's privacy commissioner wants the country's lawmakers to revamp privacy laws to address issues related to facial recognition, following an investigation into the use of such technology by Canada's federal police agency.
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada, the country's privacy watchdog, on Thursday said the Royal Canadian Mounted Police violated federal privacy law when it used software from facial-recognition-technology company Clearview AI Inc. between 2019 and 2020.
Canadian Privacy Commissioner Daniel Therrien submitted a report to Parliament Thursday with the findings of that investigation, and asked policy makers to address regulatory ambiguities that have implications for facial-recognition systems. Specifically, he called on Parliament to clarify how online images of people's faces should be treated and to stipulate that police agencies are responsible for ensuring that collection practices of data providers don't run afoul of privacy laws.
"We encourage Parliament to amend the Privacy Act to clarify that the RCMP has an obligation to ensure that third-party agents it collects personal information from have acted lawfully," Mr. Therrien said in the report.
Canada is one of a number of countries where officials are grappling with how to regulate facial-recognition technology. The European Commission in April proposed legislation for regulating artificial intelligence, including banning police from using real-time facial-recognition systems in public spaces, with some exceptions.
In the U.S., regulatory efforts to address facial recognition have largely been at the state and local level with 21 municipalities and three states -- California, Vermont and Virginia -- having banned or placed moratoria on at least some law enforcement usage of the technology, according to the Center on Privacy and Technology at Georgetown Law.
Mr. Therrien called for regulatory clarity for the legal treatment of online images. He said Canada's laws should specify that the concept of publicly available personal information "does not apply to information where an individual has a reasonable expectation of privacy."
The privacy commissioner's office said it found that RCMP violated the country's Privacy Act by using data that regulators separately determined was collected unlawfully by Clearview.
Regulators said Clearview collected biometric information without the knowledge or consent of individuals, affecting millions of Canadians. An attorney for New York-based Clearview said the company disputes the assertion that its services violated Canadian law and yet it voluntarily stopped offering services in Canada last year. Clearview has a database of about three billion photos the company scraped from the internet.
A RCMP spokeswoman said the agency disagrees with the notion that the Privacy Act mandates government agencies to "conclusively confirm" that a provider's data collection practices don't run afoul of the law. "The RCMP is not in a position to conduct an exhaustive assessment of, let alone confirm a third [party's] adherence to, every law that may relate to the third party and the services it provides," the spokeswoman said.
The U.S. doesn't have a federal privacy law. And there is no legal doctrine in the U.S. that suggests law enforcement agencies in the country may be obligated to ensure data they use from third parties has been collected lawfully, said Jameson Spivack, a policy associate at the Center on Privacy and Technology at Georgetown Law. "In the U.S., the [police] agency is like a consumer," he said. "It's more on the company to make sure they're following the law . . . not necessarily the agency."
Credit: By Jared Council
