Why do you use your computer so much more than your bike? Because your bike basically does just one thing: It moves forward when you pedal it. Your computer does many things -- and is capable of doing a limitless number of things. That is because your computer is what we call "programmable matter." In principle, it can run any program, display any image, make any sound and connect to any device that Windows hasn't broken yet.
The question for the future is: What if we could make all of our stuff as flexible and responsive as the computer? Or, at least, what would it take to create many more everyday objects capable of adapting to our shifting tasks, needs and desires? Why can't the materials in a building automatically respond to changes in the weather? Why can't we reconfigure our living room by ordering four chairs to reshape themselves into a table? Why can't we program robots to help us out in dangerous, unpredictable situations? In our age of advanced synthetic materials and ever more powerful computers, these things may not be as far off as they sound.
Various teams of researchers are working, for instance, on paper-like robots that can fold themselves origami-style. Part of what makes traditional origami enjoyable is that you can make complex structures from a small set of rules. But why do all the folding ourselves?
A simple origami robot consists of a piece of flat material that permits a certain set of folds. Along those folds are mechanized hinges. The material also contains circuitry allowing it to talk to a computer, so you can program the robot to fold in particular sequences to create different shapes.
Daniela Rus, director of the computer science and artificial intelligence laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, envisions origami bots that can shape themselves into tools to perform medical procedures or deliver drugs inside the body. In a demonstration by her team in May 2016, a tiny origami bot made from pig intestine was able to unfold itself from a swallowed capsule in a simulated stomach and move across the stomach wall with the help of an external magnet.
Similar robots could be useful in larger forms. If the material and folds can hold in place firmly enough, you could have a flat sheet that converts itself into a chair, a table, a vase or anything else. The technology also could be a step toward a "universal tool," capable of turning into anything you might find in a tool kit. That would be a big plus in environments where packing efficiency is important, such as outer space or combat zones.
A different kind of programming is involved in the elegant, membrane-like structure of the HygroScope, created in 2012 by the architect Achim Menges and doctoral student Steffen Reichert, both at the University of Stuttgart. The HygroScope is made of thin pieces of wood and synthetic composites carefully engineered to bend in response to humidity -- without motors or computers. Now on display at the Centre Pompidou in Paris, it is more than just a beautiful object. It is a forerunner for what may one day be a more environmentally friendly and energy-efficient way to regulate the climate within a building.
As for the living space in the house of the future, wouldn't it be convenient if your furniture could reconfigure itself according to your changing needs? A robotics group at Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne in Switzerland has created Roombots, which are basically rounded, softball-sized blocks that can rotate and dock with each other. Because they can rotate, they can move, either by wiggling along or by connecting together to make simple wheels. Because they can dock, they can be formed into large complex assemblies, such as chairs and desks.
Once perfected, such robots would mean that the objects in your house could come to you, a particularly valuable feature for people with limited mobility. It also would make furniture more adaptable and comfortable. You could have a table that scales its height and breadth to suit a particular task, for example, or a light that moves to the optimum location.
Such machines could be especially useful in dealing with dangerous environments. A swarm of small robots that can assemble and disassemble on command might be deployed to do reconnaissance in a combat zone or to survey damage after a natural disaster. And if one component gets damaged or destroyed in the process, the rest would be able to reassemble and carry on.
In 2014, a computer science group at Harvard demonstrated another project, Kilobots, which is a swarm of 1,024 tiny, simple robots. They look like watch batteries with three stiff little legs, and they move around by wobbling. Using a simple algorithm, they can wobble into any two-dimensional shape, such as a star or (a very impractical) wrench.
The swarm currently takes about 6 hours to reshape, so there's no need to worry that it will suddenly take the form of a killer robot like the T-1000 from "The Terminator" movie. But there is great potential for a relatively inexpensive, controllable swarm of robot ants capable of working together. Like termites, they might be able to build structures by carefully moving the right parts into place. Winged versions might be able to act as robotic crop-pollinators.
Even in its simplest forms, there are many possible uses for programmable matter that could improve our lives. Imagine, for example, going to IKEA to shop for the next generation of origami robots: You buy a flat board, take it home, and instead of reaching for that little Allen wrench, just tell it to assemble itself into a desk or a dresser. We estimate that for this innovation alone, humanity would save just over 800 billion hours of labor a year.
---
This essay is adapted from the Weinersmiths' new book, "Soonish: Ten Emerging Technologies That'll Improve and/or Ruin Everything," published by Penguin Press.

Credit: By Kelly Weinersmith and Zach Weinersmith
