Rocketship.vc raised its first $40 million fund in 2017 to invest from the U.S. in startups globally, using data rather than personal connections to find startups and make deals.
That strategy has positioned the firm to make deals remotely during the pandemic, since it had already used data to make investments remotely pre-Covid-19.
Now, Los Altos, Calif.-based Rocketship has doubled down on this strategy with a new $100 million fund. It has also hired a new partner, Madhu Shalini Iyer, formerly the chief data officer at Indonesian tech startup Gojek.
Rocketship's co-founders Venky Harinarayan and Anand Rajaraman co-founded Kosmix, a social search and data startup that was acquired by Walmart Inc. in 2011.
In 1998, their search startup Junglee was acquired by Amazon.com Inc., and they later played key roles in developing Amazon's Mechanical Turk, an early website for hiring workers to do on-demand tasks. They later became angel and venture investors with their own funds and made early bets on Facebook Inc., Lyft Inc. and other startups.
Rocketship, which has invested in startups such as India-based small business management app maker KhataBook Inc., uses data and its own analysis to find hot startups around the world and then reaches out to them to seek investment.
That is what happened with Trocafone, a Brazil-based startup that refurbishes smartphones and resells them.
"I got a LinkedIn message in 2015 from Sailesh. He said, 'We don't know each other but I love your company,'" Guillermo Freire, chief executive of Trocafone, said of Rocketship partner Sailesh Ramakrishnan. Rocketship ended up investing in the startup's Series A.
Many traditional venture investors get deals through their network of contacts and focus on getting to know founders through in-person meetings. But that approach misses new companies that don't have connections to Silicon Valley, said Mr. Rajaraman.
"You end up with a human approach and it's hard to have relationships that are truly global. You end up being very geographically rooted," he said. "We've gotten really comfortable with making investment decisions based on data and Zoom calls."
Many firms already track common metrics such as web traffic and app downloads. And traditional machine-learning models use prior successful companies as models to find new successful companies, said Mr. Rajaraman, which doesn't always work.
"Great companies don't look like each other," Mr. Rajaraman said. "You can build a machine learning model and never catch them. The key challenge is how to get around that. We've come up with new ways that are different from traditional machine learning."
In an example of how data guided investment decisions, when the firm launched its first fund, India didn't have as much investment interest, but Rocketship's data surfaced growing startups, Mr. Harinarayan said.
The reason: An explosion of cheap mobile phones and data plans was driving adoption of new apps.
"We caught it at the very beginning," he said. "We had to learn to challenge ourselves. You can't come in with a lot of bias in your investment model and how you make decisions."

Credit: By Tomio Geron
