In disasters like the typhoon that slammed into the Philippines, sifting through a barrage of confusing and conflicting on-the-ground reports is one of the first problems facing rescue teams. Social-media sites such as Twitter and Facebook can make matters worse. All too often, users recycle what others have posted or retweeted without adding any fresh information.
Sorting through all the noise is too much for individual agencies to handle on their own.
So Swiss-born Patrick Meier is gearing up to attack the problem with a new approach called social mapping: Using a combination of volunteers and algorithms to filter the chaos and to provide rescue teams with a detailed, data-driven map of what they should be doing, and where.
"This is artificial intelligence disaster response," said Mr. Meier, 35 years old, in describing the system, which is now helping the United Nations' disaster-response agency respond to the unfolding calamity in the Philippines.
The idea is to use a software platform called MicroMappers to identify useful information through set keywords. Volunteers refine the process further by noting, or tagging, to classify tweets according to their content, whether they are appeals for help, reports of property damage or shortages of medical supplies.
In future deployments, the platform will be developed further to "learn" what kind of material to seek out from the web.
The Philippines' latest tragedy will likely be a stiff test for the software. Typhoon Haiyan, known locally as Yolanda, is the most powerful storm to make landfall anywhere in the world, weather experts say. It ripped up power lines, shut down cellular relay stations, and left a trail of destruction across the worst-affected areas. Reports emerging Sunday suggested that thousands of people might have been killed. The Associated Press reported regional police chief Elmer Soria as saying that Gov. Dominic Petilla had told him that there could have been about 10,000 deaths in Leyte province.
As cellphone networks and power supplies are gradually restored, more news about the gravity of the situation will emerge, Philippine government officials have said.
This provides a chance for Mr. Meier, who is director of social innovation at the Qatar Foundation's Computing Research Institute in Doha, to put the MicroMappers platform and his expanding team of volunteers to the test.
Mr. Meier has tapped volunteers to track disasters before. His efforts helped create digital maps that aided rescuers in getting quickly to trouble spots during the Haiti earthquake in 2010.
When a devastating typhoon hit the Philippines in 2012, the U.N.'s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs used Mr. Meier's task force to analyze the hive of information coming from Twitter and create a map of useful data, literally labeling what needed to be done and where, such as providing clean water, resolving power-supply issues or sourcing fresh medical supplies. After analyzing 20,000 tweets in 10 hours, Mr. Meier's volunteer network's data became the basis for the U.N.'s first-ever disaster map created from information gleaned from social media.
"Clearly our communications networks with our colleagues out in the field come under strain, and this helps fill in the gaps," says Elizabeth Marasco at the information-management office of the United Nations' disaster-response office in the Philippines. "This is very new to us and very innovative. There is a lot there to help us."
Google Inc. took the information a step further, using the data to build its own crisis map of the Philippines. This time, Google has also launched a person-finder Web page to help find missing friends or relatives. Users can click on two options, one to locate a missing person, and another to provide information about someone. As of Saturday evening, the service is tracking around 400 names.
This social-media response to disasters appears to work better in some countries rather than others.
The first trial of the MicroMappers software was during an earthquake that struck the Baluchistan region of Pakistan in September, killing more than 800 people. Mr. Meier said MicroMappers didn't receive much in the way of useful information about that via Twitter, largely because the uptake of the Internet and social media in that dusty, remote region is very small.
The Philippines, though, offers a very different environment. Some 36% of its 100 million people are regularly using the Internet, many of them through mobile devices such as smartphones or tablets -- more than many of their peers in nearby countries such as Thailand and Indonesia. What's more, many people are avid users of social-media sites, especially Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
"There's a very large, sophisticated social-media footprint there," Mr. Meier says.
And this time, he hopes that the torrent of tweets, Facebook postings and Instagram videos expected to emerge from the affected areas in the Philippines could help build an even more detailed picture of the calamity, and provide valuable fresh clues for rescue teams.
One important change is that the information sought in tweets and other social-media traffic is filtered according to a checklist provided by the United Nations. These include requests for helps and reports of infrastructure damage.
Volunteers can also work on the go, using mobile apps. When three people have separately cleared a tweet, it is then ready for forwarding as "clean" information to create a disaster map.
"This is a work in progress. There's lots of room for improvement," Mr. Meier says.
Credit: By James Hookway
