More companies say they are concerned about facing public criticism over their use of artificial intelligence, thanks to rising fears over the technology's negative impacts, including job losses.
Until recently, companies that successfully deployed AI were often celebrated for it, said Jonathan Copulsky, a professor of marketing at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management who focuses on brand management. But since the release of the chatbot ChatGPT, public opinion has zeroed in on the insidious elements of AI, including the potential for bias, discrimination and job displacement, as well as concerns about privacy, he said.
Companies are now left to navigate how they can use the technology without upsetting their existing and potential customers.
"If you're not concerned about it, you're going to get burned," said Emory Healthcare Chief Information and Digital Officer Alistair Erskine.
Companies are now looking to avoid that scenario. Eric Yaverbaum, chief executive of public relations company Ericho Communications, said that six months ago none of his clients were asking him about the potential for reputational risk from AI. "Now everybody is," he said.
Emory Healthcare said Wednesday it was testing a generative AI tool from medical-tech startup Abridge that summarizes recorded conversations between doctors and patients and auto-generates notes for electronic health records. The notes are reviewed by doctors, and patients have the chance to opt out of the recording beforehand.
Erskine said the benefits could be massive for doctors, but he added that there is always the possibility people could react negatively to the technology. "That's going to be creepy to some people, potentially. So we're going to have to be careful about that. I don't think we can ignore it."
Erskine said the concerns aren't enough to stop the organization from moving forward, but he added that Emory Healthcare would be prepared to quickly release a statement if its efforts are misinterpreted.
At Workday, a provider of enterprise cloud applications for finance and human resources, Chief Technology Officer Jim Stratton said the key is ensuring use cases truly add value for the customer and are implemented in a safe and ethical way. There are some possible use cases the company has chosen not to pursue because they would invade too much on people's privacy, he added.
Earlier this year, Levi Strauss & Co. faced criticism on social media when it said it would test the use of AI to generate images of more body-inclusive models on its website as part of an effort to create a more diverse and inclusive customer experience. Critics said the effort deprived diverse models of work while just helping the company address calls for diversity.
Levi Strauss responded with a statement saying it doesn't see this pilot as a means to advance diversity or as a substitute for the real action that must be taken to deliver on its diversity, equity and inclusion goals. The company added that it is committed to testing new technologies; assessing benefits, risks and drawbacks; and using feedback from employees, consumers and stakeholders.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
