The Wall Street cliche is that investors hate uncertainty. Their response recently has been to swing from being entirely certain about one thing to quite sure that the opposite is true, leading to violent moves in the markets based on thin evidence.
This week's inflation figures marked the denouement of yet another shift in the market narrative, and what on the face of it was a wild overreaction to some good inflation figures.
On one level the market did exactly as it should: Inflation was lower than expected, so bond yields fell and stock prices rose, with rate-sensitive stocks rising the most.
But the scale of the moves was out of whack with what happened. Core inflation came in at 0.23% month-on-month, against Wall Street expectations of 0.3%. Year-on-year inflation was 3.2%, below the predicted 3.3%. Good news, for sure, but clearly not enough to justify a 5.4% leap in the Russell 2000, or even 1.9% on the S&P 500.
Instead, Tuesday was the culmination of the turn in the market narrative, from higher-for-longer interest rates back to a soft landing and rate cuts. Investors who had been clinging through two weeks of weak data to their belief that the Federal Reserve would have to stay hawkish to combat sticky inflation gave up. Short-covering accentuated the move. The S&P has had its best two-week stretch since October last year.
This type of overreaction keeps on happening.
"In fundamental terms, this is a much slower [economic] cycle," in the sense that interest rates have yet to cause a big growth slowdown, says Salman Ahmed, global head of macro at Fidelity International. "In narrative terms, it's a much faster cycle."
Deutsche Bank strategist Henry Allen counts up six other times since 2021 that investors have anticipated a "dovish pivot" by the Fed, all of which were eventually reversed.
Seventh time lucky, perhaps. It will depend on whether economic data keep coming in weak and inflation stays down this time. But there are deeper issues behind the rapid changes in the market story that are unlikely to be resolved soon.
First is economic volatility. There have been severe shocks that suggested sudden changes were on the way and led to rapid moves in inflation and bond yields: War in Ukraine and the Middle East; trade fights between the U.S. and both China and Europe; the implosion of the British government-bond market; and the failures of two big American banks and Switzerland's second largest. More geopolitical, political or financial shocks are entirely plausible.
This has led to continued extreme volatility in bond yields, which have serious effects on stocks and other assets. The implied volatility of U.S. Treasurys has been the highest on average over the past year of any time outside the post-dotcom recession and the 2008-09 financial crisis, according to the ICE BofA Move index.
Second is the problem of extrapolating from moves in the economy to markets. A soft landing for the economy means lower rates, lower yields and higher stock prices. A hard landing means even lower rates, lower yields and lower stock prices. The "no landing" that briefly found adherents in the summer would mean higher rates, higher yields but potentially also higher stock prices as a stronger-for-longer economy boosts profits.
The Fed itself has shifted from the hard landing it was forecasting to predict a soft landing, but of course a soft landing still means economic slowdown, and it's easy to see how weakness turns into recession.
Finally, there's the deep uncertainty about the long-term outlook. Are we going through a generational shift in the economy that will mean permanently higher interest rates and much more frequent worry about inflation? Or are we returning to the prepandemic norm of low rates and a central bank primarily worried about deflation?
I think long-run higher rates are likely as we move from a globalized world with too much stuff and a nearly unlimited supply of foreign workers and money to a more domestically focused world where both workers and savings are scarce -- and so cost more.
A future of much higher investment for clean energy and onshoring, more government-directed investment, more government borrowing and more military spending means more competition for savings and higher rates.
Artificial intelligence ought to help productivity if it lives up to even a small part of its promise -- but that also raises long-term rates, albeit for a happier reason. Against this are the countervailing disinflationary forces from the debt overhang, which makes individuals and companies less keen to borrow and spend. And there are the continued technological developments that helped keep inflation low in the 2010s.
It feels like the latest soft-landing narrative could last a while, since it will be supported by any sign of a weaker economy, and past rate rises are beginning to bite.
But don't get too comfortable, as another twist in the story -- my guess is renewed recession fears, but it could be back to higher for longer -- is likely before any rate cuts actually arrive.
Credit: By James Mackintosh
