Salesforce on Wednesday posted higher first-quarter profit as margins came in ahead of the company's expectations, a sign that cuts from its nascent turnaround plan are taking hold.
The quarterly earnings and revenue topped Wall Street expectations. The business-software provider also boosted its earnings outlook and margin targets for the year, while backing revenue guidance.
Chief Executive Marc Benioff said the results showcased its new emphasis on cost management, which came after pressure from shareholders earlier this year. "We continue to scrutinize every dollar investment, every resource, and every spend," Benioff said on a call with investors.
Shares fell 3.3% in after-hours trading to $216.
For the quarter ended April 30, Salesforce logged net income of $199 million, or 20 cents a share, compared with a profit of $28 million, or 3 cents a share, a year earlier. Adjusted earnings were $1.69 a share, above analysts' estimates of $1.61, according to FactSet.
Revenue rose to $8.25 billion from $7.41 billion. Analysts polled by FactSet expected $8.18 billion.
The results come as Salesforce is undergoing a turnaround. The San Francisco-based company has faced a sales slowdown and pressure from activist investors in recent months before outlining changes.
Earlier this year, Benioff said the company has entered a new era of efficiency and careful spending, and suggested it would no longer be using expensive acquisitions to grow.
Its efforts have been paying off. Through Wednesday's close, Salesforce shares are up by more than two-thirds this year, more than double the rally of the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index.
The company also has plans to do more with artificial intelligence. Benioff on Wednesday said Salesforce will infuse generative AI across its product portfolio, the latest company to make plans to incorporate the burgeoning technology into its operations.
For the current year, Salesforce now expects adjusted operating margins around 28%, up from its prior projection of 27%. Last year, Salesforce executives laid out to analysts a plan that would boost its adjusted operating margins to 25% by 2026. Before 2022, the company's margin was perennially less than 20%.
Benioff said Salesforce remains confident it will achieve 30% in adjusted operating margins in the first quarter of fiscal 2025.
The company forecast adjusted earnings between $7.41 and $7.43 a share, up from its prior forecast in the range of $7.12 to $7.14 a share.
For the second quarter, the company projected revenue between $8.51 billion and $8.53 billion and adjusted earnings between $1.89 and $1.90 a share. Analysts polled by FactSet expected around $8.5 billion in revenue and adjusted earnings of $1.70 a share.
---
Tom Dotan contributed to this article.
Credit: By Denny Jacob
