The decade dawned with unemployment at nearly 10%, rumblings about the gig economy and predictions that robots running on artificial intelligence would make human workers obsolete. The end of the traditional job seemed just around the corner.
Ten years later, regular full-time work is still the standard -- and the preference -- for most people. But many career paths have been upended by the changes of the past decade. The implicit social contract between employers and workers has been fractured by no-benefits contracting and contingent work, where people are employed only on an as-needed basis. And despite a decade of economic recovery and an unemployment rate at a historic low, wages were mostly stagnant before turning up more recently.
Administrative, manufacturing and back-office jobs -- work defined by routine tasks -- have disappeared or been outsourced because of technology and automation, hurting workers without college degrees especially hard. Real average hourly earnings for nonsupervisory workers have risen less than 7% over the decade, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average has nearly tripled in the same period.
The result is that while the number of jobs has risen, the quality of many jobs has fallen, says Mark Muro, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. "There are very real changes in the quality and feel of work," he says.
The change that best illustrates the vicissitudes of the labor market in the 2010s is the emergence of the gig economy. On Dec. 31, 2009, one of the first mentions of Uber Technologies Inc. appeared in a media source: a one-sentence announcement in a deals database that the "car-booking" startup had raised $200,000 in seed money.
There was no indication at the time that Uber would become one of the most valuable startups ever or that the company, by enlisting armies of on-demand drivers classified as independent contractors, would become -- depending on your view -- the face of either workers' liberation from bosses and fixed schedules or the alarming precarity of livelihoods in an app-driven economy.
As the U.S. climbed out of recession in the early years of the decade, workers flocked to gig-economy platforms such as Uber and its competitor Lyft Inc., along with delivery, odd-job and cleaning services such as TaskRabbit, DoorDash Inc. and others.
Americans needed quick income to get through stretches of joblessness or to make up for cuts in hours or a family member's layoff.
The number of active Uber drivers in the U.S. grew from a base of almost zero in 2012 to more than 460,000 at the end of 2015, according to a paper by Uber's economist Jonathan Hall and the late Princeton University economist Alan Krueger. "At this growth rate, every American would be an Uber driver within five years -- which implies that the growth rate will inevitably slow down," the authors wrote.
And it did. By 2016, only 1% of U.S. workers were earning money from online labor platforms, according to economists working with researchers from the Internal Revenue Service. The closer the economy gets to full employment, the data showed, the slower the growth in online-platform work.
In September, gig work hit its biggest hurdle yet with California's passage of Assembly Bill 5, which makes online-platform firms' business model of classifying workers as independent contractors essentially illegal in that state. Shares of Lyft and Uber, both of which had initial public offerings in 2019, have dropped 39% and 28%, respectively, from their spring debuts.
Still, work is changing in other ways. Outsourcing jobs such as security guards and call-center operators to third-party contracting firms has become a key part of corporations' labor strategy. It allows them to shrink the size of their employee base, pay and benefits -- and means less job security for workers.
Some economists say the shadow workforce created by the rise of contracting is helping to fuel income inequality between people who do the same jobs.
Google parent Alphabet Inc. has more outsourced workers than full-time employees. These 100,000-plus TVCs -- an abbreviation for temps, vendors and contractors -- test Google's self-driving cars, review legal documents and manage data projects, among other jobs.
There's debate about what kind of employment arrangement workers themselves want. Future-of-work pundits tout freelancing as the preferred arrangement for young Americans. Millennials -- who in 2016 overtook Gen Xers as the largest generation in the workforce -- also demand a sense of mission on the job and a greater voice in corporate policies.
Many of these trends collided recently at Google, where workers staged walkouts to protest company policies around sexual harassment and pay equity. Employees also joined with TVCs to demand better wages and working conditions. Soon after, Google said it would require vendors to give Google-based contractors paid parental leave, paid sick days, and a $15-an-hour minimum wage.
---
Mr. Weber is a Wall Street Journal reporter in New York. Email her at lauren.weber@wsj.com.

Credit: By Lauren Weber
