Authorities used a facial-recognition system to identify the man charged with carrying out Thursday's deadly attack at the Capital Gazette in Maryland, in the highest-profile case involving technology that has raised privacy concerns.
Anne Arundel County Police Department fed a photograph of the suspect into the Maryland Image Repository System, a database of mug shots and driver's license photos, authorities said Friday. The system secured a match and revealed the identity of the suspect.
The facial-recognition system performed as designed, said Stephen T. Moyer, secretary of the state's Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services. "It has been a valuable tool for fighting crime in our state."
Tom Joyce, vice president of client relations at Vigilant Solutions, an artificial intelligence and data analytics vendor for law-enforcement agencies, said police across the U.S. have expressed interest in using facial recognition, and demand is likely to increase after the Maryland shooting.
"It's definitely the highest-profile case in my memory since being here, where it's been used and it's been publicly known right away," said Mr. Joyce, a former lieutenant for the New York Police Department cold case squad.
Privacy advocates are concerned about the accuracy of the technology and whether police should be able to use images of people who have never committed a crime. Studies have also shown African-American faces are harder for the technology to read.
Thirty-one states now allow police to access driver's license photos for facial-recognition searches, according to the Center on Privacy and Technology at Georgetown University Law Center. Several police departments are also working with the private sector to add facial-recognition capabilities to body cameras, which could allow police to identify people in real time.
Some privacy advocates are concerned about linking artificial intelligence-operated, facial-recognition systems to cameras to identify people in public spaces. "Left unchecked, surveillance systems like this can lead to the arbitrary and unlawful use of government power," said Jennifer Lynch, an attorney with the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a digital-rights organization.
The system in Maryland began running facial-recognition searches on mug shots in 2011, according to the Center on Privacy and Technology, which issued a 2016 report on it. In 2013, Maryland added images from driver's licenses. According to the report, the system includes seven million driver's licenses and about three million mug shots. Police say a match can be used only as a lead, not a probable cause for an arrest.

Credit: By Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Robert McMillan
