NEUROSCIENCE
Golf as Brain Food
Yet another excuse to hit the links: A mere 40 hours of golf training for middle-age novices led to increases in gray matter in parts of the brain involved in visual processing and motor coordination, a study found.
Twenty-two people with limited golf experience, ages 40 to 60, took part, with half of them committing to spend 40 unsupervised hours learning golf, through lessons or on their own. Each golfer was matched by age and sex to a member of the control group, and all brains were scanned. The subjects could pursue the training outside the lab, on their own schedule. On average, the training took 150 days; subjects and their control-group counterparts were then rescanned.
In several brain regions associated with "sensorimotor" learning, the researchers detected a gray-matter boost on the order of 3.5% to 5% for the new golfers. In one region, the parieto-occipital junction, the increase correlated with how quickly training was completed. The results reaffirmed the plasticity of the mature brain, the researchers said.
"Training-Induced Neural Plasticity in Golf Novices," Ladina Bezzola, Susan Merillat, Christian Gaser and Lutz Jancke, The Journal of Neuroscience (Aug. 31)
MATH
Gender Puzzles
Men tend do better than women on tests of spatial intelligence. But would the difference persist in a world of educational and professional equality? Or if women ruled?
Researchers administered four-piece jigsaw puzzles to 1,300 members of two closely related tribes in Northeast India with little or no experience with such puzzles.
One tribe, the Khasi, was matrilineal: Property descends through the youngest daughter, and men are forbidden to own land. The other, the Karbi, is patrilineal.
In the patrilineal tribe, men were 36% faster at solving the puzzle, on average (42.3 seconds versus 57.2 seconds), but in the matrilineal society, men finished in 32.1 seconds, women in 35.4 seconds -- amounting to a statistical dead heat.
"Nurture Affects Gender Differences in Spatial Abilities," Moshe Hoffman, Uri Gneezy and John A. List, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (Sept. 6)
HEALTH
The Politics of Suicide Rates
Elected coroners identify fewer suicides in their counties than their appointed counterparts, a study finds, and the researchers attribute the results to stigma and political pressure: Aside from general uneasiness over self-killing, relatives can lose insurance money if an ambiguous death is ruled a suicide.
The researchers looked at death statistics in 2,788 counties, nationwide, from 1999 to 2002, as well as Census data from 2000. (Texas and Minnesota were excluded because their methods of determining cause of death couldn't be easily mapped onto the appointed-vs.-elected distinction.) The authors controlled for such factors as unemployment, region, religion and race.
Elected nonphysician coroners reported 11% fewer female suicides and 6% fewer male suicides than medical examiners (who are always appointed and tend to be MDs). Elected physician coroners reported even fewer suicides than elected nonphysician coroners.
"The Role of Medico-Legal Systems in Producing Geographic Variation in Suicide Rates," Joshua Klugman, Gretchen A. Condran and Matt Wray, presented at the American Sociological Association conference (August)
---
Creating a Videogame While You Play It
The videogame "Code Hero," which is still in development, looks familiar at first: It's a first-person shooter game. But in this version, the gun doesn't fire bullets or energy grenades but snippets of computer code that can destroy your enemies, erase obstacles or build bridges to get you where you want to go.
The enemy is "Null," a dark agent with artificial intelligence, and players are advised by a friendly A.I. entity. They don't need to understand code to play; they just pick it up and fire away. But as the game progresses, players learn to tinker with the code to make it work better. They pick up the basics of JavaScript and discern how it underpins the virtual world that they inhabit. The goal of the "Code Hero" developer, Primer Labs, is to erase the barrier between game consumers and game creators.
Credit: By Christopher Shea
