The Four
By Scott Galloway
Portfolio, 310 pages, $28
Tech is the business story of our time. Apple is the most valuable company based in the United States. Google's parent, Alphabet, is the second most valuable, and Facebook and Amazon are fourth and fifth, respectively.
But tech is not merely a business story. As more and more of life has become digital, the giants in tech have become a political story, too, wielding power that our regulatory apparatus, assembled in an earlier era, is ill-suited to oversee. In 2006, when the first, second, fourth and fifth places in the most-valuable list were occupied by ExxonMobil, GE, Citigroup and Bank of America, none of these companies' products or services had been used by a foreign power to disseminate misinformation in the preceding presidential election.
A spate of recent books -- including Jonathan Taplin's "Move Fast and Break Things" and Franklin Foer's "World Without Mind," both published earlier this year -- have called attention to the dark side of tech's ascendancy. Scott Galloway's "The Four: The Hidden DNA of Amazon, Apple, Facebook, and Google" sits apart.
Mr. Galloway is an experienced entrepreneur and a clinical professor of marketing at NYU's Stern School of Business. He is not unaware of the disturbing power of big tech and is concerned about the small number of employees that these companies need to achieve their outsize valuations. But he is mostly concerned with telling compact stories about how "the Four Horsemen," as he calls them -- Apple, Alphabet, Facebook and Amazon -- became so successful. He emphasizes the way they have built their brands and the way we consumers are complicit in their acquiring unbounded power, having willingly invited them "into the most intimate areas of our lives."
In the book's introduction, Mr. Galloway makes much of the rapid increase in the market capitalization of the four companies, noting that their aggregate value rose in just four years -- from early 2013 to early 2017 -- by approximately $1.3 trillion, which is equivalent to the GDP of Russia.
If market cap is the starting point, however, it would make more sense to speak of "the Five" and include Microsoft. But at a conference in 2011, Eric Schmidt, then Google's chief executive, wrote Microsoft out of the picture by speaking of "the Gang of Four." Mr. Galloway accepts this number, omitting the fully paid-up member of big tech that just happens to be the third most valuable company in America. Microsoft's market cap has increased more than $250 billion in the past 31/2 years, thanks to a turnaround led by Satya Nadella, its CEO.
Amazon is the first company that Mr. Galloway profiles. He covers its shrewd storytelling, which has persuaded its shareholders to be eternally patient; its investment in offline stores, allowing it to provide multichannel distribution; and its nascent deployment of voice-ordering via Alexa, a service that may well move customers from rival-branded merchandise to Amazon-branded products. He also ticks off its accumulation of artificial-intelligence expertise; its build-out of warehouses that are within 20 miles of 45% of the U.S. population; and its acquisition of Whole Foods' 460 stores. At the time the book went to press, Amazon was America's fourth most valuable company (today it is fifth), but Mr. Galloway predicts that it will pass the others and become the first company to achieve a market capitalization of $1 trillion.
As Amazon continues to expand its scope, many industry sectors will be negatively affected. Mr. Galloway chooses the transitive verb "molest" to describe how Amazon will act on the retail ecosystem. This word choice brings out a problem that shows up early in the book: discordant language. Amazon's assets are described in one place with a term composed of a vulgar word for excrement and "loads." When Marc Lore, the founder of the e-commerce company Quidsi, left Amazon two years after joining it (as part of Amazon's $545 million acquisition of Quidsi), he turned around and started Jet.com. Of the move, Mr. Galloway writes: "This must have felt like a half-a-billion-dollar divorce settlement to your husband, who then moves into the house next door and starts -- " and here he uses a well-known slang verb for intercourse. What may be the perfectly piquant phrase for David Mamet on stage does not play so well on the printed page.
Less coarsely, Mr. Galloway puts his understanding of retail to good use in his treatment of Apple. He shows the brilliance of Steve Jobs's decision to vertically integrate the company in the form of stores, a decision that did not look brilliant at the time. Mr. Galloway calls our attention to the way Apple prepared for the move, recruiting to its board in 1999 -- two years before it opened its first store -- Mickey Drexler, the man who had made Gap Inc. the outstanding retail story of the 1980s. Having its own stores -- and thus the power to insert itself on Fifth Avenue and the Champs-Elysees among Vuitton, Cartier and Hermes -- established Apple as a luxury brand. The company's enviably high margins come from what Mr. Galloway describes as a unique combination: "the premium-priced product, and the low-cost producer."
The transformation of Apple into a luxury brand is a good story. But Mr. Galloway often mixes the insightful with the ridiculous, sketching a cartoonish version of evolutionary psychology: "Since men are wired to procreate aggressively, the caveman in us hungers for that Rolex, or Lamborghini -- or Apple. And the caveman, thinking with his genitals, will sacrifice a lot (pay an irrational price) for the chance to impress." There are many such references to hunter-gatherers and to genitals -- and one reference in particular, to Tiger Woods's, that is so offensive that upon reading it one rubs one's eyes in disbelief.
When Mr. Galloway takes up Alphabet, he is interested only in the Google division, but his ability to say much about Google, or Facebook, is limited by the absence of physical stores in their histories. "The Four" is limited in another way as well: It is based almost entirely on accounts written not by principals in the companies but by reporters. Near-complete reliance on secondary sources is forgivable, but misreading them is not.
Mr. Galloway refers to "the most famous 'theft' in tech history," the visit that Steve Jobs made to Xerox's research lab in Palo Alto, Calif., in 1979. It was during this visit that Jobs saw a personal computer with a graphical interface, windows and mouse -- the essential things that, once glimpsed, supposedly made the Macintosh possible. But many other lab visitors saw these things, too. At the time, they were merely proofs-of-concept. Much invention and problem-solving had to follow to make the concepts into a commercial product.
The "theft" myth was debunked long ago. A full chapter was devoted to dismantling it in a book published in 1993: "Steve Jobs and the NeXT Big Thing." (I can recall this only because I am the book's author.) Mr. Galloway cites a more recent source to back up his "theft" claim, an article published in the New Yorker in 2011, but that article, in fact, is devoted to showing that the story is a myth. Five pages later, in the same context, he cites the article again.
When Mr. Galloway completes his survey of the Four Horseman, he throws in a chapter of career advice for young adults that is filled with bromides such as go to college, get to a city and promote your personal brand (or, as Mr. Galloway puts it, "Pimp Your Career"). He urges readers to exercise regularly and stay fit: "Walking into any conference room and feeling that . . . you could kill and eat the others gives you an edge and confidence (note: don't do this)." The connection between this tidbit of advice and big tech is not made clear.
Mr. Galloway occasionally offers offhand remarks about similarities among the companies he discusses, but his separate accounts of each bring out doubts that they should be thought of as a cohesive group. There are the two behemoths in advertising, Google and Facebook, which are in direct competition with each other; there is the luxury-goods company, Apple; and there is the everything store of Amazon. The categories compete only along some edges. Referring to the Four Horsemen provides the frisson of the biblical prophecy, but it would be better to speak -- more accurately if not as apocalyptically -- of the Two and the One and the One.
---
Mr. Stross is a professor of business at San Jose State University and the author of "A Practical Education: Why Liberal Arts Majors Make Great Employees."

Credit: By Randall Stross
