Tech stocks led the market rebound, bouncing back after the prior session's inflation-induced selloff.
The Nasdaq Composite rose 1.7% to close at a record level of 16442.20. The S&P 500 gained 0.7%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average shed about 2 points, or 0.01%.
Stocks mostly shook off Wednesday's pullback, which was driven by a hotter-than-expected consumer-price reading. The report marked the latest in a series of releases showing persistent inflationary pressures, forcing investors to reconsider if the Federal Reserve will be able to cut interest rates soon.
The latest wholesale-price report released Thursday morning offered some relief to investors on edge about inflation. The producer-price index rose 0.2% in March, lower than economists' expectations of 0.3%.
Shares of tech companies rallied. The S&P 500's information-technology sector jumped 2.4%, the top-performing segment of the index, followed by communication-services and consumer-discretionary stocks.
Amazon shares rose 1.7% to notch a record after Chief Executive Andy Jassy said generative artificial intelligence could be one of the largest technological transformations in decades and committed to cutting costs. Nvidia's stock climbed 4.1% and Apple advanced 4.3%.
Wall Street continued to revise projections about the Fed's interest-rate policy. Bank of America on Thursday said it now sees one rate cut this year, in December. It previously expected the Fed to begin lowering rates in June. Traders entered the year pricing in six or seven rate cuts in 2024 but now view one or two cuts as more likely, according to federal-fund futures. Some see no cuts at all this year.
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston President Susan Collins in a speech Thursday said that the urgency for lowering interest rates is lower now than it was earlier this year.
"The risks of monetary policy being too tight have receded," she said.
The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note rose to 4.575%, after notching its biggest one-day jump since September 2022 on Wednesday.
The conventional thinking is higher interest rates tend to hurt stock prices by curbing economic growth and increasing the relative investing appeal of bonds. But some investors believe that the stock market won't be in dire straits if rates remain at current levels.
"The economy is strong," said Doug Fincher, portfolio manager at Ionic Capital Management. "Perhaps some of these small moves in rates don't matter that much."
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals stock dropped 1.7% after the Justice Department accused it of fraudulent practices related to its vision drug, Eylea.
Shares of Constellation Brands rose 1.3% after the Modelo maker posted better-than-expected quarterly sales.
The Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.4%. At midday Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.5%, but Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 1.5%. S&P 500 futures were up slightly.
Credit: By Hannah Miao
