Tech giants such as Google and Amazon.com Inc. are deploying artificial intelligence to ferret out fraud on their platforms, but some cybercriminals are outfoxing Silicon Valley with software that is getting better at mimicking human behavior.
One group of developers running a Russian website advertises a $100-a-month subscription to a browser called Linken Sphere. Customers have used the software to get around fraud-detection tools employed by Alphabet Inc.'s Google, Amazon and Facebook Inc., according to researchers and users of the tools. The browser allows users to harness hundreds of stolen online accounts, purchased on the dark web, to generate fake ad traffic or to boost online search rankings and shopping reviews, those people say.
Another popular tool, Antidetect, also costs $100 a month for a subscription, and offers a $2,990 professional version. Its creator charges an extra $100 a month for personal technical support, servers and free configurations. Multilogin, created by an Estonian-based company, can control up to 100 different profiles. It charges 99 euros, about $110, a month.
Researchers say the tools can be used for legitimate purposes. They can be used to look for vulnerabilities or test defenses, for instance. Linken Sphere's creators didn't respond to requests for comment. Its website says Linken Sphere can be used for legitimate purposes. A spokesman for Antidetect said it was unfortunate such programs were misused by attackers, "but this should not be regarded as the developer's fault."
Donat Voronin, chief executive of Multilogin Software Ltd., said his company's browser was primarily used for research by companies, nongovernmental organizations and universities but that, like any software service, there were "nonmainstream use cases."
Fraudsters have typically relied on complex software that allows them to anonymously direct fake traffic to sites or ads, to then artificially boost product ratings or reviews. Another long-used trick: Networks of hacked computers, known as botnets, can send fake traffic at these targets. Many big tech companies have come up with defenses to identify these and other techniques, by using artificial intelligence to determine whether they are active or not. If they aren't, that is a sign of possible fraud.
The new tools, however, allow for the creation of hundreds of fake personas quickly and cheaply, according to users of the tools, researchers and discussion forums about them. They help carry out one of the most popular types of online fraud -- spoofing traffic to online ads or social media profiles, making them look more effective than they really are. Marketers are expected to lose around $5.8 billion on ad fraud this year, according to the U.S. Association of National Advertisers.
A Facebook spokesman said the company was getting better at spotting fake accounts, and that its detection technology helps block millions of attempts to create fake accounts every day. A spokesman for Google said it is has been researching anti-detection tools, and that the company blocks most invalid traffic before it affects advertisers. Amazon didn't respond to requests for comment.

Credit: By Parmy Olson
