Tencent Holdings Ltd. of China has quietly become one of the world's largest and most active technology investors, a calculated strategy that is crowding out competitors and bolstering the internet giant's profit.
The social-media and videogame company has bought stakes in 277 startups since 2013, and its pace of deal-making accelerated last year, according to Dow Jones VentureSource. In 2017 alone, Tencent invested in over 80 private and public companies, participating in far more deals than its main rival, Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., which took part in about 40, according to Bernstein Research data.
Tencent over the past year has emerged as one of the world's most valuable tech giants, with a market capitalization of nearly half a trillion dollars after its shares nearly doubled, making the Hong Kong-listed company worth nearly as much as Facebook Inc. and Alibaba. It is best known for its popular Chinese messaging app, WeChat.
Tencent's investments have been in a wide range of companies, from young startups to firms that have already raised several rounds of funding and some listed technology companies. Tencent hasn't disclosed how much it has spent on such investments, but the value of its stakes in public companies exceeded $33 billion at the end of last year.
The incessant deal-making, however, has also drawn criticism from some market participants who say it is helping to inflate valuations of companies that aren't profitable. Shares of some Tencent-backed companies that went public to much initial fanfare have slumped in recent months, after investors turned skeptical of the companies' profit-generating prospects.
In 2017, almost one-quarter of Tencent's $11.1 billion net income came from valuation gains in companies it has stakes in that went public, such as Chinese insurer ZhongAn Online P&C Insurance Co. and search browser Sogou Inc. A year ago, Tencent's stakes in listed companies made up a 7% share of its profit, and the recent gains from investments have helped cushion the impact of slowing revenue growth in its main businesses.
The company is set to release its first-quarter 2018 results on Wednesday.
Tencent is acting like the "SoftBank of China," said Bernstein analyst Bhavtosh Vajpayee, referring to SoftBank Group Corp., a Japan-based software distributor and telecommunications company that morphed into the world's largest tech investor. Mr. Vajpayee estimates Tencent has spent at least $25 billion buying stakes in companies in recent years. In funding rounds for private companies, Tencent has often been the lead investor, putting in more money than other participants.
Tencent's investment priorities include expanding its games and music businesses, widening the use of its WeChat messaging platform and payments service, and growing in artificial intelligence, people familiar with the company said. Tencent has said it is focused on investments in companies with leading technologies or research, as well as top rivals in high-growth markets "where we can share our experience and contribute to building the internet ecosystems."
The Shenzhen-headquartered company owns shares of electric-vehicle maker Tesla Inc. and mobile messenger Snap Inc. and has made smaller investments in scores of Asian tech startups. It has taken stakes in some of China's most valuable private tech companies, including ride-hailing firm Didi Chuxing Technology Co. and news aggregator Jinri Toutiao. Recent fundraising rounds valued each of these companies at more than $20 billion.
Most of Tencent's investments have been funded from its cash hoard. The company had 24 billion yuan ($3.79 billion) in free cash flow last year, according to its annual report.
Many of the moves reflect Tencent's desire to build market share in China's highly competitive internet and consumer sector and have helped to lock out Alibaba from taking stakes in those businesses, according to people close to the company. Investing in internet startups can help get customers of those companies onto Tencent's WeChat mobile-payments platform, which competes directly with Alipay, a larger payments network run by an affiliate of Alibaba.
---
Stella Yifan Xie and Wayne Ma contributed to this article.

Credit: By Liza Lin and Julie Steinberg
