Apple said it likely won't roll out AI features to millions of customers in Europe this year because of concerns over the EU's technology industry regulations.
The EU's Digital Markets Act, often called the DMA, enacted far-reaching restrictions on big technology companies and digital competition. One requirement was for interoperability, meaning developing software that could work across operating systems and hardware, making it easier for consumers to move their data or switch providers.
Apple singled out that regulation specifically, saying those requirements "could force us to compromise the integrity of our products in ways that risk user privacy and data security."
"We are highly motivated to make these technologies accessible to all users," the company said in a statement, adding that it is committed to working with the European Commission to find a solution.
The company said its new AI system, called Apple Intelligence, would be among the products it doesn't think it will be able to offer to European customers this year. Apple Intelligence offers users an AI assistant deeply integrated into the iPhone, iPad and Mac operating systems.
The AI will be able to scan the personal information of users to assist with various tasks, such as proofreading a text, summoning photographs or creating custom emojis.
Apple Intelligence, which will launch in parts later this year, also integrates with OpenAI's popular chatbot, ChatGPT. The company said it plans to integrate with other AI models in the future.
Apple investors reacted positively to the company's new AI strategy, sending its shares to a record high in the weeks that followed the Worldwide Developers Conference earlier this month, where the company showcased the new technology.
The iPhone maker is in a contentious standoff with European regulators over the new law, which was intended to open up closed digital ecosystems like Apple's App Store.
Apple's compliance plan, unveiled earlier this year, contained new fees and a number of restrictions for app developers hoping to take advantage of the law and launch products outside of the confines of the App Store.
Credit: By Aaron Tilley
