Lately I've been putting on my pants in front of a camera. Dressed, I say out loud, "Alexa, take a picture," and Amazon's tube-shaped Echo Look snaps a shot. Moments later, a photo of me modeling the day's clothes appears on my phone. If I change outfits and ask Alexa to snap again, the $200 camera goes further: It judges which ensemble looks better.
Yes, judges -- as in, what were you thinking wearing those white skinny jeans? Amazon has used technology as a tastemaker since it began recommending books in the late '90s. But how could a machine possibly weigh something as complex and subjective as personal style?
To find out, I called the human fashion police: Hal Rubenstein, a founding editor of InStyle magazine, Teri Agins, longtime Wall Street Journal fashion columnist, and stylists Paul Julch and Solange Khavkine. My colleague Joanna Stern and I played dress-up with nearly two dozen outfits, comparing the Echo Look's robo-judgments with those of the experts.
Here's the thing: The machine was surprisingly on point in most head-to-head comparisons. But even if computers can master current trends, they still can't replace that friend who takes you to the store and says yes, go for the floral-print bomber jacket.
Amazon isn't disclosing how this Style Check feature makes decisions, saying only that humans help the AI algorithms "get smarter over time." The Echo Look, which also does everything Amazon's other talking speakers can do, is sold only via invitation for now.
It takes a big leap to install an internet-connected camera and microphone where you usually disrobe. Unlike Amazon's similarly named Echo Show, the Echo Look isn't always on. It takes a shot when you verbally command it, and there's a button that shuts its sensors off. Amazon stores the photos for your reference -- and so it can keep learning.
Who would even desire such a thing? If you love fashion, the Echo Look could be a handy tool to capture, collect and rank outfits. For the rest of us, at best it offers low-anxiety second opinions.
The idea of a style robot "is hilarious, ludicrous and potentially lifesaving to some," says Mr. Rubenstein. We spend trillions of dollars on clothes, so perhaps it was inevitable that AI would attempt to tackle that age-old question: Do these pants make me look fat?
Elements of Style
Being more tuned to geek trends than runway trends, I sought professional help for our tests. Ms. Khavkine, a New York stylist, curated designer garments for Joanna, starting with two date-night ensembles: a shimmering blue jacket with a high collar and a sleek python-print jacket. All four experts preferred the simpler second option. (The blue number "is trying to be contemporary but looks cheap," Ms. Agins said.)
Then Joanna did the sashay and shante in front of Alexa's judgmental eye. After about a minute, Style Check spit out a result: 70% likelihood the sleek jacket looked better. Consensus!
Then she tried on a pair of black-and-white dresses in very different cuts. Again, our whole panel agreed, picking the dress with a lower hemline because of the way it fit. And, again, so did Alexa, giving it a 68% thumbs-up.
In my menswear experiments, aided by Mr. Julch, a San Francisco stylist, we had more mixed results. I modeled the same sweater and pants in two different sizes. The larger size instantly irritated our human judges. Strangely, the Echo Look barely favored the better fit. That was my first indication Alexa might sometimes be guessing.
Amazon says the Echo Look tries to give a "holistic assessment" that takes into account fit, color, styling, season and current trends, as well as "unique characteristics of each customer." It doesn't factor in past purchases, a spokeswoman says. "Anyone can use Style Check -- whether you've purchased clothing on Amazon or not."
The humans who help train the AI are fashion-focused Amazon employees, the company says.
Unlike a fashionable friend, Alexa doesn't challenge what's in your closet -- at least, not for now. There are companies using machine learning to recommend clothes to buy, and doubtless that's Amazon's endgame too. But it will take a lot of data-crunching to match a great store display.

Credit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler
