Change Agent
By Daniel Suarez
Dutton, 398 pages, $27
The basic question in science fiction is always "What next?" We've had three industrial revolutions so far -- first steam, then electricity, then computing -- and each one has been bigger than the last. What will be the fourth? In "Change Agent," Daniel Suarez thinks he knows. Not nanotech, not 3-D printing, not artificial intelligence, but gene engineering.
It has started already: improved crops to feed a hungry world, gene-tweaking to cut out hereditary disorders like hemophilia or cystic fibrosis, all well-intentioned and potentially beneficial. But if you can alter an embryo's DNA to excise defects, why not do the same to splice in improvements? If parents could give their child genes for longevity, improved intelligence, superior physiques, who would deny them the chance to show parental love? Where's the downside?
Ken Durand is an analyst for Interpol's Global Complex for Innovation, and as he explains to his daughter, there are risks even in the procedures that created her pet "toyger." Quite what genes do is never certain, side effects are bound to happen, and the only way to create safe procedures is by trial and error. Experimentation on human embryos, to see how they develop? You'll get failures, and what do you do with the discards? As one of Durand's associates, a genetic mistake himself, points out, "Mother Nature has a hell of a backhand."
One result of the downside is that the next industrial revolution won't happen in America, where rules on experimentation are strictly enforced, and where half the population has still not accepted the idea of natural evolution, let alone artificial. Nor in sclerotic, over-managed Europe. The successors to Silicon Valley will be in Singapore, Hong Kong, Mumbai -- and in places where cops are corrupt, governments weak, and criminal organizations old and powerful.
In particular the "Huli jing," headed by a mastermind and ruling cartel who seem to be immortal. Durand is on their trail, but they strike first, in a way that will stun even hardened readers of sci-fi. Long ago Larry Niven imagined what "organleggers" could do in the way of disguising identity, but people who have worked out how to edit the DNA of adults, not just single fertilized cells -- they can take identity theft to a different dimension.
Soon Durand is on the run, no longer a hunter but one of the hunted, in the new underworld of biohacker bars, cryptocurrencies and climate refugees. Some of it looks very old. War and global warming have made human raw material cheap and plentiful. Offshore container ships have been turned into "hulks," not for POWs but for slave-factory sweatshops. Remember "L.A. Confidential" and the film star look-alikes created by plastic surgery? With "Involuntary Third-Party Revisions" rich men can create harems of perfect look-alikes. Not to mention child-labor "Worker Bees," child soldiers with fear and compassion edited out of their genes, and whole subspecies of sociopaths.
Even worse is "Otto," the Huli jing's enforcer. Guard dogs flee in terror when they scent him, his slightest touch causes intense pain and as he walks by, birds fall dead out of the sky. He's a leftover from a canceled biodefense project. But has it really been canceled?
Biopunk has been waiting for its William Gibson, to bring a whole new vision of the future as Mr. Gibson did for cyberpunk, and Daniel Suarez has done it. The central story is riveting -- when you think of Ken Durand, think also of Alfred Bester's Gully Foyle, the anguished hero of "The Stars My Destination" with his flaring tattoos.
Even more compelling, maybe, is the imagined background, the "agritowers" or vertical hydroponics farms, the "pharmatowers," the drug printing, car-bodies grown from chitin (the protein in insects' exoskeletons), the "deathless" meat grown from cultures so we can all turn "degan." Much of it looks pretty good, and it's coming.
But so is the Post-Identity world. One day we will all have to copyright and own our own DNA, or it will be stolen. Exhilarating, alarming -- Daniel Suarez plays the two great thrills of sci-fi against each other, and not just for fun. He thinks this is coming, and he means it. Read it and wonder.
---
Mr. Shippey writes regularly about science fiction for the Journal.
Credit: By Tom Shippey
