The U.S. is preparing rules that would restrict the sale of advanced artificial-intelligence chips in certain parts of the world in an attempt to limit China's ability to access them, according to people familiar with the matter.
The rules are aimed at China, but they threaten to create conflict between the U.S. and nations that may not want their purchases of chips micromanaged from Washington.
In a series of measures dating to October 2022 and updated this month, the Biden administration has tried to block Chinese access to the most-advanced chips as well as chip-making equipment and other technology. It says the goal is to prevent China from using AI to advance its military and surveillance capabilities.
The latest round of curbs could come this month, weeks before President-elect Donald Trump takes office. Among the restrictions, the administration aims to introduce caps on shipments of AI chips to certain countries for use in large computing facilities, people familiar with the plans said.
One grouping of countries -- close U.S. allies -- would be unrestricted, the people said, while another tier of countries would face limits on the number of chips that can go into data centers used for AI. Chinese companies are banned from purchasing advanced AI chips without a license from the Commerce Department.
The purchasing caps primarily apply to regions such as Southeast Asia and the Middle East, the people said. The rules cover cutting-edge processors known as GPUs, or graphic processing units, which are used to train and run large-scale AI models.
The regulations are aimed at halting China's access to computing power housed in other countries, some of the people said. The rule, titled Export Control Framework for AI Diffusion, was submitted to the Regulatory Information Service Center on Monday, according to the center's website. The website doesn't detail the rule.
U.S. officials are also considering other options. The administration is considering placing controls on exports of the so-called weights that underlie advanced AI models, according to people familiar with the matter, and weighing further China-specific restrictions on chip manufacturing.
The administration recently sent letters to major chip-makers including Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing and Samsung Electronics informing them about some of the restrictions, these people said. The letters said the companies needed to apply for a license to transfer chips to China that are manufactured using advanced chip-making technology or meet other criteria.
These criteria include a size and transistor-number limit as well as any indication that the chips are for use in training AI models, the people said. Previous regulations already limit the shipment of advanced GPUs and memory chips to China, but the new rules spell out more clearly to manufacturers what is banned.
The Commerce Department often sends companies such letters in advance of new rule-making, but the restrictions could be altered or may not go forward at all.
TSMC declined to comment on specifics and said it complies with rules and regulations. Samsung declined to comment.
Nvidia has developed AI chips for the Chinese market that comply with earlier U.S. restrictions, and China still accounts for about one-eighth of its revenue.
Any cap on shipments to projects in countries outside of China could have an impact on Nvidia, depending on how the final rule is worded.
"While we do not comment on unpublished rules, we are ready to provide the government with any information it requires," Nvidia said. Advanced computing drives innovation and strengthens economies worldwide, it said.
Some companies have raised concern about the potential new rules rolling out hastily as the current administration draws to a close.
The South China Morning Post previously reported the country caps, and Reuters reported the restrictions on advanced chips from TSMC.
China has denounced the U.S. curbs and retaliated by limiting the export of some minerals used in chip production. This month, the country said it was opening an antitrust investigation into Nvidia.
Washington first imposed widespread curbs on the sale of high-end processors and chip equipment to China in October 2022, seeking to prevent China from using AI to advance its military and surveillance capabilities.
AI is increasingly seen through a national security lens by policymakers, partly because it can augment weapons capabilities.
Despite the export limits, China has managed to make strides with advanced technologies, frustrating Congress. The recent discovery of core circuitry produced by TSMC in Huawei's AI chips also underscored the difficulty of trying to isolate China from commercial technologies.
Southeast Asian nations are often viewed by industry officials as a backdoor for China to purchase advanced AI chips that it can't obtain directly from the U.S. An informal market for these chips has popped up in countries such as Singapore, with smugglers sneaking Nvidia's top-of-the-line AI chips into China through channels such as ordinary freight or individuals carrying them through customs.
In addition, Chinese entities have set up subsidiaries in Southeast Asia to sidestep U.S. curbs and purchase the processors.
The Middle East has come up on Washington's radar over the past year, with states such as the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia investing billions of dollars to develop their own AI ecosystems.
---
Raffaele Huang contributed to this article.
Credit: By Liza Lin and Asa Fitch
