TOKYO -- Waiting for his mother to finish grocery shopping one day in 1994, 12-year-old Daisuke Okanohara passed the time with a little reading -- of research describing a method to speed up data compression. He says he felt his body shake with excitement.
"It was a breathtaking method," recalls Mr. Okanohara, now 33. He spent months testing it to see how it worked.
Today, as the co-founder of Tokyo-based artificial-intelligence company Preferred Networks Inc., Mr. Okanohara is aiming for breakthroughs of his own -- with the weight of a nation's beleaguered technology industry on his shoulders.
Over the past quarter century, Japan lost its technology leadership to rivals in the West in large part because of software shortcomings. Apple Inc. pushed Japanese consumer-electronics makers out of the market with more elegant interfaces and better systems for software developers.
Japan is still at the forefront in hardware such as robots, tiny smartphone parts and automobiles. But even that stronghold is in danger of being breached, because software is increasingly critical to making those products work.
Enter Mr. Okanohara and "deep-learning" software -- programs that, like the human brain, can learn on their own, without human hand-holding. "Deep" refers to the networks of artificial neurons: They have more layers and so can tackle trickier problems.
Deep learning is already big in Silicon Valley. Alphabet Inc.'s Google last year acquired London-based startup DeepMind Technologies for an estimated $500 million, while Apple, Amazon.com Inc., Facebook Inc. and Tesla Motors Inc. also have invested in the field. Chinese Internet-search provider Baidu Inc. set up a deep-learning research center in Silicon Valley in 2014.
U.S. market-research firm Tractica forecasts that annual software revenue for enterprise applications of deep learning will reach $10.4 billion in 2024, up from $109 million this year.
To Silicon Valley, deep learning is mainly a way to make software better -- so that, for example, voice-recognition programs respond more naturally to human questions.
The Japanese companies beating a path to Mr. Okanohara's door tend to look at deep learning differently, as a way to improve hardware. They believe a deep-learning machine could improve itself much faster than humans could improve it, because it could share what it learns with its fellow machines and would never get tired.
Japanese industrial-robot maker Fanuc Corp. recently took a small stake in Preferred Networks, with hopes of developing machines that can figure out on their own how best to assemble devices and even repair other robots.
"PFN has the most advanced expertise in the world," says Fanuc Chief Executive Yoshiharu Inaba, referring to Preferred Networks by its nickname. Also working with the startup are Toyota Motor Corp., developing autonomous-driving technology, and Panasonic Corp., hoping to leverage Preferred Networks' knowledge for surveillance cameras and consumer electronics.
Preferred Networks' hope for itself is to have a place at the center of companies' deep-learning applications, much as Microsoft Corp. put itself at the center of the corporate personal-computer revolution in the early 1980s with its operating system. Preferred Networks recently introduced an operating system for deep-learning technology; called Chainer, it helps third-party engineers write artificial-intelligence-enabled programs.
Founded last year, the 30-employee startup was valued in August at $120 million, and has insisted on remaining independent. That is a gamble given Google's virtually unlimited resources, which allow it to snap up some of the best talent and potentially set global standards.
The startup's executives say they have had to turn down some partnership offerings because of a shortage of workers. Experts also say that the Japanese government's slow adaptation to new technologies might pose problems.
"Preferred Networks has great skill sets, but they also need to learn how to deal with capital markets," says Yutaka Matsuo, an associate professor at the University of Tokyo.
Mr. Okanohara says he started using computers when he was in kindergarten, growing up north of Tokyo. In grade school, he was already programming flight-simulator software.
"I guess coding was his natural instinct," says his father, Hisashi Okanohara, 67, a retired official at a car-audio maker.
Logging on via a dial-up communications service, the boy downloaded computer-science papers such as "A Block-Sorting Lossless Data Compression Algorithm" -- the one that gave him those grocery-store shakes back in 1994.
He went on to the University of Tokyo, where he met Toru Nishikawa. The classmates eventually co-founded Preferred Networks.
"I knew I wouldn't have the luck to work with such a genius if I missed the chance," says Mr. Nishikawa, the company's chief executive.
Mr. Okanohara, who serves as executive vice president, says he believes his expertise will become useful as items as diverse as cars and toasters go online. For he sees a problem with this so-called Internet of Things: A connected device can access an amount of data so astronomical that no conceivable computing power could analyze or transmit it. A car's sensor, for example, could record every pixel on a neon advertising sign, information that is useless for the car's safe operation.
Human brains face the same problem of overload, but learn to discard what is irrelevant. Computers, likewise, must grow able to judge what data is relevant and what should be shared with peers, says Mr. Okanohara.
Credit: By Takashi Mochizuki
