On one of his last days at music-streaming company Pandora, Oriol Nieto pulled up his email and started typing a note to colleagues. It felt weird.
"I was like, 'This sounds wrong. This doesn't sound like me,'" the 38-year-old researcher with a Ph.D. in music-information retrieval says.
So he picked up his guitar. A few hours later, he had his farewell missive: "Goodbye Pandora -- The Song."
"I'm leaving Pandora, last day will be Friday," the Oakland, Calif., resident croons in a YouTube video, wearing a company T-shirt, glasses and man bun. The chorus is his personal contact information, set to electric-guitar riffs. "Thank you all from the bottom of my heart, let's party hard once the pandemic has passed," he sings.
Nearly nine million Americans left their jobs in the final two months of 2021, according to federal data. That means millions of goodbye emails -- some inspired, some classy, some cringeworthy -- zinging through corporate servers. With big retirement parties canceled and in-person happy hours converted to Zoom, a lot is now riding on that one note.
Some workers feel liberated as they type (or sing), expressing themselves amid a resignation wave that has led a number of them to embrace life beyond a steady paycheck. Others say they just want to find closure and cement a career legacy via corporate listservs.
Leaving the company where he had spent 5 1/2 years was emotional, Dr. Nieto says. "Doing the song in a way helped me to kind of go through all of this processing."
While the goodbye letter is a chance to carve out finality for some, one person's email therapy could be another's alarm bell. Anthony Klotz, a management professor at Texas A&M University who studies resignations, says quitting can actually be contagious.
"They're seeing oh so many goodbye emails," Srikanth Velamakanni says of employees at his artificial-intelligence company, Fractal Analytics Inc. Workers wonder: "Why are so many people leaving?" the chief executive says.
The company, based in New York, has doubled its head count to 3,500 over the past 18 months. Attrition has increased by nearly 40% in the past year, thanks to a hot hiring market for AI talent, Mr. Velamakanni says. That translates to a couple of goodbye emails a day, some of them two to three pages long.
Fractal executives mulled restricting access to the all-company listserv to stem the tide, but decided signaling trust and transparency was more important.
"That doesn't necessarily mean the rest of the organization was convinced," Mr. Velamakanni says.
Fractal leaders also started encouraging new employees to send introductory emails to balance out the departures.
Work exits used to come with congratulations by the coffee machine and hearty back pats at farewell lunches. Informal gossip networks carried the news organically. We would then move to a new place, donning new clothes, commuting to a new office.
Such rituals help us move from one identity to the next, Dr. Klotz says. Now, changing a job often means closing a laptop in our bedroom on a Friday and opening it again on Monday, armed with only a fresh company login.
"It can leave you in a new job still having nostalgia, regret and longing," he says.
Some workers fantasize for years about what they will write in a goodbye note, settling scores and getting the last word about the time the boss humiliated them for a typo, or the anniversary trip they had to cancel because of work.
"Let it rip. Let everything out," advises Elena Deutsch, the CEO of Women Interested in Leaving (big) Law, a coaching firm focused on helping lawyers pivot. Just don't hit send. Leave the diatribe in the draft folder of your personal email, or better yet, put it on paper, she says.
For the real deal, be gracious and express gratitude. Include up to three career highlights. (Any more and you risk being seen as a braggart.) And skip the passive-aggressive jabs.
By giving your notice, "the power dynamic has been leveled," Ms. Deutsch says. Use that new sense of control and confidence to share more authentically about yourself, not torpedo your relationships on the way out the door.
Some people are really ready to embrace candor as they peace out. When Marianna Virgili Filgueiras Leiro departed Amazon in December, she fashioned her farewell note like a breakup conversation. Subject line: "It's not you, it's me."
"I realized I need things you can't give me," she wrote to about 60 colleagues and shared on LinkedIn.
She has spent the months since working on the jewelry business she started during the pandemic, visiting family in her native Brazil and plotting next career steps that she hopes will allow more flexibility and freedom. Over her eight years at Amazon, the 30-year-old London resident struggled to adopt a more corporate persona, she says.
With her time finally ticking down, she thought: "Eh, whatever."
"I don't care if people think I'm weird," she says.
When Michael Brown took an Uber home from his last day at Refinery29 five years ago, he already had the jokes for his goodbye email drafted. Then he went to log onto his work email from his apartment. His account had been wiped.
"I felt cheated," he says. "I want my chance to give my valedictorian speech."
He plowed ahead anyway, creating his own GIF, appending it to the end of a note from his personal email address and sending it to every company listserv he had committed to memory. (There were a lot; as a onetime community manager for the company, he had interacted with many teams.)
"It's kind of hard to think that when you leave somewhere, everything you did there doesn't matter anymore," he says. "You kind of want to leave a little bit of yourself behind."
He felt pangs of regret as soon as he hit send. Was it embarrassing that he had fought so hard to land in everyone's inboxes? Was the GIF, a clip of a viral internet star in huge sunglasses and a fur coat walking away from a computer, shady? Would he be blacklisted?
Still, it was cathartic, he says. All the things that had vexed him about the job -- the long hours, the missed promotion -- lost their hold. He could move on.
"It is the mic drop," he says. "Thank you for your time. I'm gone."
Credit: By Rachel Feintzeig
