U.S. stocks are zooming past their international counterparts yet again.
The S&P 500 has risen 14% this year, beating an 8.2% advance by the MSCI All Country World ex USA Index, which tracks developed and emerging-market stocks.
Investors are tiptoeing back into U.S. stock funds as well: They have added money on a net basis to equities-focused mutual and exchange-traded funds for three consecutive weeks, including $23.78 billion in the period ended June 14, the highest weekly sum since December. Such funds suffered outflows in 17 of the previous 21 weeks, according to EPFR.
Interest in global stocks has faded over the same period. Global equity funds just logged the biggest weekly net outflow since October 2022, posting net outflows for five of the past nine weeks, after a run of inflows to start the year. European funds have logged net outflows for 14 weeks, U.K. funds for 23 weeks, and China and Latin America funds are noting tepid flows.
Foreign stock indexes are lagging behind, too. Mexico's S&P/BMV IPC is up 12% this year, the pan-continental Stoxx Europe 600 has risen 7.6%, the Shanghai Composite is up 3.5%, and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index is down about 2.8%.
"They don't have fortresslike balance sheets like a lot of U.S. large-caps have," said Craig Sarembock, wealth adviser at Bartlett Wealth Management in Cincinnati. He said he is looking to add to his holdings of tech and other growth stocks, pointing to their ability to weather a potential economic slowdown.
U.S. stocks have long outperformed other benchmarks around the world. Yet when the S&P 500 dropped sharply last year on worries about higher interest rates and red-hot inflation, strategists and investors were quick to predict that global stocks were poised to make an extended run. The S&P 500's recent rebound suggests those forecasts were premature.
U.S. stock funds still have a wide gap to close. So far this year, they have suffered about $31 billion in net outflows versus net inflows of roughly $13 billion for global stock funds, according to EPFR.
Much of the recent enthusiasm for U.S. stocks stems from a boom in interest in artificial intelligence. Investors are scooping up shares of companies at the forefront of a technology that they think will change the world in the coming years.
Shares of Nvidia, the maker of the advanced graphics chips required for AI, have about tripled this year, giving the company a $1 trillion valuation. Other tech stocks have soared as well. Facebook parent Meta Platforms and Tesla have more than doubled. Microsoft, which unveiled a $10 billion investment in OpenAI's ChatGPT, has risen more than 40%, as have Apple and Amazon.com.
More broadly, investors are optimistic about the U.S. because consumers are still spending freely, the labor market remains robust and the banking-sector crisis appears to have ebbed. Plus, many investors hope the Federal Reserve is nearing the end of its interest-rate-raising campaign, which they expect will give markets more room to run.
The eurozone, on the other hand, has slipped into a recession, and the continent continues to battle high energy and food costs. Plus, the war in Ukraine is a source of uncertainty for the region. While the U.S. economy is 5.4% larger than it was before the Covid-19 pandemic struck, the eurozone economy is just 2.2% bigger.
Elsewhere, the reopening of China's economy after three years of stringent Covid-19 lockdowns has sputtered, damping investor interest in China-related bets.
Retail-sales growth has slowed, and a recent bundle of data on factory output, exports and investment came in much weaker than economists expected. Economic growth is expected to slow from the breakneck speed of recent years.
There are outliers in international markets. Japan's benchmark stock index, the Nikkei 225, is up 29% this year and hovering near a 33-year high, thanks to a rapidly expanding economy and a central bank committed to low interest rates.
Meanwhile, in France, big gains in shares of luxury brands have helped push up the country's blue-chip stock index to records.
International market economies have also benefited from a weaker dollar, which makes it cheaper to import foreign goods. The dollar, the world's reserve currency, has declined about 8% from the multidecade highs hit in September 2022.
In a potentially bullish sign for international stocks, the rally in Japanese, Mexican and European markets appears to be broadening.
The percentage of stocks moving above their 200-day moving average, a measure of breadth, is higher than in the U.S., where the rally is dominated by a handful of stocks. Some investors fear the narrow rally leaves the U.S. market vulnerable to a pullback if even one or two big companies misstep.
"A rising tide lifts all boats, and that's what you're seeing in Japan," said Todd Jablonski, chief investment officer and head of asset allocation at Principal Asset Management. "In the U.S., there's a very quick narrow stream moving through a smaller body of water, while the rest of the ocean stands still."
Jablonski is paring his exposure to U.S. and Chinese stocks while adding to his positions in other developed markets and Latin American shares.
Plus, some corners of the international stock market still look cheaper than the U.S. The Hang Seng Index is trading at 9.5 times expected earnings over the next 12 months, while Mexico S&P/BMV IPC and the Stoxx Europe 600 are trading at 12.9 and 12.7 times earnings, respectively. All three multiples are below their 10-year averages. All three multiples are below their 10-year averages. In comparison, the S&P 500 is trading at 19 times earnings, above its 10-year average of 17.6.
Jon Bell, global equity income portfolio manager at Newton Investment Management, is investing more in value-style European stocks, pointing to their cheaper valuations and higher dividend yields. "Growth is really only outperforming in the U.S.," he said "In international markets, it's still more value and income characteristics."
Credit: By Hardika Singh and Brenda Leon
