The Securities and Exchange Commission is asking investment advisers how they use and oversee artificial intelligence, as agency head Gary Gensler continues to express skepticism about the technology.
The SEC's examinations division has sent requests for information on AI-related topics to several investment advisers, part of a process known as a sweep. The agency wants details on topics including AI-related marketing documents, algorithmic models used to manage client portfolios, third-party providers and compliance training, according to one such letter obtained by Vigilant Compliance, a regulatory compliance consulting firm.
Karen Barr, the head of the Investment Advisers Association, confirmed that her trade group has heard about the SEC outreach to advisers on the use and governance of AI. The agency's exercise could be "extremely helpful as the commission considers policy issues relating to these emerging technologies," she said.
The existence of a sweep doesn't mean the agency suspects misconduct. An SEC spokesman said the agency's examinations aren't public and it doesn't confirm or deny their existence.
The scrutiny comes as some advisers contemplate the adoption of AI tools. BlackRock operates an AI research group co-headed by a former Google statistician and a Stanford University engineering professor. Fidelity Investments in August noted the "incredible potential" of AI in wealth management. JPMorgan Chase maintains an AI research team in New York to "advance cutting-edge research." Goldman Sachs has said AI is poised to support investors and help them detect trends and patterns.
The SEC hasn't publicized the sweep or its targets, and those advisers haven't necessarily received demand letters. JPMorgan, Goldman and BlackRock declined to comment. Fidelity didn't respond to requests to comment.
The SEC continues to pursue an ambitious rule-making agenda that includes a focus on regulated firms' use of AI. The agency in July proposed rules around the use of data analytics, including AI, which would require firms to neutralize any conflicts in which AI put the firm's interests above a client's. Other proposed rules also touch on AI.
Typically, SEC examinations can be used to help bolster a case for rule-making, said Chuck Martin, Vigilant's chief operating officer. They also inform risk alerts sent out to firms, and in some cases, the information gathered in an examination can provide the basis for charges against a firm, Martin said.
Gensler in his public comments has mused about potential harms that could emerge from the financial industry's growing adoption of AI.
He has warned repeatedly that AI could lead to a financial crisis. Gensler said that potential industry overreliance on a few leading AI providers could create financial instability and "drive us off an inadvertent cliff." He also raised concerns of possible "AI washing," or the practice of companies making puffed-up claims about their AI competence.
The SEC regularly takes broad looks at the firms it regulates, but the new AI sweep is more targeted, said Amy Jane Longo, a partner in the litigation and enforcement practice at law firm Ropes & Gray. "It is generally targeting fairly detailed information about firms' use of artificial intelligence," she said.
Credit: By Richard Vanderford
