The 20th century belonged to the unruly minds at 3M.
From its early days, the American manufacturing giant gave its researchers a long leash to chase ideas, many to dead-ends. The hits, though, were indelible: Scotch tape. Masking tape. Videotape. Post-it Notes. N95 masks. Artificial turf. Heart medication.
3M patented adhesives and abrasives, as well as proprietary coatings and films that reflect light, repel water and insulate against cold and heat -- materials at the heart of highway signs, weatherproof windows and stain-resistant clothing and carpets. Its optical film brightened the screens of millions of laptops, smartphones and flat-screen TVs.
A cautious air has since settled on the 3M headquarters and research campus in Maplewood, Minn., dampening the restless ambition that built the company, according to some investors and company veterans. There are fewer new products and fewer still have been blockbusters, a dry spell that couldn't have arrived at a worse time.
The company this summer agreed to pay as much as $12.5 billion to settle litigation over so-called forever chemicals known as PFAS that were used in firefighting foam. Analysts say 3M could be on the hook for billions of dollars more to settle PFAS-related personal injury claims and lawsuits related to water and soil contamination in the U.S. and abroad.
John Banovetz, 3M's chief technology officer, said the company's reduction in product rollouts shows its push for quality over quantity. The company has focused its bets on potentially high-growth areas such as climate-saving technology and its fast-selling electric-vehicle components. "The R&D machine is alive and well," he said.
Current and former scientists say the strategy makes it more difficult for fresh ideas to survive a gantlet of management naysayers. For decades, 3M released a cascade of new items on the market, confident most would be profitable and a few would become indispensable. The company has retreated from its traditional goal of earning around 30% of revenue from new products.
"Senior management has deluded themselves into thinking they can pick winners and losers, when in reality we need to generate more products so we can get into test markets to see what works," said Robert Asmus, a former 3M healthcare scientist and member of the Carlton Society, the company's highest honor for science and engineering.
Chief Executive Mike Roman has trimmed 3M in rounds of layoffs and restructuring, including two this year that cut 8,500 employees. Next year, 3M plans to spin off its best-performing unit, healthcare, which accounts for a quarter of the company's $34 billion in annual sales. The spinoff will open a path to faster growth, according to 3M.
Roman has said 3M innovation -- once the company's tagline -- remains a priority. 3M devotes more than 5% of net sales to research and development, a drop from the nearly 7% peak of the late 1990s but a larger portion than industrial peers such as Honeywell or DuPont. Last year, 3M spent nearly $2 billion on R&D.
The share price of 3M, included in the Dow Jones Industrial Average for nearly 50 years, has been cut in half since Roman took charge in 2018. While much of that is because of the liability lawsuits, investors such as Abdulaziz Alnaim of London-based Mayar Capital, which holds 76,000 shares, say it also reflects an enterprise where innovation is sputtering.
"They've lost their way, unfortunately," he said.
3M's innovation principles took shape more than a century ago under William McKnight, who grew up as a farm boy in South Dakota.
McKnight joined 3M as an assistant bookkeeper a few years after its founding in 1902 and became its president. He helped guide the company from a sandpaper maker to a manufacturer of thousands of industrial, automotive and home products.
Though McKnight began his career at the dawn of the assembly line era, he believed in worker autonomy and initiative. "Mistakes will be made, but if the man is essentially right himself, I think the mistakes he makes are not so serious in the long run as the mistakes management makes if it is dictatorial," he said, according to a company history.
He instituted what became known as the McKnight principles. One of them allowed researchers to spend 15% of their time on projects unrelated to their everyday tasks -- even if managers disapproved.
The principles championed collaboration, encouraging researchers to share findings. The Post-it Note came about after scientist Art Fry, bedeviled by paper bookmarks falling out of his church hymnal, remembered a semi-sticky adhesive discussed at a company seminar. The product was an instant success after it hit stores in 1980.
Bernard Gonzalez, who started at the company as a software engineer in 1984, said he had a habit of roaming through labs and talking to colleagues. He took some of what he learned to develop products related to heart pumps, endoscopes and reflective road stripes.
In the 1990s, a handful of researchers spent their 15% time allotment turning plastic into a thin film with unique optical properties. Polymer engineer James Jonza said managers questioned the value of the project. "But we knew," he said. "We realized the potential."
In a demonstration, the researchers put the film inside digital watches to show executives how it made the displays much brighter. The group was persuasive enough for 3M to sink hundreds of millions of dollars into developing multilayer optical films. They were first used to add sparkle to a Barbie doll's dress and shoes.
The eye-popping returns began when the films were adopted for the liquid crystal displays of laptops, flat-screen TVs and cellphones. 3M's portfolio of multilayer optical films generated billions of dollars in sales, said Jonza, a retired Carlton Society member.
But screen technology kept advancing, particularly for smartphones. The fastest-growing segment of the market now belongs to the organic light-emitting diode, or OLED. Though 3M makes products related to OLED devices, including a clear adhesive, the company has said it has taken a financial hit in the move away from liquid crystal displays.
3M says its films are being used in an expanding range of products, from virtual reality headsets to heat-reducing windows. Finding new uses for old materials is a hallmark of the company's approach to innovation, Banovetz said.
Rob Kieschke, a former research director who left the company last year, said 3M's weakening position in the smartphone display market is a symptom of its troubles. Researchers are encouraged to pursue incremental improvements to existing products rather than novel, swing-for-the fences breakthroughs.
"If you start forcing people to eliminate risk, then all you end up doing is what has been done before or what everyone else is doing," said Kieschke, who contributed to more than 20 patents.
3M said it balances work between improving products and creating new ones.
Kieschke and others said the company still feels the influence of prior leaders such as James McNerney, a former General Electric executive who served four years as CEO in the early 2000s. McNerney installed "Six Sigma," a regimen used at GE to measure and standardize business practices but loathed by 3M researchers as a creativity killer.
Under Inge Thulin, who held the CEO job from 2012 to 2018, 3M more than doubled its dividend and spent billions on share buybacks. Research spending went up modestly during that period. Even so, Thulin told investors in 2016 that he wanted higher R&D productivity. 3M makes big investments, he said, "we also expect big returns." Neither McNerney nor Thulin could be reached for comment.
Sharon Belenzon, a Duke University business professor who studies innovation, said 3M is a throwback to an age when industrial titans ran formidable R&D operations: Xerox PARC, where laser printers and the Ethernet were created, and Bell Labs, where researchers won multiple Nobel Prizes producing inventions that included the transistor.
The old industrial guard has largely ceded the role to such tech giants as Microsoft and Google, which are spending billions to develop artificial intelligence and quantum computing. "It's not obvious that it's desirable to let 3M own a big, expensive lab of researchers to do research that maybe can be done cheaper by specialists in universities," Belenzon said.
One of the newest buildings on 3M's 409-acre campus is the Carlton Science Center. Its walls of glass stand out among the redbrick buildings that house other labs, and five mounted surfboards showcasing 3M products mark the entrance.
The namesake of the center -- and the Carlton Society -- is Richard Carlton, who succeeded McKnight as president. He took a pay cut to join 3M as a lab assistant in 1921 and, like McKnight, was an evangelist for innovation.
The center is the home of 3M's research into electric-vehicle technology, which last year tallied 30% growth to hit $500 million in company sales. One product is insulation designed for electric car motors. It is coated on both sides with an adhesive that expands when heated to bond the motor's wires, saving time and cost during manufacturing.
Further on the horizon are products related to carbon capture, an industry that could be worth as much as $2 trillion a year, said Sam Tutterow, director of 3M global strategy and business development. The company's practice of 15% time has endured, and Tutterow said more than 70 people have spent those hours related to the pursuit.
Last year, 3M bought a stake in a small Canadian company called Svante that invented a laminate to trap carbon dioxide. 3M will manufacture the material for Svante, which by 2030 aims to install it in plants that will combat rising temperatures by removing tons of carbon from the atmosphere.
Such projects have kept talent flowing into 3M, which hires about 40 Ph.D. scientists a year into its corporate labs. Not all of them stay, including Ben Mac Murray, who joined the company in 2018 with a doctorate in materials science and engineering from Cornell University.
He became part of a group working on 3-D printing and was impressed with 3M's capabilities. Yet he felt the pace of product development was too slow. In 2021, he left to work at materials-science company Interfacial, which he said was "quicker in general from idea to product."
3M's future will largely depend on how well it manages the fallout from one of its biggest innovations. PFAS chemicals, which the company began making in the 1940s, resist heat and repel grease, stains and water. One type was used in firefighting foam, but 3M sells 20,000 other items that contain PFAS.
Though 3M has settled complaints from municipal water treatment plants, it still faces litigation from California, New York and other states that allege the industrial discharge of PFAS, as well as the disposal of products containing the chemicals, have contaminated their water and soil. Thousands of plaintiffs also are suing, saying PFAS caused health problems.
3M has said PFAS are safe to produce and use, though it plans to stop making them by the end of 2025 and find alternative chemicals for its products. Its annual PFAS sales total about $1.3 billion. Success in markets such as climate tech would brighten the picture, though 3M faces plenty of competition.
Olester Benson Jr., a Carlton honoree recognized for his work in optical films, abrasives and reflective products, is among those confident the company will find its niche.
"When things get rough the way they have, you've got a decision to make," said Benson, who retired last year. "You're going to lay down and die or fight your way out of it. 3M has all the resources they need to fight their way out."
Credit: By John Keilman
