Amazon.com said profit tripled to nearly $10 billion from July to September as strong sales in its cloud-computing, advertising and retail units helped the company continue its rebound from postpandemic lows.
Revenue increased 13% to $143.1 billion for its third quarter, beating Wall Street expectations. Profit was $9.9 billion, more than triple the result from the same period last year.
Amazon signaled net sales would be between $160 billion and $167 billion in its fourth quarter.
Amazon has been trying to engineer a rebound in its core e-commerce business following a slowdown after pandemic-induced heights. The company has reined in costs across its North America unit, slashing roughly 27,000 corporate jobs and streamlining operations following a cost-cutting review led by Chief Executive Andy Jassy. It has also said it saved costs through an overhaul of its delivery operations meant to place packages closer to customers.
In a statement, Jassy said that Amazon's cloud-business growth stabilized and that changes to its delivery operations helped with costs and efficiency.
Amazon's earnings followed strong results from other large tech companies that in some cases nonetheless spooked investors. Meta Platforms reported its largest quarterly revenue since going public but noted softness in advertising spending that coincided with the start of the Israel-Hamas war.
Both Microsoft and Google parent Alphabet also showed improvements in core businesses this week, but Google's revenue from its cloud unit grew more slowly than expected. Microsoft, however, saw greater demand for its cloud unit in the most recent quarter, aiding its overall sales.
While Amazon has tried to boost growth on its retail side, its cloud-computing business has seen less demand in the past year as corporate clients have looked to curtail spending because of economic uncertainty. The unit has historically accounted for a large portion of Amazon's profit. Sales in Amazon's cloud business rose 12% to about $23 billion in the third quarter. Revenue in Amazon's advertising segment, which has become a major business at the company, increased 26% to about $12 billion, beating expectations and indicating strong sales in its e-commerce business.
The company has tried to promote its efforts in artificial intelligence, which it has largely done through cloud business Amazon Web Services, or AWS, as it competes with Microsoft and Google. Amazon in September said it had agreed to invest as much as $4 billion in artificial-intelligence company Anthropic. AI startups spend much of their money on cloud-computing costs. AWS Chief Executive Adam Selipsky has said the unit's strategy is to give its corporate customers who want to build AI features as much flexibility as possible.
Amazon Chief Financial Officer Brian Olsavsky on Thursday said the company has seen more deal-driven spending online. At AWS, business customers have continued to look to optimize their spending but have responded positively to Amazon's latest cloud offerings.
"There's a lot of moving parts here, but generally, we're very pleased with the momentum we have in this area," Olsavsky said.
The company's third quarter was helped by its annual Prime Day event, which happened in July. The event is estimated to bring billions of dollars of revenue. Amazon held a second Prime Day-like event this month called "Prime Big Deal Days" that it said outpaced a similar event last year, signaling a strong start to its end-of-year sales. As the company prepares for the holiday season, its most important period of the year, it plans to hire 250,000 people for its warehouses in full-time, part-time and seasonal roles in preparation for the holidays.
Investors said that they feel cautious optimism, are encouraged by Amazon's recent hiring spree and are paying attention to how the company's cloud-computing business recovers.
"Amazon has gone through a slog of tough quarters, a lot which were driven by headwinds as a result of inflation, and that has eased," said Andrew Lipsman, an e-commerce researcher at Insider Intelligence.
The retailer continues to deal with new competition in e-commerce. Companies such as Temu and Shein, which have Chinese roots, have grown popular in the U.S. by offering bargain goods.
Credit: By Sebastian Herrera
