Years of consolidation have left Broadcom Ltd.'s Hock Tan -- the chip industry's ultimate deal maker -- surveying a landscape with few targets that rival the heft of the one the chief executive just failed to buy, Qualcomm Inc.
That bid, which President Donald Trump blocked Monday, represented the biggest tech deal ever and would have more than doubled Broadcom's revenue.
Not many semiconductor companies remain that fit Mr. Tan's exacting specifications: those with market-leading products with limited competition, opportunities to cut costs, and with something to offer Broadcom's two big customer groups, handset makers and data-center operators. Plus, there aren't many big enough to make a difference to an enterprise with a $110 billion market capitalization.
"There are only so many elephants out there," said Chris Caso, an analyst with Raymond James. "Now one is gone."
On Wednesday, after formally withdrawing its Qualcomm bid, Broadcom said it would proceed with plans to change its domicile to the U.S. from Singapore. The move could help it with future acquisitions by avoiding the sort of national security concerns that derailed its effort to acquire San Diego-based Qualcomm.
Broadcom finance chief Thomas Krause on a Thursday conference call with investors said the company does see "potential targets that are consistent" with its business model and would drive greater returns than buying back shares.
Amit Daryanani, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets, recently combed the S&P 500 index for companies with valuations between $10 billion and $120 billion, as well as financial features that might appeal to Mr. Tan. Of roughly 18 chip companies that made the analyst's initial cut, four looked like a potential fit.
Xilinx Inc., with a market value of just under $20 billion, is one possible target, according to analysts including Mr. Daryanani.
The Silicon Valley company, which makes programmable chips that can be used for purposes including artificial intelligence, is a market leader with characteristics Mr. Tan seeks. It sells its products for far more than they cost to make -- a 70% gross margin, according to Mr. Daryanani -- yet expenses exceed the level Broadcom typically deems reasonable, seen in the company's 29% pretax profit margin. That gap leaves Mr. Tan room to wring out further profits.
Some analysts said Maxim Integrated Products Inc., valued at $13.5 billion, offers similar opportunities. Its products would extend Broadcom's reach in the high-margin world of analog chips, which differ in fundamental ways from digital chips. However, Maxim's customers are in automotive, industrial and other areas outside Broadcom's base, so they don't fit neatly into Mr. Tan's strategy, according to Srini Pajjuri of Macquarie Capital (USA) Inc.
Spokeswomen for Xilinx and Maxim declined to comment.
Adding either of those potential targets would increase Broadcom's adjusted per-share earnings by only a few percent, compared with the 20% pop Qualcomm would have contributed, Mr. Pajjuri said. Moreover, he said, they wouldn't come cheaply based on current stock prices.
Xilinx trades at 27 and Maxim at 23 times their forward per-share earnings, according to FactSet. Qualcomm traded at around 14.5 times earnings in November, when Mr. Tan made his initial bid.
Nobody, however, expects Mr. Tan to stop looking. The $117 billion bid for Qualcomm followed a string of deals that built Broadcom into a giant.
"Acquisitions are part of Broadcom's DNA, and Hock Tan will always be hunting for businesses that fit his criteria," Mr. Caso said. But Broadcom's growth has been so healthy, that its chief "doesn't need to be in a hurry," the analyst said.
Broadcom on Thursday reported its first-quarter revenue rose 29% to $5.33 billion. Profit surged to $6.57 billion from $252 million the previous year.

Credit: By Ted Greenwald
