Investors shrugged off rebounding inflation, scooping up stocks in a bet that a strong U.S. consumer and resilient labor market will keep the market humming.
Thursday's slate of economic news was heavy: Consumers spent more than expected in August, suppliers faced rising prices and the European Central Bank lifted interest rates to the highest level in its history.
Traders worried that stubborn inflation might spur the Federal Reserve to raise rates further were relieved to see fuel costs behind the latest increase, since the central bank tends to ignore volatile gas prices.
The S&P 500 added 0.8%, with all 11 of its sectors finishing in the green. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite rose 0.8%, and the Dow industrials gained 1%.
Norwegian Cruise Line and Carnival were among the day's best performers, both advancing 5.7% and 4.1% respectively to extend their gains this year. Rising fuel costs stand to hit profits at cruise operators, airlines and other transportation companies, but consumers are still traveling. Shares of online travel company Booking Holdings rose 2.6%.
"If consumers are employed and have money to spend, that should keep the economy away from deteriorating too much," said Randy Frederick, managing director of trading and derivatives at Schwab.
Shares of small-caps and energy companies, typically sensitive to the economic cycle, helped lift stocks Thursday. Marathon Oil climbed 2.9%, while the Russell 2000 index rose 1.4%.
Shares of British chip designer Arm Holdings closed at $63.59 after its initial public offering priced at $51 a share, showing some positives for the cool IPO market and the continuing hype surrounding artificial intelligence. Electric-vehicle maker Tesla added 1.7% on the day.
Producer-inflation and retail-sales reports -- along with the consumer-price index the prior day -- showed gas prices are surging. Benchmark U.S. oil futures traded above $90 a barrel for the first time since November. The last time oil was this expensive, crude prices were still descending from heights reached after Russia invaded Ukraine.
Traders are betting that the U.S. central bank won't raise rates at next week's meeting but still think one more quarter-percentage-point hike before the end of the year is possible. As consumer inflation data failed to shock and with the labor market still at historically tight levels, Wall Street's growing clarity around the path of monetary policy is supporting stocks, Frederick said.
"Interest-rate certainty is a huge deal for small-caps with a lot of debt," he said.
Bond yields moved higher as prices fell, responding to the hotter-than-expected economic data. Yields remain at some of their loftiest levels since the 2008 financial crisis, signaling that bond investors haven't sounded the all-clear yet. The 10-year yield finished at 4.289%.
"The bond market has spent most of the last two months worrying about persistent inflation and an economy that seems to be running hot, despite all of the Fed rate hikes," said Chris Zaccarelli, chief investment officer for Independent Advisor Alliance. "The most recent economic data does more to reinforce those fears than it does to dispel them."
Overseas, the euro slid to its lowest since March after the ECB raised its key rate. Officials signaled their 10th consecutive hike would likely be their last, limiting any spillover to markets across the Atlantic but prompting a rally in eurozone bonds and rapid weakening of the bloc's currency. Europe's Stoxx 600 rose 1.5%.
At midday Friday, markets in Tokyo, Hong Kong and South Korea were each more than 1% higher. S&P 500 futures rose 0.2%.
Credit: By Eric Wallerstein
