A steep drop in shares of Alphabet, Amazon.com and other technology companies dragged the Nasdaq Composite into correction territory Wednesday.
The tech-heavy index slid 2.4% in a punishing session that pulled it down more than 10% from its recent high. Its losses accelerated in the afternoon, sending the gauge to one of its worst one-day declines of the year.
The S&P 500 fell 1.4%, closing at its lowest level since May. The Dow Jones Industrial Average shed 105 points, or 0.3%.
Shares of Google parent Alphabet declined 9.5% after reporting quarterly results that showed disappointing growth in its cloud business. The company shed more than $166 billion in market value, its biggest one-day loss ever. Shares of Amazon.com and Nvidia also fell, lagging behind the broader market, while fintech company Affirm and payments company Block dropped sharply.
The technology rout Wednesday punctures a rally that had dominated for much of the year. Many investors have piled into a handful of big tech stocks in a wager that they will benefit from innovations tied to artificial intelligence and keep flourishing. Now, some of that excitement is fading during a packed week for third-quarter earnings results and one of the worst bond routs in recent memory.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury note rose to 4.952% on Wednesday and breached 5% on Monday for the first time in 16 years. Yields rise as bond prices fall.
To some analysts and investors, the recent volatility is a harbinger of more turmoil and a wake-up call that the stock market's stars -- megacap tech stocks -- are susceptible to sharp swings after their results.
"These are the crown jewels" of the stock market, said Raheel Siddiqui, senior investment strategist at Neuberger Berman. "But they are not immune."
Texas Instruments reported lackluster third-quarter earnings results, weighing on other semiconductor stocks. Shares of Texas Instruments shed 3.5%. Nvidia lost 4.3%, and AMD and Intel each dropped around 5%.
Though tech stocks were among the hardest hit, the losses were broad.
Nine of 11 of the S&P 500's sectors notched declines, including the healthcare and real-estate groups. The Russell 2000 index of small companies, which has been flashing a recession signal, dropped 1.7% and sunk deeper into the red for the year.
Cloud results at Microsoft gave its shares a boost. The stock added 3.1%.
The market received other good news after the bell. Meta Platforms posted record sales and a quarterly profit of $11.6 billion.
Meta shares, which fell 4.2% in regular trading, initially gained more than 3% after hours but ended up more than 3% lower after comments from the company's finance chief. International Business Machines shares gained 1.5% after hours after the company reported results that beat expectations
Investors remained focused on the government-bond market, which has been mired in one of the worst downturns in recent memory and prone to wild daily swings.
Some businesses are feeling the heat from the sharp rise in mortgage rates, which have ascended alongside Treasury yields.
Shares of TransUnion, one of the three major credit-reporting firms, fell 7.1% after a 23% swoon in the prior session. The company, which provides credit scoring and related tools for lenders' underwriting decisions, cut its expectations for this year and pulled its 2025 financial targets, after lower mortgage activity dented its business. Executives also flagged a broader slowdown in banks' consumer lending.
Home Depot shares have slid for seven consecutive sessions, the longest losing streak since 2016, before an epic rush to buy homes and fix them up during the pandemic sent shares to records.
Some investors said the market was due for a turbulent stretch after the S&P 500 and Nasdaq climbed for much of the year.
"This volatility that we're seeing in the market is nothing unusual," said Larry Adam, chief investment officer at Raymond James.
Still, Adam said he expects bond yields to moderate and for the economy to slow in coming months.
Overseas, the Euro Stoxx 600 was up slightly. At midday Thursday in Asia, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 2.1%, South Korea's Kospi was down 2.2% and mainland China's CSI 300 was down 0..5%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.7%.
Credit: By Gunjan Banerji
