Telecom Italia Must Call Renzi
Political connections are always useful in the highly regulated telecom industry. In Italy they are essential.
The new chief executive named by Telecom Italia on Wednesday, Flavio Cattaneo, will have to show he has more traction with Matteo Renzi, Italy's prime minister, than his predecessor. He faces an uphill struggle of Alpine proportions.
Telecom Italia's relationship with the Italian authorities has become increasingly dysfunctional since Mr. Renzi assumed power in 2014. The prime minister attaches great importance to high-speed broadband, but seems to prefer working with energy company Enel, in which his finance ministry holds a 25.5% stake.
Last week, Enel announced a 2.5 billion euros ($2.8 billion) plan to deliver fiber-optic broadband cables direct to homes in 224 Italian municipalities as part of a project to install smart electricity meters. It won't offer telecom services itself, but said it had discussed a letter of intent with mobile operators Vodafone and Wind. The result would be a competitor to Telecom Italia's fixed-line business in urban markets.
This week, meanwhile, Mr. Renzi visited a renewable-power plant run by Enel in Nevada, the first stop on his U.S. tour. It is a "great global company," he commented on Facebook, his favored medium of public communication. "We will continue to make it grow, including through the innovative broadband plans we will present onApril 7."
The government has made 3.5 billion euros of public subsidies available for rolling out high-speed broadband to otherwise unprofitable rural areas. Next week's announcement is expected to include the first of the tenders. It doesn't sound like Telecom Italia will be getting the money.
Much depends on whether the Italian authorities see Vincent Bollore, chairman of Vivendi, the leading shareholder in Telecom Italia, as investor or raider. Mr. Bollore's ties with former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, who in March confirmed his Mediaset pay-TV group was in talks with Vivendi over a content deal, may not be helpful.
Telecom Italia rattled investors in February with poor results anda plan to invest 12 billion euros over three years, delaying much-needed debt reductions. The shares have fallen 18% in the year to date.
Unfortunately for shareholders, the only way to appease the Italian government an unholy trinity of regulator, sponsor and competitor in the company's key home market is likely to involve more investment. Yet Mr. Cattaneo has little choice but to pick up the phone.
-- Stephen Wilmot
Can Bad News Be Good for European Steel?
Is one man's misfortune another man's gain? The decline of the U.K.'s steel industry, with news that Tata Steel plans to shed its entire business in the country, boosted shares elsewhere in the beleaguered European steel sector: notably, ThyssenKrupp's stock jumped 8% Wednesday.
This looks like the triumph of hope over experience. The bull case for ThyssenKrupp is pretty simple: Its capital goods business, which makes elevators, escalators and other engineering components, should be worth far more than the group's five times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.
Sell, spin off, joint venture or otherwise ditch the steel business and ThyssenKrupp's valuation should benefit.
No wonder ThyssenKrupp management has been vocal in its wish to shed steel, or otherwise participate in consolidation. But the reality has proved tough in an industry where most companies spent years waiting and wagering that a massively oversupplied market would improve, only to leave themselves in a dire enough state as to have few options when it didn't.
In that regard, Tata's decision regarding its money-losing U.K. operations offers a potential opening. India's Tata is trying to pare back its European operations to its efficient premium flat-steel-products business at Ijmuiden in the Netherlands. That business, which is thought to be profitable, may fit with ThyssenKrupp's flat steelmaking operations, argues Jefferies.
Problems abound: The chances of a quick, neat U.K. sale for Tata look remote, given limited buyers for a struggling asset in need of investment. The company hasn't said anything about its plans for Ijmuiden. It also isn't entirely clear the latter is large enough for a merger and consolidation of ThyssenKrupp's European business, which made about 500 million euros in operating profit in the most recent fiscal year.
Meanwhile, consolidation only really helps if it comes with serious cost savings and, ideally, capacity closures. Closures remain as politically fraught as ever.
But options on recovery are all that a sector living on fumes really has. Rising Chinese export prices have sent shares soaring since February. Any sniff of deal making, or more aggressive protection from policy makers, does the same. Two things are clear: The foundations for a fundamental steel recovery are flimsy at best and nothing in the interim will be easy.
-- Helen Thomas
China Banks
Are Fighting
Bad Loans
Chinese banks eked out small profit gains in 2015, but investors know better than to celebrate. There are just too many risks looming.
Three of China's biggest banks each beat expectations for fourth-quarter earnings on Wednesday. Still, the results were uninspiring. For all of 2015, net profit rose just 0.7% at Bank of China, 0.5% at Industrial & Commercial Bank of China and 0.1% at China Construction Bank.
It probably isn't a coincidence that the results are strikingly similar. The banks have some control over the amount of provisions they take on expected bad loans. It has been clear for a couple of quarters that they are managing their provisioning, with a target of barely positive earnings growth.
This trick is getting hard-er as bad loans surge. At the three institutions that reported earnings Wednesday, nonperforming loans rose by an average 40% in 2015.
In China, banks are required to maintain provisions worth 150% of bad loans, a relatively high ratio by international standards. They are now bumping up against that.
The bull case for the banks hinges on government support. Many analysts expect Chinese regulators to loosen the provision ratio requirement this year, which would allow the banks to set aside less money for bad loans. But that won't halt the rise of bad loans, which is likely closer to its start than its finish.
Chinese banks look cheap, at around 0.7 to 0.8 times book value. But with risks to their loan books rising, the discount seems reasonable.
-- Aaron Back
Overheard
In the universe that Microsoft envisions, there is a bot for that.
That is a deviation from the app-centered world of smartphones, where one of the world's most valuable companies is just a bit player. Less than 2% of the smartphones sold last year carried the Windows Phone operating system, according to IDC. That may drop below 1% in the next four years.
Microsoft can't afford to ignore the mobile world. It has taken some significant steps, like making its applications available on iPhone and Android devices and pouring resources into its cloud business.
But it still needs to be a relevant platform for developers and it can't do that while relying on apps made for an operating system with a tiny share.
This is why Microsoft is trying to find new ways to keep developers engaged.
The HoloLens augmented-reality headset is one. The gadget is now shipping to developers.
Microsoft also announced its latest effort on Wednesday dubbed "conversations as a platform," which harnesses artificial intelligence for developers to make "bots" that can perform many of the tasks of mobile apps, often through voice control.
Both are compelling but likely will take a long time to come to fruition. So Microsoft can't turn its back on Windows.
Wall Street expects the company's personal-computing segment to drive more than 40% of annual revenue in coming years.
The latest Windows 10 release is promising with the installed base up 35% in the past three months.
For developers, that is the type of reception that still computes.
