One of the best holes KoBold Metals ever drilled turned up absolutely nothing.
Kurt House and Josh Goldman, the mining company's co-founders, were hunting for metals last year in Zambia's vast Copperbelt province. The mining company's geoscientists were nervous to deliver the bad news: No copper had been found in one of the recently drilled exploration holes.
The duo's surprising reaction: "Great job!"
"[The team] totally didn't believe that we weren't upset," Goldman said. The hole "had zero copper but a huge amount of information," such as where the mineral mass ended, a key piece of data. The company said it found enough copper in other holes that it believes the Zambia deposit could be one of the most-valuable in the world.
KoBold is betting it can modernize the mining industry by using artificial intelligence to scour the earth for copper, lithium, nickel and cobalt. It says machine-learning techniques allow it to collect and analyze more sophisticated data about deposits than conventional exploration methods.
Some in the mining industry say KoBold overstates AI's impact on mineral exploration, and previous attempts at revolutionizing the industry in such ways haven't always panned out. Still, the company is emerging as a player in the global rush to secure the metals needed to power the transition to green energy. It has also become a partner for the U.S. in assessing mineral projects in Africa.
KoBold's position at the confluence of the green transition and AI hasn't gone unnoticed by investors. The company attained a valuation of more than $1 billion in 2023 in a fundraising backed by Bill Gates's Breakthrough Energy, Standard Industries and venture-capital firm Andreessen Horowitz. Other investors include Mitsubishi and BHP.
The Berkeley, Calif.-based startup is currently looking to raise funds at a valuation of at least $2 billion, according to people familiar with the matter.
House and Goldman started KoBold in 2018. The pair had met years earlier at Harvard as Ph.D. students and later linked up in 2015 to invest in upstream oil-and-gas projects in North America.
After a year and a half, they pulled the plug, disenchanted with fossil fuels. Instead, they saw an opportunity to use the techniques they had developed to improve the forecasting of natural gas wells to tap metals.
To realize their vision, they hired scores of tech-savvy workers from the likes of Apple and Google with little experience in mining. More than half of KoBold's employees are data scientists or software engineers.
Geoscientists and data scientists work in pairs on KoBold's projects, in contrast to most traditional mining companies, where geoscientists typically outnumber their data peers.
KoBold creates computer simulations of underground mineral deposits using borehole drilling, laser guns, satellite imagery and electromagnetic detection, among other techniques. Its algorithms then determine the best way to drill to test the validity of its models, helping narrow down which models are most accurate.
"Predict everything" and "quantify the uncertainty" are key company mottos. By inputting new data into its models and discarding hypotheses in real time, the company can quickly refine what it is looking for. Traditionally, that information could take months to collect and incorporate.
KoBold has more than 60 exploration projects in North America, Africa and Australia.
The company says its data-driven methods proved an advantage when searching for lithium in Canada's western Quebec. Based on satellite imagery, KoBold's models had initially predicted that a swath of rocks contained lithium because they had white streaks, a telltale sign. But then field scientists discovered that white lichen on some of the rocks had tricked the models, leading to false positives.
KoBold connected data scientists with the field scientists to construct an updated model within days that avoided impostor rocks.
Typically miners would collect a sample of rocks and plan for field studies months or even a year later.
KoBold's approach now faces its biggest test in Zambia. Employees are digitizing maps from state archives to help train machine-learning models about the local geology.
They are using data from previous explorations, some going back to the 1950s, to hunt for minerals that might have been missed.
In one area previously rejected by other miners, because it wouldn't have been economical to develop, KoBold probed deeper underground than others had looked and discovered a vast deposit of high-grade copper.
If it comes online in the next decade, the Mingomba deposit could produce more than 300,000 tons of copper annually, the company says. That amount would put it among the largest copper mines in the world.
KoBold has yet to release a study of the asset, which sits more than a mile underground, leading to criticism and skepticism from the mining industry.
The company says it will eventually release its data but that it hasn't yet determined the full size of the deposit. The Wall Street Journal has reviewed a third-party analysis that largely supports KoBold's conclusions about the scale and quality of its copper deposit.
"To the extent that AI has been playing a front role in what they're doing in Zambia, I don't know if it's just a talking point or if it's real," said Denis Laviolette, who founded and sold a company that provided AI services to miners.
Laviolette, who advises mining companies on machine learning, says he believes AI can help mining companies but that KoBold should be more forthcoming about its use of the technology. "That's how you show the world: 'Here's AI and how powerful our approach can be.' But they certainly haven't presented it so far."
KoBold executives say their techniques, which they hope others will replicate, are different to what has been tried before.
Other challenges lie ahead.
House and Goldman initially intended KoBold to be an exploration company. But following the Zambia find, they decided to mine, too. To do that, KoBold is hiring employees from traditional mining companies and plans to build a smelter, which uses heat to get metal out of ore.
The mining industry is littered with failed attempts to launch new mines, which require massive sums of capital upfront, with payoffs years or decades in the future.
Credit: By Julie Steinberg and Scott Patterson
