Researchers in Israel were happy to get their hands on data about thousands of Covid-19 patients, including a 63-year-old father of two who was admitted to the emergency room with Covid-19 and soon recovered. It was the early days of the coronavirus pandemic and the treatments used for this patient could provide invaluable insight into the then little-understood virus.
Normally, it would have been unthinkable to share sensitive medical details, such as the patient's use of Lipitor for high cholesterol, so quickly, without taking measures to safeguard his privacy. But this man wasn't real. He was a fake patient created by algorithms that take details from real-life data sets such as electronic medical records, scramble them and piece them back together to create artificial patient populations that largely mirror the real thing but don't include any real patients.
Medical researchers and data scientists say such "synthetic" healthcare data has the potential to speed up medical innovation. The rapid digitization of health records has created troves of patient information that can be analyzed by algorithms and harnessed to improve disease-treatment models and develop new products and services. But patient information isn't easy to get because privacy laws require medical data to be stripped of names, addresses and other identifying details before it can be shared, a time-consuming process that can take months. Even those measures don't satisfy some privacy advocates, who point to studies showing that it is possible to re-identify patients even after data sets have been anonymized.
Enter synthetic-data technology.
"The key advantage that synthetic data offers for healthcare is a large reduction in privacy risks that have bugged numerous projects [and] to open up healthcare data for the research and development of new technologies," says Allan Tucker, a professor at Brunel University London and author of a study published in Nature in November showing the validity of using synthetic data as a substitute for real healthcare data.
Synthetic-data technology has been around for several years, and there are many synthetic-data companies working in industries such as finance and insurance. A new wave of techniques designed to better preserve statistical patterns while protecting privacy, however, cleared the way for its use in healthcare more recently, industry insiders say. While synthetic data isn't widely used in healthcare yet, the Covid-19 pandemic accelerated demand for it as providers and researchers rushed to understand the virus and find treatments.
Israel, which has an advanced digital national healthcare system and electronic medical records going back 20 years, has become a strong testing ground for the technology. All four of the country's HMOs and healthcare providers such as Sheba Medical Center, Israel's largest hospital, are clients of MDClone, an Israeli startup with a platform for creating synthetic data from medical records.
Early in the coronavirus pandemic, Sheba used MDClone's platform to synthesize data from its Covid-19 patients. The hospital then invited data scientists from around the country to glean whatever knowledge they could about Covid from the data set. More than 40 groups signed up to help, the hospital says, including startups, academics and multinational companies.
The initiative ultimately led the hospital to implement an algorithm, developed by Israeli company Data Science Group, that helps clinicians decide when patients should be given a drug treatment such as remdesivir or sent to the ICU.
Sheba also was able to integrate its electronic health records with those of Israel's second-largest HMO, Maccabi Health Services, to give clinicians a far broader view into the medical histories of Sheba's Covid-19 patients, helping them find links between pre-existing conditions and the virus's toll on its victims.
"People were completely astounded by how quickly we did this," says Eyal Zimlichman, the hospital's chief medical officer and chief innovation officer. If Sheba or Maccabi had been using real patient data, it would have taken many months for committees to approve its use and make it privacy-friendly by stripping out personal details, he says.
Scientists aren't yet relying solely on synthetic data for research, Dr. Zimlichman says. They are testing their hypotheses on synthetic data first, then retesting them on real patient data before submitting studies to medical journals for publication, he says. The use of synthetic data is sometimes described in the industry as a sandbox, allowing researchers to easily test as many hypotheses as they would like, without having to go through the long process of requesting real data.
In North America, a handful of health systems and medical schools, as well as government agencies such as the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and National Institutes of Health, are using synthetic healthcare data to study and develop new treatment options.
At Intermountain Healthcare, a health system based in Utah, researchers have used synthetic data produced from MDClone's platform to advance close to 80 projects aimed at improving patient care, says Mike Phillips, a radiologist by training and a partner of Intermountain's venture fund, which invests in startups that spur healthcare innovation.
"By democratizing the data, you can get to these changes much faster," Mr. Phillips says.
Michael Lesh, the founder and chief executive of California startup Syntegra and a professor of medicine at the University of California San Francisco, sees a possible role for synthetic data in clinical drug trials, especially in cases where drug companies are struggling to find study subjects.
"It's truly radical. It could shave years off the drug-approval process," says Dr. Lesh, adding that Syntegra has discussed using synthetic data in clinical trials with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
The FDA said in statement that it's "following developments" in the synthetic-data space and "would encourage anyone seeking to use synthetic data approaches in a regulatory submission to FDA to seek advice from the relevant center at the FDA." The agency said it doesn't comment on talks with private companies.
Not all synthetic healthcare data is built from the medical histories of real patients.
Mitre Corp., a U.S. nonprofit that oversees federally funded research-and-development projects across a variety of fields, has created Synthea, an open-source tool that can generate populations of fictional patients that aren't based on medical records.
Instead, Synthea enables researchers to create realistic patients from scratch, using health and disease statistics, demographic data, academic research and other publicly available data sources. The program can simulate what usually occurs to people with various health conditions from birth to death. Since the technology is open source, it is continually being tweaked by researchers to create more-accurate disease models.
The marriage of healthcare and synthetic-data technology comes at a time when faith in the current methods for protecting privacy of healthcare data is eroding.
Still, some privacy experts worry that synthetic healthcare data in general hasn't been sufficiently vetted to ensure that the anonymity it promises is irreversible.
"My impression is that the work being done in this space has a lot of potential but it isn't being specifically scrutinized," says Katrina Ligett, associate professor of computer science at Hebrew University of Jerusalem, and head of the program on internet and society.
Prof. Ligett says mathematically speaking, you cannot have full privacy without introducing randomness into the data that would impact accuracy.
But practitioners of synthetic-data science say they aren't trying to create an exact mirror image, just something close to the real thing.
"Synthetic data has to tell the same story as the original data. It's never 100% identical. The key is it has to be close enough," says Ziv Ofek, CEO of MDClone.
---
Mr. Lieber is a reporter for The Wall Street Journal in Tel Aviv. Email him at dov.lieber@wsj.com.
Credit: By Dov Lieber
