The web is in crisis, and artificial intelligence is to blame.
For decades, seeking knowledge online has meant googling it and clicking on the links the search engine offered up. Search has so dominated our information-seeking behaviors that few of us ever think to question it anymore.
But AI is changing that, and fast. A new generation of AI-powered "answer engines" could make finding information easier, by simply giving us the answers to our questions rather than forcing us to wade through pages of links. Meanwhile, the web is filling up with AI-generated content of dubious quality. It's polluting search results, and making traditional search less useful.
Seeking information using a search engine could be almost completely replaced by this new generation of large language model-powered systems, says Ethan Mollick, an associate professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania who has lately made a name for himself as an analyst of these AIs.
This could be good for consumers, but it could also upend the delicate balance of publishers, tech giants and advertisers on which the internet as we know it has long depended.
AI agents help cut through the clutter, but research is already suggesting they also eliminate any need for people to click through to the websites AI relies on to produce their answers, says Mollick. Without traffic, the business model for many publishers -- of providing useful, human-generated information on the web -- could collapse.
Over the past week, I've been playing with a new, free, AI-powered search engine-slash-web browser on the iPhone, called Arc Search. When I type in a query, it first identifies the best half-dozen websites with information on that topic, then uses AI to "read" and summarize them.
It's like having an assistant who can instantly and concisely relate the results of a Google search to you. It's such a timesaver that I'm betting that once most people try it, they'll never be able to imagine going back to the old way of browsing the web.
While Arc Search is convenient, I feel a little guilty using it, because instead of clicking through to the websites it summarizes, I'm often satisfied with the answer it offers up. The maker of Arc is getting something for free -- my attention -- and I'm getting the information I want. But the people who created that information get nothing.
In December, the New York Times sued Microsoft and OpenAI for alleged copyright infringement over these exact issues. The Times alleges that the technology companies exploited its content without permission to create their artificial-intelligence products. In its complaint, the Times says these AI tools divert traffic that would otherwise go to the Times's web properties, depriving the company of advertising, licensing and subscription revenue.
OpenAI has said it is committed to working with content creators to ensure they benefit from AI technology and new revenue models. Already, publishers are in negotiations with OpenAI to license content for use in its large language models. Among the publishers is Dow Jones, parent company of The Wall Street Journal.
Liz Reid, general manager of search at Google, has said that the company doesn't anticipate that people will suddenly switch over to AI chat-based search all at once. Still, it's clear that Google is taking the threat of AI-powered search very seriously. The company has gone into overdrive on this front, reallocating people and resources to address the threat and opportunity of AI, and is now rolling out new AI-powered products at a rapid clip.
Those products include Google's "search generative experience," which pairs an AI-created summary with traditional search results. "Users are not only looking for AI summaries or AI answers, they really care about the richness and the diversity that exists on the web," Google Chief Executive Sundar Pichai said in a recent interview. "They want to explore too."
For the first time in years, scrappy startups can credibly claim that they could challenge Google in search, where the company has above a 90% market share in the U.S.
Eric Olson is CEO of Consensus, a startup that uses large language models to offer up detailed summaries of research papers, and to offer insights about the scientific consensus on various topics. He believes that AI-powered search startups like his can offer an experience superior to Google's on specific topics, in a way that will carve off chunks of Google's search business a piece at a time.
Asking Consensus whether social media is bad for teen mental health provides an instructive example: Consensus summarizes the top 10 papers on the subject, and then offers a longer breakdown of the diversity of findings on the issue, in which every paper cited is individually summarized.
It's an impressive feat, one that would take a nonexpert human many hours of effort to accomplish on their own.
This kind of AI-powered search is also better than simply asking the same question of a large language model like ChatGPT, which is famously lax when it comes to answering such questions, often making up studies that don't exist, or misattributing information. This is known as the "hallucination" problem, and forcing an AI to draw only from a prescribed set of inputs -- like scientific papers -- can help solve it, says Olson.
Despite these issues, users may move toward AI-based answer engines for the simple reason that AI-generated content threatens to make the web, and existing search, less and less usable. AI is already being used to write fake reviews, synthesize fake videos of politicians, and write completely made-up news articles -- all in hopes of snatching dollars, votes and eyeballs on the cheap.
The stuff that spammers gin up with the help of generative AI sometimes ranks well in Google Search, though often the ranking is temporary, search-engine optimization expert Lily Ray told me.
The problem isn't just with Google's search results. AI-generated content has also been spotted in Google Maps, within Google's shopping listings, and in the news items Google features, she adds.
It's important to note that Google has for decades battled those who would manipulate its search algorithms, and it continually updates its systems to sweep away spammy content, whatever the source. Its guidelines on AI-generated content, last updated in February, reiterate that the company is fine with using AI to help generate content -- but only if it serves the people consuming it.
A few errant links and listings offered up by Google are hardly anything new on an internet that's always been full of human-generated misinformation. But if AI means fake content can be churned out at such a rate that it becomes widespread, it could lead to a broader crisis of trust in all of the search results offered up by Google and others.
It's not clear what lies on the other side of the transition the web is going through. Much depends on how quickly people switch to AI-powered search, how much better future language models are than today's, and which company's AI comes to dominate.
There will be both winners and losers in this future, as some publishers and services become obsolete, and others become trusted and necessary sources of information -- for AIs.
Credit: By Christopher Mims
