Intel plans to lay off thousands of employees this year and pause dividend payments in the fourth quarter as part of a broad cost-saving drive more than three years into Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger's turnaround effort.
Gelsinger laid out the plan to reduce costs by more than $10 billion next year as the chip maker reported second-quarter sales of $12.8 billion, down 1% and below analysts' forecasts in a FactSet survey. Reaching that cost-reduction goal will require cutting jobs and lowering capital expenditures, among other moves, the company said.
The company's stock fell more than 17% in after-hours trading.
Intel has struggled to gain a foothold in the market for artificial-intelligence chips that have driven the sales and valuations of Nvidia and some other rival chip makers. The heavy spending on those AI-focused chips to build out big data centers also has cut into demand for the non-AI processors for data centers that have long been central to Intel's business.
"Clearly market conditions, some were good and some not so good, and you have to adjust the financial envelope appropriately," Gelsinger said in an interview. "The AI surge was much more acute than I expected, and you have to adjust to those things."
Intel will lay off about 15,000 people, most of them by the end of this year, Gelsinger said in the interview. The company reported about 116,500 employees in its core business at the end of June.
Intel reported a loss of $1.6 billion for the second quarter, compared with a $1.5 billion profit a year earlier. It said it expected sales of roughly $13 billion in the third quarter, below analyst forecasts.
The pause in the dividend follows a 66% reduction of the payouts last February.
Intel's struggles have battered its stock, which was down more than 40% this year even before Thursday's news -- a stretch when the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index had gained nearly 15%.
In an email to employees after the results Thursday, Gelsinger said costs were too high and profit margins too low, and that bolder actions were needed to address those things amid a second-half that looks tougher than expected.
There was too much complexity, bureaucracy and inefficiency in the company, he said, pointing to how the employee count had grown in recent years even as revenue fell.
"These decisions have challenged me to my core, and this is the hardest thing I've done in my career," he said.
When Gelsinger took the helm in early 2021, he outlined an ambitious plan to turn around the U.S.'s most storied chip maker -- a company that became a household name with the rise of personal computers in the 1980s and 1990s, most of them featuring its central processing units.
Intel had slipped in the race to make the fastest-calculating chips with the tiniest transistors. Gelsinger vowed to put Intel back on top, an effort he said Thursday was still on track with the introduction of the company's most advanced chip-making technology, which it expects to be in production next year.
Other aspects of Gelsinger's turnaround have taken longer to take root, including a nascent business making chips on contract for outsiders. The so-called foundry business has gathered customers and reported $4 billion of revenue in the second quarter. But it remains far behind Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., or TSMC, and Samsung Electronics.
Intel's data center and AI division reported $3 billion of revenue in the second quarter, down by 3%.
Intel said it plans to reduce gross capital expenditures this year by more than 20%.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
