Elon Musk's recent trip to Beijing wasn't merely a win for Tesla. It was a win for the Biden administration, which seeks to improve ties with China. Tesla's expansion into the Chinese market will benefit the environment and advance regulatory cooperation on artificial intelligence -- two areas of mutual interest for Beijing and Washington. Democrats should be heralding this development, but many appear to be missing the point.
Mr. Musk is no saint. He says outrageous things and often stumbles into complex issues. Despite occasional controversies, Mr. Musk's achievements have advanced things Democrats are supposed to care about: development of affordable green energy, responsible development of artificial intelligence, and smart expansion of U.S. space capabilities.
Mr. Musk has positioned Tesla at the forefront of the global green-energy transition. Tesla recently reported that its electric-vehicle and energy-storage products prevented the emission of about 13.4 million metric tons of CO2 in 2022. Tesla has pushed the Environmental Protection Agency to adopt stringent emission standards to help drive more rapid EV adoption.
Mr. Musk has also emerged as a vocal proponent of responsible AI, advocating initiatives the Biden administration believes can harness AI's potential responsibly. Mr. Musk's views are consistent with the White House's efforts to promote transparency, accountability and fairness in the advancement of AI. Both evidently want AI to flourish -- but in equitable ways, free from biases that could harm society.
Another Musk company, SpaceX, has revolutionized space travel and bolsters Mr. Biden's goals for space exploration. In recent years the company developed reusable rocket technology that has dramatically reduced the cost of space access. SpaceX in 2020 became the first private company to send astronauts to the International Space Station, marking a significant step in the NASA Commercial Crew Program, which continues to thrive under the Biden administration. This partnership underscores a shared commitment to maintaining American space leadership and demonstrates the benefit of applying private-sector know-how and free-market efficiencies to achieve public goals.
While Mr. Musk's eccentricities may occasionally shadow his corporate endeavors, his contributions to American life across multiple sectors align closely with Democratic values and Mr. Biden's policy goals. An honest accounting of what Mr. Musk has done for the U.S. and the world should make left-leaning car buyers more inclined to purchase Teslas. Mr. Musk's success doesn't simply contribute to a better world; it helps Democrats achieve their goals.
---
Mr. Cunningham, a Democrat, represented South Carolina's First Congressional District, 2019-21, and was the Democratic nominee for governor in 2022.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Can You Place Elon Musk in a Political Party?" -- WSJ June 13, 2024)
Credit: By Joe Cunningham
