When Microsoft hired a big name in artificial intelligence, Mustafa Suleyman, earlier this year, he mentioned to a colleague that Chief Executive Satya Nadella had promised him time to build products without worrying about profitability.
Not so fast, the colleague warned. Check with Amy Hood.
Microsoft's chief financial officer of 11 years, Hood has long offered pragmatic balance to Nadella's starry-eyed ambitions. Now she's at the center of a bet-the-company dive into AI, figuring out how to steer tens of billions in new spending without it letting it spiral out of control.
Hood and members of the finance team -- many embedded with specific Microsoft divisions -- are reviewing the progress of projects nearly daily, monitoring the status of chip orders, the construction of new data centers and the development and sales of AI software, according to two sources familiar with the matter. The attention they're paying these days is a notable increase from past monitoring efforts, which tended to happen on a quarterly or monthly basis.
Originally from a small town in Kentucky, Hood, 53, now lives in Seattle with her husband and two children. For years, she took public transit to work, even as she rose to become one of the company's most highly compensated executives. She once told a colleague that she did it because it allowed her to work during her commute.
Hood is not a technologist and doesn't have a deep background in accounting, but her word inside Microsoft carries tremendous weight. Employees say that it's one thing to get the perpetually enthusiastic Nadella to embrace a project, but it doesn't mean much until the CFO signs off.
Last year during the federal antitrust hearing over Microsoft's acquisition of Activision, the company's head of gaming, Phil Spencer, was asked under oath whether Hood was a rigorous reviewer of the gaming division's financials.
"The most rigorous I've ever found," Spencer said with a laugh.
The AI boom has transformed Microsoft's structure and its balance sheet. In the past four quarters, the company's capital expenditures were $64.5 billion, up from $36.5 billion in the period a year earlier. It's now spending in a quarter what five years ago it spent in a year. The company recently disclosed that all its AI services combined are pulling in revenue at a rate of $10 billion annually.
Hood has told investors that even if the spending seems extravagant, the company is responding to market signals. So far, she says, the computing demands for developing AI or using ChatGPT, which runs on Microsoft's Azure cloud platform, outstrip the supply of data centers.
But it's unclear whether Redmond, Wash.-based Microsoft can turn hype into enough sales of new AI software that it says will transform the way people work. The company has not disclosed exactly how much revenue it's making on Copilot, the AI-powered assistant that plugs into Microsoft software like Word and Outlook. An effort last year to infuse AI into Bing to make Microsoft's search engine more competitive with Google failed to significantly move the needle.
Hood spent the first 12 years of her life in Morehead, Ky. Her mother taught nursing, and her father was a doctor who was sometimes given chickens by patients who couldn't afford other payment, she said on the "Finding Mastery" podcast in 2017. The family later moved to Nashville.
On long family car rides, her parents would discuss history and other topics with Hood and her younger sister. "My sister and I would be like, 'oh man, not again,'" she said on the podcast. "You'd kind of wish you could go to sleep."
Still, she said, the conversations reinforced a lesson she often got from her parents about the importance of education. Both daughters excelled in school, and her sister later became a pediatrician.
Hood attended Duke University, where she earned a degree in economics. After graduating, she took a job at Goldman Sachs in New York working in investment banking and equity capital markets. She took a break while at the bank to earn a master's from Harvard Business School.
She quit Goldman after eight years with no other prospects, and then joined Microsoft's investor relations team in 2002, a job she described in a company-produced podcast interview as "a bit of an accident."
She quickly moved up the ranks, at one point working as a chief of staff in the servers and tools division. She met Nadella there, himself a fast-rising executive.
Hood was appointed the financial chief of Microsoft's Office and Dynamic division in 2009 and then became the company's CFO in 2013, during the tail end of Steve Ballmer's tenure as CEO. She stayed on when Nadella took over in 2014.
She and Nadella are partners in another endeavor as well: Hood and her husband, along with Nadella and his wife, are part of the ownership group of the Seattle Sounders, the city's Major League Soccer team.
While previous CFOs at Microsoft were perceived as pass-throughs for the CEO's vision, Hood impressed colleagues with her quick grasp of numbers -- a former colleague said her speed at mental math surpassed even Ballmer, who was legendary in the company for his skill.
Hood also was willing to challenge business plans. She killed a proposal in 2014 to acquire the mobile-phone app company TrueCaller, saying she was skeptical Microsoft should make acquisitions in the consumer marketplace.
A few years ago, when leaders began noticing crosstown rival Amazon bulking up its Alexa digital-assistant team, some at Microsoft wanted to follow suit. Hood put a stop to the plans, saying the market wasn't big enough to justify the expense, according to people familiar with the matter.
"She is really good at her role and really strict," said Jim Dubois, a former Microsoft executive. "She's not fire-and-brimstone strict, but she will hold people accountable to what they say."
Current and former colleagues say Hood is also approachable and warm. She's joked about her daughter giving her "briefings" on rapper Cardi B. She admitted in a podcast interview that 11 years into being CFO, she still gets nervous doing earnings calls. To calm herself beforehand, she takes an early lunch at 10 a.m., takes long walks around whichever city she's in at the time, and practices breathing techniques.
It's commonplace inside Microsoft to blame Hood for keeping a tight lid on spending, but she is also willing to greenlight major expenditures if there's a strong business case.
In 2016, while Microsoft was in talks to acquire LinkedIn, the price tag for the deal ballooned. In one meeting, Hood quietly pulled Nadella aside and told him to name his price and, no matter what, she'd figure out the business case to the board to get the deal done. Microsoft, which was in a bidding war with Salesforce, bought the company for $26.2 billion.
Hood has told investors that the company needs to keep its foot on the gas when it comes to AI. AI cloud revenue would be even higher if it had more infrastructure, she said in an earnings call earlier this year.
She has also said the burden is still on Microsoft to prove the value of the AI software it is building itself, such as Copilot.
"This can't be tech for tech's sake. It's got to add and change how you work, the efficiency of your work, the value of your work," Hood said last year at a Goldman Sachs conference. "And if it does that, then it will be at the top of the budget list."
---
Amy Hood
-- Family: Husband, two children
-- Origin story: From Morehead, Ky., population 7,151
-- Calculating: Hood is known within Microsoft for her mental-math skills
-- Goal-oriented: Hood is part of the ownership group of the Seattle Sounders, the Major League Soccer team.
Credit: By Tom Dotan
