Invading and occupying Ukraine would be such a loser for Russia, so unrewarding, that I've had my doubts about the Kremlin-orchestrated circus of recent weeks.
That said, I'm also the guy who likened Vladimir Putin to Saddam Hussein 17 years ago, and has expected some monumental miscalculation on his part ever since.
Ukraine may be a powerhouse of grains and legumes, but it's not a leader in electron-beam lithography, artificial intelligence or any other element of 21st-century power. We're living in the information age. Tin mines and oil fields, which set Japanese imperial hearts aflutter in the 1940s, don't make great powers great anymore.
Mr. Putin would be invading Ukraine purely as a political solution. He can plainly see how NATO is constituted, an alliance of pacifist countries with no desire for war or even a desire to spend on their militaries. NATO poses no threat to Russia. His real concern, undisclosed by the Kremlin, not listed in its implausible and unactionable "negotiation" documents presented to the U.S., is of a democratic Ukraine attached to the West becoming free and prosperous.
Think back to the wretched state of Taiwan and South Korea by the early 1950s and their emergence in the '60s as thriving, wealth-building societies, whose people were becoming educated and giving birth to the industrial tigers of the '70s and '80s. This is what Russia isn't and Ukraine could be. Mr. Putin can see the consequences for his aging and enfeebled rule by the second half of the 2020s.
The impact on Russia of invading Ukraine would be so disastrous, the only reason Mr. Putin and his cronies might nevertheless proceed is because they see no other way to assure continuation of their own rule and privileges for another decade. Mr. Putin has been living a more dangerous life than appreciated. His regime's attempted murder of its most prominent critic, Alexei Navalny, was an infamous screw-up; Mr. Navalny escaped and then came back voluntarily to be arrested, making Mr. Putin the protector and cultivator of the man most likely to preside over his regime's liquidation.
Mr. Putin's lackey having been overthrown in Ukraine, Ukraine is rapidly attaching itself to the West. His lackey in Belarus had to be rescued from a voter revolt. His lackey in Kazakhstan had to be propped up with Russian troops last month. Mr. Putin resorts to ever more repression to stifle domestic dissent, in particular web-based reporting on his coterie's absurdly decadent corruption. He is trapped by alliances with sociopaths like Chechen kingpin Ramzan Kadyrov and various domestic criminal elites, models for the villains who populate a whole genre of campy, bloodspattered Hollywood action-comedy.
You might wonder of politicians in any country whether they really love their country or just crave power. In the West, we render this question moot with a routinized process of regime change, reallocating power continually on the basis of results.
The nature and record of the Putin regime speaks for itself. A generation of Western nose-holding has operated under the principle that governing Russia is a nasty job but somebody has to do it. Still, our indulgence of Mr. Putin's criminality borders on the bizarre next to the censoriousness Westerners inflict on each other over trivialities. Amy Knight, a writer invaluable on the nature of the Putin elite, has described how his most influential supporters trade jokes on national TV about mass-murdering gays. Her most recent book describes homicide as a fundamental underpinning of the regime.
There are seasons and seasons. At what point will the mentality and mental culture of the Russian people no longer sustain a Putin regime? Biblically, the Israelites were condemned to 40 years in the desert to shake off their Egyptian captivity. Russia needs to shake off centuries of serfdom under czars and commissars. A slave mentality is not a vow of poverty. It applies as much to his cronies and lickspittles with their offshore mistresses and children and foreign homes and bank accounts even as they pretend to lead the patriotic resistance to the West.
These are people who have proved they will support Mr. Putin in the impoverishment and destruction of Russian society provided they can enjoy their billions a few years longer. A catastrophic ending has always seemed in the cards, though perhaps not starting precisely with today's fabricated Ukraine crisis. As for the U.S., the constant talk of a "diplomatic path to avoid war," one hopes, is merely a locutional habit. Mr. Putin should receive no prizes for ginning up threats against his neighbor; the price should be very steep, very fast if he proceeds with military action. Mr. Putin made his bed. It's not a U.S. job to help him stay in power or postpone the sudden violent ending that such regimes typically are prey to. No concessions, no rewards. Keep the pressure on.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
