[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Matt Murphy has no interest in running a chip company 10 times the size of his current one.
Murphy, who has served as chief executive of Marvell Technology since 2016, was among the few names floated as potential replacements for the recently ousted Pat Gelsinger at Intel's corner office. That led to the rare sight of a CEO using his earnings call to deny he is on the market. "I am all in," he said on Marvell's Dec. 3 call, the day after Gelsinger's exit and media outlets reported him as a candidate.
His timing was good. A strong earnings report and news of an expanded relationship with Amazon lit up Marvell's stock, which rose 60% for the year at the start of the week. The shares jumped 18% since Tuesday's report, putting Marvell's market capitalization briefly above $100 billion for the first time ever (it was about $5 billion when Murphy took the job). The latest gains put Marvell's market cap ahead of Intel, which generates 10 times as much annual revenue.
Marvell's trajectory suggests the revenue gap will continue to narrow. The explosive growth of its data-center business has reached a point where it can more fully offset weakness in its more legacy segments, which sell chips used in goods such as telecommunications gear and autos.
Data-center sales nearly doubled year over year to $1.1 billion in the just-ended quarter, and Marvell's projection for the current period indicates it will end its fiscal year in January with the data center unit encompassing about 72% of its total revenue, up from 40% in the previous year.
Marvell's latest deal with Amazon is a five-year agreement that has Marvell helping Amazon design its own artificial-intelligence chips. Amazon announced the next generation of its largest AI chip, called Trainium, at its annual developers conference recently. Analysts believe Trainium will play a role in Marvell's AI custom revenue more than doubling in the fiscal year ending January 2026. That is expected to help propel Marvell's annual revenue to more than $8 billion in fiscal 2026, up 40% from what is expected for this year, according to consensus estimates from Visible Alpha. Analyst Mark Lipacis of Evercore ISI projects the industry for custom AI chips will reach $30 billion to $50 billion in sales by 2030. In a note to clients last week, he said Marvell "has the potential to capture one-third of that market."
What could spoil the party? Like Nvidia, Marvell has significant exposure to booming AI investments that makes the company vulnerable to downturns in that spending. That could happen if the AI services by tech giants and their business customers fail to catch on. The big buyers could put a pause on spending to absorb equipment already purchased. Such "digestion" periods are common in the data-center market. But with its stock trading nearly 45 times forward earnings -- a 21% premium to Nvidia's multiple -- Marvell isn't priced for the slightest of speed bumps.
Murphy isn't worried. "We'll see digestion at some point," he said, adding that AI is only part of what is driving investment in so-called accelerated computing systems. "We know it's not going to be a straight line over the next 10 years," he said.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
