California's AI safety act is dead following Gov. Gavin Newsom's veto last week, but its specter lingered over technology leaders some 3,000 miles away who remained divided about what future regulation could look like.
The technology sector remains divided over whether Newsom made a mistake by using his veto, but SB 1047's introduction and ultimate demise raise bigger questions, including whether regulation should target AI model makers or AI applications and whether it should be directed more by states or federal agencies.
"I think we should be very narrowly focused on the application of AI, not the training of AI models and the operation of AI models," Aaron Levie, co-founder and chief executive of Box, said at The Wall Street Journal's CIO Network Summit in New York on Tuesday. Levie added that he was against SB 1047 and the government shouldn't risk slowing down the pace of AI innovation.
"Right now, we need as much progress as humanly possible," he said. Levie added that is especially the case since he believes we are still far away from any kind of existential risk from AI -- although that is debated.
While regulation should definitely come, Levie said it should come more from individual agencies designed to regulate specific markets, like the Federal Aviation Administration and the Food and Drug Administration.
The California bill would have required developers of large AI models to take "reasonable care" to ensure that their technology didn't pose an "unreasonable risk of causing or materially enabling a critical harm."
"I would say that both politically and substantively, Newsom was wrong" to veto the bill, Bradley Tusk, co-founder and chief executive of Tusk Venture Partners, said at the summit.
For AI to grow into a truly multibillion-dollar industry, "you've got to give the public some level of confidence that somebody is keeping an eye on this thing," Tusk said, calling the bill a reasonable first step to setting up intellectual frameworks for mitigating risks and harms. While it may not have been perfect, Tusk said, a better move would have been passing the bill and then a trailer bill next year. He also said he tends to agree with some opponents of the bill who felt regulation should focus more on the application level than the model level.
Arvind Narayanan, professor at Princeton University, director of the Center for Information Technology Policy at the school and author of "AI Snake Oil," agreed. There is a lot of concern that the misuse of AI in the financial system will cause panic in the market -- but that market is already regulated by federal agencies and has been for decades, he said at the summit.
"I look at the [Federal Trade Commission] a lot, in particular consumer protection, and they have been doing this work, and that's the kind of thing I want to see at a number of other federal agencies," Narayanan said.
He added that it would make sense to regulate the model makers to some extent, but at the moment that should be focused more around transparency. "We don't know a lot about what is going on inside these companies," he said.
Tusk said he saw 800 some bills generally related to AI introduced in state legislatures last year and that he has been in touch with legislators from New York state looking to draft their own AI bill. He said the New York bill likely will be stricter than California's SB 1047.
Meanwhile, CIOs remain torn: certain that some kind of regulation is good but uncertain how it could impact their work and technology innovation overall.
Still, there is a need to do something, Andrea Malagodi, CIO of software company Sonar, told The Wall Street Journal at the event. "Of course, there's the view that innovation is going to be encumbered," he said. "I wonder if that kind of thing is based on fear."
"There is a reasonable friction that should be expected between innovation and safety," he added.
---
Bellle Lin contributed to this article.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
