Major music companies are suing two generative AI startups that allow users to compose new tracks using text prompts, alleging they infringed on artist and labels' copyrights in creating the tools.
Plaintiffs in the cases, which include the three largest record companies -- Universal Music Group, Sony Music Group and Warner Music Group -- allege that Suno and Udio used copyrighted works scraped from the internet to train models that underpin their products.
The companies have allowed users to generate sound-a-likes of recordings including The Temptations' "My Girl," Green Day's "American Idiot" and Mariah Carey's "All I Want for Christmas," along with recordings by Chuck Berry and James Brown, according to the suits, brought by trade group the Recording Industry Association of America.
The suits also allege the services produced vocals RIAA says are indistinguishable from famous artists, including Lin-Manuel Miranda, Bruce Springsteen, Michael Jackson and ABBA.
"Our technology is transformative; it is designed to generate completely new outputs, not to memorize and regurgitate pre-existing content," Suno Chief Executive Mikey Shulman said. The company doesn't allow users to reference specific artists in their prompts, he said.
"Suno continues to dodge the basic question: what sound recordings have they illegally copied?" a spokeswoman for the RIAA said.
Representatives for Udio didn't respond to requests for comment.
The lawsuits filed Monday are the latest in a stream of legal challenges related to how new artificial-intelligence models are trained on artists' work. They are a sign of an intensifying fight between creative industries and Silicon Valley over emerging technologies that are transforming how consumers interact with art.
The cases seek declaration by the court that the two companies infringed on copyrighted sound recordings, injunctions barring them from using that material in the future and damages, including as much as $150,000 per work infringed.
The case against Suno, developer of Suno AI, was filed in the U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts and the case against Uncharted Labs, developer of Udio AI, was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York.
RIAA Chairman and Chief Executive Mitch Glazier said the industry is working on AI tools that involve artists' consent.
Universal and Warner also formed partnerships with YouTube to allow some of their artists to explore the future of music royalties and creative expression as generative AI tools make it easier for internet users to manipulate art.
Credit: By Anne Steele
