BOSTON -- Getting a computer-science degree at Northeastern University is no joke. One class was especially nerve-racking for Colin Mullaney, even more so than theory of computation or object-oriented design.
"I put it off to the end," said Mr. Mullaney, who graduated this spring with a combined degree in computer science and mathematics. As part of the dreaded class, he mimicked elephant noises, imitated Michael Jackson dance moves and had to grunt in front of classmates while playing the role of a Viking rowing a boat.
Like all computer-science majors at Northeastern, Mr. Mullaney was required to take a course in theater and improv. And, like others, "I was afraid," he said. He fought off anxiety by trying not to think about it outside of class.
Many computer-science types say they would rather work at a screen than chat face to face. Others hate drawing attention to themselves. In the improv class, "The Eloquent Presenter," computer-science majors not only cozy up with peers, but work in groups and take turns in the spotlight.
The course requires public speaking, lecturing on such nontechnical topics as family recipes. Students also learn to speak gibberish -- "butuga dubuka manala phuthusa," for instance.
The class is a way to "robot-proof" computer-science majors, helping them sharpen uniquely human skills, said Joseph E. Aoun, the university president. Empathy, creativity and teamwork help students exercise their competitive advantage over machines in the era of artificial intelligence, according to Mr. Aoun, who wrote a book about it.
Not everyone thought it was a good idea. "We saw a lot of hysterics and crying," when the class was made mandatory in 2016, said Carla E. Brodley, dean of the Khoury College of Computer Sciences.
Zach Lowen postponed it until his senior year. On his first day, he had to pretend he was ice skating and walking on hot sand. "I was like, 'Oh, my God, where is this going?'" he said.
Mr. Lowen didn't get stage fright while miming a scene of betrayal between warring drug cartels. But he turned stiff during a mock interview in front of a video camera. "I wasn't sure where to look," he said. The professor asked him "who was holding me hostage," Mr. Lowen recalled.
Caitlin Wang, a junior also majoring in computer science, likes to plan and be prepared, she said, which makes improvising scary: "I don't know what'll happen, what I'll say, or how people will react," Ms. Wang said.
She willed herself into enrolling this spring and had some surprise triumphs: portraying Simba in a 30-second version of "The Lion King," and singing part of a TED Talk given by Elizabeth Gilbert, author of "Eat, Pray, Love."
"I had no idea what tune I should have been singing," Ms. Wang said.
Like other tough courses, this one has paid dividends for some alumni.
Tiffany Seeber, class of 2016, said when she took it everybody had to assemble themselves into a human Rube Goldberg machine. The touch of an arm would set another person's leg in motion, and the leg would initiate the movement of someone pretending to turn a wheel. "I couldn't figure out how this was going to relate to what I was going to be doing full-time," she said.
Ms. Seeber, now a software engineer at Uber, sometimes strikes a "power pose" before presentations -- shoulders back, chest elongated, weight evenly distributed -- a skill she learned in the class. When speaking, she walks slowly from side to side, to engage more people in the audience.
"I don't know any software engineer that doesn't have to do presentations," she said.
Dani Calacci, who took the class in 2016, is co-founder of workplace technology startup Riff Learning Inc. He said the absurdity of the class helped students learn to bond. One assignment required him to help a classmate stretch to stand up straight. "I really enjoyed it, actually," he said.
Other professionals agree that improv can teach the teamwork and communication required of working with others. Many software applications now are built in small teams, a collaboration of engineers, writers and designers.
The Northeastern class is taught by professors with a theater background. Nearly 800 computer-science majors have taken it, and few beg to opt out. There are few chairs or desks in the room. Students can role-play one day or toss around imaginary objects. One class had students stare into a classmate's eyes for 60 seconds. If someone laughed, you had to try again.
An assignment this spring required students to tell a joke. Brennan Kinnel told one involving beer, a king and lions. The off-color punchline drew "the worst possible outcome imaginable," he said. No one laughed.
"Everyone else's joke at least got a chuckle," said Mr. Kinnel, who graduated this month and hopes to find more success as a web developer.
Catherine McLean walked into the class a skeptic. "The stereotype is that we can't talk to people and we're nerds and wear hoodies," she said.
Over time, she learned about using the voice's volume and pitch, as well as being more comfortable conversing about a subject without being an expert. She had to argue for the legitimacy of astrological signs, a stretch for any computer-science major.
"It certainly would have been a lot worse if nobody laughed," she said.

Credit: By Sara Castellanos

ERIC Subject: Public Speaking; Educational Technology; Videotape Recorders; Computer Science
