Stocks ultimately sank Thursday after being whipsawed by remarks from Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell.
Powell's comments jostled markets as investors were weighing bond yields' ascent toward 5%, the continuing conflict between Israel and Hamas and the influx of corporate earnings results from the third quarter.
The S&P 500 dropped 0.8% with 10 of its 11 sectors finishing in the red. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite fell 1%, while the Dow industrials declined 0.7%.
Powell initially suggested that the central bank is unlikely to raise interest rates again in November, a reprieve for investors. Stocks climbed and bond yields fell. He then spooked investors once his speech resumed, shortly after an interruption by climate activists, prompting a reversal. Traders struggled to discern a clear sense of direction from his comments.
"Given the uncertainties and risks, and how far we have come, the committee is proceeding carefully," Powell said Thursday.
He cited the bevy of data showing that labor-market tightness and price pressures are easing, giving the Fed room to stand pat, but said the central bank would be willing to raise rates further if strong economic activity sparked worries of an inflation revival.
Market anxiety peaked when Powell said he didn't see evidence that monetary policy is too tight -- in the way it would cause a recession -- and that higher interest rates will likely be required for a long time to contain inflation. That is one reason bond yields have risen in recent weeks.
The 10-year Treasury yield reached as high as 4.991% during trading, nearly hitting 5% for the first time since 2007. Weak manufacturing data from the Philadelphia area and later Powell's comments sapped the bond selloff and boosted prices, leaving the benchmark yield at 4.987% to finish the day -- a 16-year high.
Stock investors were also gauging newly released third-quarter earnings results. Netflix shares leapt 16% after the streaming company reported it added 8.8 million net new paid subscribers, the biggest jump since early 2020, and raised prices. That was its best single-day performance since January 2021, making it the biggest gainer in the market on Thursday. Crackdowns on password sharing spurred the growth, but that has caused some analysts to question how sustainable it is.
Tesla stock, meanwhile, went in reverse following its third-quarter results. Shares of the electric-car maker slid 9.3% after the company said it is struggling to scale production of the Cybertruck, and it lost more money than analysts expected.
"In a nutshell we would characterize last night's conference call as a 'mini disaster,'" wrote a team of Wedbush Securities analysts led by Dan Ives, referring to Elon Musk's cautious comments on the interest-rate environment, artificial-intelligence investments and difficulties with producing Cybertrucks.
Regional bank earnings filed in. Results from the likes of KeyCorp, Truist and Fifth Third -- many of which suffered particularly during the March banking crisis -- showed mounting expenses are eating at their bottom line. Still, stemming deposit losses and protecting margins better than analysts expected helped some shares rise. The SPDR S&P Regional Banking ETF finished the day down 1.1%.
Shares of AT&T rose 6.6% after the telecom company beat forecasts and raised its outlook. Private-equity giant Blackstone fell 7.9% after it reported a war chest of more than $200 billion to invest in what is currently a stagnant market.
It is still early with regards to third-quarter earnings, said Tom Hainlin, national investment strategist at U.S. Bank Wealth Management, but there is nothing overwhelmingly negative about the state of the economy yet. With big banks and regionals reporting this week along with a slew of major companies, the bulk of earnings are slated for the coming two weeks.
"We've heard so far that the consumer is resilient, continuing to spend on leisure and travel, and the labor market remains tight in those areas," he said. "We came into this earnings season with a low bar, and it seems like we're about meeting those expectations so far."
Markets have been choppy for months, said Hainlin, and he thinks they will remain that way until investors have more clarity on when, and to what extent, spending and corporate profits will suffer from the rapid rise in interest rates.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 lost 1.2%, led lower by real-estate and auto stocks. At midday Friday in Asia, South Korea's Kospi was down 1.9%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 0.5% and Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.4%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.15%.
Credit: By Eric Wallerstein
