Intel Corp. suffered its largest-ever quarterly loss and said it would remain in the red as it prepares for the market recovering from the sharp fall in personal-computer sales that hammered its business.
Sales fell to a level not seen since 2010. Intel on Thursday posted revenue of $11.7 billion for the first quarter, above estimates from analysts surveyed by FactSet. That marked a 36% decline from the prior-year period.
Shipments of PCs, which drive a large share of Intel's revenue, fell 29% year over year in the first quarter, according to International Data Corp. figures, extending a slump that began early last year. Consumers rushed to buy computers, smartphones and other electronics at the beginning of the pandemic, spurred by the shift toward remote learning and working. That reversed last year as people returned to prepandemic routines.
Intel's PC-chip division reported a 38% fall in revenue for the first quarter to $5.8 billion. However, Chief Financial Officer David Zinsner said the market was on course to return to normal later this year once PC makers run through excess inventories of chips and start placing new orders.
"We saw in the quarter an improving situation in the PC market," Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger said in an interview, adding that the company was making strides in a multiyear effort to return to leadership in the race to make the best-performing chips with the smallest transistors.
Intel's sales slump translated into a $2.76 billion loss for the first quarter. It was the company's second loss in a row and eclipses what had been its largest loss of $687 million, booked in the final quarter of 2017. And Intel said it would likely post another loss in the current quarter.
The company projected sales in the current quarter of $11.5 billion to $12.5 billion, though still well below the year-ago figure. The midpoint of the forecast came in slightly ahead of Wall Street estimates.
The company's shares rose more than 5% in aftermarket trading.
Mr. Gelsinger has moved to lay off staff and pursue other cost cuts in the face of the challenging business conditions, with a target of saving up to $10 billion annually by 2025. Mr. Gelsinger is trying to balance his savings drive with making huge investments in chip factories as Intel tries to catch up to Asian rivals in the race to make the fastest processors with the smallest transistors.
Demand for chips from data centers has also fallen in recent months, putting further pressure on Intel's sales. The company's data center division reported sales of $3.7 billion in the first quarter, down by 39% from the prior year.
The market for servers that fill data centers has yet to reach a bottom, with weakness among cloud-computing and corporate customers, Mr. Gelsinger said in a call with analysts.
Intel's challenges go beyond the current downcycle, though. Perennial rival Advanced Micro Devices Inc. has stolen market share in central processing units in recent years. New processors based on circuit designs from Arm Ltd. that are ubiquitous in mobile phones are starting to mount another significant challenge in Intel's home turf.
Mr. Gelsinger said the company had better-than-expected market-share results in the first quarter for its data center chips, which he called a "turning point" and the first time the company's position in data center computing had improved during his tenure as CEO.
The buzz over generative artificial intelligence -- systems that can spit out well-crafted prose -- has supercharged shares in Nvidia Corp., the U.S.'s largest chip maker by market value. Nvidia dominates the market for chips that do AI calculations that are gobbling up an ever-greater share of the computing landscape. Intel also offers some specialist chips for AI calculations and embeds AI capabilities in many of its central processing units.
Mr. Gelsinger also is facing challenges getting Intel's contract chip-making arm off the ground, including delays in closing its acquisition of Israeli chip-making business Tower Semiconductor Ltd.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
