WASHINGTON -- The chief executive of ChatGPT creator OpenAI called on Congress to create licensing and safety standards for advanced artificial-intelligence systems, as lawmakers begin a bipartisan push toward regulating the powerful new artificial-intelligence tools available to consumers.
"We understand that people are anxious about how it can change the way we live. We are, too," Sam Altman said of AI technology at a Senate subcommittee hearing Tuesday, his first appearance before Congress. "If this technology goes wrong, it can go quite wrong."
Mr. Altman called for "a new agency that licenses any effort above a certain scale of capabilities and could take that license away and ensure compliance with safety standards."
In the meantime, he said, OpenAI pre-tests and constantly updates its tools to ensure safety, arguing that making them widely available to the public actually helps the company identify and mitigate risks.
Tuesday's hearing demonstrated the wide-ranging concerns prompted by rapid consumer adoption of AI systems like ChatGPT, the consumer-facing chatbot that rocketed to an estimated 100 million users within two months.
How the technology might affect elections, intellectual-property theft, news coverage, military operations and even diversity and inclusion initiatives were among the topics covered. "It's important to understand that GPT-4 is a tool, not a creature," Mr. Altman said, referring to the most recent version of the system that powers ChatGPT. "And it's a tool that people have great control over."
On the job market, for example, he said the technology "will, I think, entirely automate away some jobs. And it will create new ones that we believe will be much better."
Lawmakers described Tuesday's hearing as a first step in understanding the new AI systems, reflecting the lack of consensus over a congressional response even as members of both parties see a need for federal regulation.
"Will we strike that balance between technological innovation and our ethical and moral responsibility?" asked Sen. Josh Hawley (R., Mo.), the top Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee panel hosting Tuesday's hearing.
Committee Chairman Sen. Dick Durbin (D., Ill.) was one of several senators to compare the rise of AI to the early days of the social-media industry, which grew up with little regulation from Congress.
ChatGPT and similar tools can instantly produce humanlike outputs of text, computer code, videos, music and photos based on written prompts.
The session with Mr. Altman is the latest in a series of discussions in Washington. On Monday, Mr. Altman met privately with about 60 House lawmakers from both parties. Earlier this month, he attended a White House sit-down with the chief executives of Google and Microsoft and Vice President Kamala Harris.
At Tuesday's hearing, several lawmakers raised concerns about elections, fretting about how AI systems could be used to spread false information or otherwise manipulate voters.
Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D., Conn.), chair of the subcommittee, started the hearing by playing a fake AI-generated recording of his voice reading an opening statement written by ChatGPT. He marveled at its realism, but also questioned what else it could create.
"What if it had provided an endorsement of Ukraine surrendering or Vladimir Putin's leadership?" he said.
Christina Montgomery, chief privacy and trust officer at IBM, urged lawmakers to be precise in regulating specific uses of AI, rather than the technology itself. "A chatbot that can share restaurant recommendations or draft an email has different impacts on society than a system that supports decisions on credit, housing, or employment," she said in her written testimony.
Ms. Montgomery also said a new government agency isn't necessary to regulate AI -- a statement that drew a rebuke from Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.), the top-ranking Republican on the judiciary committee.
"I don't understand how you could say that we don't need an agency to deal with the most transformative technology, maybe ever," he said.
Credit: By Ryan Tracy
