FRANCE
Investment Summit
Draws Global Cash
France bagged more than $16 billion of investment commitments at this year's Choose France summit, launched by President Emmanuel Macron in 2018 in an effort to promote the country as a hub for foreign investors.
Microsoft said it would invest 4 billion euros, equivalent to $4.31 billion, to build out artificial-intelligence, data-center and cloud infrastructure. Amazon said it would invest more than 1.2 billion euros to bolster its cloud infrastructure, logistics infrastructure and AI. Pfizer said it is investing 500 million euros to strengthen research and development. JPMorgan Chase, Morgan Stanley, Accenture and the Qatar Investment Authority also made commitments.
-- Mauro Orru
---
CHINA
Ultralong Bonds
Set to Go On Sale
China this week will start selling the first ultralong-term bonds in a planned issuance of one trillion yuan, equivalent to about $138 billion. The sale will run until November, starting with an unspecified number of 30-year treasurys Friday, according to the finance ministry website, followed by 20-year bonds May 24 and 50-year bonds June 14.
Chinese Premier Li Qiang announced the plan in March and said Beijing might conduct sales for several years to raise funds for mega projects and strategic sectors. He also announced a lofty 2024 economic-growth target of about 5%, which economists say might help explain why Beijing turned to special treasury bonds to spur growth.
-- Dow Jones
---
GEORGIA
Controversial Bill
On NGOs Advances
Georgia's Parliament on Monday agreed to hold a final vote on a proposed law requiring media and nongovernmental organizations and other nonprofits to register as "pursuing the interests of a foreign power" if they more than 20% of their funding comes from abroad. Critics see it as a threat to media freedom and the country's aspirations to join the European Union. The ruling party withdrew a nearly identical bill last year after street protests, and protesters, some waving EU flags, gathered near Parliament Monday.
The opposition calls the bill "the Russian law," because Moscow uses similar legislation to crack down on independent media, nonprofits and activists critical of the Kremlin.
-- Associated Press
