[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
In less than four months' time, Nvidia has gone from the company that could do no wrong to one that seemingly can do no right.
Both views are a bit exaggerated, but the chip maker's tumble shows how quickly fortunes in tech can reverse -- especially when one factors in a brewing trade war with China, finicky videogamers, unpredictable capital investments by technology giants and even the fad of cryptocurrency mining.
Nvidia is exposed to all, and they soured in unison. The cost has been stunning; 52% of Nvidia's market value -- a little over $90 billion -- has vanished since the shares hit their peak Oct. 1.
The latest drop came Monday after the chip maker warned that revenue for its just-ended fiscal fourth quarter would come in about 19% below its previous forecast of $2.7 billion. Nvidia had previously cautioned that sales of its graphics processors used in videogaming PCs would be disappointing for the period due to bloated inventories left over from the bursting of the cryptocurrency-mining bubble. It now says the weakened economy in China and slow sales of its newest chips are playing a role as well. Nvidia also added that data-center sales for the period fell short.
Chips for videogaming account for more than half of Nvidia's business, so problems in that segment are bad enough. But the data-center business has been a major reason Nvidia became one of the most valuable semiconductor companies. Its graphics processors are key components in artificial-intelligence systems that cloud-computing giants such as Amazon.com, Microsoft and Google parent Alphabet are building into their networks. As such, Nvidia has benefited from their booming capital investments.
That spending isn't especially steady or predictable, though. Intel said last week that its own data center sales were falling short as cloud providers were taking a breather to "absorb capacity."
Nvidia said Monday that several of its data-center deals didn't close near the end of the quarter that concluded Sunday, adding that those customers "became increasingly cautious due to economic uncertainties." Analysts had been expecting Nvidia's data-center sales to rise 38% year over year to $838 million for the fourth quarter.
Nvidia might look relatively cheap now, fetching less than half the multiple of 52 times forward earnings it commanded a year ago. Several of its key businesses are now in a reset mode, though. Investors are likely to sit this game out for a while.

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
