[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Apple might actually need that $3,500 VR headset to sell.
The world's most valuable company has gotten 50% more valuable this year. But that is actually a bit of a letdown compared with the performance of the other giant-cap tech stocks known as the Magnificent Seven, all of which have outperformed the iPhone maker for the year. Microsoft -- the only big tech company whose market cap is within shouting distance of Apple's $3 trillion level -- is up 55% this year, and some others in the group have risen much more.
The reasons are varied. Apple has notably sat out of the race over generative artificial intelligence that has consumed its peers -- and investors -- since the start of the year. The company is also facing the prospect of another weak iPhone sales cycle that could be exacerbated by political pressures in China. Bloomberg News reported on Monday that a growing number of Chinese agencies and government-backed companies in at least eight provinces are now ordering their staff not to bring iPhones to work. The company also confirmed on Monday that it plans to halt sales of two of its latest Apple Watches this week in the U.S. because of a patent dispute.
Those are just the near-term risks. Recent developments also have raised worries about the long-term prospects for key aspects of Apple's services business. The Justice Department's antitrust challenge against Google is still working its way through trial and has focused squarely on the billions of dollars that Google pays to Apple every year to be the default search engine on Apple's devices.
And just last week, Google lost a jury trial to Epic Games over its app-store fees and practices. Apple defeated a similar lawsuit by Epic in 2021, but as the Google case works its way through appellate courts, the potential remains for legal rulings that could undercut Apple's App Store business, which currently generates more than $25 billion in annual revenue, according to consensus estimates by Visible Alpha.
In short, the world's biggest tech company faces some of the biggest hurdles to growth. Apple's revenue fell nearly 3% in its latest fiscal year ended in September, and Wall Street expects single-digit growth averaging 5% annually over the next three years, according to FactSet. That rate is well below its next three largest peers -- Microsoft, Amazon.com and Google parent Alphabet -- which are expected to average between 11% and 14% annual growth over their next three fiscal years.
Apple is hardly struggling. It is the only company on the S&P 500 to currently be earning more than $100 billion in annual operating income, according to data from S&P Global Market Intelligence. That produces an operating margin of more than 40% -- a notable accomplishment for a company that still generates the vast majority of its business from premium consumer electronics that are expensive to produce. Google's core services business segment, comprised mostly of digital advertising, generates an annual operating margin of 34%, by contrast.
But Apple's stock isn't priced for it to be a low-growth profit machine. Its current multiple of about 30 times forward earnings is on the high side of its five-year average, and about 10 points higher than that of the parent companies of Google and Facebook. In a note to clients this month, Toni Sacconaghi of Bernstein called Apple a "durable franchise" but noted that fiscal 2024 revenue "will likely struggle to grow for the second consecutive year, given our view of a fairly muted iPhone 15 cycle." He advised investors to buy Apple on dips closer to 20 times earnings and trim at 30 times.
A new wrinkle is the Vision Pro mixed-reality headset that Apple unveiled in June and said it would launch in early 2024. It will be the company's first new entire product category in years, not to mention the most ambitious launch yet in the still nascent virtual/augmented-reality market, with a starting price of $3,499 for the headset. In a note last week, UBS analyst David Vogt estimated that sales of 400,000 units of the headset in the first year would add about $1.4 billion in revenue, which he added would be "relatively immaterial" to the overall business of a company now selling close to $300 billion a year in hardware alone.
But for Apple these days, every little bit helps.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
