U.K. antitrust officials said they wouldn't open an in-depth investigation into Google's investment in artificial-intelligence startup Anthropic, removing pressure from the tech giant to justify the partnership to regulators.
The Competition and Markets Authority launched a merger inquiry in October to establish whether Google's investment in Anthropic and its partnership with the startup posed a threat to competition in the country. Officials have now concluded the partnership doesn't qualify for investigation under Britain's merger provisions.
Alphabet-owned Google agreed to raise its investment in Anthropic to up to $2 billion late last year in a bid to gain an edge over rivals like Microsoft, OpenAI and Amazon.com in the AI race. The startup, which offers an AI assistant known as Claude, was founded by several ex-OpenAI employees.
Deals between U.S. tech majors and AI startups have been increasingly under the microscope on both sides of the Atlantic since OpenAI's release of ChatGPT in late 2022 ushered in a spending bonanza.
In the U.S., the Federal Trade Commission launched an inquiry into generative AI partnerships earlier this year. That probe includes Alphabet, Amazon, Anthropic, Microsoft and OpenAI.
In the U.K., the CMA's executive director of mergers, Joel Bamford, said the agency had dropped the Google-Anthropic probe because Google hasn't acquired the ability to materially influence Anthropic's commercial policy, meaning the partnership doesn't meet the jurisdictional threshold for U.K. merger control.
Google doesn't hold board seats or voting rights at Anthropic and has no veto rights over the startup's strategic commercial decisions. Google didn't respond to a request to comment.
An Anthropic spokeswoman said the startup welcomed the CMA's decision. "As we've made clear, Anthropic is an independent company and our strategic partnerships and investor relationships do not diminish our corporate governance independence or our freedom to partner with others," she said.
The ruling from the CMA mirrors a similar decision not to open a formal investigation into Anthropic's links with Amazon, which invested $4 billion in the startup. In that decision, officials said they closed the case as they essentially lacked jurisdiction.
The CMA has cleared several partnerships between large tech companies and AI startups this year, including Microsoft's hiring of former employees from Inflection AI. However, the agency is still reviewing Microsoft's investment in OpenAI.
News Corp, owner of Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal, has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI.
Credit: By Mauro Orru
