Arranging transportation to the airport, lugging bags, waiting on security lines, and putting up with delays are just some of the headaches travelers suffer when flying from one city to the next. Airlines and technology companies are developing artificial intelligence to ease the journey.
Here, The Wall Street Journal outlines one vision of the future of air travel, based on interviews with a major aircraft manufacturer, airlines, technology developers and travel consultants. Some technologies, such as autonomous vehicles and facial-recognition scans, are already in limited use at airports around the world and set for further deployment. Others, such as pilotless commercial aircraft, are potentially decades away.
It is always difficult to predict an industry's future, no more so than now. The spread of Covid-19 has rocked the travel industry, and recovery is expected to take time. Whether these technologies will become widespread will depend on many factors, including how quickly they mature, the implementation of privacy and security safeguards, and, of course, passenger preferences. But AI offers the hope that the air travel experience will be easier and more accessible in the years to come.
1. Know When to Leave Home
What's the best time to leave for the airport? Your airline's app may have the answer. Using machine learning to analyze third-party weather information, road traffic data and even security-checkpoint wait times could help passengers catch their flights while minimizing wait time.
Next-Generation Roller Bags
AI can also help carry your luggage. Travelmate Robotics has developed a connected suitcase that is controlled by a traveler's smartphone. The bag, which has wheels that allow it to travel upright and on its side, uses ultrasonic sensors to avoid objects.
2. Robotaxi
When it is time to depart, order a self-driving car. A partnership between Hyundai Motor Group and Aptiv, a technology company, is testing an autonomous taxi between McCarran International Airport and points in Las Vegas, including the Strip. Delta Air Lines and others may one day integrate select ride-sharing services into their apps, enabling the apps to check flight information, traffic and other data, and book cars without human interaction for customers who opt in.
3. A Chariot Awaits
Passengers who need assistance may one day be able to use autonomous mobility devices to pick them up at the airport's curb and drive them to their gates. Japanese technology company Whill Inc. has developed a four-wheel, personal electric vehicle that can navigate itself through the terminal. The machines, already in use at the Tokyo International Airport, commonly known as Haneda Airport, are programmed with terminal maps and use lasers and wide-angle cameras to avoid collisions. The company envisions travelers booking the devices before they arrive at the airport by using a ride-hailing app.
4. Scanned and Secure
Could security screening be as simple as walking through a series of camera- and sensor-enabled arches? That is the future that Delta envisions. A biometric system would identify passengers, and their images would be matched and cleared against security and border control databases. X-rays, computer vision and other technologies would scan carry-on baggage for prohibited items. Thermal imaging would check travelers' temperatures. The system could alert security officials to potentially sick passengers or suspicious items for additional screening. The Transportation Security Administration says it continues to develop technological solutions to enhance the checkpoint screening process. The agency says it anticipates facial-recognition technology will be added to checkpoints in the future but can't speculate on the timing of implementation.
5. For Your Eyes Only
Need to check flight information? A Redmond, Wash.-based company called Misapplied Sciences says it has developed technology that allows airport flight boards to display different, personalized travel information for up to 100 people at once. Individuals would look at the same screen but see details about their own departure times and gate numbers, as well as customized images and videos. On traditional displays, a pixel emits one color in every direction. Misapplied's "Parallel Reality" allows each pixel to send beams of different colors and brightness in up to a million different directions. Cameras, sensors and facial recognition can be used to find people and tell the pixels to emit specific information to their field of vision as they move through the terminal. The displays were scheduled to be used at Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport earlier this year, but the coronavirus pandemic delayed those plans, the company says.
6. Concierge Bots
Watch out for customer-service robots that answer questions about gates and flight information -- in multiple languages -- and lead passengers to restaurants and other amenities. London-based BotsAndUs built a robot that uses natural-language processing and a dialogue engine to understand and respond to questions. The 4-foot-high machine has sensors, cameras and an AI-enabled navigation system. British Airways tested the robot at London's Heathrow Airport at the end of last year.
7. Cutting Down Time on the Ground
In an effort to reduce delays on the ground, Swiss technology company Societe Internationale de Telecommunications Aeronautiques, or SITA, is developing a system that uses computer vision and machine learning to improve airplane turnaround times. Using cameras attached to terminal exteriors and pointed at aircraft stands, SITA would monitor activities, such as when the jet bridge is extended, the catering truck arrives, and the fuel line is attached to the aircraft. The time of each activity would be tracked against the standard schedule for that aircraft. An AI model could then analyze variables to predict disruptions and delays. Managers could use that information to take corrective action.
8. Luggage Movers
See those baggage dollies driving between the airport and the aircraft? U.K.-based Aurrigo developed GPS and Lidar technology that turns existing dollies into autonomous, self-navigating vehicles that can carry luggage and cargo around the airport. They were tested last year at London's Heathrow Airport.
9. No Pilots in the Cockpit
It will probably be decades before passengers glance at the cockpit and find it empty, but autonomous commercial jetliners are becoming feasible, says Pete Kunz, Boeing's senior chief engineer for unpiloted systems. Hurdles exist, including training the AI that flies the plane to handle contingencies, such as a passenger emergency that requires the aircraft to divert to a different airport, and building systems to enable pilotless craft to communicate with airports and other planes.
10. Intelligent Logistics
Delays and cancellations are the bane of any trip, but AI could one day minimize both. Boeing has collected millions of hours of flight data on air speed, air flow, fluid levels, valve positions, pressure levels and other attributes. The idea is to use machine learning to determine patterns in the data and spot anomalies. Maintenance staff would get alerts so they can schedule inspections and repairs, reducing unplanned maintenance. Ultimately the system could be integrated with schedules for repair crews and supply chains for parts. The company is also researching whether it could use drones to augment visual inspections, and use computer vision to analyze the images for problems.
Delta is developing AI to analyze millions of data points -- including plane locations, passenger volumes and airport conditions -- to create scenarios that can be used to make better decisions on future and even hypothetical flight operations. If a nor'easter is approaching, for example, the system could look at how a flight cancellation would affect operations during and after the storm, based on past actions.
11. Tracking Crowds
In response to the coronavirus pandemic, SITA is researching ways to promote social distancing in airports. One idea: using computer vision connected to terminal security cameras that would create a heat map of where people are grouping. Airport authorities could then disperse crowds.
12. The Hotel Check-in of Tomorrow
Expect to see AI in use at hotels. Cameras equipped with facial-recognition software could identify guests and transmit a room number and digital key to their smartphones. The hotel's machine-learning system would analyze their history of stays to put them in a room that best matches their preferences.

Credit: By John McCormick and Kevin Hand
