BOEING
BA -3.7%
Boeing has been grounded by a labor dispute. Its biggest labor union went on strike Friday, halting production of its bestselling jets and dealing the latest blow to the struggling aerospace giant. Thousands of machinists walked off the job shortly after midnight Pacific time after overwhelmingly rejecting a labor deal struck Sunday morning between the union's leaders and Boeing's executives. The contract offered 25% wage increases over four years. Boeing is working on a new contract offer to address the union's concerns, finance chief Brian West told an investor conference Friday. The strike will "jeopardize our recovery," he said, adding that the company is now conserving as much cash as possible. Boeing shares fell 3.7% Friday.
ORACLE
ORCL +11%
The cloud-software provider on Monday posted better-than-expected quarterly results, as its partnership with artificial-intelligence chip maker Nvidia boosted revenue. The company has emerged as an attractive cloud-computing provider for AI developers such as OpenAI, sending its long-stagnant stock to new heights. On Thursday, Oracle unveiled unexpectedly strong financial targets at its annual user conference. Oracle shares rallied 11% Tuesday and were up 14% for the week.
UNDER ARMOUR
UAA -8.7%
The sportswear retailer on Monday lowered its outlook for fiscal 2025, saying it expects to double its restructuring costs as it closes a distribution facility and lays off more workers. Since Chief Executive Kevin Plank returned to the top job earlier this year, the company has been working on a turnaround. The latest cost-cutting actions came after the company posted a surprise quarterly adjusted profit amid slumping sales last month. Under Armour shares dropped 8.7% Tuesday.
NORFOLK SOUTHERN
NSC -1.4%
Norfolk Southern's board terminated Chief Executive Alan Shaw after discovering he had a consensual relationship with the company's top lawyer. The chief legal officer, Nabanita Nag, was also fired, the railroad said Wednesday. A three-decade veteran of the company, Shaw will be succeeded by Chief Financial Officer Mark George. Activist investor Ancora Holdings caught wind of the board's investigation before it was public, The Wall Street Journal reported. Norfolk shares fell 1.4% Wednesday.
SOUTHWEST AIRLINES
LUV -1.6%
Executive Chairman Gary Kelly will step down next year as Southwest faces pressure from Elliott Investment Management to overhaul its leadership and business strategy. Six other Southwest directors intend to retire in November. The company said it would appoint four new directors in the near future and would consider filling as many as three of those spots with candidates from the slate Elliott put forward last month. Southwest Airlines shares fell 1.6% Tuesday.
ALLY FINANCIAL
ALLY -18%
Ally's customers are struggling with the high cost of living, inflation and a weakening labor market, Chief Financial Officer Russ Hutchinson said Tuesday. He pointed to the bank's auto loans as a key problem area for the bank, and said that Ally will likely have to increase loan-loss reserves. In July and August, delinquencies increased and the bank's net charge-off rate was above expectations, he said. Ally shares plummeted 18% Tuesday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
