HONG KONG -- Tech titan Tencent Holdings Ltd. indicated it was doubling down on China's mobile-first world to ensure it remains a central presence on the smartphones carried by nearly 800 million Chinese users.
Tencent executives signaled they remain bullish on investments in video, artificial intelligence and mobile payments. "Many of the current achievements are really results from investments we made years ago," Tencent President Martin Lau said at a Wednesday press conference.
The plans emerged as the Shenzhen-based company said its fourth-quarter revenue grew 51% to 66.4 billion yuan ($10.4 billion), boosted by strong growth in mobile payments, digital content subscriptions and advertising on WeChat and QQ, its flagship mobile social apps. Its earnings nearly doubled from a year earlier to $3.2 billion.
The numbers reflected China's mobile emphasis. As of December, China had 772 million internet users, up 2.6% from the year before, with nearly 98% of those using mobile devices, according to the China Internet Network Information Center. Mobile video users grew by 9.7% and mobile payment users grew by 12%.
While such trends helped Tencent's video arm gain 63 million paid subscribers, up from 43 million at the end of September, they also aligned with changes among Tencent's core profit drivers: videogame users. Tencent's active PC videogame users declined in the latest quarter in part due to migration to mobile games, but also because the company is increasingly regarded as a purveyor of casual games.
Hard-core gamers would rather spend their money on games from rival NetEase or on overseas titles "because Tencent's games are too simple for them," said Pacific Epoch analyst Benjamin Wu.
Tencent Chief Executive Pony Ma said the company has no intention of going into the retail business. But it is boosting investment in so-called smart retail -- technologies designed to give consumers a more efficient shopping experience -- which is also a target of competitor Alibaba Group Holding Ltd.

Credit: By Alyssa Abkowitz
