Microsoft Corp. is introducing new tools for its campaign to outflank cloud-computing rival Amazon.com Inc. by targeting big businesses that have balked at shifting their data to the cloud.
The tools Microsoft unveiled Monday are aimed at what is perhaps the hottest part of the multibillion-dollar cloud market, the so-called hybrid cloud. Such systems let companies move some computing to cloud services while keeping control of data they need to hold closely.
Cloud computing, whereby customers rent computing horsepower rather than investing in their own, has become a profit driver for Microsoft and Amazon. Microsoft's commercial cloud revenue roughly doubled over two years to $11.6 billion in the latest quarter. The success of Azure, Microsoft's cloud offering, has helped build the Redmond, Wash., software giant into a $1.1 trillion company.
The cloud market overall reached $175.8 billion in sales in 2018, according to Gartner Research Inc.
Initial cloud growth was driven largely by businesses that hadn't spent much on in-house IT departments. Startups easily moved to the cloud, helping Amazon's cloud unit, known as Amazon Web Services, achieve early success.
But many of the companies with the biggest IT budgets, such as those in highly regulated industries like finance, have stood back, in part because of regulatory requirements that make it difficult for them to store data on servers belonging to other companies.
Other companies have been slow to invest in the cloud because of specific business challenges. Cargo ships and remote oil-and-gas extraction sites, for example, can be difficult to connect to the cloud.
To win business from such customers, cloud-services providers such as Microsoft are expanding into what they call "hybrid cloud," which mixes cloud IT systems with customer-owned data centers that store and process especially sensitive information.
Microsoft views its hybrid offerings as key to its efforts to catch up with Amazon, which was a pioneer in the cloud business. "It's really been a differentiator for us," said Scott Guthrie, Microsoft's executive vice president running the cloud and artificial intelligence group.
Microsoft said on Monday that it would expand its Azure offerings to target customers interested in hybrid cloud systems.
Microsoft has been offering its Windows operating system to run on customers' servers for decades. But two years ago it began allowing customers to run part of its Azure cloud on in-house equipment that is built to Microsoft specifications, enabling those servers to work seamlessly with Azure data centers.
Now Microsoft is adding new versions of those certified servers, which it calls Azure Stack. Among them is a "ruggedized" version, more robustly constructed to withstand tougher environments to appeal to military users. Microsoft just won a contract valued up to $10 billion to provide cloud infrastructure to the Pentagon, which is expected to have hybrid cloud features because some military information is too sensitive to put into the cloud.
The company is also introducing a system called Azure Arc to let more of its cloud-based database applications run within customers' data centers.
Microsoft isn't alone in its hybrid cloud bet. International Business Machines Corp. spent around $34 billion to buy open-systems software company Red Hat Inc. to bolster its credentials in the segment. "I view this as a defining moment in IBM's cloud journey," Chief Executive Ginni Rometty said in July when the deal closed.
IBM, which trails Amazon, Microsoft and others in the cloud market overall, has said it wants to dominate the hybrid cloud era. IBM has said only 20% of businesses have embraced cloud services. Arvind Krishna, IBM's senior vice president for the cloud, has said hybrid cloud services represent a $1.2 trillion business opportunity between hardware and software products.
Oracle Corp., another company doing extensive business with corporate IT departments, has labeled hybrid cloud a priority and said in October it was increasing its cloud-computing staff.
Julia White, corporate vice president of Azure, said Microsoft designed its cloud from the outset with the hybrid model in mind. "It's been our belief from the beginning that systems would be distributed," she said in an interview.
Amazon and Alphabet Inc.'s Google, another competitor, have their own hybrid cloud aspirations, including letting their cloud technology run on data centers that customers already have. Late last year, Amazon announced AWS Outposts, a product similar to Microsoft's Azure Stack servers.
Amazon's move is pushing Microsoft into further investment, said Erik Vogel, a global vice president of customer experience for Hewlett Packard Enterprise Co.'s GreenLake service, which works with clients to manage their hybrid cloud, and partners with big public cloud vendors such as Microsoft. "We're seeing a renewed investment and push for the Azure Stack solution," he said.

Credit: By Aaron Tilley
