WASHINGTON -- The Russian government and its proxies attempted to denigrate the Democratic Party and undermine voter confidence ahead of the 2022 midterm elections, an operation that most likely sought to weaken U.S. support for Ukraine, U.S. intelligence agencies said.
China also tacitly approved efforts to try to influence a handful of unidentified midterm races, though it refrained from favoring one party, as Beijing exhibited a greater willingness to target the U.S. with election influence activities than it has previously, according to a newly released intelligence community assessment. Iran also was blamed for trying to undermine confidence in U.S. democracy, while other foreign governments, including Cuba, were said to have experimented with small-scale U.S. influence pushes.
The findings come amid concerns from U.S. officials and security experts about the potential that foreign adversaries may pour resources into interfering in the 2024 presidential election contest eight years after Russia engineered a multipronged interference campaign to help Republican Donald Trump defeat Hillary Clinton, his Democratic foe in the 2016 election.
Such fears have been fanned by advances in artificial intelligence and other technologies that could be weaponized by bad actors to sow chaos and confusion in the lead-up to a likely rematch between President Biden and Trump. The former president has criticized U.S. military aid to Ukraine and claimed that, if elected again, he could broker a peace agreement between Ukraine and Russia in 24 hours.
Russia, China and Iran have previously denied meddling in U.S. electoral politics. Representatives for those governments didn't respond to requests for comment on the report.
The report, which is heavily redacted and was written last December, though only declassified Monday, contains few specifics about the influence attempts conducted leading up to the 2022 midterms, but what is generally described appears to be unsophisticated, scattered and unlikely to have been meaningfully effective. Tactics included covert use of social-media accounts, payments to online influencers, and enlistment of public relations firms, with a frequent focus on amplifying existing narratives within the U.S., it said.
"We did not observe a directive from any foreign leader to undertake a comprehensive, whole-of-government influence campaign," it said.
The Kremlin's targeting of the 2022 election didn't appear to involve "concerted efforts to shape specific outcomes" of individual congressional races, the report said.
Credit: By Dustin Volz
