Major U.S. stock indexes closed the books on a tumultuous August with monthly gains, riding a string of encouraging economic data to overcome concerns about the health of the labor market.
For all the intervening volatility, stocks rallied Friday to finish the month not far from where they started. The S&P 500 climbed 2.3% from the end of July, leaving it just shy of its record close. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 1.8% for the month, and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite ticked up 0.6%.
Knocked off kilter by a disappointing July jobs report in early August, stocks at one point appeared to be in a major tailspin as worries about the economy triggered an unwinding of popular trades, including bets on large technology companies.
But markets quickly regained their footing and were eventually buoyed by a run of better data. Not long after the July jobs data was released, reports showed continued easing in inflation and a jump in retail sales.
Weekly unemployment claims also remained steady -- a sign that, while a cooling labor market might be leading to a hiring slowdown, it is still not causing any big increase in layoffs.
Markets remain in a delicate balance, investors and analysts caution. Despite encouraging signs in recent weeks, the labor market remains a source of anxiety, putting a huge amount of weight on the August jobs report, which will be released next Friday.
While Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell has strongly signaled that the central bank plans to cut interest rates at its next meeting on Sept. 17-18, other officials have sent conflicting messages about how rapidly they want to cut rates beyond that point.
For now, the economy is in decent shape, "but the trend is in the wrong direction," said Sonu Varghese, global macro strategist at Carson Group, a financial advisory firm. "That's why I say risks are rising."
Stocks finished the month on a high note, surging late after flirting with declines over much of Friday's session. For the day, the S&P 500 rose 1%, the Dow added 0.6%, or roughly 228 points, while the Nasdaq advanced 1.1%.
For the year, the S&P 500 is up 18%.
Friday's moves came after the release of broadly positive economic data. According to the Commerce Department, personal spending rose 0.5% in July from the previous month, up from 0.3% in June. Personal income exceeded expectations, while the Fed's preferred inflation gauge held steady at 2.5% on an annual basis.
Among individual stocks, Dell Technologies rose 4.3% after the computer maker posted higher revenue and profit on surging demand for artificial intelligence-oriented servers. Ulta Beauty shares fell 4% after the cosmetics retailer cuts its full-year outlook.
Action was similarly choppy in the bond market. Yields on Treasurys initially ticked up after the strong personal spending data. They then fell back, only to climb again in a sign that traders were preparing for a post-Labor Day surge in corporate bond issuance.
By the end of the session, the yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note had settled at 3.910%, according to Tradeweb. That was up from 3.866% Thursday, though still down from 4.107% at the end of July.
Some analysts argue that markets could weather bad jobs data for August better than they handled the last round of payrolls data. One reason is the timing of the report.
"Now, we're just a couple weeks away from the Fed meeting, whereas before the thought was: Are we really going to have to wait six weeks for the Fed to make an announcement," said Ed Clissold, chief U.S. strategist at Ned Davis Research.
Interest rate futures suggested Friday that investors thought there is a roughly 31% chance the Fed will cut rates by a larger-than-normal half percentage point at its next meeting, according to CME Group. That was down from 85% earlier in the month but still up from 12% at the end of July.
Generate image description

Generate image description

Credit: By Sam Goldfarb
