New blood tests are taking on a growing role in early detection of such diseases as cancer and Alzheimer's, among the most devastating health risks in later life.
Using a single blood sample, one test released last year can detect early signals for more than 50 types of cancer, including some such as pancreatic cancer for which no routine preventive screening assays have existed up to this point. Other blood tests are proving accurate in detecting amyloid plaques -- the proteins that clump together in the brains of Alzheimer's patients, leading to eventual loss of memory and thinking skills -- even before cognitive declines have been experienced.
The emergence of these tests raises such questions as who should be getting them -- and what decisions patients and doctors need to make once they have the information in hand. The Alzheimer's and cancer tests are expensive and currently not covered by most insurance. When not used correctly, they also could lead to unnecessary concern, anxiety and further testing when there may not be an urgent health issue.
Grail Inc., a Menlo Park, Calif., biotech company, has produced a $949 cancer test called Galleri, intended for patients at higher risk for cancer, including those over the age of 50 or those with other risks such as smoking,obesity or a family historyof cancer. It uses DNA sequencing and machine-learning technology to analyze DNA shed by cancer cells in the blood.
In addition to determining whether a cancer signal is present, Galleri includes predictions of where the signal most likely is coming from in the body. Although it detects a positive signal in only 1.1% of tests, about 4 in 10 patients with a positive cancer-signal result are expected to have a confirmed cancer diagnosis, according to study data.There are caveats: If no cancer is confirmed with further testing, it could mean the test was insufficient to detect it, including cancer that is not shedding DNA into the bloodstream. And false positive and false negative results do occur, as in most cancer testing.
Mary Chang, 66 years old, a retired professor in Naples, Fla., says she was in perfect health when she decided to take the test last year. She had no symptoms that would lead her to suspect cancer, but her mother had died of cancer that had not been discovered until far advanced. Dr. Chang was stunned when her test returned a positive signal and a prediction that it could be colorectal cancer. That led to other tests including colonoscopies and PET scans -- and the discovery of a large tumor in her ascending colon.
Dr. Chang had surgery to remove the tumor in January, and says she is now cancer-free and back to her active lifestyle. She says the test, which she paid for herself, was "the best investment I ever made." It allowed her to take an active role in her own care, and it saved her from more advanced disease and likely a far worse outcome, she says.
The Galleri test requires a doctor's prescription, but some large healthcare providers, such as St. Louis-based Mercy, with more than 40 hospitals and 900 physician practices in four states, offer the tests to patients at risk, with the aim of finding cancers at the earliest and most treatable stages.
Gynecological oncologist Jay Carlson, who was an investigator in clinical trials of the Galleri test and is director of clinical research for Mercy, says its doctors directly refer patients applying for the test to Mercy's Center for Precision Medicine to be sure the test is appropriate. Patients are counseled that it doesn't replace standard recommended screenings such as mammograms and colonoscopies. Mercy notifies patients of negative results immediately online, but clinicians deliver news of positive tests personally and schedule follow-up consultations and counseling.
Dr. Carlson says that since Mercy began offering the Galleri test last year, more than 3,500 patients have requested it through Mercy's online portal, in addition to 1,061 referred by their doctors. Butafter learning more from clinicians about the test's capabilities and limits, and weighing that with the cost, some decided not to take it after all.Mercy as of late March had ordered 1,079 tests for patients who met the age and risk criteria. Of those, there have been nine positive tests, and two proved to be false positives on further workups.
"The opportunity to intervene and change the course of the disease is what is intriguing and exciting," Dr. Carlson says.
The new Alzheimer's blood tests, meanwhile, are meant to help determine if memory loss and brain aging are due to early stages of the disease. These tests, available with a doctor's prescription, include one from Quest Diagnostics Inc. and one developed at Washington University School of Medicine and licensed to C2N Diagnostics, a company founded by researchers at the university. The testshave been showntoaccurately assess whether amyloid plaques have started to accumulate in the brain based on the ratio of levels of two proteins in the blood.
While Alzheimer's blood tests are primarily meant to be used to evaluate and care for patients who already have symptoms of cognitive decline, patients with no symptoms can ask their doctors to prescribe one -- raising concerns about overuse. Suzanne Schindler, an associate professor of neurology at Washington University, and who is not affiliated with C2N, only recommends tests for people who have significant symptoms.
"If you are concerned about your memory and thinking, please see a dementia specialist who can consider whether a blood test or another type of test is most appropriate," Dr. Schindler says. The blood tests now available have different levels of accuracy, she adds, and understanding which test to use and how to interpret the results requires training and expertise.
Howard Fillit, co-founder and chief science officer of the nonprofit Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation, which provided some funding to C2N, says blood tests offer less-costly and more-accessible diagnostic testing. At $500 to $1,250, blood tests for Alzheimer's disease aren't covered by most health insurance, but they are less expensive and intrusive than other diagnostic tests for Alzheimer's.
While there are no preventive or curative treatments, a new class of medicines may help slow cognitive decline caused by the disease and more drugs are in the pipeline.Dr.Fillit says the new blood tests have diagnostic value and can more efficiently and less expensively helpidentify patients for clinical trials.The value of determining one's risk, he adds, must be weighedalong with other determinants such as genetic factors.
---
Ms. Landro, a former Wall Street Journal assistant managing editor, is the author of "Survivor: Taking Control of Your Fight Against Cancer." She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Laura Landro
