A PLACE FOR ROVER
Startup Vies for Top-Dog
Status in Pooch-Sitting
A Place for Rover Inc. aims to prove the local kennel just doesn't cut it when dog owners go on vacation and need a temporary home for their pups.
The Seattle company, known as Rover.com, is an online marketplace where dog owners can find experienced dog sitters in their area to provide a comfortable home and personalized attention. Dog owners can go to the site, browse profiles of available dog-sitters, and set up a "meet-and-greet" between pup and sitter.
Once the dog is in the sitter's care, owners are provided with text and photo updates of their dog's stay. The service also includes 24/7 veterinary access and premium pet insurance.
The company says it has some 25,000 pet-sitters -- some of whom it says make six-figure incomes -- registered on its site.
The idea for the company was sparked when Greg Gottesman, the founder of Rover.com and a managing director of company investor Madrona Venture Group, had an unpleasant experience at a local kennel with his family dog, Ruby Tuesday. The concept won the top prize at a local startup competition.
Rover.com, founded in 2011, recently raised $12 million led by Menlo Ventures.
-- Timothy Hay
---
WISE.IO
Joshua Bloom, an associate professor of astrophysics at the University of California, Berkeley, needed a way each morning to sort through the thousands of images that were gathered by telescopes the night before. That need became the basis for a startup, Wise.io Inc., which is using machine-learning technology to help analyze interactions among businesses and their customers. Wise.io's software platform automatically makes predictions based on even a small amount of data that businesses can refine. Wise.io recently raised $2.8 million in funding led by Voyager Capital.
---
MULESOFT
Venture funding rounds are generally led by one firm, but in the case of San Francisco-based MuleSoft Inc., competition to invest was so great that three firms co-led a recent $50 million funding round at a valuation of nearly $800 million. The company's software enables applications from different vendors to communicate and exchange data -- for example, it solves the problem of how to make Salesforce.com Inc. apps trade data with apps from Marketo Inc., Box Inc. or Microsoft Corp. by providing a bus that connects all of them, replacing kludgy and expensive integrations and patches. New Enterprise Associates, Lightspeed Venture Partners and Meritech Capital Partners led the round. Investors' enthusiasm for MuleSoft is part of a general appetite for enterprise software companies, which have been going public lately and trading at high valuations.
---
VC Dispatch is compiled by the staff of VentureWire, a daily newsletter covering startups and venture capital, found at pevc.dowjones.com.
