Tesla warned of "notably" slower growth in 2024, and its profit margin took a hit in the fourth quarter, signaling more uncertainty ahead for the world's most valuable automaker and the broader electric-vehicle industry.
Chief Executive Elon Musk also reiterated his desire for greater control over the electric-car company, saying he wants enough to have strong influence and deter activist shareholders.
The billionaire entrepreneur stunned Wall Street last week by offering what amounted to an ultimatum: He wrote on X that unless he controls around 25% of Tesla, he would prefer to build artificial intelligence and robotic products elsewhere.
"I'm not looking for additional economics. I just want to be an effective steward of very powerful technology," Musk said Wednesday on the company's earnings call. He currently owns 13% of Tesla and is its largest shareholder.
Tesla cautioned that growth is likely to come in lower in 2024 than it did last year, without specifying a target. In 2023, its global vehicle deliveries increased 38% compared with the previous year; for several years, Tesla had been aiming for 50% annual growth on average.
"Tesla is currently between two major growth waves," Musk said Wednesday, adding that the company is "very far along" on what he described as a "next generation low-cost vehicle." Musk said he expects Tesla to begin producing that vehicle at its factory in Texas toward the end of 2025.
Earlier Wednesday, Reuters reported that Tesla had told suppliers it wanted to start production of a new mass-market electric vehicle in mid-2025, and the model was described as a compact crossover.
The company's more subdued forecast is a sharp reversal from a couple of years ago, when demand seemed limitless and profitability was robust. Now, Tesla is confronting softening demand, shrinking margins and intensifying competition from rival electric-vehicle makers.
Tesla's stock was down roughly 5% in after-hours trading Wednesday, following the release of financial results. Shares have fallen some 16% this year through Wednesday, when they closed at $207.83.
For the fourth quarter, Tesla's net income more than doubled to $7.9 billion, largely from a one-time tax benefit. But the company's income from operations was down 47% from the prior-year period, and its fourth-quarter revenue came in shy of analysts' expectations.
Adjusted earnings per share of 71 cents for the fourth quarter also missed Wall Street's estimates.
Tesla said costs related to ramping up production of the new Cybertruck dented profitability, along with increased expenses for research-and-development projects, including those involving artificial intelligence.
Recent price cuts also took a toll, with Tesla saying vehicles sold for less on average in the fourth quarter than they had the previous year.
Its operating margin improved slightly quarter-over-quarter to 8.2% for the final three months of the year. Still, that figure was down from 16% in 2022's fourth quarter.
Tesla's valuation has long been underpinned by its sales momentum and Musk's promises to transform the carmaker into a leader in robotics and artificial intelligence. But his comments demanding more control of Tesla injected some uncertainty around his commitment to the EV company.
Tesla has also confronted other challenges in recent weeks. Hertz said this month it was selling off about one-third of its EV fleet, and Chinese automaker BYD overtook Tesla in the fourth quarter to become the world's top seller of EVs for the first time.
Musk on Wednesday's earnings call praised Chinese automakers. "If there are not trade barriers established, they will pretty much demolish most other car companies in the world," he said.
Earlier this month, Tesla initiated new price cuts in China and Europe and said it planned to suspend nearly all production in Germany for two weeks beginning in late January because of parts shortages caused by the conflict in the Red Sea. Tesla makes its Model Y crossover outside of Berlin.
The gathering headwinds fall against the backdrop of waning enthusiasm for EVs. Rival automakers are delaying investments, and executives are striking a more cautious tone about the level of consumer demand.
Buyers are also expressing reservations about going fully electric. High prices for EVs and concerns about charging and range continue to weigh on purchase decisions.
Hertz said it planned to sell about 20,000 EVs after confronting expensive repair costs and disappointing resale values on its fleet of battery-powered vehicles. The move was a reversal for a company that bet big on the technology. Hertz's commitment in 2021 to purchase 100,000 Tesla EVs helped send the electric-car maker's valuation above $1 trillion for the first time.
Credit: By Rebecca Elliott
