Artificial intelligence isn't new to the logistics world. For years, companies have used the technology to reshape operations.
Now, venture-capital investors are betting the overhaul has just begun.
Venture investors are writing checks to startups leveraging AI for a host of emerging supply-chain applications such as predictive analytics and industrial safety. The data-heavy nature of logistics makes it ripe for an AI remake, investors and entrepreneurs say, and the sector might serve as an early test case for how AI can reshape an industry.
"I think AI can be such a great place to take all of these varying data sources, structure it and then drive predictable and accurate analytics that really get to the end goal of when is my cargo going to get to me, what time and what items are going to arrive," said Kaitlyn Glancy, a partner at Eclipse, a venture firm focused on industrial technology.
Eclipse has backed startups developing logistics tech with AI applications including Reliable Robotics, which focuses on autonomous cargo aviation; Cheetah, which is developing demand forecasting and inventory prediction for restaurants; and Voxel, which leverages computer vision AI to monitor and score industrial safety in logistics and manufacturing environments.
AI could provide a host of benefits such as helping logistics companies cut costs by reducing timing inefficiencies, enabling retailers to avoid supply crunches, and allowing consumers to have better visibility of when goods will arrive.
Recent advancements in AI, such as conversational AI tools like OpenAI's ChatGPT, could benefit companies. Third-party logistics providers and freight forwarders could boost productivity by using ChatGPT-like tools to optimize scheduling, planning and pricing, Jonathan Geurkink, senior analyst for mobility tech and supply-chain tech at analytics firm PitchBook Data, said in a recent note.
Supply-chain startups saw a huge infusion of capital during the Covid-19 pandemic as venture investing boomed and the global supply-chain crisis gave these startups the chance to offer potential solutions. Funding for global logistics startups jumped 75% to $62 billion from 2020 to 2021, according to PitchBook. While it has slowed significantly since, the 2021 capital has provided a healthy runway for many of these companies.
Most of this sector's current crop of startups haven't hit public markets.
Credit: By Marc Vartabedian
