Pentagon procurements are often roiled by political interference, and the massive JEDI (Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure) cloud-computing contract is another case in point. The Biden Defense Department rightly decided Tuesday to scrap the contract and start afresh.
Two years ago the Pentagon was preparing to award the $10 billion JEDI contract to Microsoft or Amazon, both cloud leaders. The Pentagon needs to upgrade its technology for managing data, which range from reconnaissance mission readings to information about its more than 2.8 million employees, which are siloed among thousands of networks and centers.
Enter JEDI, which aimed to give the Pentagon a centralized "secure cloud environment" and allow it to "rapidly access computing and storage capacity to address warfighting challenges at the speed of relevance."
Amazon was considered the frontrunner, but Trump Defense Secretary Mark Esper delayed the decision after some in Congress and Oracle complained that a former Defense official who had worked at Amazon steered the procurement to the company. President Trump also called for an investigation of the contract, but a Pentagon probe concluded the conflict didn't affect the JEDI decision.
But after Defense handed the contract to Microsoft, Amazon alleged in a lawsuit that the contract was tainted by Mr. Trump's animus against then CEO Jeff Bezos. The Pentagon denied that Mr. Trump influenced the procurement, but the litigation threatened to delay the contract for years.
The fiasco threatens to set back U.S. artificial intelligence efforts as China races ahead. So the Biden Defense Department made the sensible decision to terminate the Microsoft contract and redo the bidding. More cloud providers including Oracle and Google will be allowed to bid for the new contract, which will run for no more than five years.
Pentagon officials are right to say that cloud computing has evolved in recent years. Awarding a single $10 billion to either Microsoft or Amazon would have tied the Defense Department to one company's technology and prices for up to a decade. Ten years ago cloud technology was in its infancy. How could the Pentagon predict the market leader in 2031?
The Pentagon is now planning a multi-vendor approach, which is what many private firms use. Flexera's RightScale 2019 State of the Cloud report found that 84% of enterprises surveyed use a multi-cloud strategy. The CIA contracted with Amazon in 2013 but is now pursuing a multi-cloud initiative. Using multiple providers could also bolster data security against inevitable cyber-attacks.
Defense needs to ensure the new cloud contract suits a tech market that can change as fast as battlefield conditions.
