Adobe has called off its planned $20 billion acquisition of the collaboration-software company Figma, weeks after a U.K. regulator warned that the deal would likely harm innovation.
Adobe and Figma said Monday morning that they have mutually agreed to terminate the cash-and-stock transaction because they couldn't see a clear path to receiving regulatory approval from the European Commission and the U.K. Competition and Markets Authority.
The deal is the latest to run into a tighter global regulatory environment as some regulators and policy makers have been giving technology acquisitions more scrutiny than they have in the past.
The U.K. agency late last month said that, following a detailed investigation, it provisionally found the acquisition would eliminate competition between two main companies in product-design software, reduce innovation and remove Figma as a threat to Adobe's flagship Photoshop and Illustrator products.
The European Commission aired similar concerns in November and gave Adobe a chance to respond to its objections.
Adobe Chief Executive Shantanu Narayen said Monday that the companies strongly disagree with the findings but "believe it is in our respective best interests to move forward independently."
The companies have signed a termination agreement that requires Adobe to pay Figma a $1 billion termination fee.
Adobe agreed to buy the collaboration-software company in September 2022. The acquisition would have been the largest yet for the Silicon Valley software company known for its common workplace tools and PDF files.
The deal surprised Adobe's investors. Some worried Adobe was paying too much. Its shares plunged nearly 17% the day after the deal was announced.
Shares of Adobe rose 2.5% after the news Monday, as some investors were relieved the company was no longer on the hook for the deal and its price.
This year, it hasn't needed a big acquisition to create buzz around its ambitions, as it is seen as one of the core companies tapping into the power of artificial intelligence.
Adobe shares slid last week after it unveiled a weaker-than-expected outlook for revenue growth. Still, its shares have risen more than 75% this year as it is one of the companies already using AI to make its core products more powerful.
When Adobe initially made the deal, it needed to shore up its web-based collaboration software technology. Since then, the company has improved its own tools and invested heavily in AI features, such as image generator Firefly, Bernstein analyst Mark Moerdler wrote in a note.
"Adobe is in a substantially different position as a company and with its products. Adobe, leveraging its Artificial Intelligence expertise and depth and breadth of its content, is the leader in AI for content curation in imaging and short video, audio, 3D and more," he said.
The U.K. Competition and Markets Authority's profile has been rising after it initially rejected Microsoft's since-completed $75 billion acquisition of Activision Blizzard. Microsoft was able to get approval for the deal only after reworking part of it.
After more than a year of discussion with the CMA, Microsoft forfeited cloud-streaming rights for "Call of Duty" and other popular Activision franchises in much of the world.
The U.S. Federal Trade Commission tried to stop the deal in the U.S. but was overruled in court.
The U.K. competition regulator stepped up its investigation in late June before disclosing its provisional findings in late November.
In a blog post Monday, Figma CEO Dylan Field said completing the acquisition with Adobe would have been the company's preferred outcome. He also noted that Figma's business has continued to grow in the months since the deal was announced and the company has added 500 new employees.
Credit: By Dean Seal and Tom Dotan
