One of my favorite childhood novels recounted the story of a boy separated from his family and caught behind Japanese lines in war-torn midcentury China. I felt I was with the boy, Tien Pao, when he woke terrified in a sampan sweeping downriver toward the smoldering ruins of his village. Alongside Tien Pao, I watched a doomed train back into a burning station and heard the screams of its passengers. Together we crouched in the broiling sun, scanning throngs of refugees for a familiar face. Later, we flew in a plane over an aerodrome and I felt his jolt of joy as if it were my own when, far below, he saw his mother.
That Tien Pao was a boy and I a girl, that his parents were married and mine divorced, that his skin was one hue and mine another -- none of this impinged on the thrilling immediacy of Meindert DeJong's "The House of Sixty Fathers," illustrated by the young Maurice Sendak.
The teacher who gave me that book widened my horizons and enriched my life. Would she still do so today? I fear not. Schools and the world of children's literature have been seized by the notion that the most important thing about a book is whether children can "see themselves" in it. This is understood in a narrow and reductive way: The race, ethnicity and sexual orientation of the young reader must be matched by those of the characters they meet in books.
What began as a laudable idea -- that children's literature should embrace a variety of stories and all manner of characters -- has morphed into monomania. Identity is all. Professional journals that catalog and review new children's titles now make a fetish of highlighting the pallor or pigmentation of fictional characters.
Publisher's Weekly, for instance, in its review of "Faraway Things," a forthcoming picture book by Dave Eggers and illustrated by Kelly Murphy, finds it necessary to report a young character is "pale-skinned" and an older one is "brown-skinned." A reviewer for Kirkus notes: "The captain has dark skin; Lucian and the others have light skin."
Researchers from Columbia and the University of Chicago have brought race-labeling to a new level by enlisting machines to sort literary characters by color. Led by Anjali Adukia, an assistant professor at Chicago University's Harris School of Public Policy, the team used artificial intelligence to sift through the past century of prize-winning children's books to identify characters by sex, age and color. Released April 12, their study, "What We Teach About Race and Gender: Representation in Images and Text of Children's Books," brings an antebellum ethic of race consciousness to American children's literature.
The research team examined two sets of novels and picture books: "mainstream" ones, which won the American Library Association's Newbery and Caldecott medals, and "diversity" ones, which have won ALA distinction because they satisfy criteria related to race, religion, ethnicity, sexual orientation or physical ability.
The researchers taught the computer to detect faces in illustrations, classify skin colors and predict characters' race, sex and age. The machine also combed through 1,133 prize-winning texts for gendered language, mentions of color and references to age. Books in the "diversity" group were found, over time, to depict more characters with darker skin, while "mainstream" books showed characters with either lighter or "chromatically ambiguous" features. There is, the study reports, "a persistent disproportionate representation of males, particularly White males, and lighter-skinned people relative to darker-skinned people." The study includes charts and graphs depicting gradations of human skin color that would make John C. Calhoun proud.
The AI findings are both dispassionate and shockingly retrograde. Such a mechanistic analysis leaves no place for art or imagination or the mysterious ignition that happens when a child connects with a story. The implication is that if you're a dark-skinned child, you are supposed to "see yourself" only in characters who have dark skin. If you are a pale-skinned child, a boy especially, it seems that you enjoy an unfair share of children's literature.
And what of characters that can't be classified as either light or dark? They are a product of a practice the study authors disdainfully call "butterscotching," which "some may argue sends an assimilationist message regarding the representation of race." Others may argue it's an invitation to universality. A good book doesn't cut readers off. It invites them in, and it doesn't care what they look like.
"The House of Sixty Fathers" won a Newbery honor in 1957, which means my old friend Tien Pao is somewhere in the team's "mainstream" color charts. To me he was a living boy, but in the study he's been flattened and denatured and reduced to a few demographic data points. It's ghastly.
That all kinds of characters belong in children's literature goes without saying, but skin color isn't what makes a book good or bad. "Inequality in representation," the study authors assert, "constitutes an explicit statement of inequality in value." That's false. If it were true, I would never have read Robert Louis Stevenson to my four daughters, lest they be blighted by the rarity of female characters in "Kidnapped" and "Treasure Island" -- books they loved. If my teacher in the 1970s had shared today's obsession with identity, she might never have introduced me to Tien Pao.
---
Mrs. Gurdon writes the Journal's Children's Books column.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Don't Racially Pigeonhole Children's Books" -- WSJ May 1, 2021)
Credit: By Meghan Cox Gurdon
