WASHINGTON -- A State Department office that uses high-level U.S. intelligence to combat Russian and Chinese information operations abroad faces a possible shutdown at the end of the year, just weeks before President-elect Donald Trump returns to the White House.
Its fate is seen as an early sign of the willingness of the second Trump administration and its congressional allies to push back against foreign disinformation plots, which intelligence officials say went into hyperdrive during the 2024 election season, powered in part by artificial intelligence.
The office, known as the Global Engagement Center, has vocal backers including retired Army Gen. Paul Nakasone, the former head of the National Security Agency and the U.S. Cyber Command, who says it has been an important tool for stymieing foreign disinformation directed at overseas audiences. But its most acerbic critics include Elon Musk, the billionaire owner of X who backed Trump during the election and is now expected to head a commission that would recommend ways to cut government bureaucracy and spending.
Musk alleged last year the center has sought to shape social-media content.
House Republicans also have trained their sights on the center, accusing it of funding organizations that have meddled in domestic politics. The center has more support in the Senate, where a bipartisan push is under way to extend it with strict controls on how it spends its funds.
Barring congressional action, the center will shut down after its current seven-year mandate lapses on Dec. 23.
The Trump transition team didn't respond to requests to comment on whether the president-elect sees a role for the center in his administration.
Proponents of the center say its budget of $61 million and some 130 employees is modest compared with the billions of dollars Russia and China are spending on campaigns to spread misinformation about the U.S. and its policies and shape international opinion.
In recent years, the center has documented a Chinese multibillion-dollar disinformation campaign that used online bots and troll armies. It also exposed Russian efforts to spread disinformation that Western public health efforts to protect Africans against disease are a plot to use them as unwitting test subjects in Pentagon biological research programs.
After it accused Russian-owned outlet RT of carrying out disinformation and other operations at the behest of Russian intelligence, several social-media companies, including Meta Platforms, which owns Facebook and Instagram, and TikTok blocked them from their platforms.
RT still posts its content on X, the social-media company Musk purchased in 2022. Musk in a 2023 tweet accused the center of being the "worst offender in US government censorship & media manipulation."
Musk didn't respond to a request for comment about his current views on the center. A spokesman for X also didn't respond.
The center's possible folding comes as X and other social-media platforms have retreated from policing disinformation. At the same time, the rapid growth of generative artificial intelligence has made it much easier for Russia, Iran, and others to disseminate disinformation to international audiences in a variety of languages, including Spanish.
The center traces its origin to a State Department office established in 2011 to counter violent foreign online propaganda by al Qaeda and other international terrorist groups. The Global Engagement Center took over that mission when it was established five years later. Its role was later broadened by Congress so it could respond to information operations by foreign governments.
During Trump's first administration, the center played a role in chronicling Russia's extensive disinformation efforts.
But it has faced questions about the effectiveness of its operations. A September 2022 report on the center by the State Department's Office of Inspector General identified organizational problems with the center, including the absence of a presidentially appointed coordinator and special envoy for nearly half of the center's existence.
Three months later, the Biden administration moved to address those concerns by naming James Rubin, the chief spokesman for former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, to the post.
While the center focuses strictly on countering disinformation overseas, it has often been pulled into a broader debate over the effectiveness of the U.S. government's role in identifying and thwarting foreign information operations.
Credit: By Michael R. Gordon and Dustin Volz
