Demand for artificial intelligence experts is surging as the economy opens up and companies expand their use of the technology to enhance the customer experience, increase sales and improve operations.
There were 37,000 AI job postings in the first quarter of this year, up more than 45% from the fourth quarter of 2020, according to IT trade group CompTIA, which analyzes employer job-posting data. Among the most sought-after AI professionals: data scientists and machine-learning developers and engineers.
"AI has had a very strong start to 2021," said Tim Herbert, CompTIA's executive vice president for research and market intelligence.
The Covid-19 pandemic has accelerated corporate digital transformations, with many companies now relying more on AI algorithms to forecast demand, make products smarter, improve the customer experience and boost other business functions.
"For the first time, we're actually seeing that [AI hiring] is equally busy across all of the market sectors," said Craig Stephenson, managing director, North America technology officers practice, at Korn Ferry.
CompTIA's Mr. Herbert said manufacturing, finance, professional services, retail and other sectors are posting openings.
Retailer Home Depot Inc. said it is increasing its AI hiring, although the company declined to provide the number of current AI job openings. The company is looking for data scientists and others with AI skills.
Fahim Siddiqui, the company's senior vice president of information technology, said the company is embedding AI talent across the organization, from store and supply-chain operations to merchandising and e-commerce.
The company is using machine learning, or ML, to analyze online customer activity and to make online product recommendations based on the shopping patterns of other customers. If shoppers, for instance, buy floor tiles, a Home Depot AI system will suggest tools and supplies to help them install the flooring.
"To extract value from our business and have insights into our business," he said, "AI/ML becomes an important and a necessary tool across all our different job functions."
Demand for AI and other IT talent comes as the overall U.S. employment picture continues to brighten.
U.S. employers added 50,000 new enterprise-technology workers in March, marking the fourth consecutive month of gains in the field, according to CompTIA.
Those gains mirror the overall improving job market. U.S. companies last month posted their largest jobs gain since August. Overall, the economy added 916,000 jobs and the unemployment rate fell to 6%.
Agriculture-machinery and technology company Deere & Co. said it has been expanding its AI recruitment for several years and will increase AI hiring again this year.
The company has been embedding AI technology in a number of products. Deere, for instance, has been developing its See & Spray technology, which uses computer vision and machine learning to differentiate crops from weeds, allowing farmers to direct herbicides only to the unwanted plants. The technology is expected to be available next year.
Credit: By John McCormick
