Social-media use has become the norm in the U.S., with around 7-in-10 Americans now using platforms like Facebook, Twitter and Instagram to connect with others, share news and information or be entertained, according to the Pew Research Center.
For many people, it's a part of daily life: Roughly three-quarters of Facebook users and 60% of Instagram users visit these sites at least once a day, Pew data show.
It isn't surprising, then, that social media has permeated the workplace, creating a dilemma for security-conscious companies: Should they allow employees to use their personal accounts while on the job for professional or even personal reasons? Or do the risks outweigh the benefits?
Some say companies can't be successful today unless they accept some level of social-media risk. And the best way to manage that risk isn't by banning social media at work but by developing policies, training and support to help employees engage wisely.
Others say letting employees use personal accounts at work is a recipe for trouble. Social-media sites can collect extensive insights about users through data mining and psychometric profiling, they say, and that is incompatible with the privacy and corporate-confidentiality obligations many firms have.
---
YES:
Having a Restrictive
Workplace Carries
Its Own Risks
----
By Alexandra Samuel
When I first began helping companies use Twitter and Facebook more than a decade ago, every organization started with this question: How can we use social media without compromising our security and privacy obligations?
Today, most businesses recognize that a branded social-media presence is an essential part of marketing and customer service, even if it comes with some risks.
The same kind of risk/benefit assessment applies to the use of personal social-media accounts by employees.
While it is true that companies can reduce risk if they ban personal social-media use during business hours, discourage employees from making any online references to their work and maybe even ban personal smartphones from the workplace, that is a terrible idea for the same reason companies now embrace social-media marketing: You can't be a successful company in the social-media era unless you accept some level of social media-related risk.
When it comes to employees' personal Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn or Facebook accounts, there are three kinds of posts that worry companies.
The first is employee posts that are directly tied to the business.
Many marketing teams will ask employees to share company news through their personal accounts as a way to inexpensively amplify the brand's voice and give employees a sense of ownership. Many salespeople, researchers and other professionals also rely on LinkedIn and Twitter to identify prospective customers, make new contacts and build relationships. Closing the door to this kind of social-media use, just because it's taking place in personal accounts, removes a crucial part of employees' tool kit.
The second category of personal social-media use is work-related but not part of the employee's job.
It's hard to be effective on social media if you sound like a corporate mouthpiece, which is why even security-conscious companies should not only allow -- but encourage -- employees to build strong professional presences in which they share industry news, reflections on business trends or tips about how to work effectively.
People who share such things online develop strong networks that can help them in their day-to-day work, and become more valuable employees because they are constantly learning.
The third (and trickiest) type of employee post is personal updates that are posted during the workday.
Why would a company allow employees to post selfies from their desks or vent on Facebook about family issues? For the same reason that companies pay for gym memberships and fruit bowls: Happy, healthy employees are easier to retain and better at their jobs.
In 2018, using social media is part of how many of us stay healthy and happy. It's far healthier for employees to take a 10-minute mental break to watch a kitten video, check in with a favorite Facebook group or post a few photos on Instagram than to use that same 10 minutes to smoke a cigarette outside or gossip in the hallway. It is also far healthier for employees to use social media with the support and guidance of a corporate team that can raise their awareness of the more insidious aspects of social-media use (like the way personal data is aggregated and turned into ad targeting).
The senior leadership team needs to balance the risk of a data leak with the risks of losing their best employees; to balance the potential cost of a privacy infraction with the potential cost of missing revenue targets because they've hampered their salespeople with overly restrictive social-media rules.
Are there associated risks with allowing or encouraging social-media use? Sure. There also are security risks associated with accepting credit cards or leaving your office blinds up. But we accept those risks because they're part of doing business and being a humane employer.
Companies should develop social-media policies, training and support teams to manage any increased risk. But at the end of the day, companies have to decide what kind of business culture they want: a culture of risk management and control? Or a culture of openness and empowerment?
They shouldn't delude themselves that only the latter has risks.
---
Ms. Samuel is a technology researcher and the author of "Work Smarter With Social Media." She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
---
NO:
The Result Could Be
Accidental Disclosure
And Oversharing
----
By Sabino Marquez
While social media is certainly a valuable marketing and customer-service tool, encouraging employees to use their private social-media accounts at work -- whether for professional or personal reasons -- can present material risks to an organization's security and privacy commitments.
Unlike other business software that employees may use, social media bites back. If there's one thing we've all been reminded of in the recent Facebook-Cambridge Analytica data-sharing coverage, it's that no one can trust social-media platforms to operate as if they have any duty to protect users' privacy. The social-media ecosystem has shown capable of providing astonishing insights based on data mining and psychometric profiling, and the uses of these insights aren't always transparent.
It is precisely because the targets of these activities may include employees (and everyone in their social networks) that organizations should closely scrutinize the benefits of any initiative encouraging the use of individual social-media accounts in the workplace. This type of exposure is incompatible with the mission of a security-conscious company.
Does your organization have contractual, statutory, market, insurance or compliance criteria that require data security and privacy-risk management?
Many firms do, and they often stem from agreements with customers, regulators, vendors or other outside parties with which the company does business. If an organization has such obligations, letting employees use personal social-media accounts at work likely contravenes the corporate duty to reduce risks to data security and privacy.
I'm not suggesting that companies stop using social media to generate sales leads, or as branding and customer-care tools. However, encouraging social-media use beyond these specific teams, or outside of corporate channels, poses two major risks to the business.
First, encouraging employees to use personal social-media accounts at work vastly increases the chances of accidental disclosure of protected information. It isn't enough to publish a policy or a code of conduct and hope people will follow it; keeping confidential data safe requires a sustained governance, monitoring and enforcement effort. That might mean implementing monitoring controls so aggressive they would be a profound invasion of employee privacy.
Second, the more employees use their own social-media accounts, the larger a company's "attack surface" -- that is, the more opportunities adversaries have to extract confidential data through social channels. Every detail employees share on social media makes it easier for an adversary to manipulate them into exposing confidential information. Notably, every detail about internal departmental and company operations shared by employees (perhaps over the chat feature of a business social network) may expose internal processes and methods that a company might want to keep confidential. Professional meetups, forums and conventions are appropriate venues to discuss professional best practices; Facebook and Twitter aren't.
Social media is designed to encourage oversharing. LinkedIn uploads personal address books (containing entire corporate directories). Photos or videos uploaded to Facebook can be analyzed via artificial intelligence to identify faces, brands, text, floor plans, wall hangings, documents or whatever else might have value. "Private messages" sent through social messenger services can be accessed by third parties.
And that's just if nothing goes wrong; even without a data breach, social-media users are routinely profiled, targeted and then distracted or manipulated by advertisers (and by the social network itself).
Companies can mitigate some of these risks by developing strong social-media policies. IT teams can monitor data flow to ensure confidential data doesn't leave through social channels, and social-media managers can monitor social content to ensure quality, message discipline and act as first responders in the event of a data leak. However, these strategies are time- and cost-intensive and can only reduce -- not eliminate -- the risk to privacy and corporate-confidentiality obligations.
Social media belongs in the enterprise, but it belongs as an outbound marketing activity performed by trained professionals who are accountable to the same requirements and commitments as any other department handling protected data assets.
---
Mr. Marquez is chief information security officer and privacy program director at Allocadia, a Vancouver-based software company. Email him at reports@wsj.com.
