China's Alibaba has grown into one of the world's biggest tech giants. As it has grown, it has spread into many different areas of tech and has begun to bump against U.S. tech giants like Amazon and Google.
The Wall Street Journal's global technology editor, Jason Dean, discussed Alibaba's strategy with Joseph Tsai, the company's executive vice chairman. Here are edited excerpts.
MR. DEAN: Let's talk about your ambition. You started off in e-commerce. You're now directly or indirectly in cloud computing, media and entertainment, logistics, payments and others as well. Your vision is that customers will meet, work and live at Alibaba, which is pretty much everything. Where does the ambition end, and what's the unifying vision?
MR. TSAI: Since 1999, we started the company with a mission to make it easy to do business anywhere. We want to make sure we help businesses, companies, especially small companies, to be able to reach their markets and reach consumers.
Today, we run the largest retail platform in China. There are over 500 million consumers on that platform. And most of them are mobile. So whenever we think about expanding into a new space, we ask ourselves, "Is that consistent with our mission? Are we staying true to that mission?"
MR. DEAN: You've been called the Amazon of China. You've competed in China against them and won. But increasingly, you're competing head-to-head globally, particularly in the cloud business. What is the strategy there? Are you trying to take them on outside China, as well as Microsoft and Google in the cloud?
MR. TSAI: If you look at Amazon and Alibaba, the two companies grew up in very different environments. We grew up in China. Amazon grew up in the United States. We started as e-commerce companies. You can say that we're from the same genus but grew up as two different species because we have our own environment.
China is a developing economy. It's an environment where the economy is shifting from investment and exports to consumption.
If you look at China today, it exhibits a lot of the developing-economy characteristics, whereas Amazon is in a very well-developed economy. E-commerce is actually very, very tough. It's not about just doing an app or launching a website. It's about figuring out the entire supply chain. We have to worry about putting merchants together. We have to worry about logistics. We have to worry about payment.
There is going to be some competition at the fringe. But in China today, the cloud market is probably what the U.S. was like maybe seven, eight years ago. It's about to take off. We're very excited by it.
We're very happy to continue to grow our business in China. Our international expansion really focuses on our customers, who are doing business in China, as they expand abroad. We help them expand.
We also have an effort in, for example, Southeast Asia, outside of China, where a lot of Southeast Asian companies are looking at cloud solutions. So that's where we are.
MR. DEAN: In that world, you have to be going up against them head-to-head, at least in some cases. And you're targeting multinationals as well, you're advertising in the U.S. What's your competitive advantage against Amazon when you go head-to-head with them?
MR. TSAI: In the cloud you really compete on technology and products. And we have areas we feel we are excellent in. We're very good in database, we're very good in middleware as well as security. We're not just competing with Amazon, we're competing with Google, we're competing with Microsoft, great, great technology companies. But we feel like we have both the wherewithal and the technology and the people to compete.
MR. DEAN: You announced last week you're ramping up R&D spending to a total of $15 billion over the next three years. What's driving that?
MR. TSAI: As a percentage of revenue, historically, we've been spending roughly around 10%, 11% of our revenues on R&D. So with this effort, $15 billion over three years, roughly on average about $5 billion a year, you're looking at midteens revenue percentage spending. I don't think that's a huge stretch.
This just shows our commitment to put more resources into the talent as well as the technology development as we see the future.
With this effort we're going to be focused a lot on very advanced areas like quantum computing, machine learning, computer vision, voice recognition, natural-language processing.
MR. DEAN: Several of those categories that you mentioned fall under the rubric of artificial intelligence. It's hard to separate the hype from the reality. Where do you have an advantage in AI technology?
MR. TSAI: I have a cigar theory on AI; you look at Cuba, C-U-B-A. Those are the four important elements. C stands for cloud computing, which means low-cost computing to train the machines and manage massive amounts of data. U means use case. We serve hundreds of millions of consumers every day. We're seeing their behavior. We have fresh data every day. B means big data. A is algorithm. You need to have smart people, the scientists, the mathematicians, to develop the good algorithms.
We are one of the top companies that have all those elements in place.
MR. DEAN: You and Google and Facebook have an enormous amount of data on people. Why should people trust the big tech companies to treat that data responsibly?
MR. TSAI: It's because it's good for business to be a responsible custodian of consumer data. If you lose that trust, why would anybody want to use your service the next day?
That's the basic principle there. It's very, very important that those that preside over these large troves of data, the companies, are very mindful of that consumer trust, the difference between the trust and nontrust is a very thin wall. So, we feel like we're treading on thin ice all the time.
MR. DEAN: Alibaba founder Jack Ma told President Trump in January that Alibaba would create a million jobs in the U.S. over five years. That pledge was met with some skepticism. Can you tell us what you're doing to make that a reality?
MR. TSAI: We take our China experience. There are over 10 million small merchants that are selling on our platform. Whenever you try to help a merchant to sell more, grow their business, it creates jobs. We have studies that show that the Alibaba platform has created over 30 million jobs in China just from merchants hiring people. The logistics industry is hiring a lot of people.
We believe that we can bring the same idea, create a platform here to let American companies, especially small businesses, sell to Chinese consumers.
Remember, we have access to 500 million consumers in China. That is a huge job-creation opportunity.

Credit: By Jason Dean
