Two former senior executives from midmarket buyout firm One Equity Partners are teaming up with former U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo to build a private-equity firm focused on backing midsize technology companies.
Chip Schorr, a former One Equity senior managing director, began forming Niobrara Capital Partners earlier this year and leads the firm in New York as managing partner. Joining him as partners are Pompeo and Todd Bradley, a software executive who served as an operating partner at One Equity.
Pompeo served under the Trump administration as head of the Central Intelligence Agency from 2017 to 2018 and later as Secretary of State from 2018 to 2021.
The firm's leaders plan to back business-to-business technology companies to capitalize on emerging trends such as the adoption of artificial intelligence, the growth of quantum computing and the reshoring of critical technology manufacturing. The areas in which Niobrara invests tend to be less capricious than consumer-oriented businesses, according to Schorr.
"I never go anywhere near the consumer, because in the tech world the consumer is where volatility exists," said Schorr, who has spent decades backing tech companies. Early in his career at Citicorp Venture Capital, which evolved into CVC Capital Partners, he worked on the 1997 corporate carve-out of computer chip pioneer Fairchild Semiconductor, regarded as one of the industry's first tech buyout deals.
Niobrara targets North American and European companies with earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of $15 million to $100 million, focusing across a range of subsectors within technology, from semiconductors and software to financial technology and information technology services.
Earlier this year, Niobrara partnered with Prysm Capital to back a $175 million majority investment in Polar Semiconductor, a Bloomington, Minn.-based maker of chips for automotive, consumer and industrial applications. Niobrara plans to help Polar double its manufacturing capacity in part by tapping into state and federal incentives, including a 2022 law called the Chips Act that aims to promote reshoring of semiconductor manufacturing back to the U.S.
"It's benefiting from a new wave of demand created by the fact that the Department of Defense, medical companies and automotive companies looked at what happened to supply chains over the past few years and said, 'I need a secure domestic source of these materials,'" Schorr said.
Pompeo, who entertained a Republican presidential bid until last year, also is a former congressman besides his two stints directing government agencies. Joining Niobrara, he said, marks a return to the business world where he spent the early part of his career before entering politics.
"I ran two businesses and was an entrepreneur and businessman in Kansas for 15 to 20 years," Pompeo said. "That's how I think of my professional life in spite of my career in [government]."
Pompeo co-founded Thayer Aerospace, a Kansas-based manufacturer of aircraft components that was sold to Highland Capital Management. He later served as president of oil-field equipment manufacturer and services company Sentry International.
The skills required to manage large government agencies like the CIA and the State Department also apply to growing companies, he said.
"There are 70,000 people working for the U.S. State Department, so there's an organizational leadership and operational piece to it as well," he added.
Schorr said Pompeo also brings with him an extraordinary breadth of relationships built over the years as well as expertise in navigating the complexities of both global partnerships and evolving regulatory environments.
"Mike is super plugged-in," he added.
Credit: By Laura Kreutzer
