CONAGRA BRANDS
Food Maker Lifts
Outlook for Profit
Conagra Brands Inc., the maker of Hunt's ketchup and Slim Jim meat snacks, on Thursday raised its profit outlook despite rising costs for ingredients and shipping.
Conagra on Thursday projected adjusted earnings of up to $2.05 a share for its fiscal year ending in May, about 8% higher than expected. It expects sales to grow 2% on a comparable basis in the current quarter.
Conagra also followed General Mills this week in saying it might raise prices to reflect higher costs. Chief Executive Sean Connolly said keeping prices flat while costs rise would cut into product-development investments that grocery stores want Conagra to make.
Net income for its latest quarter rose to $362.8 million. Adjusted earnings, excluding one-time events like a lower tax rate, came to 61 cents a share. Revenue rose 0.7% to $2 billion.
-- Annie Gasparro
---
SUPERVALU
Blackwells Mounts
Fight for Board
A proxy fight is under way at Supervalu Inc. as an activist investor seeks to overhaul the board at one of the largest grocery companies in the U.S.
Blackwells Capital LLC, which was already pushing for change at Supervalu, has nominated candidates for six seats on the nine-person board.
Supervalu officials said the advancement of six candidates constitutes an effort to take control of the company. Supervalu said it is outsize to the stake the firm holds and is unfair to other shareholders.
Supervalu said excluding certain options, Blackwells has a 2% stake. Including those options, Blackwells put the stake at 4.9%.
The grocery chain said Thursday it doesn't believe proposed board changes from Blackwells are necessary to boost shareholder value.
-- Heather Haddon and Imani Moise
---
FORD MOTOR
Auto Maker Deepens
Partnership in India
Ford Motor Co. is taking steps to solidify its partnership with Indian auto maker Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. by jointly developing several new models, an attempt at lowering costs in an important emerging market.
The Dearborn, Mich., based car maker said Thursday it would develop new sport-utility vehicles and a small electric car through the partnership and sell them in India and other emerging markets where demand is high for low-cost cars that return only slim margins.
The move is part of a broader strategy under Chief Executive Jim Hackett to cut costs by using partnerships to help defray the hefty expense of engineering and building new models.
-- Christina Rogers
---
MONSANTO
Artificial Intelligence
Is Brought to Bear
Monsanto Co. is using artificial intelligence to forecast farmers' need for crop seeds, and save money.
Jim Swanson, chief information officer, said machine-learning techniques have produced more accurate projections of how much extra seed Monsanto needs to keep on hand, helping to reduce its "safety stock." Whereas the world's largest seed supplier used to maintain a safety stock of about 5% of production, AI has in some cases helped get that down to 2%, Mr. Swanson said at an event in Chicago. "That's significant dollars," he added.
-- Jacob Bunge
