America is the world's leader in technological innovation, and that's unlikely to change. But in the global economy, information and investments flow instantaneously, and America's most important asset -- intellectual property -- is easily copied and counterfeited.
Making matters worse, a string of court decisions have weakened U.S. intellectual property rights. The Supreme Court passed up deciding important cases this month that could have reversed the trend. These events diminish confidence in the U.S. patent system and undermine American global competitiveness.
The Founders believed patents were so important that those rights were enshrined in the Constitution even before the Bill of Rights guaranteed free expression and other important liberties. By assuring inventors exclusive rights for a limited time, the U.S. patent system enables companies large and small to recoup their investments in research and development. It even allows amateur innovators to become major disrupters. Google traces its origin to two U.S. patents, one granted to Larry Page and the other to Sergey Brin, filed in the late 1990s while they were students at Stanford.
But today's U.S. patent system is a shadow of its former self. Tech giants, anxious to stave off competition, have worked tirelessly, under the guise of "reform," to undermine the value of U.S. patents. The result is enormous confusion about patent rights, uncertainty for innovators and investors, and substantial harm to U.S. competitiveness.
To get a patent, an invention must be novel, nonobvious and useful -- all reasonable requirements. But the Supreme Court reconceptualized the patent-eligibility requirement in three cases: Bilski v. Kappos (2010), Mayo Collaborative Services v. Prometheus Laboratories (2012) and Alice v. CLS Bank International (2014). Judges say the law forbids patents on "abstract ideas" and "natural phenomena," but they never define those terms and they appear nowhere in the patent statutes.
Under the "abstract idea" and "natural phenomena" paradigms, courts have canceled patents for groundbreaking medical diagnostic inventions. One allows doctors to do prenatal genetic screening with a simple blood draw, without a risky amniocentesis procedure. Another, by Athena Diagnostics, enables doctors to diagnose a patient's root cause of myasthenia gravis. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which specializes in patent cases, said that these two inventions were mere "abstract ideas" based on "natural phenomena" -- even though each invention was novel, nonobvious and extraordinarily useful, and the inventions save lives.
Athena Diagnostics v. Mayo Collaborative Services is particularly troubling, and the Supreme Court passed on its chance to fix the problem. Most of the Federal Circuit judges thought the invention should be patent-eligible but felt trapped by Supreme Court precedent. Major U.S. companies and organizations supported the effort to correct the decision. Even the U.S. solicitor general urged the justices to take the case. But on Jan. 13 they declined it, along with a slew of others raising the same issue. Other pending petitions by Trading Technologies International are challenging the "abstract idea" test because it is a judge-made test not found in the Patent Act. Absent Supreme Court intervention, any meaningful correction will have to come from Congress.
The patent-eligibility conundrum pervades the tech sectors. Inventors and companies are left wondering what, if any, computer-related inventions can be patented. Quantum computing, machine learning and other computer-based technologies are becoming the norm for innovative research, but the courts seem stuck in the past, applying the antiquated and undefined abstract-idea rubric. The lack of robust intellectual property protections for computer-based technologies is all the more concerning, as China announced its plan to become the world leader in artificial intelligence by 2030. Without strong IP protection, innovators and investors will never recoup the true value of their work. They may stop altogether, focusing on more remunerative investments in foreign countries with more predictable patent protection.
Meanwhile, the Federal Trade Commission has targeted Qualcomm with a controversial antitrust action based on speculative economic theories that posit Qualcomm's misuse of its intellectual property portfolio. Qualcomm is an American innovation success story, built on decades of groundbreaking research, protected by U.S. patents, that enabled it to become a leader in 4G and now 5G telecommunications. Unless overturned, the FTC's antitrust case will become another tool to weaken U.S. patents, although the Justice Department has taken the bold step of opposing the FTC's case and reminding the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals of the importance of intellectual property.
U.S. innovators compete in a hypercompetitive international marketplace. They need an IP system that rewards and protects modern innovation without fear of unreasonable antitrust liability. Unfortunately, the current patent system is hamstrung by obtuse and obsolete concepts such as "natural phenomena" and "abstract ideas." With the Supreme Court passing on the recent Athena Diagnostics case, the ball is in Congress's court to act before U.S. innovation falls too far behind those nations that have IP systems equipped for the 21st century.
---
Mr. Michel served on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, 1988-2010 and as chief judge, 2004-10. Mr. Dowd was a clerk for Judge Michel. Both are lawyers in private practice.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Patents Must Promote, Not Hurt, Innovation" -- WSJ Feb. 11, 2020)

Credit: By Paul R. Michel and Matthew J. Dowd
