Chief information officers say cybersecurity once again will be their top investment priority in 2023, a sign of how companies are racing to manage the business risk posed by escalating threats.
Companies are facing an escalation in cyberattacks such as the 2021 Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack that affected eastern U.S. fuel distribution. Hospital operator CommonSpirit Health disclosed this month an attack that downed systems and disrupted patient care. The Federal Bureau of Investigation's Internet Crime Complaint Center said it received a record 847,376 complaints in 2021, with potential losses exceeding $6.9 billion.
Corporate CIOs have a role in a range of crucial initiatives, from the adoption of cloud computing to the use of advanced data analytics and the modernization of productivity, collaboration and commerce platforms that touch on customer and employee experience. Cyber and information security has been at the top of their agenda since 2020.
"You boil it down to the CIO, it is cybersecurity. Absolutely. . .That is the highest priority," said Chris Howard, chief of research at technology research and consulting firm Gartner Inc., pointing to the results of the firm's latest CIO Survey. The results of the annual survey, which included about 2,200 respondents, were unveiled Monday at the 2022 Gartner IT Symposium/Xpo in Orlando, Fla.
Gartner asked CIOs whether they planned to increase or decrease their investments in a range of areas. Of the respondents, 66% said they planned to increase investment in cybersecurity. By that measure, it was the top investment priority for CIOs, beating business intelligence and analytics, in which 55% of respondents said they planned to increase investment. Other investment priorities included cloud computing platforms, application modernization and artificial intelligence.
Gartner forecasts that worldwide information security and risk-management spending by end users will reach $188.336 billion in 2023, up 11.3% from the current year. Gartner estimates spending on security will grow 7.2% this year compared with 2021. The company says spending on security grew 14.3% in 2021 compared with 2020.
At Kellogg Co., safety and security account for roughly 15% of its total corporate information and technology spend, according to global CIO Lesley Salmon. "From an expense perspective, not a capital investment perspective, it will be going up proportionately more than any of my other areas next year," said Ms. Salmon, who is based in the U.K.
Moreover, should the need to cut expenses arise, Ms. Salmon said she leaves that part of the budget intact.
"I don't ever go to that hunting ground to save money. If I get a budget challenge, it doesn't come out of cyber," said Ms. Salmon.
Ms. Salmon has spent the past 12 months or so building up the company's use of the Amazon Web Services cloud and its use of analytics and AI. "But the constant across all of that is cyber," she said.
Her strategy has been to bolster security at the perimeter of the network and work inward from there. The company also is working to adopt a so-called Zero Trust framework for cybersecurity, in which users and applications must continually reauthenticate themselves.
The company's chief information security officer reports to her, but she said that cybersecurity is a partnership that includes many roles throughout the company.
The collaborative emphasis on cybersecurity is evident across companies in healthcare and financial services where executives in a range of roles are now on the front lines of securing data.
"We are mutually concerned about cybersecurity. It's what boards are talking about," said Truist Financial Corp. Chief Information Security Officer Howard Whyte. He and Truist CIO Scott Case work closely to understand the Charlotte, N.C., bank's cybersecurity risk. In particular, they are updating digital capabilities while monitoring the integration of technology at the bank.
Credit: By Steven Rosenbush
