Days before Christmas, McKinsey's top leader sent a note to the firm's more than 40,000 staffers asking how they would answer a simple question: "What is McKinsey?"
Bob Sternfels, the firm's global managing partner, wrote that the question had no simple answer, and he urged employees to think about how they define the consulting giant as it headed into 2024.
That keeps getting harder.
McKinsey, which has long been at the pinnacle of the consulting profession and has advised big companies and government leaders, and launched the careers of future CEOs and heads of state, is struggling to run its own shop.
Sternfels narrowly survived an effort to unseat him and install the firm's third leader since 2021. He garnered a majority of votes by Thursday to secure a second term, after failing to win enough support for re-election from partners in two earlier rounds of voting.
The voting laid bare dissatisfaction within one of the world's most lucrative partnerships. It also exposed the potential drawbacks of an unusual governance structure that gives McKinsey's partners the power to choose their leader every three years. It works when business is booming, as partners who bring in millions of dollars have little reason to agitate for change. The past few years have been anything but stable.
Sternfels took over at the beginning of a period of rapid growth as companies sought McKinsey's advice in responding to pandemic-fueled changes in business. McKinsey grew to more than double the staff it had in 2012. As the economy has slowed and clients pulled back, however, the firm has been criticized for misjudging future demand.
The past year brought retrenchment. McKinsey cut 1,400 back-office workers and wound down some of its bankruptcy work. McKinsey, along with Bain and other firms, pushed back start dates for new M.B.A. hires into this year. In December, the firm shrank its newest partnership class, to about 250 people, compared with 380 in 2022.
The firm also is still working to repair its reputation following scandals that changed how it operates. McKinsey came under fire for working with Purdue Pharma and other drug manufacturers to market opioid painkillers. McKinsey said in 2021 it would pay a $573 million settlement for its work with Purdue, which prompted a broader reassessment of how much leeway partners have to select the clients they bring on.
The demand for high-end consulting services remains, senior partners said. "The quality of the work that we're doing right now is just off the charts better than it ever was," Asutosh Padhi, managing partner for North America, said in a mid-January interview. He was in Davos, Switzerland, where Sternfels and other McKinsey partners hobnobbed with business leaders.
Sternfels is a 30-year veteran of McKinsey and previously served as what was effectively its chief operating officer. The California native grew up in a small agricultural town but like many McKinsey employees has a top-notch pedigree: He studied economics at Stanford University and was a Rhodes scholar at Oxford.
In college, he played water polo but had a business bent. After his freshman year, he started a business with a classmate that hired students to summarize depositions for attorneys in the San Francisco area -- at a sharp discount to what paralegals would cost.
At McKinsey, he helped start an office in South Africa and led the private-equity practice. When he took over as managing partner, Sternfels said he wanted to speed up decision-making and de-emphasize employee tenure.
"The world's never going to slow down again, and our clients are demanding that we move faster than they do," he said in a 2021 interview. "So how do we create a model in a global firm that can actually move more quickly?"
He also defended the global partnership model, saying that when done properly it allowed the firm to give clients the best advice from anywhere in the world. "To make a partnership model work, you have to really invest in sharing perspectives and having honest debates," he said.
Part of the problem is that McKinsey's senior ranks -- who get to vote on the leadership -- have grown from some 400 people about 15 years ago to about 750 today, making it difficult to build consensus. Any senior partner can be elected to the top role as long as he or she would complete his or her first term before turning 60.
Senior partners can vote for anyone on the first ballot. The field is narrowed to 10 on the second ballot; if a winner still doesn't emerge, the top two face off in a third vote.
Another challenge is a decision a few years ago to reduce the number of three-year terms a managing partner can serve to two from three. The logic was that it would allow them to serve six years and for younger generations to step up. But the threat of having just a single stint makes it difficult to fully execute a strategy. The previous leader, Kevin Sneader, was ousted in 2021 after one three-year term in a similar protest vote. He is now a senior executive at Goldman Sachs in Asia.
Sternfels is seen by those around him as decisive. But over the past three years, his approach has irritated some partners who felt that he relied on a small team close to him, more like a CEO than the leader of a partnership.
McKinsey's revenue rose in 2023, though at a slower rate than during the pandemic, to approximately $16 billion. In the first half of the year, it asked partners to defer some of pay, but by the end of the year business was good enough that they got their full pay.
Sternfels didn't address the firm's restructuring or slowing growth in his December note to staff. Instead, he attempted to size up the firm. "It's been quite a year," he wrote, "and we not only came through it, we are uniquely positioned as we look toward 2024."
McKinsey, he said, isn't only a consulting firm, but also a startup incubator, a design lab, a training ground and more. "I'm reminded each time I speak with our Talent Attraction colleagues that so many would love to be in our shoes -- more than one million people apply to work here each year," he wrote.
Sternfels's second and final term begins in July.
Some former McKinsey partners said they are embarrassed by the tumult atop the firm.
At McKinsey, the managing partner chairs a global shareholders council that includes 30 senior partners elected by their peers to three-year stints. Sternfels faced a challenge from a former member of that council who oversees one of the firm's biggest practice areas: digital strategy advice.
TRodney Zemmel joined McKinsey in 1995, a year after Sternfels. Zemmel studied science at Cambridge University. where he received a Ph.D in molecular biology. While Sternfels joined the firm in San Francisco, Zemmel rose through the ranks in New York.
Zemmel, a British American, is in charge of a growing practice called McKinsey Digital, which now accounts for about half of the firm's client work, Zemmel said in a recent presentation. The group has thousands of employees who help companies build digital businesses, modernize core technology or roll out new tools such as artificial intelligence.
In his presentation, which was posted to YouTube in December, Zemmel said he had spent much of his time in recent months counseling clients on generative AI strategies.
"I've probably been invited to more boards in the last six months than I have in the last five years combined," Zemmel said. "I would assert that every major board on the planet is having a conversation on AI."
McKinsey has had 13 global managing partners in its history. The closely held firm started out in 1926 when a University of Chicago professor and accounting expert, James O. McKinsey, established his own consulting company.
The young firm opened offices in New York and San Francisco and rejected the idea of a loose network of offices in favor of a single partnership with shared resources.
Over the decades, it expanded with outposts across the globe and by the 1980s the majority of its partners weren't Americans. The work included advising former President Dwight Eisenhower to establish the White House chief of staff role and the creation of Universal Product Codes used to scan groceries.
For many professionals, becoming a McKinsey partner is a long-held dream. Securing the position at the prestigious firm entitles them to better share in profits and puts them on a pathway to lucrative careers elsewhere.
Former McKinsey partners and employees have gone on to take senior roles inside some of the U.S.'s biggest companies. Notable McKinsey alumni include Sheryl Sandberg, Meta's former chief operating officer, and Google CEO Sundar Pichai.
Those who have led professional-services firms said the top job is notoriously tricky. Leaders must possess a special touch in working with clients, while also managing the many feelings and concerns of senior partners. Those who do best often excel at building a high-level consensus among partners internally.
"There's a lot of wining and dining and talking and communicating," said William Achtmeyer, an early employee of Bain who is now chairman of the strategy-consulting firm Acropolis Advisors.
Partners might disagree with decisions made by top leadership, but they must at least understand the strategy and feel heard, Achtmeyer said, so "they're not ready to pound the table."
---
Lauren Weber contributed to this article.
Credit: By Chip Cutter and Russell Adams
