Federal regulators opened a new front in their investigation of big tech companies, seeking to determine whether the industry's giants acquired smaller rivals in ways that harmed competition, hurt consumers and evaded regulatory scrutiny.
The Federal Trade Commission on Tuesday ordered Amazon.com Inc., Apple Inc., Facebook Inc., Microsoft Corp. and Google owner Alphabet Inc. to provide detailed information about their acquisitions of fledgling firms over the past 10 years.
The new probe likely will involve hundreds of transactions that never drew federal scrutiny because they were under the dollar-value threshold for antitrust review, which is edging up to $94 million this year.
"This initiative will enable the commission to take a closer look at acquisitions in this important sector, and also to evaluate whether the federal agencies are getting adequate notice of transactions that might harm competition," FTC Chairman Joe Simons said.
The FTC said it isn't conducting the probes for any specific enforcement purpose, though Mr. Simons indicated they could lead regulators to seek to unwind improper acquisitions. The investigation also could prompt the commission to consider rule changes or other action to broaden the scope of acquisitions subject to review, he said
"We look forward to working with the FTC to answer their questions," a Microsoft spokesperson said. Representatives for Apple, Facebook, Alphabet and Amazon didn't reply to requests to comment.
The move marks an expansion of the government's already extensive examination of possible antitrust concerns in digital markets. Both the FTC and the Justice Department have been conducting antitrust investigations of tech giants including business practices at Google and Facebook.
Critics contend acquisitions by big tech firms show a pattern of establishing "kill zones" around themselves to prevent upstart rivals from posing a competitive threat, and say this can discourage innovation and investment.
Defenders of the tech giants say a small startup's prospect of being taken over by a major company -- and the big payoff that can result -- is a spur to investment and innovation. Many tech entrepreneurs start companies with the specific goal of being bought by one of the giants.
Mr. Simons said the FTC's initiative was prompted by the large number of acquisitions that have escaped federal review and "whether there's something we need to change going forward."
The top five tech firms have made more than 400 acquisitions over the last decade, a blue-ribbon antitrust panel in the U.K. said in March 2019.
Doug Melamed, a Stanford law professor, said the study announced Tuesday "might be more about building a consensus or road map at the commission" on how to proceed in such a complex area.
Small acquisitions put "a real burden on antitrust enforcers" to prove that they are anticompetitive, Mr. Melamed said. Moreover, certain deals that meet the value threshold -- which has varied over the past decade -- can still escape review under current rules, FTC officials said.
The FTC also is looking at deals that don't involve full-fledged takeovers. That will involve examining potential competitive impacts of minority investments, as well as data acquisitions and licensing arrangements.
The agency's action reflects growing concern in Washington and around the world that some U.S. tech companies have grown so large and powerful that they are squelching competition in various ways and harm consumers. For example, the Justice Department and state attorneys general have been looking at Google's dominance of ad tech markets.
Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D., Conn.), a critic of big tech companies, said he welcomed the FTC study, but warned that "it's no substitute for action."
"It has been clear for a decade that Big Tech is stifling innovation through its catch-and-kill tactics and unfettered market dominance," he said in a statement.
Sandy Kory, co-founder and managing director of Horizon Partners, a boutique technology mergers-and-acquisitions firm, said many deals clinched by the five technology companies likely fell below the FTC's threshold for review, and that in many cases the aim was to buy technology or engineering staff, rather than a stand-alone business that could flourish like YouTube or WhatsApp.
Many recent deals by Facebook and other tech giants have been in artificial intelligence, an area where tech companies are increasing their investment.
Mr. Kory said it was hard to see an antitrust case against major tech companies snapping up small, unproven businesses so they can hire engineers well-versed in cutting-edge technology. "It's uncharted territory to say, 'You have too many smart people at your company.'"
Scrutiny from Washington already is forcing changes in how Silicon Valley does business.
At Facebook, CEO Mark Zuckerberg has formed a sizable team within the company to develop dozens of new apps because he isn't confident the social-media giant could get significant acquisitions approved by regulators in the near term, according to a person familiar with the matter.
The company has previously had great success in turbocharging its growth through timely acquisitions of competitors, including Instagram for about $1 billion and WhatsApp for $22 billion.
In Alphabet's earnings report last week, CEO Sundar Pichai nodded toward divestitures of some of the conglomerate's outlying arms, saying he expected them to take on outside investors.
In addition to scrutinizing possible antitrust concerns involving major firms, the FTC said in early 2019 that it was creating a task force to study potential antitrust violations across the tech industry. The FTC has been particularly focused on mergers that already have been approved by the government.
---
Rob Copeland contributed to this article.

Credit: By John D. McKinnon in Washington and Deepa Seetharaman in San Francisco
