Tribune Publishing Co. rejected Gannett Co.'s latest takeover offer and said a billionaire health-care entrepreneur would take a $70.5 million stake in the company, adding another hurdle to Gannett's pursuit.
Tribune said it would receive a capital investment from Nant Capital LLC, which was founded by medical doctor and investor Patrick Soon-Shiong, in return for 4.7 million shares of Tribune stock at $15 apiece -- the price Gannett had proposed in its sweetened bid.
After the investment, Nant Capital will own about 12.9% of Tribune's shares outstanding, making it the company's second-largest shareholder.
If Gannett's offer remains at its current level, the issuance of shares would make Tribune more expensive for Gannett. Its previous offer valued Tribune at about $475 million, and it would presumably now have to purchase Dr. Soon-Shiong's additional shares, which could push the total cost of the company up nearly 15%.
Oaktree Capital Management, which had been Tribune's second-largest shareholder before Dr. Soon-Shiong's investment, said in a regulatory filing that Tribune Chairman Michael Ferro Jr. asked the company Friday if it would sell its stake, which totals 4.7 million shares according to FactSet, to an unidentified party at $15 a share.
Oaktree, which publicly has urged the company to negotiate with Gannett, rejected the offer, saying it "believed that a better price than $15 per share would be available if the Tribune board would engage constructively with Gannett."
In an interview, Dr. Soon-Shiong said he was approached within the past month by members of the Tribune board, but he declined to offer specifics. A person familiar with the matter said Dr. Soon-Shiong was approached about the investment in the past week by Mr. Ferro.
Mr. Ferro, through his prior work in the medical-software industry, had been acquainted with Dr. Soon-Shiong and knew that he previously had expressed interest in possibly acquiring the Los Angeles Times.
During a trip to California to meet with people about possibly investing in Tribune, Mr. Ferro reached out to the doctor, another person familiar with the matter said. The Los Angeles Business Journal had reported in September that Dr. Soon-Shiong was interested in buying the Times.
Gannett, meanwhile, signaled on Monday that it could abandon its bid if not enough Tribune shareholders indicate support for a tie-up, saying it would wait until after Tribune's June 2 annual shareholder meeting to decide whether to continue the pursuit.
Gannett has urged Tribune shareholders to show support for the deal by withholding votes for Tribune's eight directors.
Tribune's stock fell 15% to $12.09 in Monday trading, casting doubts over a Gannett deal at $15 a share. Shares of Gannett fell 2.4% to $15.74.
In rebuffing the offer, Tribune Chief Executive Justin Dearborn on Monday said he has "serious doubts" about Gannett's proposal, but "we stand ready to work with Gannett to assess whether there is a path forward that will create more value for both sets of shareholders."
Tribune said it had invited Gannett to seek an agreement under which the companies could engage in discussions to see whether a transaction was in the best interests of shareholders.
Gannett, in its statement on Monday, said: "Tribune has been in possession of a customary nondisclosure agreement provided by Gannett for more than a month."
Mr. Dearborn said the investment "demonstrates strong support for our plan and provides additional capital to accelerate our growth strategies for the benefit of our shareholders and all other Tribune stakeholders."
Dr. Soon-Shiong won't be able to vote his new shares at the company's annual meeting; shareholders need to have owned their stock by the close of business on April 15 to vote.
Dr. Soon-Shiong has been invited to join the company's board as a vice chairman. He will begin serving on June 2 -- the day of the annual meeting.
"Tribune again changed the composition of its board without stockholder participation," Gannett said in a statement.
Dr. Soon-Shiong, who launched and sold two biotech startups together worth nearly $8 billion, heads a firm that funds ventures related to health care, life sciences, medical diagnostics, mobile technology, semiconductors, nano-optics, artificial intelligence, cloud computing, alternative energy and scientific innovations. He said his professional background in artificial intelligence and his longtime interest in journalism happened to collide at the right moment.
"I think it's an opportunity to really benefit the local community with a medium that I think should be protected as a natural treasure," Dr. Soon-Shiong said. "I think there's a mutual benefit to both of us."
As part of the deal, Tribune will have access to more than 100 technology patents from Dr. Soon-Shiong's NantWorks LLC for use in news-media applications.
Credit: By Joshua Jamerson and Lukas I. Alpert
