PDC ENERGY
PCDE +7.2%
Chevron is doubling down on shale. The oil giant is acquiring rival driller PDC Energy, which holds stakes in Texas and Colorado. In buying PDC Energy, Chevron is aiming to build a bigger foothold in two prolific oil patches, particularly the Denver-Julesburg shale basin. The tie-up comes after big oil firms raked in record profits in 2022, as oil and gas prices hit multiyear highs following Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Now the companies are flush with cash, and investors are watching for a potential wave of deal making. PDC Energy shares increased 7.2% Monday.
ABERCROMBIE & FITCH
ANF +31%
Abercrombie shares soared after the specialty apparel and accessories retailer reported a surprise fiscal first-quarter profit. Rising demand for dresses and pants drove an unexpected lift in first-quarter sales, which boosted its revenue outlook for the year. "They're back at the office. They're celebrating with their friends," Chief Executive Officer Fran Horowitz said on a call with analysts. "They're going out and we're there and servicing them for all of those occasions." Abercrombie shares ended 31% higher Wednesday.
TARGET
TGT -2.8%
Target said it would remove some Pride Month products from stores after a backlash from customers caused employees to feel unsafe. Target has always received some criticism for the LGBT-themed collection, but this month the negative reaction has taken a more aggressive turn, a spokeswoman said. Target will continue to sell Pride-related items in stores, but will remove some that have been at the center of the most confrontational behavior. Target shares lost 2.8% Wednesday.
PACWEST BANCORP
PACW +20%
PacWest sparked a regional-banks rally to start the week.
The beleaguered regional lender said it would sell a $2.6 billion property-loan portfolio to Kennedy-Wilson Holdings, per a regulatory filing. The bank has said it will explore asset sales to boost liquidity and slashed its quarterly dividend to a penny a share. PacWest shares jumped 20% Monday, lifting other regional-bank stocks that have been under pressure since the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank in March. Western Alliance shares gained 10%, while KeyCorp shares added 4.7%.
NVIDIA
NVDA +24%
Nvidia is riding high on the AI boom. The chip giant issued a strong sales forecast due to rising demand for artificial intelligence technology. Nvidia shares rocketed 24% higher Thursday, boosting shares of other chip makers and companies tied to AI. The stock move marks the largest one-day percentage increase for Nvidia since 2016. With its finish Thursday, the chip maker added $183.8 billion to its market capitalization, per Dow Jones Market Data -- ending just shy of joining a small club of companies worth more than $1 trillion.
ZOOM VIDEO COMMUNICATIONS
ZM -8.1%
The onetime pandemic darling beat first-quarter earnings expectations and reported an improved full-year forecast. But investors appeared to focus more on Zoom's outlook for the second quarter, which implied slowing growth of enterprise sales to large and midsize businesses. While the videoconferencing company grew rapidly earlier in the pandemic amid a widespread shift to remote work, Zoom's growth has cooled as people have returned to offices and in-person activities in their daily life. Zoom shares dropped 8.1% Tuesday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
