On the Fourth floor of the Hermes men's store on New York's Madison Avenue lies a cozy atelier where choosy shoppers can sip champagne, leaf through fabric books and order custom clothes. Many clients stop in for traditional bespoke suits and dress shirts, but some covet a more modern, and perhaps superfluous, personalized piece: a made-to-order hoodie. For a princely $1,925, you can pick from 27 color options, have a tailor take your shoulder and torso measurements and, approximately 12 weeks later, walk away in a one-of-a-kind, fit-to-you, zip-up cashmere hoodie.
Hermes's premium hoodie represents the latest move in custom clothing, one keenly attuned to the relaxed way men dress now. Today's titans of industry eschew suits, custom or otherwise. Elon Musk wears black T-shirts, Mark Zuckerberg plans for the metaverse in forgettable sweaters and media moguls favor outdoorsy fleece vests. You, too, might have spent the past 22 months swaddled in sweats -- or at least have swapped your blazers for forgiving knits.
But even some men who dress down still savor the bespoke experience. For them, a number of luxury brands offer spendy, made-to-order sweatshirts. Loro Piana sells tailor-made hoodies in baby cashmere, vicuna and its uber-supple Gift of Kings wool. Starting at $2,395 for baby cashmere, they take months to produce. Zegna's custom sweatshirts -- from around $1,500 -- are slightly less wallet-gouging. The brand also allows customers to tweak the design by specifying the leather for the trim around the zipper, a rarity in the realm of made-to-measure athleisure. If you order a custom suit, you can typically modify the lapel width or the jacket lining; with most custom hoodies, the only thing you can adjust is fit. Don't expect to add a pocket or alter the hood shape.
You don't even need to be a one-percenter to enjoy a fit-to-you sweatshirt. Internet startups such as Son of a Tailor offer made-to-your-measurements cotton sweatshirts for as little as $112. The Copenhagen-based company plans to roll out a custom hoodie in January. And smaller, contemporary tailors like Stockholm's Saman Amel deliver custom cashmere hoodies that take up to six weeks to manufacture and start at $600.
Price aside, the question remains: Why does anyone really need precisely finessed sweats? Department stores are awash in hoodies. Can't customers find a sweatshirt to their liking without the expenditure and wait time? Some truly believe they cannot.
Fit is a common rationale. Lean and over 6 feet tall, Michael Rao, 31, a consultant at a software company in Chicago, long struggled to find clothes that accommodate his frame. "If I go up to a [size] large, which is probably the right length for me, it tends to be a little bit baggy," he said. But if he buys a medium hoodie and accidentally shrinks it in the dryer, his wrists will be awkwardly exposed. To avoid such off-the-rack mishaps, Mr. Rao prefers buying clothes calibrated to his lanky build, like his cotton sweatshirt from Son of a Tailor.
Other custom-casual-wear buyers say it's a more targeted way to shop. "For me, it's all about having fewer, better things and the craftsmanship that stands behind it," said Joel Hellermark, 25, the founder of an artificial intelligence company in Stockholm. Rather than experimenting with many not-quite-right zip-ups, he bought a single Saman Amel one that fits him to a tee. Mr. Hellermark sees this as a sounder investment long-term and a more environmentally conscious, waste-free way of shopping.
But let's be real: Not all men are blissful minimalists able to commit to one sweatshirt for the rest of their lives. Dag Granath, the co-owner of Saman Amel, noted that a client in England has purchased several custom sweatshirts in off-kilter colors like lilac, mustard and bright red. Such a shopper would seem to value attention more than financial prudence. He is charmed by the ability to personalize a hoodie in a custom color, fabric and cut -- a hoodie that only he owns. Companies like Zegna and Son of a Tailor also let shoppers monogram their hoodies, conspicuously declaring to the world, "Yeah, this is my sweatshirt. And you don't have it."
Ultimately, it might be bragging rights, not a bespoke fit, that draws shoppers into the atelier. With something as inessential but elite as a custom hoodie, "we're not really talking about clothing anymore. We're talking about status," noted G. Bruce Boyer, the Bethlehem, Pa.-based author of "True Style: The History and Principles of Classic Menswear." Sure, the hoodie might fit expertly around your bicep, but its true value will come at a cocktail party, when someone says, "That's a nice hoodie." Whether the compliment is worth $1,500, we'll let you decide.
Credit: By Jacob Gallagher
