The U.K. has, for a long time, had an ambivalent relationship with the rest of Europe, but the political pressure behind at least a poll about whether to leave the European Union is mounting.
Against that background, what do U.K.-based Internet entrepreneurs think of the possibility that Britain may exit the E.U.?
Tech entrepreneurs contribute an ever-growing share of the U.K. GDP. According to a 2012 Boston Consulting Group report, the aggregated U.K. Internet sector was worth $187 billion in 2010, accounting for 8.3% of GDP. By 2016 the Internet economy is set to grow to $347 billion comprising 12.4% of GDP.
Among the entrepreneurs we polled, support for membership was divided. A few were strongly in favor, but for most the primary benefit, and for many the only benefit, of membership of the EU is the free movement of people. Few saw the single market as a reality.
One of the strongest supporters for staying in was Victor Henning, co-founder of science academic platform Mendeley, which was recently acquired by a unit of Reed Elsevier PLC, for an undisclosed sum. He said a British exit would be catastrophic for the U.K.
"Pulling out of the EU would obliterate the U.K.'s position as the best place to start a tech company in Europe, and kill many nascent startups in London," he said. "The best entrepreneurial talent would congregate in Berlin instead."
A British exit could mean tighter controls on people coming to Britain to work from the rest of Europe, potentially resulting in entrepreneurs starting business elsewhere.
"My co-founders and I are German, and moved to London in 2008 to start Mendeley. More than half of our 50 employees here are EU citizens from outside the U.K. We have experienced the nightmare of trying to bring in qualified employees from countries that aren't EU member states. It took us nine months to get visa approval for a machine learning Ph.D. from Serbia," Mr. Henning said.
Mr. Henning's point is echoed by Avid Larizadeh, co-founder of online marketplace Boticca.com. "One of the reasons we decided to set up Boticca in London is because its melting pot affords entrepreneurs immediate and easy access to the best European talent. We have been able to build a world-class team with a strong global approach from the outset."
Nor is it just the entrepreneurs. Venture Capitalist Sean Seton-Rogers of ProFounders Capital said: "If the U.K. leaves the EU, can our companies recruit tech talent from Germany? Can they recruit product designers from Sweden? The supposed burdens of EU regulations are minimal compared to the broader talent issues."
However, one non-EU entrepreneur, who wanted to remain nameless for fear of upsetting the U.K. immigration authorities, said unfettered EU migration came at a cost: "The government has had to really screw down on outside-EU immigration.
"This means that the barriers for talented migrants outside the EU are now much higher . . . which effectively reduces the talent pool on which the U.K. can draw. This effect is exactly the opposite of one of the supposed benefits of EU membership: greater access to talent."
Rodolfo Rosini, CEO of artificial intelligence platform Gamebricks, said there were a lot of myths about the EU. "There is no such thing as a single market," he said. "There is no such thing as a single body of corporate law. There is no common language or culture; you need local employees and a local office. Taxation, both on corporate profits, VAT and most importantly on share options is completely different from country to country."
"I don't care if I get lower data roaming fees in Slovenia." For him, the only benefit of membership is free movement of people. "If the U.K. would pull out of the EU and keep that feature we would barely notice."
Perhaps the biggest critic of Brussels was Nick Halstead, founder of Big Data startup DataSift. He was critical of the burden placed on companies by things such as European data regulations: "Those are the sort of things that make us uncompetitive compared to the U.S."
But similar to other entrepreneurs, for Mr. Halstead, it came back to talent, and what he saw as overly protective European labor laws. "For startups the flexibility of employing people is the lifeblood-- it is such a painful process if someone does not work out."
"Moving further towards the U.S. model [of labor flexibility] would be very beneficial for startups."
He dismissed suggestions that leaving Europe would jeopardize the attraction of the U.K. for high talent individuals. "I hope that being outside [the EU] we would have a single policy that applies to the whole world making it far easier to attract talent where ever they are from."
Leaving the EU doesn't necessarily mean an end to the free movement of workers between the U.K. and the rest of the continent. For example, people from countries such as Norway, which belongs to the European Economic Area but not the EU, can live and work in the bloc. People can also move without border controls between the EU and countries, such as Switzerland, signed up to the 1985 Schengen agreement.
Nick Hungerford, CEO of online finance tool Nutmeg, was the only entrepreneur to suggest that an arm's length relationship with the rest of the Union was the ideal policy.
"The EU is often seen as a two-choice option. Either you agree to everything and sign without checking, or you are out completely. That's simply not the case, Britain has a strong position of being in without being committed, and this is powerful."
Credit: By Ben Rooney
