HARLEY-DAVIDSON
Sales Slide Spurs
Spending Shift
Harley-Davidson Inc. plans to crank up marketing and development spending that it hopes will pull it out of a persistent sales skid that hurt its third-quarter profit and pushed its share price lower.
Harley shares were down 15% recently after the Milwaukee-based motorcycle maker announced a 6.5% drop in quarterly earnings and a decline in market share. The company also said it would eliminate 250 jobs, or about 4% of the total workforce. Savings on labor costs will be applied to the budget for marketing, due to rise 65% next year, while product-development spending will grow 35%.
"Our performance didn't meet our expectations," Harley Chief Executive Matt Levatich told analysts on Tuesday. "We know we can do better, and we will." Though Harley is one of the world's best-known brands, Harley executives said they would need to "dial up" marketing because rivals such as Honda Motor Co. and Polaris Industries Inc. are grabbing attention with price cuts and new models.
Harley has been sideswiped by the strong dollar, which hurts sales outside the U.S., and the aging of its baby boomer customers at home. But Mr. Levatich also cited "headwinds of our own making," including quality problems that have led to a recent surge in recalls.
Recall expenses in this year's first nine months totaled $32 million. That compares with a combined $30 million for the three full years ended last Dec. 31. One of the recent recalls was for faulty fuel pumps on its Street models, aimed at younger and urban riders, a big part of Harley's effort to rely less on boomers.
In the wake of that recall, Harley ran short of fuel pumps and couldn't meet demand for Street models in the latest quarter, hurting sales of a product that is popular in Asia.
-- James R. Hagerty
---
CHINA MOBILE
Chinese Carrier
Posts Profit Rise
China Mobile Ltd. said Tuesday its net profit for the first nine months rose 3.4% from a year earlier, driven by strong demand for data services.
The world's largest mobile carrier by subscribers said net profit for the January-to-September period was 85.42 billion yuan ($13.43 billion), compared with 82.60 billion yuan the previous year.
The company said the launch of a new government-mandated service allowing subscribers to carry over their unused data to the next month will likely hurt its operating results in the fourth quarter.
-- Joanne Chiu
---
VOLKSWAGEN
Automaker Suspends
A Fifth Executive
Volkswagen AG recently suspended its chief quality-control official, Frank Tuch, the fifth senior executive to be put on leave in connection with an emissions cheating scandal, according to a person close to the company.
Mr. Tuch, 48 years old, wasn't immediately available for comment. Neither he nor others suspended from the auto maker during its probe, has been charged with a crime. He was suspended last week, the person said.
The move indicates that investigators are still focusing their probe on a group of the company's most senior executives directly involved in overseeing diesel-engine development, production and quality control.
Of the five confirmed suspensions so far, all belong to the company's top management echelon.
-- William Boston
---
GOOGLE
U.S. Technology Giant
Invests in China Firm
Google Inc. has bet tens of millions of dollars on a Chinese search-and-smartwatch company that marks a rare deal in China and renewed interest in a market it mostly exited in 2010.
Google said Tuesday that it invested in Mobvoi Inc., a Beijing-based artificial-intelligence startup that provides mobile voice search in Chinese. The company has developed a Chinese voice search mobile app with two million accumulated users, a Chinese smartwatch operating system and a smartwatch called Ticwear. Terms weren't disclosed.
-- Li Yuan
---
SAP
Cloud Subscriptions
Boost 3-Month Profit
German business software provider SAP SE on Tuesday said it had posted a 2% rise in net profit for the third quarter, helped by new subscriptions for its Internet cloud-based products.
Net profit for the period ended Sept. 30 was 898 million euros ($1.01 billion), compared with 880 million euros during the same period last year.
The company also provided a net profit figure of 1.17 billion euros based on calculations that aren't recognized under international financial reporting standards.
Analysts had predicted a non-IFRS net profit of 1.09 billion euros for the quarter, according to a recent poll conducted by The Wall Street Journal.
"Clearly the third quarter is a beat," said Chief Executive Bill McDermott, suggesting that the company had a chance to "outrun" its guidance for the full year.
-- Christopher Alessi
