The bets that Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc., Microsoft Corp. and others are placing on the metaverse reflect a growing belief that the emerging virtual realm will unlock serious real-world dollars.
The metaverse remains more aspirational than real, and its biggest supporters don't expect it to be built quickly. Proponents, though, see a range of possibilities, from selling the hardware and software needed to access the metaverse to hawking virtual goods, services and advertisements within the digital world.
Companies big and small have started outlining business plans for the metaverse. Microsoft last week said it would roll out software tools around the metaverse in coming months, with pricing still to be disclosed. Meta Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg last week also said that as the company works on the metaverse, it would look for ways to aid creators to make money, potentially tapping a $1 billion fund the social-media giant already has established.
To tech leaders, the metaverse is emerging as a generational step-change in how digital interactions and commerce unfold. Metaverse proponents say the new digital world will have a profound effect on day-to-day lives, not unlike the emergence of the internet.
"When we talk about the metaverse, we're describing both a new platform and a new application type, similar to how we talked about the web and websites in the early '90s," Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella said as he rolled out the company's new tools for the digital world. They include the wider ability for users of Microsoft's Teams workplace-collaboration software, starting next year, to join meetings using customized avatars.
The digital world offers new ways to shop that should spur sales, analysts say. "The commerce capability, I think, will be insane because you'll see these goods that are virtual and instead of looking at pictures, you'll be able to rotate objects and look at them and try on different things," said Brent Thill, an analyst covering the tech sector at iJefferies.
Analysts say it is difficult, at this early stage, to estimate the size of the likely metaverse economy. However, one pointed to the more than $80 billion already being spent annually on virtual goods in videogames as an indication of how much business could be generated in the virtual world.
Moneymaking opportunities at this point are linked largely to establishing the infrastructure for the online realms.
Meta is selling its Oculus virtual-reality headsets for $299 and said it is working on augmented-reality devices. Snap Inc. sells a pair of augmented-reality glasses for $380. Microsoft sells its HoloLens headsets, aimed at business users, with the cheapest costing $2,975. The U.S. Army is among its customers.
The augmented- and virtual-reality global equipment market is expected to grow by over 50% this year, reaching a total of 9 million units shipped, according to data from International Data Corp. By 2025, shipments could reach 28.7 million units, IDC says.
Graphics-chip company Nvidia Corp. is rolling out software it calls Omniverse Enterprise that offers collaboration tools on a subscription basis. It bills the suite as foundational to creating and connecting virtual worlds and on Tuesday introduced new tools, including one to create interactive artificial-intelligence avatars.
"I'm fairly sure that at this point that Omniverse or the metaverse is going to be a new economy that is larger than our current economy," Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang said on a recent earnings call.
---
Alexandra Bruell contributed to this article.
Credit: By Meghan Bobrowsky
