ASIAN STOCKS
Taiwan Index Soars
To a 17-Year High
Taiwan's main stock index finished at a 17-year high Thursday and closed above 10000 points, as continued iPhone-related hopes bolster the trade hub's growth prospects.
The Taiex stock index ended up 0.3% at 10001.48 and has gained 8.1% this year. It has risen steadily for the past year after bottoming out just below 8000 last May. Strong global demand for consumer electronics and technology products has been fueling gains, Commerzbank said recently.
Taiwan's exports have risen for seven consecutive months from a year earlier, including April's 9.4% growth amid an 11% increase in electronics components. While the Taiex has moved above 10000 during intraday trading recently, it always fell back before the close. The last time it closed above 10000 points was in 2000, just before the U.S. tech-stock bubble burst. Tech makes up roughly half of the Taiex.
Taiwan has been a hot destination for foreign equity investors in emerging markets, partly because of its reliance on Apple Inc. Many of the company's iPhone suppliers are based on the island, and the 10th anniversary edition due out this year has been eagerly awaited. Apple shares have been reaching a series of records, and many Taiwan stocks have followed. Camera-lens-module maker Largan Precision Co. has jumped 31% this year and casing supplier Catcher Technology Co. is up 44%.
-- Ese Erheriene
---
WELLS FARGO
Further $2 Billion
Added to Cost Cuts
Wells Fargo & Co. plans to cut an additional $2 billion in expenses by the end of 2019, more than analysts had expected.
The expense savings, announced at Wells Fargo's investor day, come on top of the bank's January announcement to cut $2 billion in costs by the end of 2018.
Wells Fargo, which has been under pressure since its sales-practices scandal last fall, said the cuts would bolster its bottom line. The bank said it plans to consolidate "similar operational activities" and automate more of its manual processes.
As part of its focus on costs, Wells Fargo said it plans to close about 450 branches in 2017 and 2018. The bank said the closures will be across the country, but will include "saturated markets" and "redundant locations."
-- Christina Rexrode
---
SOFTBANK
Firm Invests in
Nascent Technology
Masayoshi Son, founder and chief executive of Japanese telecommunications and internet giant SoftBank Group Corp., is making another big bet -- this time on a nascent technology that might take years or decades to bloom.
Improbable, a London-based startup that makes virtual worlds for videogames and simulations of the real world, said it raised $502 million in a SoftBank-led funding round. Improbable said SoftBank would take a board seat and noncontrolling stake in the startup but didn't disclose the deal's terms. The company said that based on the funding round, investors value it at more than $1 billion.
The deal fits into Mr. Son's recent interest in artificial intelligence. He has said that the promise of A.I. and the Internet of Things -- the idea that everyday items such as sneakers and refrigerators will be connected to the web -- has underpinned recent deals.
-- Stu Woo
