Miquela Sousa, who recently graced billboards from London to Japan as part of an Ugg advertising campaign, ticks off all the boxes for a model of the moment: She is exotic, attractive and huge on Instagram.
She is also fake, a computer-generated character who -- despite what she says on Instagram -- can't feel a hangover's pain or appreciate how difficult it is to walk in stilettos.
Miquela was created by a Los Angeles startup called Brud, which is betting it can turn her and an expanding group of CGI-based social-media personalities into a cast of characters that is part Marvel Comics and part Kardashian. Like comic-book characters, they can evolve with the times without aging. And their drama can be managed.
"You can create the Kardashians without any of the inherent issues that come with being human," said Cyan Banister, a partner at Founders Fund, which put in $100,000 for Brud's seed round in May 2017. Brud earlier this year raised an additional $6 million in venture capital from firms including Sequoia Capital and BoxGroup, according to people familiar with the situation.
Over the past decade, social media's influencers have become online celebrities thanks to daily postings about beauty, videogames and pranks. They have also become sought-after brand ambassadors.
Miquela, sometimes called Lil Miquela, is a test of the power of social-media celebrity. She also flies in the face of the latest trend in digital marketing, in which advertisers and influencers say users are clamoring for content that is "authentic" rather than overly glossy and curated. Miquela is anything but authentic.
Brud launched Miquela on Instagram in 2016. With carefully composed images, she appeared lifelike and didn't identify herself as artificial until April as part of a drama that played out over a series of posts. Over ensuing months, the character professed to be angry at Brud for lying to her about her true origin story.
If Miquela were human, her 1.5 million followers on Instagram could command $12,000-$25,000 per post to promote a product, according to experts in influencer marketing.
Like human influencers, Miquela posts photos showing herself at premium restaurants such as Blue Hill at Stone Barns in the New York City suburbs, which features a menu for January that costs more than $400 with drinks. Besides collaborating with high-end fashion brands -- Ugg declined to say what it paid to use Miquela's image -- she has released singles on Spotify.
Brud declined to comment, and it has tried to cultivate an air of mystery around Miquela.
Miquela's story lines are composed by writers at Brud in Los Angeles, according to people close to the company. Brud co-founder Trevor McFedries is a former songwriter for musicians including Katy Perry.
Brud describes itself on its website as a robotics and artificial-intelligence company, but people familiar with the startup say it isn't primarily a technology company. The website description serves Brud's claim it reprogrammed Miquela after saving her from the machinations of another artificial-intelligence company. "It's all performance art," said a person familiar with Brud.
Ms. Banister and other investors say social media can mature into another medium for the creation of characters with all sorts of powers and personal histories. From there, the characters can be deployed for product deals, movies or headlining their own Netflix shows, said Kara Nortman, a partner at Los Angeles-based Upfront Ventures. Ms. Nortman said she didn't end up investing in Brud because of timing issues but introduced Mr. McFedries to other venture capitalists who ultimately invested.
Brud wants to create a suite of characters with interweaving story lines in the same vein as the Marvel universe, according to Ms. Banister. Earlier this year, a new blond-haired blue-eyed character named Bermuda made her debut as a villain. She was the antithesis of Miquela, who supported Black Lives Matter and was confused about her nonhuman background. Bermuda was a Trump supporter and proud to be fake.
Some wonder whether Miquela's shelf life can survive beyond her novelty as a computer-generated influencer, especially now that the mystery around her back story has been revealed.
"I think the success of digital talent is in their engagement and their authenticity," said Adam Wescott, partner at Select Management Group, a talent-management firm for influencers. "And to what extent can you be authentic if ultimately you're not even a real being?"
When Sarah Peretz first encountered Lil Miquela's posts, she had a "small-scale existential crisis," she said. Ms. Peretz, a social-media consultant, said it was disconcerting for her to not know what was real.
"When you walk into a movie, you know where that line is," she said. "This feels manipulative and deceptive."
At the same time, she said Brud is "doing an incredible job at storytelling" and that the drama often pulls her in.
Brud's backers acknowledge they are taking a gamble about where pop culture is headed. "A lot could go wrong. This is highly speculative," Ms. Banister said. "Having a few million followers on Instagram is exciting, but becoming a world-wide recognizable brand like the Kardashians is the goal."

Credit: By Yoree Koh and Georgia Wells
