CLAY, N.Y. -- A shortage of skilled workers in places such as this Syracuse suburb is posing a major challenge for the Biden administration's ambitious plan to spur chip manufacturing in the U.S.
Micron Technology Inc. plans to invest $100 billion to open a semiconductor-manufacturing campus here, with construction starting in 2024 and production beginning in the latter half of the decade.
This snowy outpost isn't an obvious place to reshore an industry from overseas. Its working-age population has declined over the past two decades as other big companies pulled out. The new jobs require highly skilled engineers and technicians already in scarce supply nationwide. At least two other semiconductor manufacturing companies considered expanding here but opted against it after evaluating the area, county leaders said.
To make the plan work, civic leaders are trying to cultivate a new workforce in what they say is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to rejuvenate a postindustrial region. Local colleges and universities are overhauling their education and training programs to vastly increase the number of new engineers they produce and teach technical workers skills such as supply-chain management and orbital welding.
"We have to remake a decade of workforce development in two or three years," said Duncan Brown, vice president for research at Syracuse University. "It wasn't just the manufacturing that went offshore but it was also the talent pipeline that went offshore."
The Micron project is a key part of President Biden's effort to bring advanced chip manufacturing back to the U.S. and bolster national security by making America less reliant on Taiwan and other faraway countries. Semiconductors, silicon wafers that power most modern equipment, were invented in the U.S., but many companies moved their factories abroad in search of cheaper labor and to tap incentives offered by foreign governments eager to become chip-making hubs. Chip shortages during the pandemic highlighted the hazards of outsourcing an entire industry.
To attract chip makers here, Mr. Biden last year signed the Chips and Science Act, which includes $39 billion in manufacturing incentives for companies to build complex fabrication centers and for related suppliers. Micron Chief Executive Officer Sanjay Mehrotra met with White House officials frequently while the law was being written, pressed publicly for its passage, and announced the company would build in New York several months after the law was enacted.
Micron, based in Boise, Idaho, has said it would apply for some of the federal incentives, a process that begins at the end of the month. It also will benefit from $5.5 billion in state subsidies from New York. Micron said it plans to employ 9,000 workers at the Syracuse-area campus when it is fully built by 2045, and predicts an additional 41,000 jobs for contractors and suppliers.
Micron viewed New York's well-established semiconductor industry as another benefit of the region, the company said, with over 70 such companies operating in the state. International Business Machines Corp. is investing $20 billion in the Poughkeepsie area to expand semiconductor manufacturing, artificial-intelligence programs and quantum computing. Yet the pool of talent around Syracuse to fill thousands of highly specialized new jobs isn't big enough.
April Arnzen, Micron's chief people officer, said the company is planning to build a pipeline of workers by investing in local training centers and providing $10 million to K-12 schools to beef up their curricula in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. Micron is also collaborating with local community colleges and universities to make sure their graduates are ready to work for the company, she said.
"Partnership with those institutions is incredibly important because we do have to scale," Ms. Arnzen said. "Nine thousand jobs is going to be a significant task."
To help Micron, Syracuse University plans to increase the size of its undergraduate and graduate engineering programs by 50% over the next three to five years.
Syracuse is recasting an engineering degree to be more welcoming, hoping to increase its ranks in part by attracting more women and minorities who are underrepresented in the field. "One of the biggest problems we have is communicating to this next wave of students that this line of work is for them," said J. Cole Smith, dean of Syracuse's College of Engineering and Computer Science.
The engineering program has given every student a faculty adviser, a student success adviser and a career adviser to better support them.
Onondaga Community College will offer a new degree program for semiconductor technicians starting this fall. College leaders are drawing up plans to install a $10 million cleanroom, which replicates the hypersensitive environment of an advanced manufacturing workspace, in a two-story building occupied by the campus bookstore.
Over the summer, the college plans a three-day "chip camp," funded by Micron, for middle-school students to generate awareness about advanced manufacturing.
Even construction workers will require specialized training to operate in the ultraclean environments the fabrication facilities require, according to union leaders.
A postpandemic slump in the semiconductor industry hasn't changed Micron's plans for New York, said Scott Gatzemeier, corporate vice president of front end U.S. expansion. Micron will ramp up chip production in New York as demand for semiconductors rebounds, he said.
Credit: By Annie Linskey and Joseph De Avila

ERIC Subject: Community Colleges; Presidents; Two Year Colleges; Outsourcing; Manufacturing; Leaders; Elementary Secondary Education; Engineering Education; Labor Force Development
