Man Group, one of the world's biggest hedge-fund managers, reported higher client inflows during a choppy first quarter for investment firms, led by its computer-driven funds.
The London-based firm posted $500 million of new client money, compared with withdrawals of $1.3 billion a year earlier, although it sustained $700 million of investment losses during the period.
Man's shares rose more than 5% on Friday in London trading.
The first quarter "has been a difficult one across the industry for both flows and performance. Against this background, Man did well to see flat assets under management and [$0.5 billion] inflows, we think," said Bank of America Merrill Lynch analyst Philip Middleton.
Man -- which has been trying to turn itself around under Chief Executive Manny Roman after years of client withdrawals -- has been boosted by the revival of its computer-driven hedge fund unit AHL.
The flagship AHL Diversified fund rose nearly 34% in 2014, ranking it as one of the world's best-performing hedge funds. It lost money last year and is up 3% this year.
Funds including one that trades niche markets, such as German power or emerging-market interest-rate derivatives, and one that uses newer investment styles such as machine learning, also have made money.
That has helped lure back clients, with a net $1.3 billion flowing into AHL and other computer-driven hedge funds during the first quarter, reflecting renewed demand across the hedge-fund industry for such funds.
Man said that 71% of AHL's open-ended funds were at their so-called high-water mark -- the point at which they can start to earn lucrative performance fees.
"We believe that Man's efforts to diversify its product range and broaden its distribution network have resulted in net inflows during a volatile and uncertain [first quarter]," said Peter Lenardos, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets who had forecast net outflows of $400 million during the quarter.
Investment losses and more than $1 billion of withdrawals at its discretionary unit GLG helped pushed Man's overall funds under management down to $78.6 billion from $78.7 billion at the end of last year.
"The ongoing uncertainty in the markets remains challenging and, accordingly, the risk appetite of our clients has the potential to affect flows," Mr. Roman, the chief executive, said in a statement.
In February, the firm reported that profit last year had fallen 17%, hit by lower performance fees and higher compensation costs.
Credit: By Laurence Fletcher
