Goodbye rush hour and business suits. Hello robots and mood-boosters.
Just three months after releasing its forecast of this year's biggest global consumer trends, market researcher Euromonitor International on Monday updated its predictions to reflect a major impact from Covid-19. Some shifts have taken hold much faster than Euromonitor expected, notably the home's transformation into a multifunctional refuge used for work, school, leisure and exercise. But the pandemic has stalled other trends -- relaxing previously rising privacy concerns and damping interest in reusable products.
"As we all know, life has been turned on its head," Alison Angus, head of Euromonitor's lifestyle research, says in a webinar released Monday. Here are Euromonitor's updated predictions for big global consumer trends:
Privacy Concerns Ease: Euromonitor forecast in January that consumers would be less trusting of companies using their data without transparency, adequate security and opt-out options. But Covid-19 put those worries on hold, it says.
"Right now, consumers are more focused on the virus, that's their fear," says Ms. Angus. "They're prepared to pause their privacy concerns and share data in the name of public health." Even as lockdowns ease, Euromonitor expects privacy worries to remain on hold as online shopping and payments continue to be a necessity rather than a choice.
Friendly to Robots: Consumers have suddenly become far more comfortable with robots and other types of artificial intelligence performing jobs traditionally done by humans. Euromonitor earlier this year noted that consumers were buying more AI-enabled home appliances and virtual assistants, like Amazon.com Inc.'s Alexa. But now, such devices have a new draw, says Ms. Angus. "Voice-control technology limits the need to touch surfaces so much, so that's why they are appealing," she says.
Robotic innovation is further driven by businesses investing in technologies that offer no-contact services and deliveries.
Heightened Distraction: Shorter attention spans mean that people expect information to be as accessible as possible in the quickest possible time. Earlier this year, Euromonitor cited this as the "catch me in seconds" trend and called for businesses to offer more personalized content in easily digestible messages. The pandemic has deepened consumers' distraction because they are overwhelmed by fast-changing information, and the lines between work, rest, play and exercise have blurred at home.
Slower Mobility: The coronavirus has "all but stalled" demand for better transportation options, which Euromonitor in January had said was on the rise, Ms. Angus says. Before the virus, people were seeking easier navigation through crowded cities, including more public transportation and more opportunities to share bikes, scooters and even helicopters. Now such needs have waned.
More Inclusivity: Demand for products and services that emphasize "inclusivity for all," including people with physical and mental disabilities, is a trend that has been strengthened by the novel coronavirus, Euromonitor says. As more travel destinations, education courses, entertainment venues, business meetings and cultural institutions emphasize their online accessibility, disabled communities benefit. And a rising sense of community is fueled when more people are helping those in need, putting pressure on businesses to include disabled communities, Ms. Angus says."As we come out of lockdown, most of us will have experienced firsthand the isolation many individuals with disabilities cope with daily," she says. "This is increasing our community spirit everywhere."
Homebodies: The multifunctional home is a prediction that came true "overnight," Ms. Angus says. As access to broadband grew, Euromonitor in January had predicted that more consumers would become reluctant to leave their homes. Amid the coronavirus-fueled lockdowns, consumers fully retreated to their homes and immediately transitioned to working, learning, exercising and socializing there.
Local Pride: The pandemic has fueled consumer demand for more local brands and products, Euromonitor says. Overnight, international travel and supply chains closed. Meanwhile, the virus has created a feeling of "getting through this together" and wanting to support local businesses and communities to keep them going, Ms. Angus says.
Fewer Reusables: "This is another trend that coronavirus for now has halted," says Ms. Angus. Euromonitor initially predicted more circular business models that aimed to promote sharing, reusing, refilling and renting to avoid waste. But now, concerns over health and touching products that have previously been used have led consumers to again embrace disposable products, Ms. Angus says. "Clean comes before green," she says.
Taking Care: At the start of 2020, well-being was a top priority as consumers sought products that offered mood enhancement and brain-function boosts, Euromonitor reported. Amid the pandemic, that concern is heightened as many people struggle with isolation, fear of the unknown and anxiety. "Covid-19 will reset people's behavior and priorities," she says. "They'll be favoring consumption patterns that prioritize the self."

Credit: By Ellen Byron
