International Business Machines Corp. posted its second consecutive quarter of higher revenue after nearly six years of declines, a sign that Chief Executive Ginni Rometty's slow-moving turnaround may be taking hold.
Revenue in the quarter rose in all of the company's major business units. Still, the results underscored the fragility of IBM's shift from older businesses supplying on-site technology to faster-growing businesses based on cloud computing.
The quarter's performance was plumped by sales of new hardware that analysts expect to eventually peter out. Profit margins, meanwhile, continued to narrow from a year earlier.
Revenue rose 5% to $19.07 billion from a year earlier, its strongest gain for the top line since the third quarter 2011. As in the previous quarter, though, adjusting for currency-exchange rates tells a different story. Stripping out the impact of foreign exchange, IBM said revenue was flat.
Several quarters ago, the company found itself on the other side of the issue, where unfavorable rates made IBM's revenue declines steeper than they appeared when adjusted for currencies.
Profit fell 4% to $1.68 billion. Shares of the tech giant sank 5.7% in after-hours trading, after closing up 1.9% at $160.91. The stock has lost 6% in the past 12 months, even as the S&P 500 index has risen 15%.
The stock market reacted to overoptimism arising from IBM's revenue turnaround in the fourth quarter, said Daniel Ives, an analyst with GBH Insights. "Ultimately you'd call it a good quarter, but the bulls were looking for more," he said.
Ms. Rometty has been working to turn around IBM almost since the moment she took over from Sam Palmisano in 2012, as the emerging industry of cloud computing ate away at IBM's business of managing information technology in customers' facilities.
She has refashioned IBM as a cloud provider, seeking to differentiate the company's offerings from lower-cost competitors through buzzy technologies such as its artificial-intelligence tools and blockchain, a decentralized way to execute and track transactions.
IBM expects these offerings, which it calls strategic imperatives, to grow more rapidly than its legacy businesses are shrinking, propelling IBM to faster revenue growth as they come to constitute a bigger portion of overall sales.
The company said strategic-imperatives revenue reached $37.7 billion, making up 47% of its revenue over the past 12 months, and remains on track to reach $40 billion by the end of the year.
"The overarching message," IBM finance chief James Kavanaugh said, "is that we grew revenue, stabilized our gross margin across all our lines of business and grew operating profit, cash, and earnings per share."
However, margins remain an issue. The Systems division, which is responsible for mainframe computers, and the Cognitive Solutions division that includes high-profile offerings such as Watson, both took a hit.
---
Maria Armental contributed to this article.

Credit: By Ted Greenwald
