Alex Gerko cannot wait to lose $10 million.
The founder of the algorithmic trading firm XTX Markets, Gerko is now one of the world's richest men. But he's not spending his fortune on a sports team or a flight to space. This billionaire is plowing his money into a different, even wilder adventure: He wants to conquer the world's most prestigious high-school math competition.
This past week, his company unveiled an intriguing new contest called the AI-MO Prize, which might be the geekiest way for someone to collect millions of dollars. XTX is offering a bounty to the first team that develops a public artificial-intelligence model smart enough to perform at the highest levels of the International Mathematical Olympiad.
Basically, as soon as AI can win IMO gold, Gerko's company will have to pay up.
And he sounds totally psyched about it.
"I'll be very excited," he said.
The International Mathematical Olympiad is the annual summer event where hundreds of top high-school students from around the world challenge themselves and compete with each other to solve problems that would make your brain hurt. Less than 10% leave with a gold medal, which is not just an indicator of their mathematical aptitude but "a strong predictor of future success," says the AI-MO Prize team. Especially now. The best of the brightest have the kind of sharp quantitative minds that have never been valued so highly by Wall Street and Silicon Valley.
The math whizzes at IMO face a series of six questions covering topics in algebra, combinatorics, geometry and number theory. Even some gold medalists nail only four of them. The answers require these high-schoolers to invent their own logical arguments on the spot. They are proofs that demand imagination, creativity and "the highest cognitive function of human beings," said Gregor Dolinar, the IMO president.
"You do not need any university knowledge of mathematics: no integrals, no differential equations, no matrices," Dolinar said. "What you need are very clever ideas, abstract thinking, rigorous reasoning, sometimes also out-of-the-box ideas and in the end a clear presentation of the solution."
Which explains why ChatGPT can't do this sort of math. Yet.
AI is excellent for telling you how to do things that have already been done. But humans still trounce machines when it comes to being original. Gerko told me an AI model could ingest every math textbook ever written and it would still be "quite easy to confuse it with relatively simple math problems." And the math problems at IMO are not relatively simple. They're insanely difficult.
"The spirit of making an IMO problem is to make something that you will have to generate new ideas for," said Po-Shen Loh, a Carnegie Mellon University math professor. "And the harder IMO problems require more idea generation."
I met Loh last summer as he was traveling across the country and explaining to students (and their parents) that being human will become more important as AI becomes more advanced. But that wasn't the only reason I called him about the AI prize. Loh also spent the past decade as the coach of the U.S. team, and he was an IMO contestant himself as a brilliant high-schooler. He knows how hard it is to win a gold medal: He won a silver.
Gerko, 43, would've loved the chance to win a medal of any color. He grew up in Russia, where he earned admission to a famed school for gifted math students, and he says he placed 10th in the nationwide high-school math rankings. There are only six spots on IMO teams.
"I was extremely competitive and it was quite upsetting to never make it to IMO," he told me. "But it was always an interest of mine. What if?"
That idea stuck with him even when he made the sort of fortune that can make someone forget about not making a math team. After getting his Ph.D. in math from Moscow State University, he left school to trade equities and currencies at Deutsche Bank. Then he joined the hedge fund GSA Capital in 2009 and founded London-based XTX in 2015.
"I moved into finance because I found working with data very interesting," he said. "And the money. Obviously."
I figured that someone with a quant-trading firm had professional reasons for his philanthropic investments. And of course he does: XTX is in the market for the nerds who dominate IMO. But he said his motivations were personal.
"I retained my interest in math education because this was the path from, let's say, an underprivileged background to a very lucrative career," Gerko said.
That interest was piqued when someone recently asked him when he thought an AI model could win IMO gold. He wasn't sure. But he remembered that researchers had launched a similar challenge in 2019, pre-ChatGPT, and he felt it was the right time to give their project a financial boost. He knew it would take more effort than existing $1 million challenges, so he made this one worth $10 million.
The result was the AI-MO Prize.
Unlike the IMO, you don't have to be in high school to participate, and the winners almost certainly won't be. This is a project worthy of a Ph.D. in machine learning. Gerko is betting that $10 million will entice those researchers with the tools to explore a new frontier of knowledge and expedite the future.
Most details of this math prize remain fuzzy at the moment. Gerko said he's in the process of hiring a director, finding advisers and specifying the criteria, like what counts as performance equivalent to a gold medal.
"It's very important to define these things very precisely," he said. "That's why everything is kind of vague right now."
But one exuberant math evangelist is a big fan of the idea. When Loh read about the initial AI challenge for IMO, he thought it was both noble and doomed to fail. "Honestly, my response was: 'Good luck, guys, but I'm never going to see this in my lifetime,'" he said. That was four years ago -- an eternity in AI. "Now," he said, "I'll definitely see it in my lifetime."
Gerko believes he won't have to wait long.
"I think we will part with this money within five years," he told me.
I shared that prediction with Loh and could see him running the numbers in his head.
"I wouldn't be surprised," he said.
He also pointed out that anybody who can devise AI systems powerful enough to win it won't have to worry about money.
"Whoever manages to claim the prize is going to have a company worth $5 billion," he said. "And maybe $50 billion."
Gerko's firm is subsidizing this prize because he's seen for himself how other, smaller challenges have stoked innovation in everything from self-driving cars to Netflix algorithms.
Money can't buy success. But it can buy some progress.
Just ask Terence Tao. He was the youngest IMO bronze, silver and gold medalist, winning gold when he was a 13-year-old prodigy. Now a 48-year-old professor at UCLA, he also won the Fields Medal, math's version of the Nobel Prize. The man known as the Mozart of mathematics says this prize will serve two useful purposes.
"Firstly, it is an accessible way to showcase progress (or lack thereof) in using AI to assist in mathematical thinking," he said in an email. "Secondly, it provides an important objective benchmark to measure progress (or lack thereof)."
The big prize is more seductive, but Tao believes the smaller progress prizes will be more essential to helping advance intelligence of all kinds. That would be worth every penny.
"I think this is a case where the journey may be more valuable than the destination," he said.
Credit: By Ben Cohen
