Private-equity firms often employ herds of junior employees to comb through and cold-call companies to source deals. But technology-focused Pilot Growth Equity Partners has found that a system using artificial intelligence can do the job just as well.
The San Francisco firm, which just closed its second fund, developed NavPod, a cloud-based deal-sourcing and workflow tool that it has used to source eight of its 10 completed deals over the past four years.
"We built NavPod because it was a necessity," said William Lee, a co-founder and managing director at the firm. "We are the ones who have to do the cold-calling."
Mr. Lee said that the firm, which has managed more than $200 million of assets with four employees and four advisers, began to build NavPod in 2013. It took two years to write the AI programming code and come up with the first version of the software in 2015, he said.
The firm operates in one of the most competitive sectors in private equity, as it makes growth investments in bootstrapped technology companies in their early stages. As a result, Pilot Growth vies with other sponsors and capital providers to win deals. NavPod gives the firm one more tool to gain an edge over the competition.
Pilot Growth isn't the first to use AI to help source deals or internally to help with business functions involving private equity or venture investments. Enter Capital, also based in San Francisco, has its own proprietary program to help track potential deals that fit with its investment thesis. Insight Partners, of New York, also has used AI to source deals. Many others have in-house AI capabilities they have developed as well.
Since being deployed, NavPod has been learning how to improve its performance, according to Mr. Lee. The system retrieves information from public filings, news, website scraping and database screens, and then learns from what it harvests. NavPod also employs data from CB Insights, a machine intelligence platform and Pilot Growth portfolio company, and it uses the IBM Watson AI service from International Business Machines Corp. to do processing work.
Pilot Growth says NavPod "organizes, tracks, and prioritizes thousands of companies to identify the best bootstrapped technology investment opportunities" in the country, automating about 90% of the work involved in deal sourcing. On its website, the firm says the system does the work "of several dozen humans" and does it with greater accuracy and at lower cost.
NavPod operates autonomously, sending a daily email that explains what everyone in the firm is working on, as well as summarizing information about companies that could be good fits for Pilot Growth and should be contacted. It also uses Google Maps to help the team coordinate visits to target companies as they travel across the U.S.
The AI system is generally one of the first things firm co-founder and Managing Director Neil Callahan mentions when he calls
Mr. Callahan said that by using AI, Pilot Growth can be the one to "show up first" when a company is ready to take on an outside investor.

Credit: By Laura Cooper
