WASHINGTON -- The Pentagon has identified more than $5 billion in programs from which it wants to shift money to fund higher-priority initiatives, according to a draft budget document reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.
The targets for reduced funding include the "right-sizing" of about 50 medical facilities across the country, consolidating some logistics operations and reducing the subsidy for Stars and Stripes, the military's independent newspaper, the draft document said.
Defense Secretary Mark Esper directed aides to review funding for nearly $100 billion in nonmilitary Pentagon programs to find cash to redirect toward initiatives considered higher-priority, such as combating threats from China and Russia, and away from efforts focusing on the Middle East, according to the document.
Defense officials also identified $2 billion to be realigned within the services of the Army, Navy and Air Force, according to the draft.
The transferred money would be reinvested in nuclear modernization, space, missile defense, hypersonic weapons, artificial intelligence and force "readiness," the draft said.
The proposed shifts in military spending will be part of a $705.4 billion budget the Pentagon is set to release Monday as part of President Trump's $4.8 trillion budget proposal for fiscal 2021, according to a senior administration official.
That figure represents a slight increase since last year for the Pentagon, but after years of generous defense budgets, some military officials expect their allocations to level out in coming years.
One of the most controversial aspects is the proposal to close, modify or change the mission of about 50 medical facilities across the country, according to the draft of the budget document, which didn't identify the individual facilities.
The effort to realign the hospitals and clinics is likely to draw criticism from members of Congress representing districts where those facilities are located.
The proposal has raised concerns within Mr. Esper's Pentagon, according to a separate memo circulated within the Office of the Secretary of Defense and reviewed by the Journal. Some Pentagon officials said they continued to have "significant concerns" about the proposal to cut the facilities. "These continued plans have potential to hinder our ability to comply with Congressionally directed DOD healthcare obligations going forward and to create wedges for future budget cycles," the memo said.
Stars and Stripes, which was first published during the Civil War, could see significantly less Pentagon funding.
The Defense Department aims to reduce its subsidy to the newspaper to reflect "the public's transition from print to more widely available alternative media sources," the draft budget document says.
---
Kate Davidson contributed to this article.

Credit: By Gordon Lubold
