Hong Kong's stock exchange is planning new rules allowing some technology and science companies that have yet to generate revenue to go public, its latest effort to boost initial-public-offering volumes.
Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing Ltd., operator of the exchange, wants to lower the bar for listings of prerevenue and early-stage technology companies. That would expand the number of potential IPOs in a market that has struggled this year. Primary and secondary listings in Hong Kong this year have raised $10.78 billion, down 71% from the same period in 2021, according to Dealogic.
The proposal comes amid a worsening relationship between China and the U.S. that has deterred some Chinese companies from listing on U.S. exchanges, raised the risk of delistings for others and encouraged a group of state-owned companies to exit from the market.
It also follows the U.S. government's decision to tighten exports in the semiconductor sector, a move that sent shares of China's chip makers reeling. Semiconductor companies are among those specifically targeted by the proposed changes to Hong Kong's listing rules.
The exchange currently requires companies hoping to list to pass one of several tests, including a revenue requirement of at least 500 million Hong Kong dollars, equivalent to $63.7 million, for the most recent audited year. A consultation paper published Wednesday proposes waiving the revenue requirement for some companies. That would be the biggest overhaul of Hong Kong listing rules since 2018.
The new proposal applies to what the exchange calls "specialist technology companies," which include those in cloud-based services and artificial intelligence; advanced hardware; advanced materials; new energy and environmental protection; and new food and agriculture technologies.
That list includes several sectors considered key areas for investment by China's government, including semiconductor manufacturing, artificial intelligence and new energy.
The exchange operator said those specialist technology companies, many of them still focusing on research and development, find it hard to list in Hong Kong because they often can't meet profit, revenue or cash-flow requirements for listings. The exchange's talks with market participants suggest there would be strong appetite among investors for those companies' listings due to their growth potential, Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing said.
That could help counter the fall in listings this year, which has hurt profits at the exchange. The exchange operator on Wednesday said profit fell 30% to HK$2.27 billion for the three months ended Sept. 30.
The exchange will take public feedback on the proposal until Dec. 18.
---
Jing Yang contributed to this article.
Credit: By Dave Sebastian
