The new online tests New Jersey launched last week are ushering in another first for the annual state exams -- research into computer scoring of students' essays.
The automated scoring will have no effect on students' test results this year, New Jersey Department of Education officials said Monday. Computer scoring can be faster and cheaper than human scoring.
Skeptics question whether so-called robo-graders can evaluate complex writing as well as teachers and other human scorers do. New Jersey officials said all essays on the English language arts tests this spring will be scored by people, but 10% will also be rated by a computer as part of a study on the reliability of that approach.
Jeffrey Hauger, director of assessments for the New Jersey Department of Education, acknowledged a public perception that computer scoring fails to capture nuance.
"We would not go full automated scoring without having some information for us to believe it does just as good a job as human scorers," he said.
Phasing in the use of artificial intelligence to rate essays is part of the plan for states in the consortium known as PARCC, or Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers. PARCC officials say 11 states plus the District of Columbia are giving the new tests to five million students this spring. That includes about 900,000 in New Jersey.
David Connerty-Marin, a spokesman for PARCC, said the group anticipates that states involved will move to automated scoring of essays over three years, "but only if the results show the scoring is at least as reliable as human scoring." Even if automated scoring is proven to work, he said states can keep human scoring if they pay extra.
The debut of the PARCC tests last week brought pockets of resistance where some families opted out, saying the test had overly confusing questions and was a distraction from learning time. Supporters of PARCC say it will give parents and teachers much more meaningful information on children's skills than fill-in-the-bubble tests of the past.
State officials said it is too early to tell how many opted out. Children are taking the tests during testing windows in March and May.
Credit: By Leslie Brody
