Elon Musk's embrace of Donald Trump can be traced in part to a snub by President Biden.
In early 2021, the new Biden administration began making plans to implement its campaign promises to boost electric vehicles.
At the time, Musk's Tesla produced about two-thirds of the EVs on U.S. roads. But Tesla is also the only major U.S. car manufacturer that doesn't have unionized factory workers, and some of its labor practices were under scrutiny by federal regulators.
Tesla officials reached out to the White House multiple times, hoping to connect Biden and Musk, people familiar with the matter said. The Tesla boss, who said in a TV interview that he voted for Biden, -- and has said he voted exclusively for Democrats until a few years ago -- repeatedly got the cold shoulder.
The reason: Biden officials didn't want to anger the United Auto Workers union, which leaned on the White House to keep its distance from Musk, people familiar with the matter said.
Then in August 2021, Biden organized an EV event, to be anchored by him signing an executive order with a target to make half of all new vehicles sold in 2030 zero-emissions vehicles. Just ahead of the event, White House officials called Tesla with an apology: Musk wasn't invited.
Instead, Biden welcomed executives from General Motors, Ford Motor and Chrysler parent Stellantis, all of which trailed Tesla by a big margin in EV output. Those companies employ thousands of UAW members.
Things only got worse from there.
"In the auto industry, Detroit's leading the world in electric vehicles," Biden said at a November 2021 event while promoting the new infrastructure bill. He then turned to GM's Mary Barra and praised the CEO. "You electrified the entire automobile industry. I'm serious. You led, and it matters," Biden said.
Tesla's leaders, including Musk, were outraged. During the fourth quarter of 2021, Tesla delivered more than 115,000 EVs in the U.S. while GM produced just 26.
Musk and his representatives didn't respond to requests for comment.
The Wall Street Journal reported this month that Musk has said that he planned to contribute around $45 million each month to America PAC, a pro-Trump super political-action committee he created along with other prominent tech executives.
Musk has since said he formed the super PAC but that the amount he is contributing was "at a much lower level."
Musk's political evolution to some extent played out on Twitter, now called X under his ownership, where he has railed against what he calls the "woke mind virus" and has been critical of Biden's approach to a number of policies. He sparred frequently on Twitter with Sens. Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders over issues such as a possible wealth tax on billionaires and the regulation of big tech companies.
In 2022, after another event in which Biden praised GM and Ford's efforts on EVs, a Twitter user called out the omission of Tesla. Musk tweeted a reply: "Biden is a damp [sock emoji] puppet in human form."
The criticism caught the attention of Biden's team.
Brian Deese, then a senior adviser to Biden, called Rohan Patel, then Tesla's vice president of global public policy and business development, and said the tweet seemed aggressive and unproductive. Deese asked to speak with Musk to address his concerns.
In a phone call with Deese and Biden's chief of staff at the time, Ron Klain, Musk complained that Biden had been misstating facts about EVs and not giving appropriate recognition to Tesla's leading role in the market. The two men listened to Musk and said they would convey his remarks to the president.
Democrats such as Rep. Ro Khanna, whose district includes a significant chunk of Silicon Valley, have tried to bring Musk back into the fold, people familiar with the matter said.
"I made the case to him that it was the Obama administration's policies that helped Tesla get off the ground, that helped SpaceX with [former Defense Secretary] Ash Carter, and he's often expressed his respect and admiration for President Obama," Khanna said in an interview.
Since Biden became president, the Federal Trade Commission has investigated whether Twitter violated a consent decree when Musk allowed journalists to access company records; the Justice Department has sued SpaceX, alleging discrimination in its hiring practices; and the Federal Communications Commission has denied Starlink nearly $900 million in rural-broadband subsidies -- actions Musk saw as politically motivated, people with whom he discussed the actions said.
Musk and his companies were also subject to regulatory actions in previous years.
A spokesman for the FTC said agency investigations aren't motivated by politics, while a representative for the FCC said it makes decisions based on facts.
A Justice Department spokesman declined to comment. Department officials have said its SpaceX lawsuit is based on an investigation that began during the Trump administration, in May 2020.
Musk critics say the scrutiny is warranted given the scale of his businesses and the influence they wield. They also say Musk often brought the scrutiny on himself with his provocative tweets and other commentary aimed at regulators and government officials.
Musk's personal wealth has surged during Biden's tenure. Today, he is worth $234 billion and ranks as the richest person in the world.
In addition to X, Tesla and SpaceX, Musk oversees three other companies: tunneling venture the Boring Co., brain-implant startup Neuralink and an artificial-intelligence company, xAI.
Tesla is a beneficiary of the Biden administration's Inflation Reduction Act, which provides hundreds of billions of dollars in subsidies for investing in renewable-energy projects.
SpaceX notched several big wins in Biden's term, reeling in roughly $4 billion in NASA contracts to develop a lander to transport astronauts to the moon and working with the Federal Aviation Administration to triple the number of agency-approved launches between 2021 and 2023.
Trump and Musk also have a complicated relationship.
Musk was critical of Trump's tenure while Trump was president. He frequently has made comments about how the leadership of the country was being run by a "gerontocracy," or a government ruled by old people.
Musk's softening toward Trump was aided by some of his key tech associates, such as David Sacks, who had worked with Musk at PayPal years earlier, and Palantir Technologies co-founder Joe Lonsdale. They have been encouraging him to get more involved in the electoral process, and Lonsdale is involved in the super PAC.
Some of Musk's shifting views are connected to his ownership of X, people close to him said. After he relaxed speech restrictions on the social-media site that had rankled many conservatives, he began to receive praise from them.
Musk also has been critical of gender-affirming care for minors and has blamed progressives for allowing the practice.
In the podcast interview, Musk said he felt tricked into signing documents for one of his children to receive medical treatment.
"I vowed to destroy the woke mind virus after that," Musk said. "And we're making some progress."
Trump recently has also shifted his tone on Musk.
At a rally this month, Trump touted Musk's endorsement. Trump said Musk hasn't asked for any changes to the candidate's stated position seeking to eliminate subsidies for EVs.
"I mean other guys, they give you $2 and you've got to take them to lunch. You've got to wine them, dine them," Trump said at the rally. "But he's never mentioned to me, 'Why are you hitting the electric cars?' because he understands I'm not hitting it."
---
Alex Leary, Robbie Whelan, Enes Morina, Micah Maidenberg and Jim Oberman contributed to this article.
Credit: By Dana Mattioli and Emily Glazer
