The Fear Index
By Robert Harris
(Knopf, 286 pages, $25.95)
"Whoever woke at four in the morning because they were feeling happy?" asks the physicist and financial wizard Alexander Hoffmann in Robert Harris's financial thriller "The Fear Index." Readers may find themselves lying awake at night unsettled by the story of what happens when Hoffmann devises a software program that exploits human fright for profit.
Hoffmann, an American living in Switzerland, is vastly wealthy but indifferent to his riches. He is socially inept, unlike his glib investment-banker business partner, Hugo Quarry. Hoffmann is simply obsessed by numbers -- by algorithms and their potential for perfecting artificial intelligence, or "autonomous machine reasoning." Meanwhile, his work spins off billions of dollars for the hedge fund that he and his partner run.
Hoffmann's latest algorithms isolate and analyze one specific human reaction as a predictor of market movement: "Fear is historically the strongest emotion in economics," the scientist tells his investors. "Our conclusion is that fear is driving the world as never before." Mr. Harris has clearly been keeping up with financial news, deftly extrapolating from events like the "flash crash" of 2010 that was blamed on a blizzard of automated, algorithm-driven trades executed in milliseconds -- essentially a computer panic.
But what if the computers could be made to read human panic? Building on data accumulated for years by the S&P 500 Volatility Index, or VIX ("traders call it 'the fear index' "), Hoffmann's new software, learning as it goes, calculates and acts on second-by-second changes in group behavior. Instant communication, Hoffmann posits, is creating an epidemic of fear that feeds on itself: "The rise in market volatility, in our opinion, is a function of digitalization, which is exaggerating human mood swings by the unprecedented dissemination of information via the Internet." "And," says Quarry, the hedge fund's public face, "we've found a way to make money out of it."
Business is indeed booming. But Hoffmann's own fear index spikes when odd and alarming incidents start occurring in his personal life. He receives an anonymous gift of a rare and disturbing book containing photographs of the inmates in a Victorian-era lunatic asylum: "Their misaligned eyes and skewed teeth," Mr. Harris writes, "gave them the look of crafty superstitious peasants from the Middle Ages. They reminded Hoffmann of a childish nightmare -- of grown-ups from an old-fashioned book of fairy tales who might come and steal you from your bed in the night and carry you off into the woods." When Hoffmann's wife, a talented artist, is about to have her first gallery show, someone goes to a great deal of expense to spoil it. An intruder breaks into Hoffmann's isolated mansion late one evening and batters him senseless before being chased away.
Is a business rival out to get him? Are these strange events all coincidence? Hoffmann the objective scientist reasons with Hoffmann the frightened human and comes up with two disturbing possibilities: "Someone was trying to screw with his mind. . . . They were trying to make him doubt his own sanity, maybe even murder him. Either that or he really was going mad."
Mr. Harris has shown himself a master of the thriller form, regardless of context -- his 1992 best seller, "Fatherland," was an alternative history of World War II, and "The Ghost" (2007) offered a fevered view of modern British politics. The author has a marvelous knack for sketching a scene or evoking a mindset and then drawing the reader in. Here Mr. Harris describes the rare old book that helps spark his protagonist's crisis: "Hoffmann held the volume to his nose and inhaled. A compound of leather and library dust and cigar smoke, so sharp he could taste it, with a faint hint of something chemical -- formaldehyde, perhaps, or coal-gas. It put him in mind of a nineteenth-century laboratory or lecture theatre, and for an instant he saw Bunsen burners on wooden benches, flasks of acid and the skeleton of an ape."
As Hoffmann's terror mounts, the trained observer notes his own symptoms: "His breath was becoming short, his heartbeat accelerating so rapidly it was uncomfortable. His hair felt as stiff as fur." Nature appears violent when viewed in this tormented state: "Above the inky expanse of lawn, the moon was a silvery-blue discus that seemed to have been thrown at great speed through scudding masses of black cloud." Man-made contraptions can seem frightful: "A tram rattled to a halt and opened its doors, spilling out passengers along its entire length, as if a knife had been passed from end to end, gutting it."
Hoffmann's darkening view contrasts sharply with the happy cynicism of his more worldly partner, for whom even the bleakest day can turn sunny: "He always felt good after he fired someone: it was cathartic." Quarry is nonchalant about the effect that Hoffmann's increasingly eccentric behavior might have on the firm's biggest investors: "At the end of the day, Hoffmann could swing naked from the rafters playing the ukulele . . . as long as he made them a return of eighty-three per cent."
"The Fear Index" is full of engaging flashback set pieces: how Hoffmann met Quarry, how their company was formed and took off, how Hoffmann's wife mastered an innovative art form. But the principal narrative, of Hoffmann's ordeal, unfolds at a breakneck pace. When the reason behind the eerie incidents becomes apparent, the effect is chilling -- and, for some characters, fatal. Only when the plot's smoke clears will certain fussy readers feel their suspension of disbelief plummeting and say: Now, wait a minute. That's another kind of flash crash.
---
Mr. Nolan is the author of "Artie Shaw, King of the Clarinet: His Life and Times" (Norton).
Credit: By Tom Nolan
