A contraction in the U.S. warehousing sector is deepening following a period of frenzied expansion during the pandemic.
Real-estate developers sharply pulled back construction of warehouses in the latest quarter, and logistics operators slashed warehousing payrolls last month, signs that the market is resetting heading into the busy holiday shopping season.
The amount of industrial real estate under construction in the third quarter fell to 309 million square feet, down 43% from the previous year and the steepest drop since 2008, according to real-estate services firm Cushman & Wakefield.
Developers are paring back their expansion plans as companies have held off on making leasing decisions and higher interest rates have pushed up borrowing costs.
"You have softer market conditions. It's taking longer for some of these projects, when they deliver, to lease up," said Jason Price, head of logistics and industrial research at Cushman. "There's not this rush to get something built right away."
The vacancy rate for industrial real estate climbed to 6.4% in the third quarter, up from 4.6% in the same period a year earlier to the highest quarterly level since the end of 2014, according to Cushman.
The receding demand is reaching across the sector.
Warehouse operators shed a seasonally adjusted 11,000 jobs in September from August, according to preliminary Bureau of Labor Statistics data released Friday. Payrolls in the storage and distribution sector have fallen by 171,600 jobs from a pandemic-era high of 1.94 million jobs in May 2022.
The Logistics Managers' Index, a monthly survey of supply-chain managers, showed available warehouse capacity expanded in September but at a slower pace than August and below year-ago levels.
The storage industry is contracting following a two-year stretch of feverish leasing, construction and expansion as e-commerce demand soared during the pandemic and companies sought to place their goods as close as possible to consumers to speed up delivery. Consumer demand for goods has since cooled off as Americans have shifted toward spending more on services and have grappled with higher inflation.
Developers and owners of industrial real estate have also shifted their focus toward building data centers as demand soars for space to fuel a boom in artificial intelligence.
Cushman's Price said the declining construction could squeeze capacity if goods demand grows, triggering another turn in the cycle.
"By next year, when another half of this current pipeline delivers, there's not a lot behind it," he said. "We should start having that inflection point at some point next year, and supply and demand come into more balance."
Generate image description

Credit: By Liz Young
