A Chicago-based aluminum company is betting billions of dollars that it can solve one of the biggest challenges in American manufacturing: paying for electricity.
Century Aluminum aims to roughly double domestic output of aluminum from smelters by building the country's first new smelter in 45 years. The company's biggest hurdle to starting the project is securing an affordable power supply.
"As a U.S. aluminum producer in a market where there is a huge deficit, why don't we produce more? It's all about the power," said Matt Aboud, vice president for strategy and business development for Century Aluminum. The company has lined up a $500 million grant from the Energy Department to support the planned facility, which could cost as much as $5 billion.
Steadily climbing electricity costs have been a major factor behind the shrinking ranks of U.S. aluminum smelters, leaving buyers increasingly reliant on imports as demand is growing.
Automakers, energy companies and the aerospace industry are hungry for more of the aluminum from smelters, prized for its purity and ability to blend with other metals. The U.S. imported nearly 4 million metric tons of such aluminum last year, while 4.7 million metric tons was produced from recycled aluminum, from old beverage cans to manufacturing scrap.
Domestic production of smelter aluminum -- which is known as primary aluminum -- is on pace this year for 689,000 metric tons, which would be the lowest since 1950. Smelters have been steadily going out of business for years, pinched between stagnant aluminum prices and escalating power costs, which in some cases have climbed by more than one-third in recent years.
Century is still arranging financing and seeking a site for its smelter, which would be the largest in the U.S. with about 600,000 metric tons a year of production capacity. Aboud said much depends on where the company can find a steady supply of affordable power.
Century aims to secure a power-supply deal and complete the plans for the plant in the next two years and then start construction, which is expected to take about three years.
In manufacturing, few things are as power-intensive as smelting powdery aluminum oxide into aluminum. The process takes about 24 hours, and producing a ton typically uses more electricity than a single household consumes in an entire year. Century expects its planned smelter to produce about 1,500 metric tons of aluminum a day.
Four smelters remain in operation in the U.S., down from seven in 2020 and 23 in 2000, when the U.S. was the world's leading producer of primary aluminum. A smelter in southeast Missouri was the most recent to close in January after reopening in 2018. Century and Alcoa now account for nearly all the U.S.-made primary aluminum.
Electricity accounts for 40% of smelters' operating expenses. Century said that for over a decade it was able to secure enough reasonably priced power for its 55-year-old aluminum smelter in Hawesville, Ky.
When Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022, the cost of U.S. natural gas used to generate electricity rose as the U.S. exported more gas to Western Europe to offset the loss of Russian supplies. The average cost for a megawatt-hour of electricity for U.S. smelters jumped to $54 in 2022 from $39 in 2021, according to commodities analyst CRU Group.
Century idled the Hawesville smelter in the summer of 2022 and has no plans to restart it, though CRU said smelters' average price for electricity receded to $36 a megawatt-hour last year. Century said forward prices for electricity in Kentucky are above $45 per megawatt-hour through 2027 -- too high for Century to recover its restart costs and make a profit.
For every dollar increase in the price of a megawatt-hour of electricity, Century said it costs the company at least $3 million in annual profit.
Century and other primary aluminum producers also have been hamstrung by low prices that have been held down by China's massive production of the metal. The annual average inflation-adjusted price of aluminum on the London Metal Exchange slipped 2.1% from 2010 to 2023, CRU said.
Still, Century is betting that it can conquer the power conundrum. In addition to the Energy Department grant, its planned smelter will be supported with tax breaks created by the Biden administration to revive U.S. aluminum smelter operations and reduce carbon-dioxide emissions from the electricity they consume.
"This is going to be a test case for America's reindustrialization," said Joe Quinn, executive director for the Center for Strategic Industrial Materials. The Washington-based group advocates for more domestic aluminum production to support electric vehicles, solar-energy panels and other manufacturing.
Century is counting on the aggressive build-out of solar- and wind-powered generating capacity now under way to start yielding excess power after 2030, and the company hopes to lock down supply in exchange for a decade's worth of steady electricity demand from a new smelter.
Much of that renewable-energy capacity isn't yet connected to power grids, making it difficult for industrial users to access it. Grid-connected renewable energy is expected to attract high demand, said Greg Wittbecker, an aluminum-industry analyst.
Other big users of electricity also are vying for large loads of renewable energy, including new semiconductor-chip plants and computer-server centers that are expanding to accommodate artificial-intelligence products such as ChatGPT.
Renewable power currently costs about $10 more per megawatt-hour than electricity generated by conventional power plants using coal or natural gas, according to analysts. The price gap could be narrowed with a provision in the Inflation Reduction Act that allows primary aluminum producers to receive a federal tax credit for up to 10% of their production expenses, including electricity.
Aboud said Century purposely opted for yearslong lead time for the plant to give executives enough time to obtain a favorable deal for electricity. "We need to see a sustained low-cost power environment and a sustained improvement in aluminum prices," Aboud said.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: The North American Difference in Aluminum" -- WSJ July 23, 2024)
Generate image description

Credit: By Bob Tita
