A new set of American semiconductor leaders is rising, fueled by pandemic-driven demand for their chips that they are looking to parlay into blockbuster deals to disrupt an industry traditionally dominated by Intel Corp.
The U.S. chip industry has historically been a mix of niche players, midsize companies and Intel. But this year, Advanced Micro Devices Inc., long the underdog in the computer-processor market, and Nvidia Corp., a graphics-processing specialist, are mounting their biggest challenge yet to level the playing field.
AMD said Tuesday it would buy San Jose, Calif.-based chip maker Xilinx Inc. for $35 billion. AMD, best known for its personal-computer processors, is paying for the acquisition in stock after its shares soared almost 80% this year amid supercharged demand for videogames, PCs and servers that crunch data for companies.
Nvidia, whose shares have more than doubled this year, placed its bet in September by agreeing to buy chip-design specialist Arm Holdings from SoftBank Group Corp. for $40 billion in cash and stock, in what would be the industry's largest deal to date. The transaction would extend Nvidia's reach into the booming smartphone market where Arm-designed chips dominate.
The AMD and Nvidia transactions -- which still need to pass regulatory scrutiny in the U.S. and abroad -- would put those companies on a more even footing with Intel, America's chip-making icon. AMD Chief Executive Lisa Su said being bigger is an advantage in a semiconductor landscape where development costs are rising.
America has other big chip competitors, notably Qualcomm Inc. and Texas Instruments Inc., both of which have a market value well above AMD's roughly $93 billion. But those companies largely compete in different markets: Qualcomm in mobile devices and TI in analog chips that rely on real-world signals.
The chip industry has been consolidating for years through a string of mostly smaller deals. Deal activity this year is shaping up to be unprecedented because stock valuations of some acquiring companies have soared, giving them financial leverage, said Stacy Rasgon, an analyst at Bernstein Research. "Valuations are high and interest rates are low, and if you're going to do it, now is probably the time," Mr. Rasgon said.
Investors have rewarded companies catering to the digital transformation that businesses are undergoing, and that the coronavirus pandemic has accelerated. Nvidia this year surpassed Intel as the most valued U.S. chip maker, with a market capitalization of more than $330 billion, in part reflecting its edge in chips powering artificial-intelligence processes and a growing data-center business.
Intel has long been the dominant U.S. chip company. A series of manufacturing missteps and more forceful competition could upend that status, according to analysts and industry officials. Intel said this year that development of its next generation of chips had fallen behind. That set it on course to be technologically behind the world's top-tier semiconductor manufacturers.
Rivals are making inroads as the industry moves away from Intel's core strength -- powerful processing engines that can do all types of calculations -- toward chips made for narrower applications, such as artificial intelligence or telecommunications, said Alan Priestley, an analyst at research firm Gartner.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
