OpenAI on Friday showcased technology that can re-create a human voice from a 15-second clip, but said it wouldn't release it publicly until it knows more about potential risks for misuse.
The program, Voice Engine, creates an AI-generated version of a person's voice from a short recording and can use it to read text aloud. Voice Engine also can recreate a person's voice in foreign languages, even if the original sample is provided in English, OpenAI said.
OpenAI has worked with a limited group of customers that has been testing the technology since late 2023, the startup said. In those tests, Voice Engine has been used to provide reading assistance to children, translate content into other languages and generate voices for people who are unable to speak.
The potential risks associated with generating cloned voices, especially in an election year, were part of the decision to limit access to the technology, the company said.
Generative artificial-intelligence technology has made it easier to deceive people. Election officials have said 2024 is the first election cycle in which they are preparing to confront AI-generated disinformation on a broad scale. Voters are already encountering AI-powered falsehoods, according to researchers and U.S. officials.
One early example in the U.S. presidential race occurred in January, when an estimated 5,000 to 25,000 robocalls told New Hampshire residents not to vote in the state's presidential primary, which was days away.
"Your vote makes a difference in November, not this Tuesday," said the voice on the call. It sounded like President Biden, but it was created by AI, according to an analysis by security firm Pindrop. The message also discouraged independent voters from participating in the Republican primary. The New Hampshire attorney general's office later said it identified a Texas-based company as the source of the calls.
Voice Engine was first developed by OpenAI in 2022 and has been used to power voices for ChatGPT and other programs.
OpenAI also limited public access to its text-to-video program Sora when it was unveiled in February. Sora was shared with a select group of researchers and academics for further study.
The preview of Voice Engine's functionality is meant to encourage institutions and the public to be on alert for deceptive AI practices, OpenAI said. It warned that criminals could use fake voices to access people's private information or bypass security measures such as voice-based security authentications at banks.
"It's important that people around the world understand where this technology is headed, whether we ultimately deploy it widely ourselves or not," the company said.
Credit: By Ginger Adams Otis
