Global stocks were mixed on Wednesday and U.S. index futures wobbled after Nvidia dethroned Microsoft to become the most valuable listed company in the world.
U.S. equity and bond markets were closed for the Juneteenth holiday, but futures continued to trade. Contracts tied to the S&P 500 gained less than 0.1% in late-afternoon trading. Nasdaq-100 futures rose 0.2%, while contracts on the Dow industrials ticked lower.
Enthusiasm over artificial intelligence continues to boost markets. The S&P 500 on Tuesday notched its 31st record close this year, while the Nasdaq Composite finished at its 20th all-time high.
The indexes were lifted by a rally in shares of Nvidia. The chip maker ended Tuesday with a market value of $3.34 trillion, overtaking Microsoft as the most valuable publicly traded company in the world.
Stocks received a boost from data indicating the U.S. economy is cooling. Investors were rattled in recent months by its resilience, which raised questions about the likelihood of the Federal Reserve cutting interest rates this year. Investors largely expect the Fed, which left rates unchanged last week, to begin easing policy in September, according to federal-funds futures data from CME Group.
"What's remarkable is, given the market's reassessment of rate cuts this year -- they've gone from expecting six cuts to now one -- [equities] haven't been upset by this," said Susannah Streeter, head of money and markets at Hargreaves Lansdown. "That's because AI has been the biggest story in town."
Investors are looking ahead to Friday's release of U.S. purchasing managers' surveys, which are expected to show that activity in services and manufacturing eased in June.
Most European indexes slipped on Wednesday, but the U.K.'s FTSE 100 crept higher. Data showed U.K. inflation fell back to the Bank of England's 2% target for the first time in nearly three years in May, though price pressures in the services sector remained high.
The data reinforced investors' expectations that the BoE will hold rates unchanged on Thursday. The Swiss National Bank, which kick-started the continent's rate-cutting cycle in March, meets Thursday. Investors are divided on whether it will cut rates again.
Some Asian indexes rallied Wednesday, shadowing Tuesday's tech-powered gains in the U.S., but many Asian markets moved lower early Thursday. At midday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.6% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 0.4%.
Credit: By Chelsey Dulaney
