With barbershops and salons closed around the world, many individuals have been taking matters into their own hands. DIY haircuts are trending.
Online videos about cutting hair at home have seen a jump of more than 220% in average daily views since March 15, YouTube said last week. Meanwhile, sales of men's hair clippers in U.S. stores grew 58% in the eight weeks ended April 25 from the year-earlier period, according to Nielsen.
We asked readers to send us photos (before and after) of their own explorations in at-home haircuts for potential evaluation by experts. Then we asked three professionals to offer their critiques: John Barrett, a hairdresser whose eponymous New York City salon has served such clients as Hillary Clinton, Martha Stewart and Liza Minnelli; Linh Nguyen, a fashion and television hairstylist whose work has appeared in Vogue and on "Project Runway"; and Lacy Redway, hairstylist for such actors as Tiffany Haddish from "The Carmichael Show," Tessa Thompson of HBO's "Westworld" series, and John Boyega from the recent "Star Wars" trilogy.
Almost all of the submissions were from men, including some whose wives or girlfriends cut their hair. Perhaps most women are too scared, or too smart, to cut their own hair at home. (Our experts have some tips for women about cutting their own hair or managing longer-than-usual locks, at the bottom of the page.)
What follows are accounts of some of our novice barbers, and what the experts had to say about their work.
1. The last time a barber cut Anuvrat Baruah's hair was March 1, "right before the Toronto lockdown escalated," the 24-year-old says. Mr. Baruah, who normally gets a haircut every six weeks, says he started to feel "heavy" with his growing hair, so he decided to take matters into his own hands.
"This quarantine has left most people feeling powerless and uncertain, and this felt like taking control," says Mr. Baruah, a graduate student who is working on a master of management in artificial intelligence. Also, he says, "if I messed it up, I had enough time for my hair to grow back."
To prepare, Mr. Baruah watched YouTube tutorials on buzzcuts. Then he used an electric shaver and his bathroom mirror.
"It went much better than I thought," he says of the result. "I was expecting to end up with a blooper reel of me ruining my hairline."
MS. REDWAY: "He did a decent job. It just needed to be evened out a little bit more. He has a slight weight to his hair normally, but when it's this short, it's pointier. You can see all those little hairs that are sticking up.
"What he can do after buzzing is, he can use a pair of small scissors to just visually even out those short pieces that are sticking up."
As for the hairline, "Any men that are concerned about hairline receding or thinning should leave their hair longer on the top," Ms. Redway says. "On the first photo, I barely notice his hairline. But now when it's cut this low, you can see the exact formation of how his hair is growing or receding."
2. Don Bredbeck, a 61-year-old retiree in Poygan, Wis., usually gets his hair cut every two months or so. His last professional cut was in December.
In March, he asked his wife, Jeanne P Lilly Bredbeck, to cut it. Ms. Bredbeck, who is 58 and also retired, asked her stylist for advice. Still, she says, "I didn't know what I was doing and had not thought to watch any videos. I figured, how hard can it be? If I mess it up, it will grow out."
Ms. Bredbeck ended up using a small comb and kitchen scissors to cut her husband's hair in their basement. It took about 15 minutes.
She feels it went well.
"He has asked me to cut it for him from now on," she says. "That is fine with me. With the money we save, I will spend it on myself at the hair salon."
MS. REDWAY: "I actually think she did a decent job. I would take off more around the sides, the ears and the nape of the neck, like where his hair is still touching his collar. Guys typically like the sides a little shorter. It's still a little poofy. I think she was very cautious."
If Mr. Bredbeck likes having the sides a little long, Ms. Redway says, "he can swoop a light mousse behind his ears" to keep the hair low.
3. William W. Cameron, of Barboursville, Va., has always said he would only shave his head when his hairline receded too far. "To borrow from an SNL skit: I will shave my head like a real man, not do a bouffant comb-over," he says.
But recently he decided to let his wife, Judy Blair, shave his head. "I was past the five-week mark for a haircut," says the 67-year-old investment adviser. "Something needed to be done. Judy commented that desperate times required desperate measures."
Mr. Cameron owns a beard trimmer with a wider blade for cutting hair, so his wife used that. "We simply used a technique similar to how I trim my beard: trim up against the direction of the hair," he says. "Everything went fine. We both liked the results. I texted a photo to our hair stylist. She replied, 'I like it!!'"
MR. NGUYEN: "Judy did a great job. It looks even and smooth."
For a closer cut on the sides, Mr. Nguyen recommends a No. 1 or 2 clipper guard. The standard guard is size 4. The lower the number, the closer the shave. "It helps make the hairline look less pronounced when shorter on the sides, and it is better aesthetically," Mr. Nguyen says. "I always keep my hair super short on the sides to help with the hairline and [to] slim out your face."
4. Lydia Granger of Holland, Mich., had offered to cut her boyfriend's hair many times before, mainly as a joke. "He never took me up on it, because I frankly had zero experience," Ms. Granger says.
But her boyfriend, Josh Parks, finally said OK. "It was beginning to really bother him," Ms. Granger says, "and we figured he'd have time to let it grow out before seeing people in person again."
The goals were twofold: Mr. Parks, who is 23 and works in finance, wanted to get his hair off his ears, while Ms. Granger, who is also 23 and works in the career-advancement office of a Chicago university, says she wanted "an unconventional Saturday morning project."
Ms. Granger says she relied on coaching from her boyfriend, help from her older sister "and whatever I could remember from years of watching my dad get his hair cut at the barbershop." Her tools were a cordless trimmer that Mr. Parks owns, and the kitchen scissors, "I'm not proud to admit," she says. "I should've thought to use a mirror," she adds. "We did periodic checks with the selfie camera."
Both agree it could have gone worse. "He was on a Zoom call with his old baseball teammates and they said this is not even close to the top-five worst haircuts Josh has had," she says. "He's paid for a lot of bad haircuts."
MR. NGUYEN: "Looks good for a quarantine haircut. Lydia did a great job on Josh. The mirror definitely helps with balance and trial and error and teaches us to be better. With more practice she'll get the blending better. It's a little bumpy toward the back. Use the mirror and check for corners. Getting clippers will help her perfect it with time."
5. For Bryan Lee of New York City, quarantine has been a time to test out new skills. "My hair was getting longer than I liked, so I figured why not give this a try," the 31-year-old says. "I already learned I make great tacos."
To cut his own hair, Mr. Lee says he "just went off memory of past haircuts. My usual barber doesn't speak any English, so I guess I had plenty of time to observe." He used scissors, an electric razor, a comb and a Spotify playlist.
The cut went better than he expected. He was trying to achieve symmetry, and "I think I got pretty close," he says. "Don't ask about the back though."
Mr. Lee, who works for a food and beverage company, is quarantining with his roommate, of whom he says, "I'm sure he's trying his best not to laugh." Meanwhile, feedback from his colleagues on video work calls has been positive, he says, "although you can't see the back on Zoom."
MR. BARRETT: "He did a good job. The top of his hair is super impressive. If his career isn't working out, maybe he should come and talk to me.
"I don't know if he intentionally wanted to get it that close to the side. He could have used a bigger guard on the clipper so it wasn't as 'military' around the sides. But otherwise, great."
As for the back of Mr. Lee's head, Mr. Barrett says, "If you're doing it with clippers, rather than just going straight up and down, do it side-to-side as well, with a guard on the longer side." That will keep things even, he says.
---
Mr. Smith is a Wall Street Journal reporter in New York. Email ray.smith@wsj.com.
---
Lockdown Locks: Hair Help for Women
While few women participated in our show-and-tell of home hairstyling, our three experts offered up some DIY salon tips for them anyway:
If you must cut, do so with caution: "It's always better when cutting your own hair to do as little as possible," says hairdresser John Barrett. "If you think you need to take an inch off, then take half an inch. You can always go shorter but can never reverse."
Just updo it: A simple and fast way to look polished is arranging hair into a bun, top knot or ponytail, says fashion and TV hairstylist Linh Nguyen. "Buns and top knots always help pull a look together," Mr. Nguyen says. "It's quick and easy, especially if you have a family at home demanding your attention. Use a texturizing spray to keep it loose and springy, or hair spray for slick and smooth. Pomade or gel after it's done for shine and control." A ponytail also "looks neat, clean and ready to go," he says.
If your bangs are a bother: You can restyle misbehaving bangs off your face, for instance by sweeping and arranging the bangs into a half-knot, braid or twist, says celebrity hairstylist Lacy Redway. "Or a side bang is something you can consider as well, if they're growing longer than usual," she adds.
Coloring your own hair: Several steps are involved. "Before you start the color process, apply a little Vaseline around the hairline so you don't get stains on your skin; always use gloves as the dye is very hard to get off the fingernails," says Mr. Barrett. And choose "a color at least one shade lighter than you think," he says. "If your hair is light brown, go for a dark blond." When applying color, Mr. Barrett recommends "that you only do the hairline and the parting; go about an inch or so on each side of the part, and apply color only to regrowth." Then, when washing off, "use the leftover color, mixed with shampoo, to lather through the hair so you get a better evenness."
In lieu of a regular blowout: "A flatiron can be used to create very quick straight looks," says Mr. Nguyen. It can help produce everything from "beach waves to bouncy, springy locks."
To manage textured or curly hair: "If you're wearing braids and they're growing out, and you're ready to take them out, I would definitely recommend giving yourself a deep condition or hot-oil treatment" to keep the hair moisturized, says Ms. Redway. (Test the oil to make sure it isn't too hot before applying.) For women of color used to getting their hair straightened with chemical relaxers by professionals, if the relaxer is wearing off, she recommends, "tie your hair down flat [at night] so that it eliminates some of the volume that you'll experience."
-- Ray A. Smith
(See accompanying photos -- WSJ May 15, 2020)

Credit: By Ray A. Smith
