European stocks moved broadly higher on Monday despite disappointing data from Germany.
Europe's manufacturing powerhouse reported its first trade deficit since 1991 in May. Exports fell 0.5%, while imports increased 2.7%, thanks in part to surging energy costs, according to data from the German statistics office.
The pan-continental Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.5%, while the U.K.'s FTSE 100 added 0.9%.
The U.S. stock market was closed Monday for Independence Day. On Monday night, S&P 500 and Dow Jones futures each rose 0.3%, while Nasdaq 100 futures rose 0.4%.
Shares of U.S. electric-vehicle maker Tesla that trade in Milan fell 0.8% to 645.20 euros, equivalent to about $672. On Saturday, the company said its quarter-over-quarter deliveries fell for the first time in more than two years after an extended shutdown of its largest factory in Shanghai.
Energy producers led gains as oil prices rose. Oil-and-gas firm Harbour Energy added 5.2% in London trading, while BP rose 4.4% and Shell rose 3.9%. France's TotalEnergies added 3.9%. Brent crude, the global oil benchmark, rose 1.8% at $113.60 a barrel on continued supply concerns.
Meanwhile shares of Uniper SE, one of Europe's largest utility companies, plunged 28% as it continues discussions with the German government over a bailout. The utility said last week that its profitability has been hit by Russia's move to cut natural gas supplies to Europe.
Asian stocks were mixed. Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index fell 0.1% after a long weekend to commemorate the territory's 25th anniversary of its return to Chinese rule. Japan's Nikkei 225 added 0.8%, and South Korea's Kospi declined 0.2%.
"Clearly we're coming off of a soggy week," said Mark Matthews, head of research for Asia at Julius Baer. "Direction from the U.S. is still broadly negative."
In mainland China, the benchmark CSI 300 index of the largest stocks listed in Shanghai and Shenzhen rose 0.7%, and the Shanghai Composite rose 0.5%.
Early Tuesday, the Nikkei was up 0.8%, the Hang Seng was up 0.3%, but the CSI 300 was down 0.7%.
Growth in China, which is still sticking with its zero-tolerance approach to Covid-19, has tumbled this year with mass lockdowns and business closures during outbreaks. But Beijing has recently shown signs of opening up, with authorities last week cutting quarantine periods for inbound travelers.
Nomura analysts said they expected some stabilization in Asian stocks late in the third quarter, if there are clear signs of U.S. inflation moderating or if the Federal Reserve turns less hawkish.
"A developed world recession does not mean a recession in Asia, and we think Asian earnings can still post positive growth," the analysts said, saying that China's economic growth was likely to recover in 2023.
Notable movers in Asia included Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., the world's largest contract chip maker. TSMC shares fell 3% to hit their lowest since November 2020, helping drag Taiwan's benchmark Taiex index down 0.9%.
Shares of artificial-intelligence specialist SenseTime Group built on a steep selloff in the previous trading session in Hong Kong, which was fueled by the end of a lockup period for some investors. The stock fell an additional 19% Monday.
Credit: By Dave Sebastian and Chelsey Dulaney
