Two years after its much-hyped IPO, Etsy Inc. finds itself in a predicament familiar to the rest of the retail industry: Sales are slowing and investors are frustrated.
The online marketplace for handmade and vintage goods is now under pressure to stop spending like a tech startup and start acting like a retailer.
"We're trying to find the right balance between a tech company and an e-commerce company," Fred Wilson, a venture capitalist and chairman of Etsy's board, said in an interview. "Engineering is still critically important, but we don't need to build technology for technology's sake."
Etsy's new chief executive, Josh Silverman, who took over in May, has slashed spending and is focusing on reviving the company's core marketplace, in which revenue growth has slowed in each of the past four years.
"We have invested too much in building our version of things that already exist in the market," Mr. Silverman said.
Last year, Etsy booked a $30 million loss as higher costs offset a 33% jump in revenue to $365 million. In the first quarter, operating expenses rose 36% from a year ago, or twice as rapidly as revenue. The company reports its latest results on Thursday.
Several people familiar with Etsy's thinking say the company has grappled with the expectations of public markets and failed to prioritize its marketplace, which now accounts for less than half of its revenue. Since 2015, Etsy generates most of its money from providing add-on services to merchants, such as shipping labels and advertising. Shares shot above $30 in their first day of trading in April 2015 but soon crumbled and have been trading below the $16 IPO price for about the past two years.
Hedge fund Black-and-White Capital LP publicly criticized the company in May, citing issues from Etsy's "horrendous search functionality" to a "historical pattern of ill-advised spending." The firm, along with buyout giant TPG and others, have encouraged Etsy to explore a sale of the company.
Asked if the company was for sale, Mr. Silverman said he would have to consider any offers that might surface but he is focused on revamping the business. "Step one is to have a plan and confidence in the plan and only then could we weigh any offers," he said.
Etsy, according to former and current executives, long prided itself on building its own technology but many of the homegrown products, such as the site's email system and search engine, had limited capabilities.
The site's technology frustrated Amy Stringer-Mowat, who has been selling cutting boards on the marketplace since 2010.
When her items seemed to stop showing up in search results as frequently and her revenue declined, she shifted more of her business, American Heirloom, to her own e-commerce site.
"Everything felt like an experiment on Etsy," she said. "I realized I could make better use of my time figuring out my own analytics rather than figuring out Etsy's algorithms."
Growth in Etsy's core marketplace business derived from charging transaction and listing fees began decelerating a few years before its initial public offering. Some analysts say finding secondary revenue streams such as selling search ads and shipping services to merchants has been necessary because Etsy's marketplace has limited growth potential.
"Artisanal goods is a relatively small addressable retail market," said Cooper Smith, research director at L2, a digital brand consultancy. "Etsy is never going to scale to what Amazon can because its merchants are not major brands and they don't have a lot of merchandise."
In search of growth, Etsy's previous CEO, Chad Dickerson, invested in business tools for merchants and an overseas expansion. To prevent successful merchants from leaving the site, Etsy also loosened its rules to allow items produced in small manufacturing plants, departing from its handmade-only policy.
Executives continued investing over the past year, including the acquisition of a machine-learning startup, a new marketplace for craft supplies and a brand-marketing campaign. After its IPO, Etsy's head count increased more than 30% to 1,043 by the end of 2016.
The company also moved into a 200,000-square-foot building in Brooklyn featuring a dining hall serving locally catered meals, breathing rooms for weekly yoga sessions and a rooftop with solar panels, among other amenities.
In May, the company announced plans to eliminate 8% of its workforce and said Mr. Dickerson, who had run the company since 2011, was being succeeded by Mr. Silverman, a former executive with Skype and eBay.
Investors cheered the move on hopes that the company will find a buyer. Shares of Etsy have surged about 30% since the CEO change.
Mr. Silverman is centralizing marketing in international markets and deploying more outside technology, a shift from the company's guerrilla-type marketing approach and do-it-all-yourself engineering culture.
In June, Etsy said it would cut an additional 15% of its staff, bringing the total layoffs to 230 jobs.
Mr. Silverman also intends to leverage customer data to offer more personalized product recommendations. As part of its new technology approach, Etsy on Monday named a new chief technology officer, Mike Fisher, the co-founder of consulting firm AKF Partners.
"Driving more visitors to the site, doing a better job of converting those visits to purchases, and getting buyers to come back" are the biggest priorities, Mr. Silverman said. "It doesn't necessarily mean spending more money."

Credit: By Khadeeja Safdar
