Wall Street Journal owner News Corp struck a major content-licensing pact with generative artificial-intelligence company OpenAI, aiming to cash in on a technology that promises to have a profound impact on the news-publishing industry.
The deal could be worth more than $250 million over five years, including compensation in the form of cash and credits for use of OpenAI technology, according to people familiar with the situation. OpenAI would use content from News Corp's consumer-facing news publications, including archives, to answer users' queries and train its technology.
Terms of content-licensing agreements between publishers and OpenAI aren't public, but the News Corp deal is among the biggest, if not the biggest, reached to date.
"The pact acknowledges that there is a premium for premium journalism," News Corp Chief Executive Robert Thomson said in a memo to employees Wednesday. "The digital age has been characterized by the dominance of distributors, often at the expense of creators, and many media companies have been swept away by a remorseless technological tide. The onus is now on us to make the most of this providential opportunity."
News Corp's A shares were up 7.1% in after-hours trading Wednesday.
The rise of generative AI tools such as OpenAI's humanlike chatbot ChatGPT is poised to transform publishing. AI companies are hungry for publishers' content, which can help them refine their models and create new products such as AI-powered search.
Publishers are seeking to ensure that they extract a hefty payment for the use of their intellectual property, setting up complex and sometimes tense negotiations across the industry. Many journalists, meanwhile, are concerned about the impact of AI on jobs in newsrooms whose ranks have already been thinned by years of cuts.
The News Corp-OpenAI deal is the latest illustration of the differing approaches adopted by publishers looking to address the rise of generative AI.
News Corp joins a growing list of publishers that have reached commercial partnerships with OpenAI, including Politico and Business Insider parent Axel Springer, the Associated Press, Le Monde, the Financial Times and IAC's Dotdash Meredith, home of publications such as People and Better Homes & Gardens.
Other publishers, including the New York Times, have opted to battle OpenAI and its backer Microsoft in court, saying their content was used without permission to train artificial-intelligence tools and populate answers for users. OpenAI has said the lawsuit is without merit.
Among the other publishing deals OpenAI has done, Axel Springer's three-year pact, which includes use of its content for both training and display, is worth at least $25 million to $30 million over three years, according to people familiar with the deals. The deal with the FT, which also includes both display and training, is worth $5 million to $10 million a year, according to a person familiar with the matter.
The AP's deal, in the single-digit millions a year, is more narrowly focused on the use of text archives for training. The news organization is in talks with OpenAI about the use of its content for display, according to another person.
Before the Times filed its lawsuit against OpenAI and Microsoft late last year, the publisher and OpenAI had discussed a licensing deal in the tens of millions of dollars a year, according to people familiar with the matter. But the talks fell apart when OpenAI added a term that could absolve Microsoft of some legal risk, the people said.
The deal that News Corp reached with OpenAI guarantees that content won't become available on ChatGPT immediately after publication, according to a person familiar with the agreement. In addition to providing content, News Corp will share journalistic expertise with OpenAI, the companies said.
News Corp owns multiple news publications in the U.S., the U.K. and Australia. Its biggest profit driver, Dow Jones & Co., is home to the Journal, Barron's and MarketWatch. News Corp's other news properties include the New York Post and the Times of London. The deal doesn't include content from News Corp properties such as research tool Factiva or book publisher HarperCollins.
"Together, we are setting the foundation for a future where AI deeply respects, enhances, and upholds the standards of world-class journalism," said OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman.
Many of the discussions OpenAI is having with publishers are focused on future use of their news content in answers to queries. The talks come in the midst of concern that AI-powered search tools from OpenAI or Alphabet's Google will serve up complete answers based on news content, eliminating a user's need to click on an article link and depriving publishers of traffic and advertising revenue.
OpenAI is seeking to play a key role in answering news queries from users, and plans to attribute information to publishing partners through a series of links below a summary that appears in response to the queries, according to people familiar with the matter. OpenAI plans to supplement search results with information from Microsoft's Bing, they said.
A future version of ChatGPT may display the logos of the publications whose content is featured in the answer to a user query, as well as links back to their websites, according to mock-ups that OpenAI showed to at least one publication.
Mounting a challenge to Google, which has two decades of search dominance under its belt, won't be easy. Other AI companies are entering the search battle, including Perplexity, which is backed by Jeff Bezos. But building a frequently updated index across a large enough portion of websites to be useful is difficult -- particularly when it comes to answering questions about something that has just happened.
Google, meanwhile, earlier this month said it would show AI-powered answers to billions of people using its namesake search engine by the end of the year, strengthening its embrace of generative AI.
Publishers are jaded by more than a decade of dealing with tech giants -- especially Meta's Facebook and Google, whose on-and-off payments and algorithmic tweaks are affecting the fortunes of media companies. The tech giants wound up winning the bulk of revenue from online advertising, while many publications saw their print ad revenue wither.
Credit: By Alexandra Bruell, Sam Schechner and Deepa Seetharaman
