Technology-focused Invictus Growth Partners has invested $43 million to obtain a controlling interest in software provider Allbound Inc. and will help it develop products that use machine learning to make customers' sales efforts more efficient.
San Francisco-based Invictus used its own artificial-intelligence platform -- called the Deal Intelligence Assessment Neural Engine, or Diane -- to source the deal, Allbound Chief Executive Daniel Graff-Radford said.
Allbound wants to strengthen its products by adding the same sort of machine learning, he said.
Software from Chamblee, Ga.-based Allbound focuses on managing sales and marketing partner relationships with programs that offer ways to help customers such as Zoom Video Communications Inc. and General Electric Co. increase sales at a lower cost while also producing insights from the transactions, according to Allbound.
For example, drawing on sales and other data, Allbound's software could make suggestions to a GE distributor on how best to close a deal.
Allbound's technology is designed to simplify and automate much of the work. That ranges from creating partnerships with distributors and resellers to providing email notifications when performance drops below preset thresholds, according to the company's website.
The software also can mesh with other systems, such as those used to manage customer relationships, Mr. Graff-Radford said.
Last year, Allbound added a data hub in Germany to allow customers keep data there to address European security and privacy regulations, according to the company's website.
Customers using Allbound's technology have generated more than $100 billion in revenue and shortened sales cycles by more than 60% on average, according to the company.
Allbound said its annual recurring revenue has more than quadrupled since 2019.
Mr. Graff-Radford declined to comment on specific revenue figures but said that the company expects to maintain a similar rate of recurring revenue growth.
"We're seeing companies that are doing cost reductions and layoffs in areas of technology," he said, adding that Allbound is seeing more business as a result.
Customers are "able to meet and exceed their sales objectives through having these resellers or referring partners bring them revenue as opposed to [having] to carry larger and larger direct sales forces that take a long time to onboard and manage and are very costly," Mr. Graff-Radford said.
Credit: By Maria Armental
