[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Salesforce isn't growing the way it used to. It also isn't spending the way it used to. Keeping up the latter in the age of generative artificial intelligence will be the trick.
The cloud-software pioneer on Wednesday posted stronger-than-expected results for its fiscal second quarter. Revenue rose 11% to $8.6 billion. That growth matched that of the previous quarter, which was a record low for a company that long had average growth rates well above 20%. But it also edged out Wall Street's forecast for 10%.
Earnings proved to be the bigger surprise. Adjusted operating income -- the metric most closely watched by analysts tracking Salesforce's performance -- surged 77% to $2.7 billion. That was 12% ahead of analysts' projections. Shares rose 3% on Thursday.
Growing demand for generative AI services could end up testing Salesforce's newfound resolve to keep delivering "profitable growth" -- a phrase uttered by Salesforce executives seven times on the company's conference call Wednesday. Those services require expensive chips and other components and are thus expensive to offer. For now, that cost is being borne mostly by cloud-computing giants including Microsoft, Alphabet's Google and Amazon.com, which are equipping their data-center networks for such capabilities.
Those costs will be passed down to businesses such as Salesforce, which use that infrastructure to power their own GenAI offerings. Salesforce announced pricing for some of its new AI tools in July and lifted prices on some of its other offerings, but some on Wall Street have yet to be sold on the company's prospects. Mark Moerdler of Bernstein noted that Microsoft is adding new AI features at no additional cost to its Dynamics customer relationship management software, which competes directly against Salesforce. "We are concerned that Salesforce is going to have difficulty monetizing AI," Moerdler wrote in a note to clients recently.
Salesforce will have to prove that wrong, while not spending a fortune to do so. But Salesforce effectively doubled down Wednesday on its commitment to expanding profit, raising its adjusted operating margin target to 30% for the current fiscal year, which is one year earlier than the Street expected for that milestone. And when asked on Wednesday's call about balancing the need to invest in the AI opportunity while also keeping its profitability goals, Chief Executive Marc Benioff said, "we are very thirsty to make sure that Salesforce is the No. 1 AI CRM."
Salesforce's sales force might have to start thinking creatively.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
