Stocks extended recent gains, with the major indexes boosted by banks and shares of artificial-intelligence related companies.
The S&P 500 rose 0.7%, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average added 1.1% and the Nasdaq Composite advanced 0.8%. The Dow extended a winning streak to seven days, closing at its highest level since April 2022. The Nasdaq is now 37% higher in 2023.
Bank stocks rallied after earnings reports from bellwethers Bank of America and Morgan Stanley, among others. Morgan Stanley rose 6.45% after executives said client activity strengthened during the quarter, raising hopes for a return of deal-making activity that has been stalled by higher interest rates.
Bank of America shares climbed 4.4% after it reported a 19% increase in net income from a year ago. Its consumer division increased revenue by 15%.
"Investor sentiment remains buoyant," said Jose Torres, senior economist at Interactive Brokers. "Banks continue to believe that consumers are keeping healthy finances."
Charles Schwab was the S&P 500's best performer, rising 13% after the brokerage reported results that beat Wall Street estimates and said its pace of deposit outflows has continued to slow.
Smaller banks also performed well, with the KBW Nasdaq Regional Banking Index up 4.1%.
Meanwhile, AI mania continued. Microsoft rose 4% after announcing plans for several new initiatives to sell AI-powered products to consumers and businesses.
"We believe over the next three years over 50% of the Microsoft installed base will ultimately be on this AI functionality . . . which changes the game" for Chief Executive Satya Nadella and the company, wrote Wedbush Securities analyst Dan Ives.
Microsoft's market capitalization rose by more than $100 billion. Shares of Nvidia, the S&P 500's best performer in 2023, rose 2.2%. Nvidia produces graphics chips used by companies that make AI-chat models.
Information technology was the best-performing S&P 500 sector, followed by financials.
Investors have grown increasingly bullish in recent weeks, pouring money back into U.S. equity exchange-traded funds and bidding up shares of technology companies as they price in a soft landing for the economy, in which Fed rate increases don't cause a serious recession.
Some analysts and investors are concerned the outlook has grown too rosy.
"A flood of soft inflation data has equity investors excited about a sustained rally," said John Lynch, chief investment officer at Comerica Wealth Management. "While we appreciate the technical momentum of the market, we are less optimistic that such frothy price to earnings multiples are warranted."
The S&P 500 is trading at around 19.5 times its expected earnings over the next 12 months, higher than its five-year average of 18.9 times, according to FactSet.
Investors will get their next look at how companies fared in the second quarter Wednesday, with Tesla, Netflix and Goldman Sachs among the companies scheduled to report earnings.
Data released Tuesday showed U.S. monthly retail sales rose in June but came in below expectations. Investors are closely watching consumer activity for any signs that the Federal Reserve's rate-increase campaign is beginning to affect demand.
"The consumer is still in really healthy shape and that's supporting retail sales," said Josh Jamner, investment strategist at ClearBridge Investments. "But there are some potential headwinds to the consumption story," he said, including more layoffs as rate increases take effect and the resumption of student loan payments.
Treasury yields ticked lower, with the yield on the benchmark 10-year bond falling to 3.788% from 3.796% Monday.
Interest-rate derivatives traders are overwhelmingly pricing in a quarter-point interest-rate increase from the Fed at its meeting next week, according to CME Group. After that, they see just a 14% chance of a rate increase at the Fed's September meeting.
Brent crude oil rose 1.4%, halting two days of declines prompted by concerns about China's economy.
The international oil benchmark last week breached $80 a barrel for the first time since April.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 Index rose 0.6%. Early Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 1% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 1.25% amid concerns about China's property sector. S&P 500 futures were flat.
Credit: By Jack Pitcher
