Facebook is shifting its artificial-intelligence development out of central research labs and into its product groups, a move aimed at accelerating the technology's adoption as the company pushes for faster growth.
The move breaks with recent practice at many companies, including Facebook, which concentrated AI research efforts in centralized hubs.
Meta Platforms Inc., the social media giant's parent company, announced plans last week to go the other way -- decentralizing how it develops advanced AI and machine learning tools.
In an online post Thursday, Meta's Chief Technology Officer Andrew Bosworth said the company's previous approach, centered around a handful of stand-alone R&D hubs, made it difficult to integrate new AI capabilities across the business.
"In the new model we will distribute the ownership of these AI systems back to Meta's product groups," Mr. Bosworth said. "We believe that this will accelerate the adoption of important new technology across the company while allowing us to continue to push the envelope."
After posting lackluster first-quarter earnings and the slowest quarterly sales growth since going public a decade ago, Meta is looking to extract more value out of everything. Javier Olivan, who last week was named successor to departing Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg, is known for focusing on growth and said he would emphasize growth and efficiencies.
As part of the restructuring, Jerome Pesenti, who has led overall AI research as head of Meta AI for the past four years, is expected to leave at the end of the month. Mr. Pesenti oversaw key projects such as the ongoing development of an AI supercomputer.
Like Meta, many companies with central AI development hubs have found it difficult to convert the emerging capabilities they generated into business assets. With little involvement from other divisions, the hubs operated much like an outsourced AI service.
"It sends a strong message that they believe it is time to focus on embedding AI into their products," said Bill Gropp, director of the National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, said of Meta's reshuffle.
Jon Carvill, a Meta spokesman, said the overall mission of the company's AI research efforts will remain unchanged under the new structure, as will much of its leadership. Joelle Pineau and Antoine Bordes, who co-lead Facebook AI Research, the company's core AI research hub, known as FAIR, will remain in those roles, he said.
Credit: By Angus Loten
