SEOUL -- In a surprise move, Samsung Electronics replaced the head of its semiconductor business, who had also served as co-CEO, after the South Korean company had lagged behind rivals in the recent artificial-intelligence boom.
Samsung, one of the biggest recipients of the Biden administration's Chips Act subsidies, has seen its home-country rival, SK Hynix, become Nvidia's initial partner for the specialized memory used in generative AI applications, such as OpenAI's ChatGPT. Meanwhile, Samsung's contract chip-making unit that goes head-to-head with Taiwan's TSMC has lost ground.
The U.S. is betting big on Samsung to help revive America's homegrown chip production. Last month, Samsung received a grant of up to $6.4 billion for roughly $45 billion in semiconductor facilities planned for Taylor, Texas, just outside Austin. Only Intel and TSMC have received bigger subsidies.
At a March shareholder meeting, the departing chip-division head, Kyung Kye-hyun, who had held the job for just over two years, acknowledged Samsung's recent shortcomings. In the realm of "high bandwidth memory" -- the type paired with Nvidia's processors -- Kyung admitted Samsung had made early missteps.
"We'll be well prepared to ensure that will never happen again," said Kyung, 61 years old, responding to a shareholder's question about Samsung's having apparently fallen behind in HBM technology.
Samsung, without elaborating, called the leadership change a "pre-emptive measure" meant to strengthen the company's competitiveness in an uncertain global business environment.
Kyung will remain at the company in a different role. The move was unexpected, according to company employees, since Samsung's management shake-ups typically occur at the end of the year.
Succeeding Kyung is 63-year-old Jun Young-hyun, who has overseen future business strategy for Samsung Electronics and its close affiliates. Called a "relief pitcher" by local media owing to his turnaround feats, Jun led Samsung's memory-chip business through 2017 as it posted historic profits -- and ended Intel's nearly quarter-century run as the world's biggest semiconductor player by revenue.
After that, Jun served for five years as CEO of Samsung's battery-making unit, which had attracted controversy over the component's central role in the company's global recall of Galaxy Note 7 devices that overheated and caught fire.
Samsung had operated with co-CEOs since 2022: One oversaw components, while the other helmed consumer products such as phones and televisions. For now, Jun won't be given the co-CEO title.
"I think there was a realization that we are in the beginning of a new AI boom. But Samsung was caught in a not-so-good position," said Sanjeev Rana, a senior technology analyst at CLSA Securities, a Hong Kong-based brokerage.
The biggest stumble for Kyung sits with HBM -- an area that Samsung, the world's biggest memory player by revenue, would have been expected to dominate. SK Hynix had bet more actively early on than its rivals -- including Samsung -- that HBM would become a breakthrough product.
SK Hynix and U.S.-based Micron both began shipping the newest version of HBM, called HBM3E, to Nvidia in March, industry analysts say. There is no public evidence suggesting that Samsung has begun supplying Nvidia.
Memory chips for AI computing are expected to become a major revenue generator in the years ahead. By 2028, HBM is projected to account for more than 30% of worldwide DRAM revenue, up from 8% in 2023, according to TrendForce, a tech-market researcher. HBM is produced by stacking multiple DRAM chips, a major type of memory, on top of one another and fusing them together to achieve greater memory efficiency.
Samsung also saw its share of the global foundry business -- manufacturing chips designed by others -- fall in recent years despite a ramp-up in investment. These chip factories sit at the heart of the Biden administration's recent efforts to boost U.S. production of advanced logic chips.
Back in 2019, Samsung had laid out plans to invest around 133 trillion won, equivalent to roughly $116 billion at the time, in its chip-design and foundry business by 2030, as a way to expand past its powerhouse memory offerings. And it has pledged additional investments since then.
Last year, Kyung, the former co-CEO, vowed Samsung's foundry business would overtake TSMC within five years.
But rather than gain ground, Samsung has seen its relative standing in the foundry business fall, a sign of limited growth in customer bookings.
TSMC, which manufactures Nvidia's AI accelerator chips and Apple's latest processors for iPhones, has seen its share of the worldwide foundry market expand to 59% in 2023 from 50% in 2019, according to CLSA estimates. During the same period, Samsung's market share fell to 12% from 18%.
Samsung must also fend off Intel, which in March received up to $8.5 billion in Chips Act funds and wants to aggressively expand its contract-chip-making business. Intel is expected to spend more than $100 billion in the U.S. over the next five years. CEO Pat Gelsinger recently said he expects Intel to be the world's No. 2 foundry player by 2030.
Credit: By Jiyoung Sohn
