Consulting firm EY said it recently completed a $1.4 billion investment into artificial intelligence, the latest among a series of peers to make a billion-dollar announcement regarding the rapidly developing technology.
In addition to the $1.4 billion investment, announced Wednesday, the professional-services company said it has created its own large language model, EY.ai EYQ, and that it would train its 400,000 employee workforce on AI.
EY declined to comment on the exact sum it would spend on AI going forward, but said the amount is more per year than it has spent over the past five years.
Future investment includes continuing to refine its large language model.
A few of EY's peers have also made big-bang AI announcements over the past year.
KPMG in July said it planned to spend $2 billion in AI and cloud services globally over the next five years. Also in July, Accenture announced a $3 billion investment to expand its data and AI practice.
PricewaterhouseCoopers in April said it planned to invest $1 billion in generative AI in its U.S. operations over a three-year period, and Deloitte in December said it was spending $1.4 billion on employee training on technologies including AI.
The EY.ai platform unveiled Wednesday includes new and existing EY products that now have AI embedded in them, such as EY Fabric, which helps companies manage their data, according to the company.
It also has a library of use cases that essentially provide a path for how companies can safely and effectively deploy AI at scale, EY said.
Andy Baldwin, EY global managing partner, client service, said the guidelines and frameworks, which include best practices for risk, governance and data management, are intended to help companies answer the question: "Where do I even start with AI?"
"That's part of the challenge for a lot of companies -- they all started in very different places on this technology," Baldwin said.
"For some of them, it's more of a natural evolution. For some of them, they're starting from scratch."
One challenge that EY is also hoping to solve for customers is uncertainty over privacy and data security when using large language models.
EY's new large language model is trained on publicly available data from the internet, but can be used in a safe and secure way: In other words, customers don't need to be concerned that prompts they feed the model could find their way back into its training data, Baldwin said.
Going forward, the goal is to train the model on EY's own library of data and create a series of use-specific LLMs, such as an LLM trained on EY's hundred-plus years' worth of tax data, Baldwin said.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
