[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Online grocery ordering platform Instacart wants to continue its pandemic run. To do that, it needs to physically move into more stores.
On Tuesday, Instacart said it was buying Caper AI, a maker of artificial-intelligence-powered shopping cart and checkout technology. The deal underscores the central role in-store shopping will continue to have in the industry.
Instacart says the acquisition will allow it to offer smart checkout counters to retailers that can automatically detect items placed on them, even allowing customers to check out right from the cart.
There is no doubt the pandemic was a boon for Instacart. Chief Executive Fidji Simo said this past week that Instacart's transaction value has multiplied since the beginning of 2020. Data from Bloomberg Second Measure show Instacart's monthly year-over-year growth in terms of consumer sales peaked in April 2020 at 433%. That was a tough act for any business to follow. Over the past six months, Instacart's monthly consumer sales have fallen an average of more than 7.5% versus last year.
In North America, groceries are a $1 trillion industry with roughly 10% of purchases coming online. Instacart believes online penetration can grow to 30% over the next five to 10 years. But grocers have voiced concerns about Instacart's model, with many saying they aren't making money on the platform because of high commissions. Others complain that the platform owns too much control over interactions with their customers. It would therefore serve Instacart well to become more of a full-fledged, omnichannel partner to grocery stores -- something the Caper AI deal helps it accomplish.
Instacart also has said it expects to pursue a public offering. While Ms. Simo declined to comment on timing, bolstering growth will be key. This gives Instacart a strong incentive to play where 90% of grocery sales are still taking place: in stores.
To compete with the likes of Amazon.com's Whole Foods, Instacart has to offer solutions. The company already has strengthened its advertising business, which, among other things, helps brands to reach consumers at the point of sale.
A more diversified business model will no doubt help Instacart better position itself for an eventual public listing. At $350 million, Instacart is putting some rather expensive eggs into Caper AI's smart basket, but at least it isn't betting the whole farm on basic grocery delivery.
Credit: By Laura Forman
