"Was the richest person in the world overpaid?" Such is the first line of Delaware Chancellor Kathaleen St. J. McCormick's legal ruling this week on Elon Musk's compensation package, as if she were horning in on the business of an op-ed writer.
Tsk tsk. But the line will probably get her some clicks.
The judge, who presided over a trial in America's corporate-governance capital brought by a disgruntled Tesla shareholder, says a lot about Mr. Musk's 2018 pay deal. The one thing she can't say is that it was truly abusive of shareholders, though this didn't stop her from stripping Mr. Musk of unexercised options currently valued at $55 billion.
How would Tesla have fared under a different CEO? Unknowable, but even the judge plainly recognizes that Mr. Musk's ability to infuse the share price with astonishing hopes makes him a one-of-a-kind CEO. She goes wrong in an apple-and-orange sense by harping on a round number because it seems out of line with other CEO payouts. Put it this way: You should always be ready to agree with anyone that, if they build you a $650 billion company, you'll let them have a $55 billion share in it.
Even so, Judge McCormick doesn't really criticize the outcome so much as the method, calling the board insufficiently independent of Mr. Musk. This is a laugh. Whether it consisted of his best friends or people who hated his guts, the board didn't have a lot of room to negotiate. Shareholders wouldn't accept another CEO. The stock would be severely punished if the board failed to sign him. Under the circumstances, the board's only job was to discover his terms and accede to them.
And notice what Mr. Musk's terms lacked. Not a dollar of salary for his time and efforts. No signing bonus for committing himself to a 10-year deal without a guaranteed reward. Targets for revenue and cash flow were added for accounting reasons, but the rewards all turned on Tesla's share price reaching a set of targets. These ultimately called for increasing the company's value an improbable 13-fold, from $50 billion to $650 billion, a goal he reached in four years, never mind the 10-year period of the deal.
At the time, commentators made better sense of these terms than Ms. McCormick does. The "all or nothing," "swing for the fences" nature of the contract, many pointed out, was a deliberate signal to investors. Shareholders would join Mr. Musk in a high-risk, high-reward gamble. The signal worked: Shareholders sustained Tesla through large continuous losses which a strong share price allowed it to fund through repeated sales of new stock.
In the court's telling, a second Musk motive emerges. Ms. McCormick reports he told the board he wasn't willing to devote himself to Tesla as his primary venture if the terms didn't offer sufficient potential personal upside to help him fund a colonization mission to Mars.
Of course, the ending is yet to be written, and then the hindsight fallacy will come into play. Tesla remains extraordinarily highly valued in the stock market in relation to its underlying main business of selling and profiting from electric cars. Mr. Musk and his cheerleaders say the real profits lie down the road, from artificial intelligence, robotics and a clean-energy revolution. These claims haven't worn thin yet, but if they do, down the road probably lies angry shareholders and a legal bonfire because Tesla turns out to be worth what a middling-sized car maker is worth.
Could the compensation dispute start this unraveling of shareholder hopes? Maybe. Mr. Musk was already throwing spitballs about his future compensation even before the Delaware ruling. The company is down 50% from its all-time high. A Tesla bubble, if it exists, is a Musk bubble, disproportionately dependent on the market's confidence in one man's leadership.
In any ending, the legend of Mr. Musk's "illegal" pay package will now figure prominently. The real story will be more interesting -- the collective willingness of investors, analysts and Mr. Musk to see in a successful electric car company not the next GM but the next Apple.
If this is a mistake, it's a mistake anyone can make, and completely defensible until it isn't. But blame laying is a human necessity, coming right after food and water. Mr. Musk will be vociferously blamed if Tesla turns out to be a car company and nothing more.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
