Attention, people too tuckered out to make dinner and anyone who eats way too much Chipotle: There's now an oven that will cook you a fresh meal -- pretty much on its own.
Tovala, launching this week, aims to reinvent the TV dinner. Instead of lurking in the freezer aisle, these $12-a-person meals are shipped to your door, chilled in ready-to-cook packs. Instead of a microwave, the meals cook in a special $400 steam oven. And since this is 2017, of course that oven connects to the internet.
The verdict, after two weeks of cuisine a la robo-chef: Tovala turns out superfast, consistent restaurant-quality meals, making it the first connected kitchen device with real mass appeal. But before I buy in, Tovala has to prove it can turn its razor-and-blades model into a sustainable business.
Ever since a colleague and I began testing two Tovala ovens, our insta-meals have been the subject of fascination, and considerable ribbing, by family and colleagues. Some couldn't believe mankind had slipped to this new level of laziness. The rest wanted to know where they could buy one.
Internet food shopping still hasn't gone mainstream, but millions of Americans are going online for "meal kits." They remove the hassle of planning and shopping by shipping selected recipes' necessary ingredients to your doorstep -- right down to that tablespoon of Sriracha. Meal-kit pioneer Blue Apron, which listed on the stock market last month, faces dozens of competitors, with prices that range as high as $18 a person. There's even a Tom Brady meal kit.
Tovala's subscription kits, with meals costing $2 a person more than Blue Apron's, arrive mostly oven-ready. For a smoky mesquite chicken dish, I peeled plastic off the top of two foil containers and poured the included sauce over the raw chicken. That took 10 seconds.
You put the containers in the oven, and the oven scans a QR code on the leftover cardboard wrappers to know what's cooking. Press a big button to start.
An alert pops up on your phone when dinner's ready -- usually in 15 to 20 minutes. Just promise me you'll use all this newfound free time to call your mom, OK?
The oven is big enough to cook up to four meals at once, depending on their size. You're still responsible for taking the hot meal out of the oven and putting the elements onto your own plate.
Tovala's founders, graduates of the Y Combinator startup program, say their meal kits are for people who tried others but gave up because they were too much work. On some nights, that includes me. I've subscribed to Blue Apron for nearly two years, but there are plenty of times when I just couldn't be bothered with 30 to 45 minutes of chopping, mixing and cooking -- leaving some ingredients to go to waste.
Tovala promises that, unlike takeout, its meals contain healthy and "clean" ingredients; they range from 450 to 650 calories, not counting toppings like Parmesan cheese. Of the more than 10 meals we tried, all were at least diner-quality and most better than that.
What you give up, even versus other meal kits, is control over salt, sugar and fat in your food -- and a sense of accomplishment. When a machine does all the work, can you still call it "home cooking"?
And for many budgets, $12 a person is a lot for dinner. But it's less than the $17.50 a person it typically costs to go to a full-service restaurant, including tax, tip and parking, says Bob Goldin, partner at research firm Pentallect.
The Tovala oven, sold separately from the meal kits, is both the key to its magic and likely the biggest hurdle to mass adoption. It's a steam oven -- a cooking technology that hasn't made it into many homes because it requires some expertise to operate. Restaurants use steam ovens to bake, cook and reheat food faster, more evenly and (most important) without drying things out. Instead of "cook at 325 degrees for 20 minutes," the Tovala oven runs a program that might involve cycles of steaming, convection baking and broiling.
Tovala's internet connection and companion app are what make it accessible: You don't have to know anything about food science to make a tasty dish. Increasingly, kitchen gear is building in smarts. A pricier oven, called June, uses machine learning to identify and cook dishes to perfection.
Will you be an early adopter in hopes that Tovala catches on? Or do you wait to make sure you don't get stuck with a $400 steam oven but no ready-to-eat meals, should the startup fail? I want Tovala to succeed, because I like their product -- but it's a chicken-or-egg situation, and there's no guarantee it will turn into a delicious quiche.

Credit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler
