A contemporary concrete-and-wood home in Manhattan Beach, Calif., that can run entirely off the electrical grid is coming on the market for $29.9 million.
The sellers are crypto investor and tech entrepreneur Jeff Schumacher and his wife, Jamie Schumacher, who paid about $19.6 million for the house in 2021, records show. Schumacher, a venture-capital investor, is founder and CEO of NAX Group, a software company in the artificial-intelligence space.
Jeff Schumacher said that when they bought the house, about two-thirds of it was built and they spent several million dollars to complete it before moving in about a year ago.
Spanning about 9,500 square feet, the house sits on a gated corner lot, said Jason Oppenheim of the Oppenheim Group, one of the listing agents. There are six bedrooms and an office, and the main living space has double-height ceilings.
Jeff Schumacher, who grew up in Minnesota and went to college in Wisconsin, said his family was already living in Manhattan Beach, a coastal city about 20 miles from Los Angeles, when they came across this property. They were attracted to the new construction and flow of the house, and he said the natural materials reminded him of Frank Lloyd Wright, whose influence he felt growing up, he said.
The house's walls are made of concrete that was poured in such a way that it resembles an undulating wave. Other walls and ceilings are clad in cedar wood.
In the main dining and living area, enormous pocket doors retract to create a roughly 50-foot-wide opening to the outside.
The house also has 48 solar panels, four Tesla power walls and more than a dozen zones for air conditioning and heating. "The house is like its own energy plant," he said.
Schumacher, who founded NAX around 2019, previously founded and was CEO of BCG Digital Ventures, a subsidiary of Boston Consulting Group. He and his wife are selling because his company is expanding in Europe and they plan to spend more time in London.
Oppenheim said the house is one of Manhattan Beach's priciest listings, but it is priced to sell. To date, Manhattan Beach hasn't had a residential sale above $30 million, records show.
Oppenheim is marketing the property with Carmella Garcia and Radley Raven of the Oppenheim Group.
Credit: By E.B. Solomont
