'Never Again Is Now." "Now and Always, We Stand With the People of Israel." "Am Yisrael Chai." So reads my Instagram feed since Hamas's brutal attacks on Israeli citizens Saturday.
With these social-media posts, friends who belong to my temple, classmates who attended my bat mitzvah, family members with whom I observe the High Holidays all declare their solidarity with the state of Israel.
But as I keep scrolling and exit my personal bubble, I see a wider world on Instagram. Some posts express support for the Jewish people and the state of Israel. Others attempt to furnish some kind of "context." A college acquaintance uses a graphic to illustrate that "this has been the deadliest year in decades for Palestinians under the Occupation." A Manhattan restaurateur reminds his followers of their "Responsibility to Listen to the Other Side." After a furor, he apologized, deleted the post and wrote: "All I want is peace in the Middle East." Another person posts differing opinions within hours, swayed by the comments on her feed. As I move further from my echo chamber, I see members of Hamas depicted as heroes fulfilling their duty rather than as terrorists descending on a music festival to brutalize and murder young people.
Members of my generation -- I'm 24 -- grew up with social media and are accustomed to learning through these platforms. Many young people turn solely to social media for their daily news and information. As news outlets and our government become more divided, so have social-media platforms.
Now, we are watching a war unfold on Instagram. We are seeing women raped and children slaughtered right on our feeds. And yet we are coming away with drastically different understandings.
As the platforms' algorithms reinforce our views and mute opposing ideas, we risk losing sight of reality. Our feeds foster an environment in which the NYU Law Student Bar Association's president posted that "the full responsibility for this tremendous loss of life" rests on the Israeli government. Thirty Harvard student groups "hold the Israeli regime entirely responsible for all unfolding violence." All while the leaders of many top universities fail to make public statements.
A moment of 9/11-like moral clarity has been transformed into a series of political statements scrolling on phone screens.
As the war grinds on in Israel and Gaza, many who post on social media will forget their brief stints of activism. But my generation in Israel and those who support it will keep fighting for what some of those Instagram posters claim to care about: freedom, liberty and democracy. It's time to look up from our screens.
---
Ms. Osman is an assistant social media editor for the Journal editorial page.
Credit: By Emma Osman
