Spain banned Sam Altman's Worldcoin from scanning people's eyes in exchange for cryptocurrency tokens, citing concerns over the collection and processing of biometric data.
The Spanish Data Protection Agency, or AEPD, said Wednesday that it had ordered a precautionary measure prohibiting Worldcoin's activities in the country for up to three months after it received several complaints on the collection of data from minors, a lack of information, and what it said were other infringements.
The watchdog said the measure effectively called on Tools for Humanity -- the company of which OpenAI Chief Executive Altman is a co-founder -- to cease the collection and processing of users' personal data through its Worldcoin project in Spain and stop using the data it had gathered so far.
Worldcoin works as an open-source protocol, according to its website. Users download a wallet app that supports the creation of a digital identity known as World ID. To get their identity verified, users visit a physical imaging device known as the orb that uses sensors "to verify humanness and uniqueness."
More than four million users across 120 countries signed up for World ID, with orb verifications taking place in 36 countries, according to Worldcoin's website.
The AEPD said the decision was necessary and proportionate to safeguard the right to the protection of personal data and prevent possible data transfers to third parties. The European Union, of which Spain is a member, has some of the toughest data-privacy laws in the world.
Worldcoin's Data Protection Officer Jannick Preiwisch said in a statement that World ID is the most privacy-preserving and safest solution for "asserting humanness" in the age of artificial intelligence, and that the agency was spreading inaccurate and misleading claims about its technology.
"Our efforts to engage with the AEPD and provide them with an accurate view of Worldcoin and World ID have gone unanswered for months. We are grateful to now have the opportunity to help them better understand the important facts regarding this essential and lawful technology," Preiwisch said.
Credit: By Mauro Orru
