If you've ever published a blog, or posted something to Reddit, or shared content anywhere else on the open web, it's very likely you have played a part in creating the latest generation of artificial intelligence.
Google's Bard chatbot, OpenAI's ChatGPT, Microsoft's OpenAI-powered version of Bing, and similar tools -- none could exist without text freely available on the web.
Now, in a way that hasn't been true since the early search-engine battles, the contents of the web are the subject of a contest over who owns what, as great powers attempt to carve up an irreplaceably rich source of information with a whole new kind of value.
The tech and media companies that unwittingly provided this data are waking up to how essential it is to training the latest generation of language-based AIs. Reddit, an invaluable source for OpenAI, recently announced that it will start charging AI companies for access to data. OpenAI declined to comment.
Twitter also recently started charging for the service that allows access to its data, including by AI companies. And the News Media Alliance, which represents publishers (including Wall Street Journal parent Dow Jones) declared this month that when companies train their AIs on work produced by its members, they should pay a licensing fee.
"For us, what it really boils down to is proper attribution," says Prashanth Chandrasekar, chief executive of Stack Overflow, a site where programmers answer each other's questions. His company also has plans to start charging big AI companies for access to users' work on the company's sites.
The battle of AI-generated words promises to be even bigger than previous ones over computer-created imagery, encompassing not just issues of compensation and credit but also privacy.
This battle exists because of the way AI chatbots are made. The so-called large-language-model algorithms that power these bots have to be trained by processing oceans of existing language to try to mimic what humans say, and how they say it. This isn't the kind of data we're used to thinking about as a commodity on the internet, such as the behavioral and personal information used to target ads by companies like Facebook parent Meta Platforms.
A 2021 paper by Jesse Dodge, a research scientist at the nonprofit Allen Institute for AI, found that Wikipedia and countless news articles were in one of the most commonly used databases of content scraped from the web. Both Google and Facebook have used this data set to train large-language models, and OpenAI has used its own, similar database.
Reddit isn't yet sure how much revenue it might generate from charging companies for access to its data, says spokesman Tim Rathschmidt.
Publishing executives have been examining the extent to which their content has been used to train ChatGPT and other AI tools, how they think they should be compensated for it, and what their legal options are, the Journal reported last month. To date, though, none of the proprietors of the big AI chat engines have struck deals to pay for the portions of their training data that came from News Media Alliance members, says Danielle Coffey, general counsel for the organization.
Twitter didn't respond to a request to comment.
Microsoft declined to comment. A Google spokesperson says that the company "has a long track record of helping creators and publishers monetize their content and strengthen relationships with their audiences. In accordance with our AI Principles, we will continue to innovate in this space responsibly and ethically." He also says that it's "still early days," and that Google is soliciting input on how it builds AIs that benefit the open web.
Copying data that's available on the open web -- a practice called scraping -- is legal in some circumstances, although companies continue to tussle over the specifics of how and when they are allowed to do it.
Most companies and organizations that make their data available on the web do so because they want it to be discovered and indexed by search engines, which can then direct people to that content.
Copying that data to train an AI that could supplant the need for seeking out the original source is a whole other kettle of fish.
Tech companies that are scraping the web to train their AIs are operating on the principle that "we can take it, therefore it's ours," says University of Washington computational linguist Emily M. Bender. Transforming that text into answers from a chatbot strips the material of links to its origins, adds Dr. Bender. It also makes it harder for chatbot users to verify what the bot is telling them -- a problem for systems that often say things that aren't true.
These giant scrapes can also suck up personal information. A blog post you wrote a few years ago and subsequently deleted could still be in the training data used by OpenAI, which teaches its AIs using years of web-wide scrapes, says Sebastian Nagel, a data scientist and engineer at Common Crawl.
Common Crawl is a nonprofit that for more than a decade has scraped a significant portion of the open web and made its database freely available to researchers. Common Crawl's database also is used as a starting point for companies that want to train AIs, including Google, Meta, OpenAI and others.
But, in most cases, it's difficult to get an AI that has been trained on data including personal information to regurgitate that information, Dr. Dodge adds. OpenAI says it has tweaked its chat-based systems to reject requests for personal information.
Some AI proponents argue that AIs should get access to all the data their engineers can get their hands on, because that is how humans learn. Why shouldn't machines as well, the logic goes?
Setting aside that today's AIs don't actually function like humans, one issue with this argument is that under current laws, AIs can't be held accountable for actions that would be plagiarism if done by humans, says Dr. Bender.
As for all those personal essays, posts on obscure forums and defunct social networks, and other miscellany that millions of individuals have created, and that helped make today's chat-based AIs as good as they are at writing? The only dividend the creators of all of that content are ever likely to see is whatever utility they get out of using the language-creating AIs that were trained on their own work.
Credit: By Christopher Mims
