Walmart Inc. is shutting down its Jetblack shopping service and laying off most of its roughly 350 staffers after the retailer abandoned plans to find investors for the unprofitable operation.
The New York City-based unit, which offers fast delivery on orders placed through text message, will stop delivery services on Feb. 21, a Walmart spokesman said. The Wall Street Journal earlier reported that Walmart was planning to end its Jetblack service and restructure the organization.
Some members of Jetblack's technology and design team will become part of Walmart's customer organization, continuing to work out of New York, the spokesman said. Walmart will lay off 293 of Jetblack's employees, he said.
Last year, Walmart worked to spin off the unit, which had less than a thousand customers at the time. The retailer discussed an investment with several potential partners including Microsoft Corp., and venture-capital firms including New Enterprise Associates, the Journal reported at the time.
Those talks have ended, people familiar with the situation said.
Jetblack Chief Executive Jenny Fleiss left last year, succeeded by Nate Faust, Walmart senior vice president of e-commerce logistics, who had worked previously for Jet.com, the e-commerce startup Walmart bought in 2016.
Jetblack was launched publicly in 2018 as part of an innovation arm at Walmart dubbed Store No. 8, where the company intends to build technology and business units that aren't immediately profitable but could be integrated in the future. Walmart executives have talked about Jetblack as a potential avenue of growth and research, not as a profit center. As of last summer, Jetblack was losing about $15,000 per member annually, the Journal reported.
Jetblack members pay $600 a year to order anything except fresh food by text message. Their orders go to a Jetblack office where agents field inquiries, from diaper reorders to requests for suggested yoga attire. Couriers fetch the items so they can be hand delivered, usually the same day.
Walmart aimed to use Jetblack's human agents to train an artificial-intelligence system that someday would power an automated personal-shopping service, preparing Walmart for a time when web-browser search bars disappear and more shopping is done through voice-activated devices, Ms. Fleiss said last year.
Walmart, which reports quarterly earnings next week on Tuesday, has worked to stem losses from its smaller e-commerce units over the past year, selling units or cutting staff in those businesses.

Credit: By Sarah Nassauer
