Israel and Iran appear to be trying to calm tensions after trading military blows in recent days. Markets aren't getting the message.
An Israeli strike late Thursday night led to a brief spike in oil prices, rattling investors before the opening bell Friday. That added momentum to a pullback in the S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite that saddled both with their longest daily losing streak in more than a year.
By the time the closing bell rang Friday afternoon, tech-heavy Nasdaq had racked up a 5.5% weekly decline, its worst such performance since 2022. The S&P 500 dropped 3.1% for the week, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average eked out a tiny gain.
The Nasdaq and S&P 500 have both declined in each of the past three weeks as a stronger-than-expected U.S. economy buoys inflation and scrambles Wall Street forecasts for interest-rate cuts by the Federal Reserve. Those changing expectations are hammering the speculative, artificial-intelligence-oriented tech stocks that propelled a market rally in recent months.
A frothy oil market has added another high-risk variable to investors' outlook. After Israel targeted an area not far from an Iranian air base and nuclear facilities Thursday night, benchmark global crude prices quickly jumped from less than $87 a barrel to nearly $91 a barrel.
"Things were looking a little wild," said Matt Thompson, a co-portfolio manager at Little Harbor Advisors.
Oil traders retreated almost as quickly when reports trickled out suggesting that the Israeli strikes appeared to be narrow in scope. Front-month Brent crude closed Friday with a pedestrian 0.2% gain, to $87.29 a barrel. Still, it was enough to give a 1.1% boost to the S&P 500 energy sector, the only vertical in the index that has advanced this month.
Thompson's firm runs exchange-traded funds that shield clients from market swings by buying futures linked to the Cboe Volatility Index, or VIX, a measure of traders' expectations of stock-market turbulence. As anxiety around a Middle East war pushed up crude prices in recent weeks, firms such as Little Harbor have snapped up those contracts as a hedge against the fallout of a potential oil shock that could ripple through the economy.
If the correlation between crude prices and Wall Street's so-called fear gauge were to break down, Thompson said, "that would be a good sign for the market. Then we'd just move back to the wet-blanket narrative, the Fed."
That narrative continued Friday, when Chicago Fed President Austan Goolsbee said at a conference that "progress on inflation has stalled." The yield on 10-year Treasurys, which tends to rise and fall alongside investors' interest-rate expectations, settled slightly lower at 4.613%. A run-up in yields in recent weeks has turned tech stocks, the big winners in previous months, into major losers. The so-called Magnificent 7 stocks lost a collective $950 billion in market capitalization this past week, according to Dow Jones Market Data, their largest weekly loss on record. Other AI darlings, including Intel, Qualcomm and Advanced Micro Devices, similarly skidded.
Those companies also weighed down major indexes Friday, when Nvidia slumped 10%.
The Nasdaq fell 2.1%. The S&P 500 veered 0.9% lower. Boosted by financial firms and consumer staples, the Dow rose 0.6%, or 211 points.
---
Weilun Soon, Dave Sebastian and Joe Wallace contributed to this article.
Credit: By David Uberti
