When "Spotlight" opened early last month, I called it "the year's best movie so far." The reason for the "so far" was obvious. The complete returns weren't in and a better movie might have come along, especially given the movie industry's idiotic, self-destructive and by now probably irreversible policy of jamming its most promising productions into the last two months of every year. (The rationale for the idiocy remains Hollywood's crass fixation on Oscars, Golden Globes and other such adjuncts to marketing. What we think of as the holiday season is, for movie executives, the awards season.) Until recently, though, I figured the "so far" was just a pro forma precaution; that's how good "Spotlight" is. But then "The Big Short" opened last week, and I had to pry my mind open to the possibility of a tie.
In one sense these films are a mismatched pair. "The Big Short" is as reckless in its satirical take on events leading up to the financial debacle of 2008 as "Spotlight" is meticulous in its account of the Boston Globe's 2002 revelations of widespread child abuse in the Catholic archdiocese of Boston. Yet satire in the right hands is no less revelatory than investigative reporting, and Michael Lewis's book could not have fallen into righter hands than the ones responsible for making "The Big Short." How, then, to solve this happy dilemma? With guidance from a term I never thought I'd find myself typing for one of these annual wrap-ups -- gravitas. "Spotlight" is deeply serious, as well as exceptionally dramatic, a rare conjunction of qualities that makes it the best movie of 2015. "The Big Short" is runner-up, and we're doubly blessed to have them on screen in the same year.
Here are my other picks, in alphabetical order:
'Brooklyn'
On first sight it endears itself to you, then keeps growing on you, this fable about a small-town Irish girl's pursuit of happiness as an immigrant arriving in America in the 1950s. The girl, Eilis Lacey, is played by Saoirse Ronan, the purity of whose performance seems to be causing a lump in my throat as I recall it. But artistic success has many parents, and some of them surrounding Ms. Ronan's radiance are the director, John Crowley; the writer, Nick Hornby, who adapted a novel by Colm Toibin; and a supporting cast led by Emory Cohen, Domhnall Gleeson, Jim Broadbent and Julie Walters.
'Ex Machina'
Alex Garland made his directorial debut with this elegant sci-fi fantasy about artificial intelligence. Oscar Isaac is Nathan, a hipster mogul and prickly narcissist. Domhnall Gleeson -- who will have been seen in four films this year -- is Caleb, a bright young programmer in Nathan's company who pays a visit to his boss. Alicia Vikander is Ava, Nathan's creation, a mysteriously beautiful robot. What Ava is up to may have profound implications for humanity. Ms. Vikander's performance has already had a profound effect on her career. For this gifted young actress from Sweden, 2015 has been a sensational year.
'Inside Out'
We're awash in media-generated emotion. "How did you feel?" has replaced "What happened?" as the obligatory question that reporters ask on TV. Pixar's glorious animated feature about the life of the mind, and the heart, takes a different approach. The feelings themselves are characters in this tale of 11-year-old Riley, who's going through the emotional upheaval of moving, with her parents, from the sweet security of her childhood home. The film made millions of people, including me, feel absolutely wonderful.
'Mad Max: Fury Road'
Marketing campaigns try to make you believe new movies are big deals. This movie truly is. The director was George Miller, returning to the post-apocalyptic franchise he started in 1979. A gleefully violent -- and improbably feminist -- phantasmagoria, "Fury Road" turns epic road rage and long stretches of vehicular megacide into an eye-boggling joy ride. Tom Hardy, picking up the torch from Mel Gibson, plays Max, the cop/avenger. Charlize Theron is Furiosa, a one-armed woman warrior with a rococo prosthesis. Regardless of the title, it's Furiosa who drives the story, as well as an 18-wheeler hot rod called the War Rig.
'The Martian'
The allure of other planets may be enhanced by the devastation we're inflicting on our own, but Ridley Scott's exuberant adaptation of the Andy Weir novel wasn't meant to make a case for Mars as humanity's next happy home. The film makes a strong case, though, for the continuing appeal of big-screen spectaculars, provided they're as smart and surprising as this one. Matt Damon's astronaut, Mark Watney, is the vital center of an impressive production. He's a problem-solver whose main problem is surviving after his crewmates blast off during an epic storm, leaving him behind.
'Room'
By now you may know that much of this superb movie takes place in a single room, and that the production is graced by two transcendent performances: Brie Larson as a young mother, Ma, and Jacob Tremblay as her 5-year-old son, Jack, both living as prisoners. But "Room" has yet to find the large audience it deserves, so what you may not know if you haven't yet seen it is that the film is full of life, and that the drama doesn't flag once the mother and child leave their prison.
'Son of Saul'
Here again, whatever you think you know about Holocaust films will only begin to prepare you for the beauty -- the horror, of course, but also the beauty -- of this phenomenal debut feature by Laszlo Nemes. Geza Rohrig is Saul, the grim-faced, gimlet-eyed Auschwitz prisoner who finds a way to perform a meaningful moral act in the midst of unceasing madness. Seldom has an artist found such startling new perspective on a solemn subject, and rarely has sound been such a potent tool in telling a story.
'Star Wars: The Force Awakens'
A last-minute entry, so you may not have heard about it, but a worthy little winner all the same. Ideally this huge, fearfully expensive, fatefully ambitious and steadfastly enjoyable production would be at the top of a one-film list in a category of its own: maybe Best Global Commercial Venture That Nobody Thought Would Be as Good as It Is. The director, J.J. Abrams, knows how to make a movie move, and how to slow it down for magical moments. His stars, Daisy Ridley and John Boyega, know how to make those moments live and breathe.
Credit: By Joe Morgenstern
