Few careers in the entertainment business have been as tumultuous as that of former Hollywood super agent Michael Ovitz. After founding Creative Artists Agency in 1975, a powerhouse that represented the likes of Robert De Niro, Bill Murray and Paul Newman, Mr. Ovitz built a reputation as one of the most powerful and ruthless men in Hollywood.
He left CAA in 1995 to join Disney, expecting one day to run the company. Instead he was fired 14 months later. Industry executives excoriated him in the press. "He created a lot of enemies," a "Hollywood power" told Fortune.
More than two decades after his ouster, Mr. Ovitz, now 71, is telling his story in a new memoir, "Who is Michael Ovitz?" out Sept. 25. "I became the most feared man in town," Mr. Ovitz writes. "And once I left C.A.A., when it became safe for everyone to vent, I became the most hated."
His efforts at reinvention in the late 1990s -- he attempted to bring a pro football franchise to Los Angeles, to produce theater and to start a new production and management company -- didn't take hold. Then he all but disappeared from Hollywood. He shifted his sights to Silicon Valley, where for the past 15 years he has been quietly advising and investing in Bay Area companies.
He says that it has taken him a long time to be able to reflect on what he once was. The book only briefly touches on his life after Hollywood, focusing instead on his unlikely rise from his youth as the son of a San Fernando Valley liquor salesman to the founding of CAA.
"I think you get to a point in your life where you start to look back at things," he says over the phone from his Los Angeles office. "When you're younger, your life appears to be all ahead of you and you can take a lot of risk and be invulnerable . . . As you get older you . . . look back and you go, 'Hmm, I wonder what would've happened if I did this differently?'"
The memoir grew out of those reflections. "You start to think about things that you did that you could've done better," he says. "When you're a perfectionist like I am and you're an insane human being about detail, you really start to obsess about these things, and that obsession grew into the idea of writing it down."
He describes the methods that his agency used to break the old system dominated by the studios, which controlled both acting and directing talent. By signing so many of the top actors and directors in Hollywood, CAA shifted the power dynamic in its favor. If a studio needed a major director or actor, it often had to work with CAA, so the agency had huge leverage over salaries, parts and financing.
Rather than simply representing individual clients, CAA became known for "packaging" films and TV shows: Because it had amassed so much top talent under its umbrella, the agency could assemble the writer, cast and director itself instead of letting the studios drive the deals.
Mr. Ovitz reveals his regrets, such as bulldozing people in his way and being overly power hungry. "I aimed for us to be formidable," he writes. "Regrettably we over shot the mark and became fearsome."
He writes that he wishes he had given his CAA co-founder Ron Meyer a bigger share of the agency -- Mr. Ovitz convinced the other partners to give their stakes to him, making him the majority shareholder -- and he regrets taking a job at Disney.
Still, "there are other areas where I have no apologies," he says, such as the hard-charging strategies he used to get CAA off the ground. "The agency is still going strong 40-plus years after founding," he says. "We must have done something right."
He eventually found a haven outside of L.A. In 1999, his friend Ron Conway, a Silicon Valley investor, introduced him to Netscape co-founder Marc Andreessen. A few years later, when Mr. Andreessen and entrepreneur Ben Horowitz were trying to start a venture-capital firm, Mr. Ovitz began to advise them and remains a special adviser today. "That kind of changed everything for me," he says.
He says that he helped them model Andreessen Horowitz on the better aspects of CAA. One tactic: Andreessen Horowitz aims to serve as a network of experts for entrepreneurs, just as CAA offered clients the use of all of its agents in different areas, such as books, film, and television, rather than having clients work with just one agent. "We replicated it entirely at Andreessen Horowitz," says co-founder Ben Horowitz. Mr. Horowitz says that he talks to Mr. Ovitz every week. "It's amazing how many ideas he has," he says.
Mr. Ovitz invested in Silicon Valley companies both through Andreessen Horowitz and on his own, including Stemcentrx, a biotech firm that sold to AbbVie in 2016 (he declines to reveal the value of his stake). He has also invested in firms such as the artificial intelligence company Anki and the shopping app Wish.
In the Bay Area, where he spends three days a week, celebrity is different, he says. "The crew up there don't suffer fools well," he says. "Talent is based on brains and achievement and drive and ideas, not on how you look or what your last movie was, and it's a meritocracy up there. It's not a high school popularity contest."
Mr. Ovitz spends the rest of his time between New York and Los Angeles. He's engaged to the shoe designer Tamara Mellon, whose daughter he considers his own, and has three children with his former wife Judy.
He insists he's past the old grudges. "I do my work up north, where I'm involved with really terrific people," he says. "Life is really good."

Credit: By Alexandra Wolfe
