SHANGHAI -- Communist systems show no mercy to political losers.
Liu Shaoqi, one of Mao's designated successors, died on a prison floor in his own filth. Another, Lin Biao, perished in a plane crash fleeing China.
Power transfers are how one-party systems threaten to come unstuck. High-level battles roiled Deng Xiaoping's reign, too. The urbane Zhao Ziyang, ousted as Communist Party chief for encouraging pro-democracy protesters in Tiananmen Square in 1989, spent the rest of his days under virtual house arrest in Beijing.
Eventually, Deng hit on an alternative to winner-take-all contests: collective leadership, along with term limits. The party got a new lease on life. Deng's signal innovation allowed China to focus its energies on getting rich.
By abandoning the first part of Deng's formula, and calling into question the second, Xi Jinping has pitched Chinese elite politics into a potentially precarious unknown.
For the first time in several decades, the succession question is up in the air; the just-concluded 19th Party Congress failed to appoint a next-in-line to Mr. Xi.
Will he stay on as leader-for-life? Nobody can say, although now that his "thought" is embedded in the party charter alongside Mao's he is politically untouchable.
On this fragile basis, Mr. Xi proposes to build China into a modern socialist country by 2035 and a superpower on a par with the U.S. by midcentury, the centenary of the People's Republic.
One-man rule has been a recipe for instability since Stalin's day. Yet in a measure of the self-doubt that grips Western democracies today, a congress most notable for wrenching the country backward has been interpreted in some corners as a triumphal coming-of-age for the party, even a warning of the West's impending eclipse.
"China is marching toward its perception of its global destiny," writes Kevin Rudd, the former Australian prime minister. "It has a strategy. The West has none."
China's confidence has been building in tandem with deepening political disarray in the U.S. and Europe.
Some China watchers speculate that Mr. Xi may feel a successor at his shoulder will slow him in a historic opportunity to return China to its central place in the world. Of course, he can anoint one at any time; the Politburo is packed with his supporters.
So far, Mr. Xi hasn't trumpeted this retro-Maoist political setup as something for others to follow. In his speech to the congress, though, he did suggest that developing countries would be wise to adopt China's economic model. Its accomplishments are impressive.
Yet the true test is to come. Apart from a handful of oil-rich emirates, not a single country has broken out of the so-called middle-income trap and achieved rich-nation status without adopting some form of political pluralism.
South Korea and Taiwan are two examples of economies that took off at a similar trajectory to China's under strongman rule, but made the final ascent to prosperity as democracies.
Mr. Xi's big bet is that he can personally lead the breakthrough without strong institutions, checks and balances and, crucially, without orderly and predictable arrangements to hand over power.
Perhaps Mr. Xi is setting store in technology to supplant collective wisdom at the top. China is investing massively in artificial intelligence and quantum computing.
This could be one way its new Mao hopes to overcome what he calls his country's principal "contradiction": After years of breakneck growth, the desire for a better life collides with the realities of wide income gaps, an inadequate social safety net and environmental ruin.
Mr. Xi has neither Deng's revolutionary credentials nor Mao's charisma. He is powerful but not yet loved.
Meanwhile, the burden of delivering national rejuvenation now rests upon Mr. Xi's shoulders. That reality threatens to make his rule a brittle one. And Deng would be dismayed: Whether Mr. Xi hands over the reins or dies in office, like Mao, the prospect of a chaotic battle for supreme leadership looms again.

Credit: By Andrew Browne
