Hundreds of doctors across the U.S. have entrusted recordings of their private talks with patients to a startup promising to turn the conversations into usable medical records through artificial intelligence.
The technology makes several errors while producing the reports, such as failing to use correct medical terminology and adding medicines a patient isn't taking, according to current and former workers.
To fix those errors, health-tech startup DeepScribe relies on 200 human contractors to listen to the medical conversations and revise the records, the company's founders said.
With all its administrative tasks, data entry and paperwork, healthcare is a ripe target for AI. DeepScribe has made sweeping claims about the power of its AI, but the work by its contractors shows the technology can't pull off some basic chores in medicine without heavy human assistance.
Errors such as listing medications a patient hasn't taken are common to many AI algorithms, which often suffer from "hallucinations" where they present false information as true, co-founders Matthew Ko and Akilesh Bapu said.
DeepScribe's software is able to write 80% of each record, the founders said, but the company employs 200 people to "catch errors that can be a product of nascent technology such as AI and give healthcare providers the confidence of knowing that their notes are reviewed by a training member of our team for accuracy."
Having humans review the AI's work and identify its mistakes helps train the algorithm and improve its accuracy, Ko and Bapu said. DeepScribe discloses the quality-assurance work on its website and in sales presentations, they said.
Doctors are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of the reports they add to patients' medical records. Current and former DeepScribe workers said they weren't aware of doctors failing to catch any errors that get through the human review.
The following account of DeepScribe, its technology and use of human workers is based on interviews with current and former workers, as well as a review of communications among the DeepScribe workers and other company materials.
The company works in a tedious but crucial corner of healthcare: record-keeping.
DeepScribe made bold promises about the power of its technology to automate the record-keeping. The company says its AI takes verbatim transcripts of each conversation, which can total thousands of words, and turns them into standardized reports that can be merged into the patient's electronic record.
For many health-tech startups, there is a wide gap between the promises they make about their technology and what they deliver, said Dr. Isaac Kohane, professor and chairman of biomedical informatics at Harvard Medical School. "The froth is such that there is too much money chasing too few good companies," he said.
San Francisco-based DeepScribe, founded in 2017, has raised $37.3 million in venture-capital financing, and was valued at $180 million after its last financing in December 2021, according to PitchBook. The company has about 1,000 doctors and other healthcare providers using its service, Ko and Bapu said. They said the company was on track to have revenue of substantially more than $6.5 millionthis year. The company charges one-sixth to one-eighth of the $2,000 to $3,000 that other AI doctors' notes rivals bill a medical practice each month, the founders said.
With DeepScribe's product, doctors record each patient visit with a smartphone app made by the company, and then upload the recording to DeepScribe's database. DeepScribe uses software from other companies to produce a transcript of the audio, Ko and Bapu said. Then DeepScribe's AI gets to work summarizing the transcript for placement in a patient's record.
The AI analyzes the transcript and highlights medically relevant information, such as a patient's history and current symptoms, as well as the doctor's follow-up plan. The AI writes up the highlighted information in complete sentences.
DeepScribe's human workers, known as scribes, review the audio recordings and compare them with the transcripts and AI-generated sentences. The problems start with the transcripts, the current and former workers said. Often they contain disjointed, nonsensical sentences. DeepScribe says its software recommends key pieces of data to be included in patients' medical records, including codes for billing insurance.
Both the transcripts and the AI-generated summaries sometimes incorrectly spelled the names of medications, the workers said. The current and former workers said they frequently had to make corrections and fill in gaps left by the AI. They said they often composed most of each medical report.
The quality of the transcripts and reports has improved over the past several months after the company began using a new version of its AI software, one of the workers said.
Ko and Bapu said the algorithm learns each doctor's conversation and writing styles, and improves its accuracy. Employees said they were responsible for making the notes conform to doctors' preferences, which were communicated to DeepScribe's sales staff.
DeepScribe said its AI constructs the bulk of the reports and its human workers scan transcripts and reportsfor any information that the AI may have missed. The workers raise the accuracy of the AI's work by 15 percentage points to 95%, and the remaining 5% is done by doctors proofing the notes before accepting them, Ko and Bapu said. Doctors contacted by the Journal who use DeepScribe's software didn't respond to interview requests.
Credit: By Joseph Walker
