Adoption of artificial intelligence globally is about to experience a big increase in the next two years as the technology begins to prove itself in core business operations, predicts a new report from consulting firm Deloitte LLP.
The report says 25% of businesses surveyed have implemented cognitive technologies such as AI or machine learning, either as pilot projects or as long-term strategies, to remain competitive.
Within two years, Deloitte says, nearly three-quarters of businesses will either have implemented or will be planning to implement the technologies to gain business insights in core functions such as marketing, sales, pricing, logistics, compliance and fraud detection.
The projections are based on responses from executives and senior business leaders in major industries. Of the 1,219 respondents, about 300 are using AI now and 576 more will be using or planning to use AI soon, for a total expected use of 72% over the next two years, said Omar Aguilar, global strategic cost transformation leader at Deloitte and co-author of the report, "Save-to-transform as a catalyst for embracing digital disruption."
The Deloitte report is in line with a survey released last month by International Data Corp. projecting that global AI spending will more than double to $79.2 billion by 2022.
The reason for the AI boost now is the convergence of three forces: cloud computing, big data and high-powered analytics to build AI applications.
The expected surge in adoption also is being driven by the reported successes of AI in optimizing business operations, and by the anxiety of being left behind if firms ignore AI, Mr. Aguilar said.
The industries with the most aggressive adoption will be life sciences and health care, consumer and industrial products, and technology, telecom and media, Mr. Aguilar said.
In all three sectors the adoption rate is expected to exceed 50%, he said.
Artificial intelligence also is popular with retailers, which are harnessing large data sets, cloud computing, and machine learning and computer vision to improve everything from customer service to forecasting and replenishment.

Credit: By John Murawski
