Chip maker Intel Corp. has delayed production of one of its newest chips to improve performance, the first significant product setback under new Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger as he seeks to rebuild the company's competitiveness.
Intel plans to start producing the next generation of central processing units for servers -- the brains of those machines -- in early 2022 after previously saying it would be ready late this year, Lisa Spelman, the company's corporate vice president, who manages the server-chip business, said in a Tuesday blog post.
The additional time, Ms. Spelman wrote, would allow Intel to improve the chips' performance, in particular around the highly prized metrics of data handling and artificial-intelligence processing. Production is set to begin in next year's first quarter and ramp up in the second quarter, she wrote.
The delay of the new chips is the first under Mr. Gelsinger, who became chief executive in February following major delays in chip-making advances under his predecessor, Bob Swan. Intel almost a year ago said the following generation of even more advanced chips with super-small transistors wouldn't be ready until late next year, about a year later than initially expected.
Mr. Gelsinger has vowed to make Intel more reliable in producing new chips. At his first shareholder meeting as the company's CEO in May, he said Intel aimed to deliver a "steady cadence of leadership products that our customers can depend upon."
The server-chip market is one of the largest, fastest-growing and most competitive in chip making. Intel generated $5.6 billion in revenue from its data-center business in the first quarter, roughly a quarter of all sales.
Data-center demand has jumped in recent years with the shift toward cloud computing, where people's data are processed remotely in huge data centers. The need for server chips became even more acute during the pandemic, when millions started working from home and relying on internet services.
Intel has long dominated the data-center chips business, but perennial smaller rival Advanced Micro Devices Inc. has released chips in recent years that meet or exceed Intel's in performance metrics, helping it gain market share. AMD's market share grew to 8.9% in the first quarter from 1.8% in 2018, according to Mercury Research, sending Intel's share down to 91.1%.
Intel is still the largest vendor in that segment, according to the data.
Nvidia Corp., now America's largest semiconductor company by value, in April said it was planning new chips for the data-center market, raising the competitive pressure on Intel.
Intel shares fell 1.3% Tuesday. AMD's stock advanced 2.8% and Nvidia's rose 0.2%.
Intel's delay may have been a reaction to strong demand for new features that it wanted to satisfy, Bernstein Research analyst Stacy Rasgon said in a note. "A less charitable explanation however is that the company's competitive position is worsening," he wrote, adding that management could be calculating that delaying the release made more sense than coming out on time with an inferior product.
An Intel official said that satisfying customer demand drove the company's schedule adjustment, rather than losing ground to competition.
Mr. Gelsinger, an Intel veteran who was the company's first chief technology officer, returned to the company with a mission to right the ship and bring back its former glory. He has launched a fast-track turnaround program, including a push to make Intel a leading chip maker for others, announcing more than $20 billion of factory investments in his first few months in the job.
Governments in the U.S. and Europe are considering multibillion-dollar subsidies for the semiconductor industry, which has largely migrated to Asia in the past three decades. The pandemic charged demand for electronics and chips, but supply-chain disruptions demonstrated to some politicians that access to an important technology could be imperiled by relying on overseas vendors.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
