Silicon Valley dominates the Internet, but this week's initial public offering by Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. shows how much action is shifting to Asia.
When the Chinese e-commerce firm begins trading Friday, four of the world's 10 largest Internet companies by stock-market value will be based in Asia, up from two in 2004, according to S&P Capital IQ.
Combined, Alibaba, Tencent Holdings Ltd., Baidu Inc. and JD.com Inc. are worth about $426 billion, assuming the offering by Alibaba after the U.S. market close on Thursday values the company at about $165 billion. The four biggest U.S.-based Internet companies -- Google Inc., Facebook Inc., Amazon.com Inc. and eBay Inc. -- have $797 billion in combined stock-market value.
Twenty-six other Internet companies based in China, Japan or South Korea already have gone public so far this year, raising a total of $4.45 billion, according to Dealogic. Alibaba is expected to increase Asia's total by $25 billion. In the U.S., 21 Internet companies with IPOs in 2014 have raised $3.2 billion, while nine Internet companies in the U.K. have completed IPOs for a total of $4.7 billion.
"When I think of the seven great Internet companies in the world five years from now, I think of Facebook, Google, Apple, Amazon, Tencent, Alibaba and Baidu," says Jim Breyer, one of the most successful venture-capital investors and best known for his early bet on Facebook.
Since 2004, Mr. Breyer and his partners in China have poured more than $2 billion into Internet firms based there.
The stock market is an important barometer of how far and how fast Asian companies are rising in the Internet's global pecking order, largely because of their aggressive expansion in Asia.
About 45% of the world's nearly three billion Internet users are in Asia, according to the International Telecommunication Union, the United Nations information-technology agency. In China, more than 500 million people go online using smartphones. The number of social-media users in the Asian-Pacific region is expected to approach one billion by year-end, almost five times the total in North America, says research firm Webcertain Group Ltd.
Joseph Chen, chief executive of Renren Inc., a Chinese social-networking firm valued at about $1.2 billion, says the "big market-cap companies benefit from the size of China. It's the same technology, but when you put it in China, it's worth more."
Asia's gravitational pull on the Internet is bolstered by language differences in countries like Korea and censorship in China that keeps foreign firms out. Conversely, even the region's nimblest Internet companies usually have little presence in the U.S. and lack the muscle, pizazz or interest to challenge entrenched household names like Google outside of Asia.
Their innovations also are seen as more practical than groundbreaking. For example, Tencent's mobile instant-messaging service WeChat (called "Weixin" in China), which has about 440 million users, is also used as a platform to sell games, helping Tencent generate far more revenue than larger rival WhatsApp Inc., which has about 600 million users and is being acquired by Facebook for $19 billion.
Tencent now is trying to move beyond games and is pitching WeChat as a way to buy airline tickets and money-market funds or make down payments on property. Tencent also has installed 10,000 beverage and snack vending machines across China where purchases can be made with the scan of a smartphone code -- and then deducted from a personal online account at Tencent.
So far, the formula has been highly profitable. Tencent's profit margin in the second quarter was 32%, compared with 27% at Facebook and 21% at Google. Tencent's stock-market value is $148 billion, compared with Facebook's $194 billion.
Last year, Japanese messaging app Line Corp. had revenue of $323 million from mobile games, sales of cutesy emoticons and advertising -- or 16 times the estimated revenue of WhatsApp.
Success will force at least some of Asia's strongest Internet firms to become more ambitious elsewhere, says Takeshi Idezawa, Line's chief operating officer. The company has more users outside Japan than it does inside its home country and wants to expand even more aggressively abroad before foreign competitors push into Japan.
Line is preparing for a possible initial stock offering in New York or Tokyo. "I do think we are at a turning point," Mr. Idezawa says of Internet companies in Asia.
Rakuten Inc., Japan's biggest online-shopping site, is so determined to expand in other countries that it has required since 2012 that all in-house meetings and memos be in English.
Last week, Rakuten said it would buy U.S. online-coupon website Ebates Inc. for about $1 billion. Rakuten has said it hopes to increase its business outside Japan to about 50% of sales from the current 10%. Ebates was Rakuten's third big purchase of a non-Japanese firm so far this year.
Baidu has a 79% market share of the Internet search business in China, but is barely a blip elsewhere. Baidu's search engine in Japan has gained little traction. In July, Baidu launched a search engine for Brazil, and the company is considering expanding into Egypt and Thailand.
In a sign of growing interest in Silicon Valley, Baidu is spending $300 million to build an artificial-intelligence research center there. It will be run by Andrew Ng, the former chief of Stanford University's artificial-intelligence lab.
Tencent has bought stakes in two large U.S. game makers as part of its push to bring popular games into China. The company's international expansion beyond China consists largely of WeChat, which has been downloaded more than 100 million times outside the country.
Seven of this year's 10 biggest Internet acquisitions by value were made by Asian firms, with Alibaba and Tencent spending a total of more than $11 billion, according to Dealogic.
Alibaba founder and Executive Chairman Jack Ma said Monday that the Chinese e-commerce firm plans to expand aggressively in the U.S. and European markets after its stock sale. In an earlier letter to investors, he wrote: "In the past decade, we measured ourselves by how much we changed China. In the future, we will be judged by how much progress we bring to the world."
In its latest quarter, Alibaba's online shopping sites in China generated 85% of the company's revenue of $2.5 billion. In June, Alibaba launched a U.S. shopping site called 11 Main, which is currently available only to customers who first sign up and get an email invitation.
Matt Cheng, founder of venture-capital firm Cherubic Ventures, says he has seen a huge transformation over the past decade, particularly in China. At first, the country had a smattering of promising startups and an overwhelming number of clones trying to copy Internet businesses in the U.S.
Now, young Internet entrepreneurs in Asia bristle at being compared with Silicon Valley, and Mr. Cheng is increasingly battling some of the largest U.S.-based venture-capital firms to buy stakes in up-and-coming Internet firms. "Competition has gotten really fierce," he says.
---
Eric Pfanner and Carlos Tejada contributed to this article.
Credit: By Eva Dou, Juro Osawa and Wayne Ma
