Facebook Inc. says it has developed a way to recognize people in photos even if their faces are obscured.
"We can easily picture Charlie Chaplin's mustache, hat and cane or Oprah Winfrey's curly volume hair," Facebook said in a paper presented earlier this month. "Yet, examples like these are beyond the capabilities of even the most advanced face recognizers."
The findings, first reported in New Scientist, a weekly technology and science magazine, stem from Facebook's work in computer vision, which involves teaching software to recognize language and images as quickly and easily as the human brain. The findings themselves aren't considered a big breakthrough but represent the latest step in an emerging body of work from Facebook, experts said.
In the paper, researchers at Facebook and the University of California, Berkeley used body shape, posture and other clues to identify people in photographs even if their faces weren't entirely clear. Facebook said it can identify individuals with 83% accuracy using a method dubbed PIPER, an acronym for pose invariant person recognition.
Facebook tested PIPER on more than 37,000 photos from public Flickr albums with more than 63,000 images of people. Slightly more than half the photos contained images of faces at a resolution suitable for recognition. Researchers focused on people who appeared at least twice in each album.
"Machines can understand people in images much better than five years ago and in some cases as well as people can," said Nigel Duffy, chief technology officer of the San Francisco-based artificial intelligence startup Sentient.
The method also allows Facebook to identify someone partly through their social circles, said Aditya Khosla, a researcher at MIT's Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab.
The technology could help Facebook develop more products akin to its newly launched photo-sharing app Moments, which uses face recognition to group images based on who is in each photo.
In the future, this technology could help advertisers, law-enforcement officials and academics mine photos for clues about a person's activities, interests and social circles, experts said.
Those capabilities also may draw scrutiny from regulators and privacy advocates in Europe and the U.S.
"If you have people's faces recognized without their consent, you're violating their right to a private life," said Mike Weston, chief executive of London-based data-science consulting group Profusion.
Mr. Khosla said Facebook could mitigate concerns by letting users limit when they can be tagged in photographs.
Facebook didn't respond to requests for comment.
Facebook has been investing heavily in studying artificial intelligence since late 2013 when it hired well-known French-born researcher Yann LeCun.
Facial-recognition technology, also known as "faceprint" technology, is a particularly complex problem, Mr. LeCun has said. Clothing can help identify someone, but it isn't always a good indicator, researchers said, because people change clothes or multiple people may wear the same outfit.
Other tech companies and government agencies use facial technology as well, including the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the FBI. Google Inc. last month introduced an app, Google Photos, that uses facial-recognition technology to identify people in photos.
The app is available world-wide, but the facial-recognition features are available only in the U.S. Likewise, Facebook won't offer its Moments app immediately in Europe because of regulators' concerns about its facial-recognition technology.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman
