The S&P 500 ebbed lower Friday, weighed down by a decline in Nvidia shares, but held on to its third consecutive week of gains.
The benchmark index dipped 0.2%, bringing its week-to-date rise to 0.6%. The Nasdaq Composite shed 0.2% for the day and was little changed for the week. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was the relative outperformer, inching up slightly to bring its weekly gain to 1.5%.
The S&P 500 has climbed 15% this year, in large part because of a rush of investments in companies at the vanguard of artificial-intelligence development. The index and Nasdaq Composite each remain not far off their records notched before Wednesday's Juneteenth holiday.
"It's been a really aggressive bull market, and every bull market is going to have some soft patches," said Ross Mayfield, investment-strategy analyst at Baird.
The rise and fall in shares of Nvidia, whose chips power AI technology, has helped drive the direction of the major indexes this year. The stock rallied on Tuesday, briefly making Nvidia the world's most valuable public company, but struggled to close the week.
Since the S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite are weighted by market value, moves in megacap stocks such as Nvidia have a big influence on their performance. Shares of Nvidia fell 3.2% on Friday, capping the stock's first weekly decline since April.
"The bifurcation in the market continues to exist and there's a lot of concern about the breadth of the market," said Mark Luschini, chief investment strategist at Janney Montgomery Scott. "Or to put it another way, the narrowness of the leadership."
Investors have also been monitoring economic data for clues about the path of inflation and if and when the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates this year. Data Friday showed home sales slowed in May, reflecting continued tightness in the housing market. Sales of previously owned homes fell 0.7% from the prior month, the third consecutive monthly decline, according to the National Association of Realtors. From a year ago, sales were down 2.8%.
Meantime, business activity in the U.S. continued to grow rapidly this month, according to surveys of purchasing managers released Friday.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note ticked up to 4.256%, from 4.252% on Thursday.
Fed officials last week penciled in one interest-rate cut for this year, indicating they are in no hurry to lower rates. "AI enthusiasm is winning over higher rates," said Scott Duba, chief investment officer at Prime Capital Investment Advisors.
Among individual stocks, shares of Hertz Global rose 16% after the car-rental company raised the size of its bond deal to $1 billion.
Sarepta Therapeutics' stock jumped 30% after the Food and Drug Administration expanded approval of the biotechnology company's Duchenne muscular-dystrophy gene therapy for patients aged four and older.
Generate image description

Credit: By Hannah Miao
