Sometimes, youth is wasted on young executives. Companies such as Ford Motor Co. are recruiting young bosses to jump-start or reinvent businesses. But those leaders often struggle to gain acceptance and trust from skeptical older colleagues.
Caterpillar Inc., American International Group Inc. and SAP SE have tapped executives in their 30s for senior spots since 2016. And in late January, Ford hired 34-year-old Musa Tariq as its first chief brand officer.
Mr. Tariq, who was most recently global marketing and communications director for Apple Inc.'s retail division, is helping the No. 2 U.S. auto maker shake up its 113-year-old business model and shift into new transportation services. Ford chose Mr. Tariq based on his reputation "for challenging convention," says Chief Executive Mark Fields. Being young "was OK, too."
Mr. Tariq is the youngest of his 44 fellow corporate officers. Ford's top ranks previously had been largely populated with lifers who worked their way up, Mr. Fields says. The CEO adds that he has tried to stem possible resentment of the young newcomer by ensuring members of top management interviewed and helped integrate Mr. Tariq.
Demand for young executives is growing, especially in areas like digital commerce and artificial intelligence, executive coaches and recruiters say. As a result, more workers find themselves reporting to younger bosses.
Nearly four in 10 U.S. employees worked for someone younger in 2014, up from 31% in 2010, concluded surveys conducted for CareerBuilder, a job site.
A young star's appointment to upper management can be unsettling for older managers whose career trajectories have been less meteoric. Individuals with younger supervisors must demonstrate their relevance in the workplace.
For youthful bosses, leadership specialists say the challenge is admitting what they don't know and humbly seeking advice from their elders.
Young executives struggle to win acceptance from older associates, who expect them to be arrogant and make mistakes, says Peter Cappelli, a management professor at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School. He co-wrote the book, "Managing the Older Worker."
Anyone with a younger boss should say, "I know a lot of stuff and I'd like to be your partner in execution," Mr. Cappelli recommends.
Jessica Bigazzi Foster, head of the executive development global practice for RHR International LLP, a leadership advisory firm, says her employer is getting more assignments to coach young executives, especially those hired from outside a firm.
At Ford, Mr. Fields encouraged senior executives to teach Mr. Tariq how to navigate the bureaucracy. Mr. Fields says he meets with Mr. Tariq regularly for informal coaching about issues such as finding key internal allies.
Among his early tips for the new branding chief: Travel the world and "get to know [Ford] people on a personal level." Ford said Mr. Tariq was unavailable for interviews.
Matt Anderson was 35 when he joined Arrow Electronics Inc. as its first chief digital officer in 2014, charged with accelerating the electronics distributor's transformation into digital products and services.
Mr. Anderson says he worked hard to forge a strong bond with Andy King, a then 51-year-old Arrow executive whom the company's CEO respected for his successful command of its biggest unit's operations in Europe, the Middle East and Africa. Mr. Anderson proposed that he and Mr. King "work together and help each other succeed."
When Mr. Anderson became the youngest-ever partner of management consultancy Booz & Co. at age 30, older colleagues were resentful, he says. One co-worker privately griped that the new partner "impressed one or two people, but he won't be able to achieve the revenue needed," Mr. Anderson says.
Mr. King, now president of Arrow's global components business, says he has advocated on behalf of Mr. Anderson and his team because the younger man offered a fresh perspective and went out of his way to collaborate.
"Working together, we've found new ways to invest in and grow Arrow's online design and sales capabilities," Mr. King says. At Arrow, he adds, results count more than age.
Briana J. Mullenax was 35 when she advanced to partner from senior manager last May at LBMC PC, an accounting firm in Nashville, Tenn. A senior manager in her 50s subsequently turned chilly, refusing to offer ideas during several meetings led by Ms. Mullenax.
She says her former peer, whom she doesn't supervise, had viewed herself as superior to Ms. Mullenax because of her age and experience.
Amy Lynch, a generational researcher who knows Ms. Mullenax, blames her relative youth for ignoring a baby boomer's concerns "about formality, dignity and privacy."
Ms. Mullenax reluctantly agrees. "My generation tends to be more informal overall in work," she says. That's "sometimes harder for older generations to understand."
Credit: By Joann S. Lublin
