Google Chief Executive Sundar Pichai revealed new products and services that use smarter software to make decisions rather than follow instructions, part of a major push into artificial intelligence that he said would define the tech company over the next decade.
Google, a unit of Alphabet Inc., said it would soon start selling a device called Home that will answer users' questions and complete tasks for them, like scheduling appointments, playing music and sending emails. The device resembles Amazon.com Inc.'s popular Echo device.
Google also said it would launch a new messaging app, called Allo, that would incorporate some of the same underlying technology as Home to create smarter conversations. Google has lagged behind others in messaging, including rival Facebook Inc.'s two messaging apps, Messenger and WhatsApp.
At its 10th annual Google I/O developer conference, Google also announced its next moves in virtual reality.
Google has invested heavily in artificial intelligence in recent years to strengthen its existing products and spawn new ones.
When Google's AlphaGo computer program bested South Korean Go champion Lee Se-dol in March, it took advantage of a secret weapon: a microprocessor chip specially designed by Google.
The chip speeded up the Go-playing software, allowing it to plot moves in the time-limited match and look ahead in the game.
The processor, built in secret over the last three years and announced on Wednesday, plays a more strategic role in the company.
Google has been using it for more than a year to accelerate artificial intelligence applications as the software techniques known as machine learning become increasingly important to its core businesses.
Overall the chip, known as the Tensor Processing Unit, is 10 times faster than alternatives Google considered for this work, the company said.
The company has been rumored to have been working on its own chip designs, but Wednesday's announcement marked the first time it confirmed such an effort.
Google isn't the only firm speeding up artificial intelligence with new chip designs. Microsoft Corp. is using programmable chips called Field Programmable Gate Arrays to accelerate AI computations, including those used by its Bing search engine.
International Business Machines Corp. designed its own brain-inspired chip called TrueNorth that is currently being tested by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
Nvidia Corp. has been pushing its chips, known as graphical processing units, into artificial intelligence as well.
Google, which relies mainly on standard Intel Corp. processors for most computing jobs, also has used Nvidia GPUs for artificial intelligence calculations including its early tests of the AlphaGo software.
Large companies have begun using new processor designs to augment general-purpose processors as pace of improvement in that field has slowed, said Mark Horowitz, a professor of electrical engineering at Stanford University.
"They're not doing this to replace the Intel processors," he said. "These are addendums to these processors."
Google believes its new chip will give it a seven-year advantage -- roughly three processor generations -- over currently available processors when it comes to machine learning. That is important because Google is betting its future on such software.
It uses machine learning in more than 100 programs for applications including search, voice recognition, and self-driving cars.
Such programs require intensive calculation, and supplying the processing power and electricity to do this math quickly is expensive.
"In order to make them feasible to roll out, economically, with the required latency for users and all that stuff, we looked around at the existing alternative and we decided that we needed to do our own custom accelerators," said Norman Jouppi, a distinguished hardware engineer at Google.
It is unclear how much of Google's overall computation runs on its new processors. Mr. Jouppi said Google uses more than 1,000 of the chips, but he wouldn't say whether that meant the company was buying fewer processors from vendors such as Intel or Nvidia. "We're still buying literally tons of CPUs and GPUs," he said. "Whether it's a ton less than we would have otherwise, I can't say."
Google began using the Tensor Processing Unit in April 2015 to speed up its StreetView service's reading of street signs.
---
Don Clark contributed to this article.
Credit: By Robert Mcmillan
