If a person starts abusing a robot, will other people intervene if the robot's friends show sadness?
That was the objective of a new study by researchers at the Interactive Machines Group at Yale University.
As robots become increasingly present in public and work spaces, in roles such as security guards and baristas, harm from humans is surprisingly common. Robot researchers say photos of people punching, kicking, even beheading these machines are popular online.
HitchBOT, a robot attempting a cross-country trek from New York to California in 2015, never got beyond Philadelphia, where it was dismembered by an unknown assailant. (Offers to repair the droid poured in, proving that all is not lost for humanity.) A few years later, a robot in San Francisco that had been programmed to prevent homeless encampments was attacked, perhaps unsurprisingly, by homeless people themselves.
"It could be that some people are threatened by technology, but their behavior is also driven by curiosity," says Marynel Vazquez, assistant professor of computer science at Yale and co-author of the study. "They want to see what will happen." She adds: "The more we understand human/robot interaction, the more we will be able to design these machines so they can work better for people."
The Yale research team set up its experiment to see if humans would show more empathy if bystander robots expressed sadness over the mistreatment of their fellow robot, Cozmo. The diminutive, commercial android is mobile, verbal and conveys unhappiness with a downcast and droopy facial expression worthy of Pixar.
In the experiment, two humans (one of whom was secretly instructed ahead of time how to behave) and three robots work on a project together. Cozmo starts making mistakes, such as pointing to the wrong piece at the wrong time. The human following instructions then mistreats Cozmo by insulting, pushing and shaking the machine.
Nine out of 15 people strongly intervened in response to the abuse when the bystander robots expressed sadness. Only three out of 15 intervened when the other robots didn't react. Of those that intervened, most admonished the attacker verbally, while one participant went even further, taking the robot off the table.
The research team also noted conditions in which humans' patience was tried more sorely. In a pilot test, Cozmo made a severe mistake and destroyed an artifact the team had built. After seeing the robot get abused, the other human mildly mistreated the robot. "Such a reaction showed us there's a threshold" regarding people's willingness to defend or not to defend the poorly performing robot, Prof. Vazquez says.
---
Ms. Rubin is a writer in Chicago. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Bonnie Miller Rubin
