How will the metaverse go over with progressives? Not so good from early signs.
A few years ago, a new African supermodel by the name of Shudu Gram appeared on Instagram and was greeted rapturously, until some weeks later, she was revealed to be the digital creation of a white, male British fashion photographer. Cue the complaints about "digital blackface," "identity tourism" and hijacking opportunities meant for real black influencers or at least black programmers.
Then there was the singer and Instagram personality Lil Miquela, revealed to be the digital creation of a Los Angeles marketing firm, Brud. In a meta irony, Lil Miquela would later confess that her skin tone and gender were a "choice made by a corporation . . . in order to sell me to brands, to appear 'woke.' I will never forgive them. I don't know if I will ever forgive myself."
Which, of course, only generated more interest. Lil Miquela has three million Instagram followers, her music is available on Spotify. London's Daily Telegraph last year reported that she earns $10 million a year from sponsored posts, which lately seem to include Target, McDonald's and Turtle Wax.
In the metaverse, you can be whatever race, gender, or species or even inanimate object you want to be. The metaverse will be a field day for role players, for cultural appropriators, for people choosing their own identities rather than being pinned to the hierarchies of victim and victimizer that so enthrall the modern left.
Progressives favor gender fluidity but not any other kind. They are adamant about the nonfluidity of racial, ethnic and cultural categories that humans, from the birth of time, have yearned to treat as crossable. Indeed crossing the boundaries between people is the very definition of life, culture and non-stagnation.
The internet, notice, already is populated in large measure by virtual humans. Media platforms and message boards, including some with a power to move stock prices, are full of actors who represent themselves only with pseudonyms and jokey two-dimensional GIFs. Expect the same triumph of the imagination when online interaction takes the form of three-dimensional simulated figures in three-dimensional simulated spaces, perhaps even imbued by their creators with artificial intelligence.
A website, virtualhumans.org, tracks a sliver of these fake persons, the ones created for marketing purposes. Last month it identified another 29, bringing the total to 214. One example: Jennifer Aniston recently introduced Clydeo, her virtual pet dog, which the website calls a "new, fun spin in her existing celebrity narrative."
Is the metaverse the next phase of liberalism in the traditional sense of freeing the individual from previously intractable constraints of identity, history, class and geography? If so, this probably is the moment when liberals finally part company with the authoritarian woke. "Gender and race are not digital imperatives in the metaverse. They are optional entries on a ledger," writes Doug Clinton, managing partner of Loup Ventures, a Minneapolis investment firm.
It also finally becomes clear what nonfungible tokens and blockchains are for, helping to create new forms of ascertainable identity to permit trust in transactions without actually surrendering anything about ourselves. Commercial marketers are getting there first for obvious reasons: Virtual influencers are more controllable and cheaper than real influencers on social media, and less susceptible to scandal, cancellation or even aging except as its own kind of marketing stunt.
Because scarcity is also likely to be less pertinent in the infinite space of the metaverse, defused as well may be the class distinction most precious to progressives, the resentment of the educated upper middle class toward billionaires. Possibly the reactionary left will even rediscover its original concern for the underprivileged. After all, without access to the headsets, haptic devices and bandwidth to participate in the new online possibilities, a large part of humanity will be left out.
All this is further down the road than some let on. While small-group interactions are already happening in the metaverse, computing infrastructure will have to be invented to support genuine, spontaneous interactions in environments where hundreds, thousands or even millions of people might bounce off each other.
Mark Zuckerberg, with uncharacteristic public-relations skill or luck, has managed to associate himself with the term metaverse at the very moment it assumed wide coinage. Even so, he may be an old man by the time these challenges are really solved. Still, this is the same Facebook founder who a decade ago took to slaughtering his own pigs and chickens. Is this not the kind of thing you might do to make sure the real world doesn't slip away however much you look forward to a metaverse where you can spend a big part of your day not being Mark Zuckerberg?
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
