U.S. stocks rose in muted trading Friday, helping the S&P 500 secure its fourth consecutive weekly gain.
Markets were relatively quiet with investors largely in wait-and-see mode ahead of next week's inflation data and Federal Reserve interest-rate decision.
Major indexes posted modest gains and losses over the course of the week.
Underneath the surface, though, a number of stocks staged big rallies -- helping lift the S&P 500 out of a bear market on Thursday and giving the Nasdaq Composite its longest streak of weekly gains since 2019.
Tesla shares, which had surged all week long, extended their advance Friday after General Motors said the prior afternoon that it would produce electric vehicles with Tesla charge ports starting from 2025.
Chip makers also rose, adding to their already substantial gains for the year.
Shares of companies like Nvidia and Advanced Micro Devices have soared, thanks to rising interest among investors in companies involved in artificial intelligence and computing.
Investors are still in debate over whether or not the gains can hold. Many are concerned that much of the market's returns this year have been driven by the shares of a few big technology companies.
For instance, the S&P 500 finished the week up 12% for the year. The equal-weighted version of the S&P 500, which gives every company equal weighting, rather than basing their weighting off of their market capitalization, closed up about 2% for 2023.
"This very narrow market leadership is not a sign of a quality rally or bull market," said James Demmert, chief investment officer of Main Street Research.
Investors may get some more clarity next week, when they get fresh consumer-price inflation data for May and hear the Fed's interest-rate decision for the month.
The central bank is widely expected to keep its key interest rate unchanged in June.
Its path for the rest of the year is less clear, however.
Worries about rapidly rising rates have squeezed technology stocks' returns in the past.
The S&P 500 rose 0.1% Friday and posted a 0.4% weekly gain. The Nasdaq climbed 0.2% for the day and 0.1% for the week, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average advanced 0.1% for the day and 0.3% for the week.
Tesla shares finished up 4.1% at $244.40, logging their 11th consecutive session of gains. That marks their longest such streak since the 11-session streak of gains they posted in January 2021, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
The electric-car company was the most popular stock of choice for retail traders over the past week, according to Vanda Research.
GM also rose, following its announcement of its deal with Tesla. The company's shares finished up 1.1% at $36.23.
Netflix shares were up 2.6% to $420.02 after analytics company Antenna reported the streaming service's effort to crack down on password sharing among users appeared to lead to a jump in new subscribers in May.
Trading in the bond market was relatively muted Friday. The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note crept up to 3.744% from 3.714% a day earlier. Yields rise as bond prices fall.
Overseas stocks were mixed. Asian stocks gained, with Japan's Nikkei 2% higher and Hong Kong's Hang Seng up 0.5%. The Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.1%.
The Turkish lira continued to slide. The currency hit a new record low against the dollar after a former First Republic executive was appointed to head Turkey's central bank.
---
Gunjan Banerji and Chelsey Dulaney contributed to this article.
Credit: By Akane Otani
