In the hills of southwestern Wisconsin, atop grain elevators and silos, a small team of technicians is assembling a next-generation wireless 5G network piece by piece. They work for a rural broadband company, not a telecom giant, and their mission is bringing connectivity to homes that otherwise wouldn't have it, rather than helping people max out the speeds on their new $1,000 phones.
David Bangert, the 51-year-old founder of WiConnect Wireless, still lives on the farm where he grew up, just outside of Ithaca, Wis. His company has nine employees and serves broadband internet to 1,400 rural households in seven counties. The "wireless" in the name isn't referring to cellphones, but to the way he's connected homes to the internet for the past 14 years. He's depended on a variety of wireless technologies, including miles-long relays of Wi-Fi base stations.
Now, with 5G, there's a convergence of cheaper hardware, free and open-source software, and lightly regulated wireless spectrum free for most anyone to use. It's enabling WiConnect to reach new customers and offer connection speeds rarely seen on rural Wisconsin's side of the digital divide.
Though its performance might seem underwhelming to urbanites who live with ultrafast fiber-optic broadband, the technology WiConnect is using is remarkably similar to what is already enabling 5G networks in the world's most advanced and automated factories, warehouses, ports, mines and military bases.
Players large and small are now building specially designed private 5G networks. In contrast with the 5G networks celebrated during the launch of the latest iPhone, these are intended as much for machines as people. Private networks are geographically constrained areas of coverage, intended to keep a local set of sensors, machines and computers in sync, and allow communications with the rest of the world as needed.
Utility companies, retailers and other large enterprises have in the past made use of private 4G cellular networks. These can be more customizable than a carrier's existing network, and offer better reliability and security than Wi-Fi, especially over large areas. With 5G, it's suddenly possible for many companies -- even rural broadband providers -- to bypass the traditional network gatekeepers and create their own 5G wireless networks, with more bandwidth than ever.
"In this world it's kind of like feeding the beast: always more more more, gotta have more," says Mr. Bangert. "As everybody transitions to streaming video, online meetings, online school, every device connected and all-consuming bandwidth, what used to be just fine is now limiting, and I don't see that changing."
Private 5G networks are like your home Wi-Fi, except instead of a router, they use radios called cell sites, each with a range of a mile or more outdoors. Like a Wi-Fi router, a cell site must be tied to the internet through a physical cable, or wirelessly, through another cell site. One big difference is the software running the system. In a cellular system, all the traffic is tightly controlled and centrally organized, giving every connection enhanced speed and reliability.
Traditionally, the software that runs these 5G networks was written by the companies selling their hardware, including giants like Nokia, Ericsson and Huawei. But in February 2019, engineers at Facebook open-sourced Magma, software that anyone could use as the operating system, or core, of their own network.
Another critical element of a cell network is spectrum, the range of radio frequencies participating devices must keep to. The carriers have, over the years, paid billions in government auctions for exclusive access to wireless spectrum. But now there's a slice that isn't entirely under their control.
The Federal Communications Commission recently opened up a patch of mid-band spectrum known as the Citizens Broadband Radio Service. Some of the CBRS band is available to anyone who wants to register for it, as long as they specify where and how they want to use it for their own network. The last time a chunk of spectrum was made this accessible by the U.S. government was in 2003, when more airwaves in the 5 gigahertz range were freed up for Wi-Fi.
All in, a company or individual can now set up their own single-site 5G network for less than $5,000, says Boris Renski, chief executive and founder of FreedomFi, which sells a version of the open-source Magma software to customers such as Mr. Bangert's WiConnect.
In a December 2019 report, analysts at Deloitte predicted that by the end of 2020, more than 100 companies world-wide will have begun testing their own private 5G networks. That includes organizations such as Ford Motor Co., Corning Inc., BMW AG, BASF SE, China's state-owned Shandong Energy Group, and the U.S. military, which by itself is pouring $600 million into five different projects.
Even though companies can build their own private 5G networks, they can also pay wireless giants to do it for them, says Sowmyanarayan Sampath, president of global enterprise at Verizon Business. The advantages include network-building know-how, regular monitoring and repair, he adds. Plus, when companies hire a wireless giant, they can gain access to all the extra 5G spectrum that carrier has rights to. In March, The Wall Street Journal reported Verizon was in talks with Walmart to set up 5G networks to connect its stores.
For the most part we're still waiting for applications for the kind of consumer 5G being rolled out by the world's biggest carriers, but private 5G is already proving useful, says Kevin Westcott, head of the U.S. technology, media and telecommunications practice at Deloitte.
The fast speeds and ability of mid-band 5G wireless signal to go through trees and other obstacles mean companies can use it for mundane but important tasks like connecting to machines without running cables to them. Other applications include, for example, connecting and tracking equipment such as forklifts and cranes in ports in China.
Companies are adopting more robots and automation in factories and warehouses, and as these devices become more autonomous and reliant on artificial intelligence, there's a need for ultrafast connections between these robots and the computers inside the same buildings, to help them make sense of their surroundings.
Robots that rely on remote computers to process what they are seeing, and to tell them how to react from one millisecond to the next, need low latency -- the lag between when a signal is sent and when it arrives somewhere else in a network. The way 5G radios behave gives them lower latency and greater reliability than any other wireless option, says Rajeev Shah, CEO and co-founder of Celona. His Cupertino, Calif.-based startup is now piloting 5G and 4G LTE private networks with more than 30 different companies and schools.
Paradoxically, 5G is so fast, the internet itself can be a bottleneck. If robots, sensors and other devices are to communicate without delays, they need to connect to computers on the premises, not in the cloud, says Mr. Westcott.
For many of the world's largest multinationals, the goal of rolling out 5G is making their operations more automated and efficient, a process some call the fourth industrial revolution. In rural Wisconsin, Mr. Bangert's goals are more modest.
Every new 5G site Mr. Bangert can put up, for about $20,000 apiece, connects on average 25 more homes, he says.
Grain silos are optimal places to put sites: They're tall, they already have power, and most of the farmers who own them are begging him to bring faster internet service to their land.
WiConnect's home 5G has average speeds of 25 megabits per second download and 5 Mbps up -- a far cry from the 100 Mbps or more that can be had in major U.S. population centers. And even though WiConnect is using essentially free bandwidth, the service still costs $79 to $99 a month. That's the cost of broadband going where no broadband has gone before.

Credit: By Christopher Mims
