TORONTO -- Higher technology spending weighed on Royal Bank of Canada's fiscal fourth-quarter earnings, as Canada's largest bank by market capitalization continues to pour money into artificial intelligence, mobile banking and cybersecurity.
The bank, which this month said it had been designated a systemically important institution by the Switzerland-based Financial Stability Board, reported earnings of 2.83 billion Canadian dollars (US$2.2 billion), or C$1.88 a share, compared with C$2.53 billion, or C$1.65, a year ago.
Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters were predicting profit of C$1.87 a share.
For the year ending Oct. 31, the bank reported net income of C$11.47 billion, up 10% from the prior year. The results take into account C$3 billion of spending on technology, more than 7% of revenue. The tech spending, which included opening a new AI lab in Montreal, tempered growth in units like wealth management and personal and commercial banking.
David McKay, the bank's chief executive, who has a bachelor of mathematics and computer science degree, said the spending is higher than the bank's Canadian peers but in line with U.S. banks such as J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. and Bank of America Corp. Royal Bank is unlikely to keep up that pace of spending, he said.
"I think it's at an elevated level, so you will not see the same type of growth in that as our revenues grow," he said, during a conference call with analysts.
Royal Bank has been cutting costs to help pay for investments in digital technology, which have been translating into highercustomer-retention rates, said Rob Bolger, the chief financial officer, in an interview.
Royal's high spending reflects the difficulty of keeping pace with changing technology, said John AIken, a Canadian banking analyst with Barclays. "A lot of this is trying to make sure you've got your fingers in enough pies," he said. "We're in early stages right now, and no one knows what technology is going to win or, really, what the technology will even look like five years out."
For the quarter, noninterest expenses were C$5.61 billion, up 5.9% from the year-earlier period. Total revenue rose 12% to C$10.52 billion. The bank's net interest margin expanded by 0.02 percentage point to 1.72%.
Net income in the personal and commercial banking unit rose 10% to C$1.4 billion.
The bank is expecting mortgage growth to "slightly moderate," after new rules meant to curb risky lending take hold at the beginning of 2018, Mr. McKay said. Some customers pulled their borrowing ahead to avoid the new rules, which may have helped boost the mortgage business during the quarter, he said.
Net income from wealth management was up 24% to C$491 million. Net income for insurance and capital markets rose 16% and 21%, respectively. Investor and treasury services reported a 10% decline in net income compared with a year ago. Loans rose 4% to C$542.62 billion. In September, the bank increased its prime lending rate to 3.2%, up one-quarter percentage point.
The bank also announced Wednesday that group chief risk officer Mark Hughes would retire April 9 and would be succeeded by Graeme Hepworth. Mr. Hepworth will become deputy chief risk officer Feb. 1. Mr. Hughes, who has held his position since 2013, has worked for the bank for 37 years.
During the quarter, Royal Bank completed a share-buyback program and bought back five million shares for C$462.8 million.

Credit: By Vipal Monga and Allison Prang
