MAN GROUP
Sharper Focus on
'Machine Learning'
Man Group PLC, one of the world's biggest hedge-fund firms, is changing the focus of an Oxford University research department it funds to "machine learning" as firms increasingly embrace technology to gain a competitive edge.
Man, which manages $78.6 billion in assets, has put millions of dollars into the Oxford Man Institute, or OMI, since setting it up in 2007, with the aim of tapping some of its research ideas.
The unit, which has been researching subjects such as statistics, economics and financial-asset prices, will now focus solely on machine learning, a branch of artificial intelligence in which computers learn from data rather than simply acting on it, and data analytics.
-- Laurence Fletcher
---
DEUTSCHE BOERSE
CEO Gives Update
On LSE Merger
Deutsche Boerse AG Chief Executive Carsten Kengeter said Wednesday that a merger with the London Stock Exchange would create a global exchange player in Europe, and a tie-up would make sense even if the U.K. decides to quit the European Union in June.
Speaking at the Deutsche Boerse shareholders' meeting, Mr. Kengeter again said that the joint entity would have a registered office in London and be listed both there and in Frankfurt. But questions remain over whether German policy makers would allow Deutsche Boerse to be controlled by a holding company that was neither located nor supervised in the European Union.
Mr. Kengeter said he expected regulators in the U.K. and Germany to approve the tie-up, but didn't speculate on whether the U.K. would exit the EU. He also said talks about the merger with officials in Hesse -- the German state in which Deutsche Boerse is headquartered -- were going well, but declined to comment further.
"With the merger, we will create a European player that will compete on a global basis," Mr Kengeter said in a speech to shareholders.
The looming U.K. referendum on EU membership remains a big hurdle for the tie-up of the two exchange operators. People familiar with the matter have said German authorities likely wouldn't approve the deal if Deutsche Boerse were controlled by a holding company outside the EU.
-- William Wilkes
