It occurred to me recently that I Duolingo know why my iPhone makes these kidneys of mistakes. Ugh, duck you, autocorrect!
I get it, complaining about autocorrect feels very 2000-and-late. Yet here in 2022, nearly 15 years since the iPhone's debut, Apple's smart typing software can still make us want to break the Guinness World Record for phone throwing. The system still introduces annoying -- OK, sometimes hilarious -- typos, misspellings and grammatical errors. Perhaps even more than ever before.
But before I git into thast, allow me to make a pont. Go itnto hour iPhone settings and turn off autocrrct. Yeaaasah. Good lyuck typig without it!
If you didn't catch that, I turned off autocorrect for a day and barely lived to tell the tale. Within minutes, it was clear how much the software is saving us from ourselves.
"But therein lies the rub," Ken Kocienda, who created the iPhone's autocorrect software, told me. "The more you ask it to do, the more potential there is for bugs and unexpected behaviors."
I tracked down Mr. Kocienda, who left Apple in 2017, as well as other former and current Apple employees to explain autocorrect errors I continue to experience, and if recent system updates have made the software worse. I also sought out tricks to help autocorrect behave better.
Word Swaps
For months one autocorrect error has stuck like a poppy seed in my teeth. Apple insists on correcting the word "newsgrid," my fast-typed rendition of a tool we use at work, to "newsgirl," as if Teddy Roosevelt were still president. Sure, you likely don't see that exact error, but you've probably experienced your own annoying word swaps.
When you type, the autocorrect algorithms are trying to figure out what you mean by looking at various things, including where your fingers landed on the keyboard and the other words in the sentences, while comparing your word fragment to the words in two unseen dictionaries:
Static Dictionary: Built into iOS, this contains dictionary words and common proper nouns, such as product names or sports teams. There were over 70,000 words in this when the first iPhone launched and it's gotten bigger.
Dynamic Dictionary: Built over time as you use your phone, this consists of words that are unique to you. The system looks at your contacts, emails, messages, Safari pages -- even the names of installed apps.
It's also where new words unique to your vocabulary get logged: By the third time you type an unknown word, the software will typically add it to the dynamic dictionary, said Mr. Kocienda and others.
"The static dictionary and the dynamic dictionary would be in a little bit of a battle with each other," Mr. Kocienda said. The software is designed to break the tie, he added, but it doesn't always pick what you would pick.
An Apple spokeswoman confirmed the learning rule and explained that with "NewsGrid," the learning may have been delayed because of its unique capitalization.
What you can do: The surefire way to make sure your phone knows your personal vocabulary? On your iPhone, go to Settings -- > General -- > Keyboard -- > Text Replacement. Now add your words or phrases to both the Phrase and Shortcut fields, which will add them to the dynamic dictionary. Since adding NewsGrid here, there have been no newsgirls in sight.
Foul Language
I know what you're thinking: I've typed some curse words way more than two times and the software has never learned those!
When working on the original iPhone, Mr. Kocienda had a peculiar job. He made a list of bad words -- profanity, curses, slurs -- and put them into the static dictionary. But he programmed these with a special rule: "Never ever help anybody type these words," he said.
What you can do: Type your ducking curse words correctly. You can also add them to that Text Replacement database. My trick? I entered my favorite profanities as contacts in my address book.
Grammatical Errors
Another pet peeve? All the grammatical errors autocorrect introduces. I frequently see "in" instead of "on," "it's" instead of "its" and "we'll" instead of "well."
Over time, Apple's autocorrect has become more sophisticated and aggressive, correcting words based on the previous words in a sentence and even retro-correcting words after you've typed a few more words.
It does that by using machine-learning algorithms that absorb what people have written on the internet. With iOS 15, Apple started using a privacy-focused method for training its algorithms using iPhones in the wild, without collecting typing data from them. The improvements from this can then be shared in iOS updates, the Apple spokeswoman said.
The good? The autocorrect system can be updated frequently with our more casual English. The bad? Some argue it can pick up our typos and our no-good-very-bad writing habits.
What you can do: Sadly, Apple doesn't offer a way to disable auto-apostrophes, though you can disable auto-capitalization.
There's another option. You can download a third-party keyboard from the app store, like Google's Gboard or Microsoft's SwiftKey (though I suggest looking into what data they might collect and share). One option called Typewise has an autocorrect undo button.
So has autocorrect gotten worse? Part of me -- the part that just had to retype "part" because it was corrected to "pet" -- says "100% yes." The other part of me thinks the software has just gotten more aggressive.
As the machines learned more and helped us type better and faster, we became lazier typers. We're blissfully oblivious to autocorrect's many fixes, but we do notice the errors. Are some errors dumb? Do they seem avoidable, especially if the system just did nothing instead? Sure, which is why I think we need more control over the machines.
I'd like to see an autocorrect aggressiveness dial where I could adjust the level of correction. At the very least I'd like to disable some of those auto-apostrophe's.
Duck!
Credit: By Joanna Stern
