Arm set a price of $51 a share as the British chip designer lays the groundwork for the biggest U.S. public offering of the year.
The price was decided on after meetings Wednesday afternoon between underwriters and company executives, according to people familiar with the matter. Initially, the company was eyeing a price of $52 a share, but later settled on $51.
At that price, Arm would be valued at $54.5 billion on a fully diluted basis. That is below the $64 billion Arm owner SoftBank Group recently valued the company at when it bought out a stake held by its Vision Fund.
Arm shares are set to start trading Thursday on Nasdaq under the symbol ARM.
The pricing and trading will be closely watched for signals of the health of the new-issue market, which has been in the doldrums since last year, the slowest for traditional IPOs in the U.S. in at least two decades, as rising interest rates and inflation deterred investors from riskier investments.
If Arm's stock trades well, it could be a boost for grocery-delivery company Instacart and marketing-automation platform Klaviyo, both of which are planning listings of their own next week.
SoftBank, the only seller in the offering, is set to raise about $5 billion. The Japanese technology investor had planned to sell shares at a price between $47 and $51 apiece. In a sign of the importance of the deal to SoftBank, its chief executive, Masayoshi Son, attended Wednesday's pricing meeting virtually.
Arm doesn't make chips, but supplies chip makers with essential circuit designs. Founded in 1990, it focused on the nascent mobile-phone market in its early years and became a dominant supplier to that industry.
Investors in the company are betting that Arm will be able to generate more sales from its current customers and venture into new markets. The company's circuitry is in more than 99% of smartphones, but it is seeking to make inroads in areas where it is less dominant, including computer networks, cloud-computing and the automotive industry.
The company is also trying to seize on an explosion of interest in artificial intelligence and language-generation systems such as OpenAI's ChatGPT.
Credit: By Corrie Driebusch, Ben Dummett and Asa Fitch
