JetBlue Airways Corp. has gotten into a business that is far removed from flying planes: venture capital.
In 2016, JetBlue took an unusual step for an airline: establishing a hub in Silicon Valley to invest in startups that bring fresh ideas to air travel. JetBlue Technology Ventures is working with the startups on technologies for better customer service, a smoother overall travel experience and timely plane maintenance. Since its launch, the venture operation has scanned around 3,000 companies and invested in 28.
The airline sees technology as a way to attract and retain passengers in a market driven by pricing. For instance, the airline is testing a better way of predicting airport weather to help redirect flights and notify customers of possible delays, and personalizing travel by remembering where passengers left off in a movie or show between flights. Another focus is on automating check-in, bag drop and boarding via biometrics, such as facial recognition.
Eash Sundaram, chief technology officer of JetBlue and investment-committee member for the venture operation, spoke to The Wall Street Journal about JetBlue's presence in Silicon Valley and how it fits into the airline's future. Here are edited excerpts.
WSJ: Why does an airline need a presence in Silicon Valley?
MR. SUNDARAM: The speed to market at which new-generation companies are coming in travel, hospitality and tech spaces is super amazing. When you think about the last five to seven years, companies like Airbnb and Uber, even the supercharged growth of Expedia, is happening through the tech space in the valley. We want to have a seat at the table and be the disrupter into the future.
WSJ: Why is JetBlue Technology Ventures a good way to invest in technology as opposed to having your own tech team?
MR. SUNDARAM: Innovation has been in our DNA, but the pace at which it is happening today, it makes it incredibly difficult for the mother ship to just put a process in place to evaluate these startups and make sure there are focused teams around ingesting these startups within the company. This venture-capital unit is driving the innovation within JetBlue by bringing products into our portfolio that do not exist now.
WSJ: Are certain innovations crucial to you?
MR. SUNDARAM: One is the way we manage customer experience. It's also very critical for JetBlue to preserve our cost base and manage it better. Maintenance planning not only drives significant cost but also is key to the safety and security of the airline. A lot of advancements in AI and machine learning are changing the way these planes are maintained, how these planes are scheduled.
WSJ: What kind of startups are helping improve the customer experience?
MR. SUNDARAM: Gladly [a customer-service messaging startup in San Francisco] provides a 360-degree view of customer interaction via multiple channels such as voice, chat or text. When a customer contacts us via phone or email or text during the course of booking through the day of travel, the tool consolidates all these communications into one integrated story line. Customers used to call us or chat or send a message -- it never synchronized together in one single view.
So our customer-support response time to solve a problem is much shorter compared to the past -- I would say 30% to 40% faster in minutes to close that problem. The savings across tens of thousands of interactions a day is a big deal for us. We started rolling this out to customer-support crew members in Salt Lake City about three years ago. Now we're looking at an enterprisewide rollout in the next year or so.
WSJ: Are there any interesting ideas you didn't fund?
MR. SUNDARAM: There's a lot more, "It's not the right thing for us, it's not ready for us" than "We made the investment." There are technologies that have come to us that go deeper into customer data. We typically stay away from those kinds of companies. Most companies leverage customer data extensively, and our legal teams are very cautious in terms of how we approach these companies.
WSJ: Can you give an example of addressing plane maintenance with respect to JTV?
MR. SUNDARAM: The new-generation planes coming out have an enormous amount of data in their engines and in the cockpit that doesn't come back to the base real time. Think about the diagnostics that you can run while the plane is flying, so that when the plane arrives at the airport, you are ready for any type of fixes that need to be put in place.
WSJ: Could you talk about new technologies JTV plans to bring to the airline?
MR. SUNDARAM: We have a company called ClimaCell. ClimaCell predicts weather by a few hundred feet. Think about a thunderstorm coming into JFK. ClimaCell uses cell towers to track the transmission from one cell tower to another to monitor precipitation and predict weather to that precise location. It's being tested in a few airports, in parallel to our current systems.
If you can predict weather at an airport to the level of the 15- to 30-minute range, multiple diversions can be prevented, our gates can be much more ready. There's a huge impact to our operations in terms of keeping people safe and secure, but also keeping our customers informed on what's going to happen and how to avoid certain diversions. These kind of technologies you wouldn't know if you weren't in the valley.
---
Mr. Shah is a reporter for CIO Journal in New York. He can be reached at agam.shah@wsj.com.

Credit: By Agam Shah
