NARRATIVE SCIENCE
Robots Could Be Writing
Your Financial Report
A company that was formed with the idea of automatically generating written recaps of baseball games is expanding into the world of computer-generated client reports that read as though they were written by humans.
Chicago-based Narrative Science Inc. uses artificial intelligence software, whimsically named Quill after the pre-technology pen, to extract facts and insights from data and turn them into narrative content.
Narrative Science is focused on three industries -- financial services, marketing services and the intelligence community. Chief Executive Stuart Frankel envisions Quill supplementing the work of a financial analyst, for instance, who could now send clients more in-depth reports.
While better data analysis is the goal of nearly every modern business, most analysis comes in the form of spreadsheets and dashboards. Narrative Science says turning that information into written content makes it easier to digest and valuable.
Narrative Science has raised $20 million in financing, including a new $11.5 million round from SAP Ventures, Jump Capital, Battery Ventures and Northwestern University.
-- Deborah Gage
---
MATTERPORT
Crate & Barrel founder Gordon Segal and entrepreneur and Microsoft Corp. executive Blake Krikorian are among the backers of a company aiming to use 3-D camera technology in industries like retail and insurance. Matterport Inc.'s cameras create 3-D images of interior spaces, giving an immersive view for online users. The Mountain View, Calif., company expects sales this year to insurance companies, which use the scanners to evaluate claims and make property assessments, and to the home furnishings and remodeling sector.
---
LEVELELEVEN
A company that wants to tap into salespeoples' competitive instincts has gained backing from some of the most competitive people around -- professional athletes. Former NBA basketball player Jamal Mashburn and ex-NFL football player Winston Justice have founded investment firm Mashburn Justice Capital Partners and made their first deal by supporting LevelEleven Inc. The Detroit company's software features leaderboards and other tools to get salespeople competing with one another to increase their ranking in the company. Customers include the Detroit Pistons basketball team, the company said, cable-TV provider Comcast Corp. and restaurant reservation service OpenTable Inc. The new $2 million funding round included Detroit Venture Partners, Hyde Park Venture Partners and Salesforce.com Inc.
---
Compiled by the staff of VentureWire, online at pevc.dowjones.com
