Stock bulls found much to cheer for this week.
All three major U.S. equity indexes added at least 1.3% for the week, marking six weekly gains in the eight weeks of 2024 so far. The S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at new records on Thursday, then did it again Friday. The Dow on Thursday rose above 39000 for the first time.
Nvidia's Wednesday-evening earnings report sent tech investors into a fervor. The chip maker's shares soared 17% in the two trading days after its quarterly sales and forecast topped Wall Street expectations. Nvidia's market valuation briefly jumped above $2 trillion on Friday.
After a blockbuster 2023 for stocks, investors are getting more of the same in 2024. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq are both up roughly 7% so far this year.
Some investors are optimistic because the current rally appears to be driven by strong earnings reports, rather than expectations for interest-rate cuts.
Hope that the Federal Reserve might begin slashing interest rates as early as March helped drive stocks higher last fall. Fed officials have all but taken a March rate cut off the table. The "no need to rush" message was reinforced again this past week, both with the release of the minutes from the Fed's last meeting and in statements from Fed officials.
"It's encouraging that the market looks satisfied by strong earnings, and has something to celebrate other than potential rate cuts," said Quincy Krosby, chief global strategist at LPL Financial. "The market still believes rate cuts are coming. As long as that's a question of 'when' and not 'if,' AI euphoria can keep lifting markets."
Wall Street will be closely watching the coming week's release of the personal-consumption expenditures index, the Fed's preferred gauge of inflation, for a look at price pressures and clues on the Fed's path forward. Recent readings on consumer inflation and jobs came in hotter than expected, which could give Fed officials more breathing room to hold off on rate cuts.
For now, the focus is on artificial intelligence. Analysts were widely bullish on the trend and stocks in general after Nvidia's report helped confirm that there is huge demand from tech companies for AI chips. Some say the boom looks increasingly sustainable.
"We think generative AI will prove to be the growth theme of the decade," Solita Marcelli, chief investment officer for the Americas at UBS Global Wealth Management, wrote in a note to clients Friday. "The rise in tech stocks could go further still."
Nvidia's rapid ascent to about $2 trillion in market value is making some investors nervous that the stock is priced for perfect future performance. But few are vocally betting against it.
"AI is transformative in ways we can't predict," said Chris Marangi, co-chief investment officer of value at Gabelli Funds. "Nvidia is one of the few clear winners able to monetize the boom. I don't have a differentiated view other than, don't fight it."
Stock-market gains continue to be heavily concentrated among the so-called Magnificent Seven, a group that includes Google-parent Alphabet, Amazon.com, Apple, Meta Platforms, Microsoft and Tesla, in addition to Nvidia. That is prompting concern that indexes are vulnerable to the swings of just a handful of companies -- and optimism that there is more room to run, depending on whom you ask.
Still, trading action was relatively quiet on Friday, with the S&P 500 adding less than 0.1% and the Dow 0.2% higher. The Nasdaq edged down 0.3% after soaring 3% on Thursday, its biggest one-day jump in a year.
Treasury yields slipped, with the yield on the benchmark 10-year note falling to 4.258%.
Credit: By Jack Pitcher
