Brexit isn't the toughest challenge facing the City of London.
Banks in Britain are still languishing in the doldrums brought on by the financial crisis of 2008. Weak banking activity and low investment returns have caused revenue to shrink, leading to widespread cost-cutting and automation.
While Britain's planned departure from the European Union threatens London's position as the "investment banker to Europe," in the words of Bank of England Gov. Mark Carney, the impact that will have on London itself will likely be smaller than people think. EU clients provide only one-fifth to one-quarter of revenue for the City's finance sector.
Other, continuing pressures look more significant -- in particular, low investment returns and pressure from clients to cut costs. In a low-return world, everyone from fund managers to small individual investors wants to pay lower fees.
"Trading [is] a commodity business, it's about who can do it most efficiently," says Andrew Formica, chief executive of fund manager Henderson Group. "It's becoming a bit of an arms race in terms of technology investment."
Pressure to cut costs is fueling a move to passive investing, in which fund managers do much less trading and research. Where active managers remain, they have to cut costs, too, to stay competitive. This all feeds into less revenue for investment banks, forcing them to cut more costs.
And the same trends that are hurting banks in Britain are affecting big banks everywhere.
"The continued uncertainty makes it a lot harder to invest in the future," says Hakan Enver, operations director at Morgan McKinley Financial Services, a recruitment company. "It's a lot of things, not just Brexit," Mr. Enver says. "But that is good cover" for layoffs as well, he says.
The total number of people employed by all kinds of banking in the U.K. has fallen 22% from its precrisis peak in 2008, or by about 120,000 jobs, according to data from Britain's statistics office.
Technology is replacing people on trading floors and in the middle and back offices where trades are checked, confirmed and settled. Some of this is to give investors an edge in markets with computer-driven tools such as algorithmic and high-frequency trading.
But technology also means more work can be moved offshore or to cheaper locations. More reliable internet links with India, for example, mean people can work together on the same documents or files in real time.
One U.K. firm, Frontline Analysts, runs teams of equity and credit analysts based in India on behalf of investment banks in London. The bank can cut back its more expensive big-city staff to just those who interact with clients directly, but still have access to a cheaper team to do much of the number crunching and report writing.
Frontline's senior people can work from anywhere. One managing director, Daniel Davies, spent more than a decade as a bank-stock analyst at Exane BNP Paribas, Credit Suisse and elsewhere, but now trains and oversees teams of India-based analysts from his home in Exeter in southwest England.
"Investment banks can't shift the front office and they can't shift the brand, but as time has gone on and margin pressure has been brought to bear, they've realized they need to cut costs per head," Mr. Davies says.
Investment-bank executives don't want all their research to be run from elsewhere because it is harder to monitor, while their most important analysts have to spend time selling ideas to clients rather than training and checking faraway number crunchers.
"We in Frontline stand in between and do the quality assurance," Mr. Davies says. "I can do that from a cafe or from my home office."
In Europe, new regulations will soon force all banks to charge clients for research. That is going to put even more focus on costs because investors won't be willing to pay for many research teams. Henderson's Mr. Formica says banks could set up joint ventures just for research to reduce and share the output. But for some, cutting more people is the more likely outcome -- either by outsourcing or no longer doing research.
Another big cost for banks everywhere is satisfying all of the extra reporting and compliance demands from regulators since the crisis. This involves a lot of repetitive, data-processing activity that is labor intensive, which has kept staff and real-estate costs high in banks' middle and back offices, particularly in the City, where office space is among Europe's most expensive.
How big banks are handling their compliance and other back-office work is something being looked at by Accenture, the global consulting and services firm.
Accenture cut 17,000 of its own back-office processing jobs, it says, by adopting what it calls artificial-intelligence tools. The company says it is now promoting the same kind of technology to banks, while also talking up the importance of retraining those who are displaced, as it did itself.
"No question, AI will lead to substantial job displacements over time," says Richard Lumb, Accenture's global head of financial services. "But the technology is still young.. . .The real power of AI is in how it augments workforces and makes it possible for people to do higher-value work."
Ultimately, Brexit is just one symptom of the growing desire in the U.S., the U.K., and across Europe to put up more borders between international trade and finance to protect unhappy voters at home. When it comes to banking, this protectionist theme was at work long before the Brexit campaign began. It is a theme that has led regulators increasingly to put up barriers between global banks' operations and capital bases in different countries, making them less efficient.
Kinner Lakhani, an analyst at Deutsche Bank, believes that the postcrisis crunch in financial activity has passed. But to stay profitable, he says, investment banks will need to cut costs further to substitute for economies lost through increased regulation. "Subsidiarization and Balkanization will challenge business models that don't have scale," he says. "Investment banks have adjusted significantly, but the process is not complete."
---
Mr. Davies is a London-based writer for The Wall Street Journal's Heard on the Street column. Email paul.davies@wsj.com.
Credit: By Paul J. Davies
