Smart speakers powered by artificial intelligence are one of the hottest consumer products in the U.S. Amazon.com Inc., Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Apple Inc. are all offering competing products. If they think that is a crowded field, they should come to China.
Within a day of Apple announcing its voice-activated HomePod speaker in June, Song Shaopeng, founder of smart-speaker technology startup Sugr Electronics Corp., fielded calls from three electronics manufacturers with the same request. All wanted his help to make HomePod-like products.
Li Haibo, vice president of China's biggest online audio-sharing site Ximalaya, says that out of 300-plus speaker makers that license Ximalaya's audio content, more than 100 have switched to making smart speakers. In Shenzhen, China's tech hub, Mr. Li says he is approached by so many smart-speaker startups, all within a 20-minute walk from each other, that he often schedules a full day's meeting at the same coffee shop.
China's big tech companies are also in the game. This month, e-commerce company Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and smartphone maker XiaomiCorp. each launched their smart-speaker models. Social-media behemoth Tencent Holdings Ltd. is working on something it is calling a "smart box," according to a senior executive. Search engine Baidu Inc. unveiled an Amazon Alexa-like voice system that powers hardware.
From tech giants to consumer-electronics makers, all see voice-activated products as the gateway to a future where platforms animated by artificial intelligence will power homes, cars and offices. To some, this first wave in the AI revolution already looks frothy.
"This is definitely a bubble," says Mr. Li of Ximalaya, which launched a smart speaker in June.
China's online population is barely growing -- 2.9% last year by official data -- and the number of hours spent online hasn't budged in two years -- 3.8 hours a day. Internet companies need new ways to engage users, and smart speakers look like the next big thing.
For the internet giants, voice command is seen as a critical technology, the new interface between humans and computers, after keyboards and touch screens. For ambitious startups, the smart speaker is an opportunity, like apps were at the advent of the mobile internet age.
For electronics manufacturers, the smart speaker may keep production lines and sales humming, just as laptops, tablets, smartphones and drones did.
An added inducement to jump in is that Amazon's, Google's and Apple's smart speakers don't offer voice interfaces in Chinese -- and those are hard to build.
Smart speakers require complex software to recognize and execute voice commands and provide content ranging from weather forecasts, traffic reports, music, news and books, as well as services from shopping to payment.
The speakers are supposed to interact with users and learn their preferences over time.
That means heavy research and development.
"It's like when you were trying to build a smartphone in 2007 only to find that you had to build the Android operating system and the mobile apps running on the phone, too. It's not something for small startups," says Mr. Song, the Sugr founder.
Ximalaya's owner, Shanghai Zendai Ximalaya Network Technology Co., joined with the new AI subsidiary of app developer Cheetah Mobile Inc., which hired more than 200 engineers to work on the smart speaker.
"It was a lot of work," says Mr. Li, the vice president. He says they used more than 80,000 different voices to ensure the speaker understands when people call its name, "Xiaoya." When they changed the cover fabric for the speaker, the voice recognition rate fell from 90% to 10%. They then spent a month rewriting the algorithm.
Technology aside, the pack might be chasing a market that isn't yet there. Having only recently risen to the middle class, many Chinese have never lived with stereo speakers, much less a digital assistant, so they will need to get comfortable with both.
E-commerce giant JD.com, which launched a smart speaker in 2015, sold 100,000 units last year and expects to sell hundreds of thousands this year. At prices between 179 yuan to 998 yuan ($27 to $148), the sales revenue is negligible for the company whose total revenue was 260.2 billion yuan in 2016. Since the launch three weeks ago, Alibaba's Tmall shoppers preordered roughly 7,600 AliGenie smart speakers at 499 yuan each ahead of the Aug. 10 shipping target.
Ximalaya has an advantage, says Mr. Li, because the audio-sharing site's 370 million registered users and 22 million daily users are natural customers for a smart speaker. The company sold 50,000 units of Xiaoya at 699 yuan each the day it was launched and expects to sell one million units this year at 999 yuan each, including subscription services.
As for his many competitors flooding into the field, "I think 80% to 90% of them will die next year," Mr. Li says.
---
Follow Li Yuan on Twitter @LiYuan6 or write to li.yuan@wsj.com.

Credit: By Li Yuan
