VerizonCommunications Inc. has invested in an autonomous-vehicle tech startup best known for turning a vintage DeLorean into a self-driving car.
The startup, Renovo Auto, said the investment fromVerizon's venture arm is part of a new $10 million funding round led by True Ventures.
Founded in 2010, Renovo gained attention five years later when the startup and Stanford University researchers demonstrated a vintage DeLorean driven in tight, smoke-filled circles.
Now the company is seeking to create ubiquitous autonomous-vehicle software similar to an operating system like Microsoft Windows or Google Android that would help car manufacturers, fleet managers and others control their software and data across a groupof shared vehicles.
Verizon, the largest U.S. telecom carrier, sees a place for itself among the oceans of wireless data that could flow from computer-driven cars.
"One of the biggest markets we see as we look at this ecosystem is the [automated mobility on demand] space," said Ed Ruth, a director forVerizonVentures, in an interview from his Palo Alto, Calif., office. "There needs to be a significant amount of orchestration that goes on with the data that's being generated by all of those vehicles."
Intel Corp., which is also exploring how to manage the data, estimates a single self-driving car will generate four terabytes ofdatain about 90 minutes of driving, the typical amount of time a person spends in a vehicle each day. That is the equivalent of data that 3,000 people might generate on the internet by 2020, according to Intel. Today, cars generate littledata.
Several car makers and tech companies are far along in developing computer systems -- essentially the artificial intelligence's brain -- that can handle sensing, perception and path-planning required for autonomous travel, said Chris Heiser, Renovo's chief executive.
"Figuring out how to operationalize that and bring it across a fleet of vehicles in a consistent way, that's not something we see others taking a serious look at," he said.
WhileVerizonVentures declined to say how much it contributed, the investment in Renovo follows other efforts by the data carrier to position itself in the fast-evolving transportation industry.
Last year, Verizon acquired fleet-tracking software companies Fleetmatics Group PLC and Telogis Inc. as part of a broader strategy to focus on connected cars.
Credit: By Tim Higgins
