Silicon Valley's technology whizzes are mobilized to fight the coronavirus, trying to hack everything from disease modeling to elder care and medical-device manufacturing.
It isn't clear how best to apply the industry's talents for on-the-fly innovation to a fast-moving pandemic. But thousands of volunteers from the tech world have begun pitching in on hundreds of hastily assembled projects over the past two weeks.
One of the most ambitious projects, which Silicon Valley investor Sam Altman helped organize, aims to build a million low-cost ventilators in three months. The ventilator project, which hopes to ease the desperate shortage at hospitals during the crisis, is being organized on helpwithcovid.com, a clearinghouse for scores of virus-fighting projects created by Mr. Altman.
"What we do best is mobilize, invent and move incredibly fast," said Neil Thanedar, a startup chief executive working on the million-ventilator project.
Mr. Thanedar got involved in the million-ventilator project after stewing over it one night and sending an email to Mr. Altman. The ventilators will be both mass-produced and made in a decentralized way by individuals and small businesses, Mr. Thanedar said.
Instagram co-founder Kevin Systrom, among others, has become an armchair epidemiologist, modeling the spread of the virus and sharing his findings with experts.
Mr. Systrom, while holed up in his Montana home for several weeks, built a model to predict the spread of the virus and published it online. Leaning on his experience watching Instagram's viral growth, combined with some data science knowledge he has picked up since leaving Instagram in 2018, he predicted that the U.S. would have 10,000 cases by March 19, about the time it passed that mark.
Mr. Systrom said he did his analysis, which has been shared with policy makers, because he felt many of the existing models were either too dismissive or too alarmist. "The cost of being quiet on something like this seemed so incredibly high."
According to Mr. Systrom's model, cases of coronavirus in the U.S. will surpass China's total 81,000 cases by midweek and 250,000 by the beginning of next week. As of Wednesday, there were 65,285 confirmed cases in the U.S., according to Johns Hopkins University.
Google parent Alphabet Inc. put its DeepMind artificial-intelligence unit on the task of finding a vaccine, and its Verily life-sciences research unit is working on virus detection. Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg's Chan Zuckerberg Initiative is working with San Francisco hospitals to expand testing, and Facebook also is donating reserves of 720,000 masks to health workers.
Some of those involved say they hope the efforts will help revive tech's image, which has been hurt by misuse of personal data and other issues.
While the Food and Drug Administration has begun to relax some of its rules around the use of ventilators and other medical devices relevant to coronavirus treatment, it isn't clear yet whether Silicon Valley's rapid medical-equipment development ultimately will get the go-ahead. An FDA spokeswoman didn't respond to a request for comment.
Some startups had hoped to offer at-home Covid-19 tests, including birth-control-by-mail startup Nurx Inc., at-home medical testing company Everlywell Inc. and lab company Curative Inc. The companies put those tests on hold in recent days after the FDA updated its guidance to warn against at-home testing kits.
Some in Silicon Valley are thinking about how to move on when the worst of the pandemic is over.
Brian McClendon, the executive in charge of Google Maps and Alphabet's other geographic-related products for 10 years until 2015, has been kicking around an idea for a smartphone app to track health status. He hopes it would give people the confidence to return to normal life without fear of catching the virus.
Mr. McClendon's health-tracking plan would use blockchain technology to protect people's privacy. He said he wants to collaborate with others to refine his ideas before he publishes them.

Credit: By Asa Fitch, Rolfe Winkler and Deepa Seetharaman
