Making Marvels: Science & Splendor at the Courts of Europe
The Met Fifth Avenue, through March 1, 2020
New York -- Wealth and power can seem to inspire as much scorn as envy these days, as if inequity were a sign of iniquity. In that light, some artifacts in the Metropolitan Museum of Art's stupendous exhibition "Making Marvels: Science & Splendor at the Courts of Europe" might just be taken as evidence of unmerited pride and unquenchable greed. Here, for example, is a collection of Baroque pieces from the mid-17th century owned by Prince Paul Esterhazy I, vice-regent of Hungary: a mirror, a table and pairs of enormous gueridons and wall sconces. They are decorated with milled sheets of silver that are embossed, cast, engraved and chased, shaping gaudy reliefs with overgrowths of fruits, flowers and putti. The table is ornamented with Tritons and sea nymphs and is topped by the mythical Judgment of Paris in which the hero must choose from among Aphrodite's beauty, Athena's wisdom and Hera's power. The owner of this table, we feel sure, would have advised grasping all three.
But wealth and power also have subtler preoccupations -- and here they become profound. This exhibition, organized by Wolfram Koeppe, a curator in European sculpture and decorative arts, shows about 150 objects created between the 16th and 18th centuries for the courts of early modern Europe. Most have never before been seen in the U.S. or even outside settings close to their origins. Nothing is casual or conventional. Everything was created to impress. And it does, so you can barely repress cries of amazement or delighted laughter at their accomplishment.
There are drinking cups made of Nautilus shells mounted by gilded-silver Neptunes (Nuremberg, 1588); miniature obelisks studded with cameos and gemstones (Dresden, before 1705); an "animated painting" of a courtly garden backed by gears that cause figures to move (French, 1759); a tiny spider automaton whose hidden mechanism would propel it in motion (Dresden, before 1604). And as we proceed, we are shown something about the cultures that inspired such creations.
The prince's silver pieces are displays of ornamental wealth. But other works use similar materials only to hide them in trompe l'oeil imitations of the mundane -- soil and leaves and beetles. The earthly and sublime are intertwined. Germanic princes owned rights to mine their land and typically kept handsteine (hand stones) -- samples of the raw ore. We see one small mound from a Hungarian mine (c. 1740) on which a craftsman has built miniature mine shafts and ore-processing workshops. It is crowned by a figure holding an engraved dish aloft, perhaps for a banquet -- the object thus suggesting the transfiguration of mined ore into culinary delicacy. The earthly realm could also turn fantastical: a gilded silver sculpture from Nuremberg (1603-09) is part boar, part bat, part aquatic creature, its body made of a then-exotic coconut.
In these works, the power to mold the world is affirmed in a masterfully crafted piece of the world. We see familiar, utilitarian objects -- cups, game boards, tools -- created with startling materials, demonstrating inventiveness but also proclaiming the court's powers. A stunning early 17th-century German chess and backgammon board is made of amber; inlaid ivory miniatures peer through the smoky-rose translucence of fossilized resins.
Many such objects were part of noble families' cabinets of curiosities -- collections of wonders put on display -- the ancestors of contemporary museums. Such collections sampled the world's marvels at a moment when the very idea of local understanding was being transformed, expanded and unsettled by voyages of discovery revealing strange cultures and unimagined life forms. Such exotic objects often appear here held aloft by sculpted precious metals as if wonder were being combined with assertions of possession.
Space and time were being redefined as well, which is why cabinets included artfully made instruments used to measure and mark the world; here are orreries, an odometer, a microscope, along with illusions and puzzles demonstrating both mystery and mastery. A finely wrought alchemical furnace from Dresden (c. 1575) is decorated with the seven planetary gods and heavenly bodies.
Transmutations -- not just alchemical ones -- are the rule. We see a mid-18th-century lathe used to spin ivory pieces, turning the tusks of a lumbering beast considered regal into ethereal miniatures (often shaped by royalty) -- fanciful, spindly, otherworldly.
But this is child's play compared with the period's clocks and automatons. Unfortunately, we can see them move only in videos, but they are also spectacular in repose. A German automaton clock (c. 1625) plays music as commedia dell'arte figures dance. A figure in the "Miraculous Writing Machine" (1760), constructed by Griedrich von Knaus in Vienna, writes words on paper (seen in a video) thanks to intricate networks of gears, cogs and pegs.
The exhibition links such inventions with artificial intelligence and computer programming. They are also demonstrations of early science as a form of transformational magic that characterized the world of the cabinet of curiosities. Wealth and power, we see, gave access to that magic, encouraging it with relentless enterprise and reflection, transmuting the vulgar into the transcendent. And this should be familiar: The ambition to alter material properties, master the passage of time, bring mechanisms to life and playfully explore new realms -- these same dreams are now associated with contemporary tech entrepreneurs, dreaming of other magical marvels.
---
Mr. Rothstein is the Journal's Critic at Large.

Credit: By Edward Rothstein
