Facebook said it is shutting down its facial-recognition system in the coming weeks, scrapping a feature that has developed into a key tool for sharing photos on social media but has raised concerns among privacy advocates and regulators
The move continues a dramatic reshaping of the tech giant, which includes pausing the development of an Instagram for kids product and a rebranding of the company to Meta Platforms Inc.
People who have opted into facial-recognition service will no longer be automatically recognized in video and photo content, according to Jerome Pesenti, vice president of artificial intelligence at Meta. He said the social-media platform would also delete data related to the faces of more than one billion people.
"We need to weigh the positive use cases for facial recognition against growing societal concerns, especially as regulators have yet to provide clear rules," he said on Meta's website.
The company has long trumpeted the convenience that facial recognition delivers for users and has pushed back against privacy advocates who find the technology invasive. Tuesday's move also could have implications for the so-called metaverse, which is a series of virtual online communities that Meta Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said last week was the future of the internet and his company.
Those communities are powered by virtual reality and other advanced technologies, as well as data about users.
In its blog post, the company called Tuesday's decision "one of the largest shifts in facial-recognition usage in the technology's history."
More than one-third of the social-platform's daily active users are currently opted into the setting, Facebook said.
Facebook last year reached a $550 million settlement with the state of Illinois, which alleged the company was wrongfully using facial-recognition technology on residents without their consent. Facebook didn't admit to wrongdoing.
The company's use of facial-recognition was also cited by the Federal Trade Commission in its $5 billion settlement in 2019 with Facebook related to its privacy practices.
With the change, Facebook's technology will no longer automatically recognize if someone's face pops up in videos, photos or Facebook memories. Users also won't see a suggested tag in videos or photos they may be featured in.
The company said it would continue to pursue ways to use facial-recognition as a tool for users to verify their identities.
The pivot comes as the company has been under substantial fire for its practices. A recent Wall Street Journal investigation showed the social-media company knew its platforms were riddled with flaws that cause harm. The Journal's reporting also found that the company didn't fix those flaws.
Ken Bamberger, a law professor specializing in privacy at University of California, Berkeley, called the company's announcement on Tuesday "jaw-dropping."
Credit: By Allison Prang
