GENERAL ELECTRIC
Firm to Create
1,000 Jobs in U.K.
General Electric Co. said Thursday it struck a deal with the U.K. that could eventually create 1,000 jobs there, the industrial conglomerate's latest move to create jobs abroad after the U.S. Export-Import Bank's charter lapsed this summer.
GE said it reached an agreement with the U.K. export credit agency for up to $12 billion in export financing to support orders in markets including Brazil, Ghana and India. It said the 1,000 jobs would be focused in the energy sector. It said it would continue to expand its business in countries where export financing is available.
-- Chelsey Dulaney
---
COCA-COLA
New System in U.S.
Consolidates Bottlers
Coca-Cola Co. said Thursday that it plans to bring some of its top U.S. bottlers together under a new supply system, the soda giant's latest move to cut costs amid tepid sales.
The new national supply group will include independent bottlers Coca-Cola Bottling Co. Consolidated, Coca-Cola Bottling Company United, Swire Coca-Cola USA and the company-owned Coca-Cola Refreshments and Coca-Cola North America. Together, the bottlers account for 95% of the volume produced in the U.S.
The initial terms of the agreement call for Coca-Cola Refreshments, which is owned by Coke, to divest nine production facilities valued at about $380 million to the other bottlers between 2016 and 2018.
Coke has said that it is aiming for $3 billion in cost-cutting for the year, and is redirecting savings into marketing like its "Share a Coke" campaign.
-- Chelsey Dulaney
---
IBM
Watson Subsidiary
To Be Expanded
International Business Machines Corp. on Thursday announced a new San Francisco location for its artificial intelligence unit Watson, signaling an expansion of the business widely known for its artificial intelligence that beat human contestants on the "Jeopardy" quiz show.
The new California location is the second for Watson, which has been based in New York City.
In addition, IBM said Watson was expanding its product offerings to developers who use the platform to build apps and roll out new business functionality across industries from health care and retail to wine-buying.
The upgrades include new speech, language and vision tools that IBM said will help organizations tap what is projected to be a $143 billion app market next year.
-- Lisa Beilfuss
---
BHP BILLITON
BlackRock Cuts
Stake in Miner
BlackRock Inc., the world's largest asset manager, has cut its shareholding in resources giant BHP Billiton Ltd., selling stock as a global commodities slump pushes its share price to the lowest level since 2008.
BlackRock ceased to be a substantial shareholder in BHP, the world's biggest miner by market value, on Sept. 22, according to a regulatory filing to the Australian Securities Exchange.
-- Rhiannon Hoyle
UBER
Brussels Court Bans
Low-Cost Car Service
A Brussels commercial court has banned Uber Inc.'s controversial low-cost service in the European capital, an Uber spokesman said Thursday, adding yet another woe to the U.S. tech firm's business in Europe.
The spokesman said the ruling meant it would have to stop its UberPop service in Brussels within 21 days or else be fined 10,000 euros ($11,250) for each day it operates, with an overall fine capped at 1 million euros.
"We are looking at the implications of this ruling," Uber spokesman Gareth Mead said.
The company could decide to temporarily suspend its UberPop service in Brussels as it files for an appeal, the spokesman said.
The commercial court's ruling in the case, which was brought to court by taxi company Taxis Verts, doesn't apply to Uber's other services -- including Uber X -- which is more expensive than its UberPop service, but still cheaper than standard taxi fares.
-- Natalia Drozdiak
