General Electric Co. and Microsoft Corp. announced a partnership to bring GE's industrial "internet-of-things" platform to Microsoft's computing cloud, as both companies continue to shift legacy businesses into areas more focused on mobile and the internet.
The companies said Monday that GE's Predix software platform, which enables industrial machines to connect to the "industrial internet," would hook up with Microsoft's Azure cloud platform, allowing users to analyze and share data from their machines using Microsoft applications.
Predix is a software and cloud platform that provides a standardized way for companies to connect their industrial devices -- from train wheels to package shipping machines -- to the cloud to monitor and optimize them.
Microsoft has been investing in its Azure platform, as competition in the market for on-demand computing power continues to heat up. It is battling with similar offerings from Amazon.com Inc.'s Amazon Web Services, or AWS, Alphabet Inc.'s Google Cloud Platform and IBM's SoftLayer.
Predix already runs on AWS, and GE is working with Oracle Corp. to integrate the technology into its offerings.
International Data Corp. analyst Al Gillen said Monday's announcement "is not a win for Microsoft as much as it is a catch up." Azure operates in many countries, and the availability of Predix may make Azure "more attractive for some country- and regional-level customers," Mr. Gillen said.
The partnership will allow Predix customers to access Microsoft Azure capabilities such as natural language processing, artificial intelligence, data visualization and integration with Microsoft's Office 365 suite of online workplace productivity apps and other software.
A developer preview will be released toward the end of the year and the platform will be released commercially by the second quarter of 2017.
Microsoft has been directing its efforts on internet-based products and services for corporate customers and away from its traditional focus on making office software and operating systems for desktop users. Last month, it said it would buy LinkedIn Corp. for $26.2 billion, the largest acquisition in its history, as it tries to connect the networks of tools that workers use with the workers themselves.
In January, GE said it was moving its headquarters to Boston, in a bid to attract younger, more creative workers as it is betting that a new industrial era will revolve around software innovation.
---
Jay Greene contributed to this article.
Credit: By Austen Hufford
