NVIDIA
Artificial Intelligence
Is Promising Market
Nvidia Corp. has found a surprising -- and growing -- niche in artificial intelligence, where its graphics chips show exceptional efficiency in some tasks.
Data center sales ballooned 186% in the first quarter, driven by build-outs by major cloud players, which have made AI a priority.
Alphabet Inc.'s Google, Baidu Inc., International Business Machines Inc. and Tencent Holdings Ltd. recently added Nvidia's graphics processing units to their cloud offerings, joining Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft Corp.
-- Ted Greenwald
---
ABC
'American Idol'
To Make Comeback
ABC says it will revive "American Idol" after the show has spent only one year off the air.
The Walt Disney Co. network said Tuesday that the music-competition show, which dominated television in the 2000s and minted stars such as Carrie Underwood, Jennifer Hudson and Kelly Clarkson, will begin sometime in the next TV season. That season starts in September.
The series originally aired on Fox and was canceled a year ago after years of fading ratings. But ABC Entertainment President Channing Dungey called it a "pop culture staple that left the air too soon."
ABC left plenty of questions unanswered, including who will host and who will serve as judges.
-- Associated Press
---
SUNEDISON
Shareholders Seek
More Transparency
A group of SunEdison Inc. shareholders say they deserve more information about how the solar power company lost billions of dollars of investor money, most likely leaving them with nothing.
In court papers filed Monday with the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in New York, shareholders said they are lacking "basic and essential information" about the company's assets and the direction it has taken since filing for bankruptcy more than a year ago.
Lawyers for the group have asked Judge Stuart Bernstein to reject a legally required disclosure statement that typically precedes final court approval of a chapter 11 case.
The shareholder group, composed of more than 1,000 individual investors, says SunEdison's current disclosures "serve only to darken the murky factual waters of these cases." A spokesman for SunEdison did not immediately respond to a request for comment Tuesday.
-- Tom Corrigan
---
HERTZ GLOBAL HOLDINGS
Stock Falls Sharply
On Financial Loss
Hertz Global Holdings Inc. shares fell 14% on Tuesday after the U.S. rental-car company reported a far larger financial loss than Wall Street analysts expected, raising further concerns about its turnaround efforts.
Hertz shares fell more than 20% in the morning before regaining some of that ground as investors digested the first-quarter results reported after the market closed Monday. Lower resale values and a fleet comprising too many passenger cars instead of the large sport-utility vehicles customers desire contributed to the loss.
The company on Monday reported an adjusted net loss of $134 million, or $1.61 a share, compared with a loss of $67 million, or 79 cents a share, in the year-earlier quarter. Analysts polled by FactSet expected Hertz to report a loss of 90 cents a share.
Hertz shares closed Tuesday at $12.80, down 14.2%.
-- Adrienne Roberts
