Corrections & Amplifications
Global chip sales for the month of May totaled $31.9 billion, according to the Semiconductor Industry Association. A Heard on the Street column on Monday about the chip industry incorrectly said the sales figure was for the 12-month period ended in May.
(WSJ July 11, 2017)
[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Times are very good in the chip business. In this boom-and-bust industry, that leads to the obvious question: Are they too good?
Global semiconductor revenue has doubled since the first dot-com era of the late 1990s. That is when PCs were flooding into every home, and every business was buying servers and wiring up for the internet. Those aren't big growth drivers now, but new industries have emerged to fill the gap: Cars and household appliances are packing in more chips than ever. Artificial intelligence is being built into big corporate networks. These sorts of capabilities require new processors and memory, in turn driving up sales of chips.
That has put the chip industry in the strongest upswing in years. Global chip sales jumped nearly 23% in the 12 months ended in May to $31.9 billion, according to the Semiconductor Industry Association. That is the sixth consecutive month of double-digit gains -- the strongest sustained run in seven years. The association also projects full-year sales growth of 11.5%, which would mark the highest growth rate since 2010. Profits are surging as well; Samsung and Micron Technology both recently reported record quarterly earnings, thanks mostly to strong prices on memory chips.
But chips have been a cyclical business in the past, so investors are nervous. Despite some gains in recent sessions, the PHLX Semiconductor Index is about 7% off its peak in the past month. That was after surging by 60% in value over the previous 12 months. The coming second-quarter earnings season will include forecasts for the latter half of the year, and any disappointment will likely send share prices down further. Still, Credit Suisse opined Friday that at its current level the semiconductor index has priced in "cyclical peak" concerns.
Those cyclical concerns may be overblown. The industry is enjoying several strong demand drivers that aren't short-term in nature. Autos in particular are in the midst of a strong push toward automation. Artificial intelligence also is still in its early days. And even mature markets like smartphones are creating fresh demand for specialized chips.
With demand strong, the biggest risk could be supply. Much of the current upswing in revenue is driven by strong prices in the volatile markets for DRAM and NAND flash memory. That could change, and an added risk may come from a handful of fabrication facilities under construction in China.
With some exceptions -- like Nvidia and Advanced Micro Devices -- chips aren't that expensive. The PHLX Index averages around 14.8 times forward earnings, unchanged from a year ago and a 32% discount to the Nasdaq Composite. The group has averaged a 21% discount over the past five years.
With demand strong, the downside for the sector is limited. If investors believe the industry's wild swings are a thing of the past, they could give companies more credit for their healthy growth -- and feel confident in stacking up a few more chips.
---
This is the first of three columns on what is next for the booming semiconductor industry. Still coming: What the new iPhone means for chip makers and how China is trying to upend the industry.

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
