AMARAVATI, India -- The government planners now dreaming up India's first "smart city" realize they have a problem.
To solve it, they are planning to dispatch a fleet of drones, bury the power grid and link a biometric database to every square foot of land here in India's newest state capital.
The problem is that none of India's modern-day planned cities have lived up to their hype. Instead, they have succumbed to slums, crowding and chaos.
Amaravati was named the new capital of Andhra Pradesh after the Telangana region broke away as a new state in 2014. Since then, $1 billion in loan pledges from the World Bank and Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank, alongside an additional $2.3 billion from state and federal government agencies, have breathed life into the project.
Planners envision a city of 3.5 million people on land currently home to 100,000 farmers and rural laborers living in 29 villages.
Farmers are exchanging their land for smaller, more valuable plots in the new city. Poorer farmhands who don't own land have been promised a place in new government housing. For low-income business owners, government developers plan to offer "micro-plots" as small as 50 square meters for $3,000 and up.
Two of Singapore's largest developers, Ascendas-Singbridge and Sembcorp Industries, have signed on to build the city's commercial district, while British architects Foster + Partners are designing a sprawling government complex to spread over 2 square miles.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi has pledged to build or redevelop 100 "smart cities" in coming years, sparking a wave of interest from offshore developers, and skepticism from those who view the plans as unrealistic.
Mr. Modi and other leaders are striving to avoid the mistakes of past grand urban-development plans. In Navi Mumbai, a satellite city of 1.1 million next to financial capital Mumbai, the latest national census determined that around one of every five residents now lives in a slum.
Gurugram, a new city previously known as Gurgaon south of the capital Delhi, is likewise dotted with slums and struggles to provide services such as sewerage, water, drainage and firefighting.
Efforts to provide such services to slum residents have left many cities financially crippled.
Amaravati, its planners in the state development agency say, will be different. They insist that technology will help the city run more efficiently and allow them to impose rules and order on growing populations in ways that haven't yet been possible.
"This is a highly futuristic city; India's second growth story will start from Amaravati," said Sreedhar Cherukuri, the commissioner in charge of Andhra Pradesh's state development agency.
Every contingency has been thought of, state planners say. They aim to deploy drones to spot new slums popping up within the sprawling parks it plans, allowing authorities to quickly clear them.
Every property owner will have their fingerprints and iris scans from a new national database linked to land records. Residents will pay property tax and utility bills using bank accounts and mobile apps linked to the database.
An underground power grid with smart meters that identify spikes in usage will make it impossible for poachers to steal electricity.
Buses and trams will be largely self-driving.
The visionary behind this new city is N. Chandrababu Naidu, the state's chief minister. He helped transform the state's previous capital, Hyderabad, into a high-tech hub.
Mr. Naidu said he believes Amaravati can emulate prosperous modern cities in China, Japan and Southeast Asia, and at age 67 he is staking his legacy on making it work. "I'm confident," he told The Wall Street Journal. "People will associate it with me totally. Amaravati means Naidu."

Credit: By Daniel Stacey
