'The American Scream'
-- Nitehawk Cinema
136 Metropolitan Ave., Brooklyn
(718) 384-3980
Saturday-Sunday
Every day is Halloween for the Bariteau family of Fairhaven, Mass. Unlike most middle-class dads, Victor Bariteau doesn't ask his wife and two daughters to indulge him a weekly night out with the boys. No, he enlists them in his personal obsession: he's a "haunter," a man whose hobby is constructing a haunted house to terrify neighborhood kids every Halloween. Director Michael Stephenson's follow-up to his 2009 "Best Worst Movie" (about the creature-feature disaster "Troll 2") is likewise about the manufacture of horror as a kind of folk art gone gonzo, and is likewise generous toward its sweetly eccentric subjects, including some of the Bariteaus' more dysfunctional neighbors. The therapeutic aspect of Mr. Bariteau's passion to spook comes into poignant focus as the story develops, as does the influence it has on his eldest daughter, who embraces the family mania like a junior-varsity George A. Romero, cheerfully sacrificing her Barbie collection to the greater gory.
Ninth Annual South Asian International Film Festival
-- Various locations
Oct. 24-30
Taking audiences far beyond Bollywood, this annual survey of new films from South Asia offers sometimes surprising perspectives on life in the subcontinent. Among 16 feature premieres and five shorts are some left-field standouts. "Valley of Saints," a double prize-winner at this year's Sundance film festival, observes a tentative romance between a Kashmiri-American ecologist and a local boatman in the Kashmir region, where a military clamp-down has complicated everyone's lives. Far less chaste is "Miss Lovely," a raw drama set in the sleazy underbelly of the 1980s Bombay film industry. Brothers Sonu (Nawazuddin Siddiqui) and Vicky (Anil George) hustle up a living by making cheap, illegal movies that mix horror with soft-core porn -- scenes that director Ashim Ahluwalia invents with a delirious Grade Z awfulness. Trouble comes hard and fast when gangsters get involved and Vicky becomes obsessed with Pinky (Niharika Singh), an aspiring actress who is not as innocent as she seems. Vicky aims to prove his manhood to his domineering brother, but everything goes to hell in a torrent of fatalism.
'The Flat'
-- IFC Center
323 Sixth Ave., (212) 924-7771
Friday-Oct. 25
One of the finds of the 2012 Tribeca Film Festival, this Israeli documentary by Arnon Goldfinger reveals what happened when the director went to clean out his grandmother's apartment in Tel Aviv. Combing through 70 years of vintage baubles and other possessions that his grandmother and late grandfather accumulated after leaving Germany for Palestine in the 1930s, he discovered something shocking: evidence of the couple's improbably close friendship with a pro-Zionist Nazi SS officer that continued long after World War II. Mr. Goldfinger follows a trail that leads to the officer's daughter in Germany. She is as unwilling to confront the ugly truths as many in the filmmaker's own family. The intriguing weave of historical and personal tragedies is made even more compelling by a detective-story structure, underscored by jaw-dropping ironies that arise from Mr. Goldfinger's stubborn drive to uncover all the facts.
Salut les jeunes! Young French Cinema
-- BAMcinematek
30 Lafayette Ave., Brooklyn
(718) 636-4100
Through Oct. 25
Marking its 20 anniversary, the French organization Association du Cinema Independant pour sa Diffusion -- L'Acid for short -- showcases 13 recent efforts from the current generation of young French filmmakers that it supports. As part of the program, first-time director Sophie Letourneur's "La vie au Ranch" opens a one-week theatrical run on Friday, zeroing in on the lives of a group of 20-something women sharing their lives on their "ranch," a Left Bank apartment that becomes a contemporary bohemian petri dish. Let's refrain from the phrase, "Le mumblecore." Although the film evolved from improvised performance sessions with non-professional actors, Ms. Letourneur used the process to develop a very deliberate screenplay, built around the real personalities of the cast. The shaggy camerawork is likewise a purposeful aesthetic choice, using 35mm film -- not digital video -- that evokes a freewheeling sensitivity to the moment.
Doomsday Film Festival & Symposium
-- 92YTribeca
200 Hudson St. (212) 601-1000
Friday-Sunday
"We always joke that this is the last one," said Kristana Textor, the co-director of this annual (so far) celebration of apocalyptic cinema. Unless ancient Mayan prophecies concerning 2012 and the end of the world are fulfilled by the weekend, the show will go on. Movies include "The Terminator," "The Hellstrom Chronicle" and "Goke, Body Snatcher from Hell," each followed by a panel discussion on such related topics as the evolution of artificial intelligence and Japanese pop culture's obsession with apocalyptic themes. Even the venue's weekly Shabbat dinner will focus on a related topic: the visions of Nostradamus. "We're always trying to find that fine balance between fun, ridiculous, insane movies, like 'Zardoz,'" said Ms. Textor, alluding to the 1974 sci-fi epic starring a hirsute Sean Connery as a futuristic bounty hunter in knee-high boots and a red diaper, "and slightly rarer gems." If you've ever seriously wondered about the chances of a robot uprising, this is your happy place.
Subscribe to WSJ:
Credit: By Steve Dollar
