Schools help organize our world. They are where future generations learn to propel our economy, understand our democracy and live in society. Schools allow parents to work, giving children a safe learning environment. And, for millions of American students, they are a reliable source of a warm meal.
Educators, administrators and school staff take these roles seriously. It was no surprise when they responded heroically to the pandemic, scrambling to teach and support students after schools closed.
Nevertheless, school closures unavoidably exacerbated day-to-day struggles for people in every part of this country -- wherever they lived and whatever their background -- and stoked well-founded worries about their students' learning and future.
Challenges now facing U.S. schools represent an indisputable priority and a timely opportunity. As the nation contemplates its post-pandemic future, our schools and students represent common ground and a shared focus. It is vital that Americans come together at the local, state and national levels to reform and rebuild the education system, to address the lessons of Covid-19 and to set a stronger foundation for the future -- the children's and ours.
We should start with the role technology has played, for better and worse, in real and virtual classrooms this year.
On one hand, it is clear that despite herculean efforts by millions of teachers, parents, superintendents and policy makers, the benefits of in-person learning are difficult to duplicate with a video camera and a computer.
For millions of students in low-income and rural families, however, virtual learning wasn't even an option. Technology only works when students can access it. When the pandemic began, an estimated 17 million children lived in homes without high-speed internet, and seven million didn't have computers at home, based on 2018 Census Bureau data. Existing gaps in educational achievement caused by poverty or racial inequities likely have widened during the pandemic due in part to lack of technology access.
Meanwhile, as many as three million students -- many again from low-income communities -- weren't enrolled in school this fall. They were, in effect, missing at a time when it was more important than ever for our school system to know their educational, emotional and physical status.
Going forward, even after every school reopens, students will need broadband access to complete homework, apply for college and jobs, and even maintain friendships. Through public-private partnerships and by building on successful existing programs, we can deliver broadband to every American student -- that must be our goal.
At the same time, there is no question that more innovation has occurred in education in the past few months than perhaps in the entire preceding decade. Small-group learning pods have taken hold and seen success. Many students finally have the personalized pace and content they need to learn effectively. And the best teachers have found ways to reach thousands of students through online platforms. Indeed, the pandemic has proved the importance of training and support programs that turn good teachers into great ones, and of tutoring and technology that catches students who fall behind.
Still, despite these efforts, the pandemic only highlighted problems that already existed. The 2019 National Assessment of Educational Progress, or NAEP, found that only 35% of U.S. fourth-graders could read at or above their grade level, and only 40% achieved similar results at math. Test scores showed alarming gaps between groups based on family race and income. Reading scores for high-school seniors last year, meanwhile, were lower than in the previous year, and math scores were stagnant. According to the assessment, this indicates only two out of five current high-school seniors are adequately prepared to succeed in postsecondary education.
How the pandemic has further affected student performance is something that should concern every parent, teacher and policy maker. We need to know as much as we can, as quickly as we can. Teachers and schools need clear and ongoing data on students' progress and needs. Policy makers need accurate information to set priorities for use of limited resources.
The federal government should consider significant, targeted efforts to address education achievements gaps. Possible measures could include a national tutoring corps of recent college graduates, retirees and business leaders to help this generation of students by providing one-on-one intervention in a safe and effective way.
It is also well past time for the educational system to take a hard look at the skills employers want and need from students and to align resources to deliver them. Through the pandemic, Americans have been far more likely to lose their jobs if they lacked a post-high-school degree or credential. An analysis of U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics data showed that in February, only one in 25 people with a high-school diploma or less was unemployed; by May, it was one in five.
Covid-19 wiped out millions of blue-collar and hourly services jobs, and that trend is unlikely to reverse. Automation, artificial intelligence, globalization and other forces will continue to reshape the economy. It is imperative that teachers and schools prepare students for the world they will face.
School districts should start by expanding access to college-level courses. They also should work more closely with employers, community colleges and others to create degrees and programs that help students fill high-skill jobs.
Companies such as Microsoft, Google and Amazon have begun offering skill certifications that are inexpensive, fast and meaningful to employers. Educational institutions should learn from their example.
In the short term, we must retrain whole communities for a post-Covid economy and simultaneously make up for lost time and learning suffered by millions of students.
Longer term, the future of the nation, and every individual in it, hinges on our ability to adapt and employ new approaches that meet market needs.
---
Ms. Spellings, the former U.S. secretary of education and former University of North Carolina System president, is president and chief executive officer of Texas 2036, a data-driven, long-term policy planning organization.
---
Key Dates In 2020
-- MARCH 12: Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine orders all K-12 schools in the state to close, effective March 16. Many other states will follow within days.
-- MARCH 15: New York City schools, the nation's largest district, will close.
-- MARCH 16: Public and private schools are closed for nearly 30 million children across the U.S. -- more than half of the nation's school enrollment.
-- JULY 8: President Trump threatens to withhold funding from school districts that don't reopen in the fall.
-- AUG. 17: Some schools around the nation are closing temporarily or longer term just days after reopening because of Covid outbreaks.
-- SEPT. 29: New York City schools open with a mix of in-person and remote instruction for the fall. It's one of the few big urban districts nationwide to open for in-person instruction.

Credit: By Margaret Spellings

ERIC Subject: Academic Achievement; Urban Schools; Educational Environment
