Cybersecurity threats increased for businesses over the past year, according to a Wall Street Journal survey of compliance professionals.
Nine out of 10 companies said cybersecurity risks rose, with nearly half saying the risk shot up substantially. Almost all midsize companies -- those with between $50 million and $1 billion in revenue -- said they felt cyber threats had increased.
The Wall Street Journal surveyed around 300 compliance professionals between Feb. 13 and March 11. More than three-quarters were based in the U.S. and about 4% in Canada. Around 36% of respondents worked in the financial services sector, while around 13% worked in professional and business services and around 9% in the technology sector.
Other major areas of concern among the compliance professionals that the Journal surveyed included regulatory scrutiny and enforcement, cited by 78%; and the digitization of their business, cited by 71%.
Several high-profile hacks and regulatory changes in recent months have raised the stakes for companies. In September, casino operator MGM Resorts International shut down some of its computer systems after a cyberattack hit hotel and casino operations. In February, attackers gained entry into UnitedHealth Group's Change Healthcare unit, a ransomware strike that crippled vital parts of the U.S. healthcare system.
The U.S. also has ratcheted up the pressure on companies to communicate cyber breaches more promptly. Starting in December, the Securities and Exchange Commission required companies to disclose cyberattacks to the agency no later than four business days after they determined the incident will have a material impact on operations.
Diversity and inclusion, another hot-button topic companies wrestled with over the past few years, was lower on the radar of compliance professionals. Roughly one-third of companies said they saw such issues as an increased risk compared with the previous year, the smallest such change in the survey's sample.
Diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives in recent years have been a major area of focus of companies, as they described in detail their activities in this area in annual reports and lauded them in public statements. But while many businesses claim they aren't cutting back on these programs, some have retreated on how loudly they have touted them in public as such programs have come under increasing legal and political threat.
Accompanying the heightened cyber risk is increased uncertainty about their compliance departments' ability to respond to incoming threats.
The need to staff up to handle incoming cyber threats also weighs on the mind of compliance professionals. About 35% of respondents said insufficient head count was a challenge faced by their company's cyber compliance program, while 31% cited a need to keep up with regulatory changes around cybersecurity and 23% a lack of required skills.
Compliance professionals also say that cybersecurity was the biggest area in which they have had to build their skill set. Nearly seven out of 10 respondents told the Journal they have needed to gain knowledge in this area over the past year. Regulatory scrutiny and enforcement was the only other area cited by more than half of respondents, at around 67%.
With the continuing Russia-Ukraine war, the continuing tension between the U.S. and China and, more recently, the Israel-Gaza conflict roiling commodity and export markets, the Journal wanted to know how geopolitical risks affected the ability of compliance professionals to do their jobs.
Nearly two-thirds of respondents overall said that business risks attributable to geopolitical concerns have increased over the same time a year ago. Among geopolitical factors that impacted the work of compliance professionals, the Russia-Ukraine conflict was cited by 43% of respondents. This was particularly acute for those from the largest companies -- those with more than $1 billion in revenue -- with more than half (54%) saying the Russia-Ukraine war was impacting their work.
The Journal survey also suggested that while artificial intelligence is a topic of interest to compliance professionals, most have yet to use it as part of their compliance efforts. Just over one-third of respondents said they were using AI tools for compliance, compared with 46% who said they weren't yet using it but planned to in the future.
Of those using AI, 45% said they used it to detect control deficiencies, while 44% said they used it for cybersecurity. Regulatory change management was cited by about one-third of respondents.
Generate image description

Generate image description

Credit: By David Smagalla
