Electrodes embedded in the brains of four people have captured a detailed and precise portrait of chronic pain.
The new work, published Monday in Nature Neuroscience, points to brain regions that could be targets for future treatments, neuroscientists say, while adding to our understanding of why some people develop persistent, unyielding chronic pain.
Scientists surgically implanted electrodes in the brains of four study participants who had struggled with mysterious searing pain in parts of their body for years. The researchers collected data for months, and used machine-learning models to sift through the data, ultimately pinpointing electric signals in the brain that corresponded to moments of high and low chronic pain in their study participants.
The findings are a rare view of brain activity linked to chronic pain, a puzzling condition that afflicts millions of Americans.
The team found that a section of the brain just behind the forehead lighted up with a low hum of electrical activity when the study participants were feeling chronic pain. But when participants touched a hot probe, another region of the brain was active, indicating that fleeting pain from an injury operates differently from chronic pain.
"Chronic pain is actually its own separate disease that is not simply an extension of pain in general," said study author Dr. Prasad Shirvalkar, a pain physician and neurologist at University of California San Francisco Medical Center.
The study is a step toward an objective, universal measure of pain in a patient, Shirvalkar said, to augment the current method available to doctors: asking patients to rank their discomfort on a scale.
A fifth of U.S. adults experience chronic pain, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, definedas pain felt most days or more for the past three months. These could be migraines or back pain, pains linked to cancer or arthritis, or a lingering ache from an injury that has long healed. For about 19 million people, intense chronic pain restricts the ability to work or disrupts daily life.
Between 2019 and 2020, there were more new cases of chronic pain than other chronic conditions, a study published this month in JAMA Network Open found.
There are no effective cures for chronic pain, in part because its biology is poorly understood. "Most treatments don't work for most people most of the time," said Tor Wager, a neuroscientist and psychologist at Dartmouth College who wasn't involved with the work.
Arthritis or inflammation is responsible for the dull aching of some chronic pain. Misfiring neurons in the brain or nervous system are thought to drive the stabbing and burning of another type of chronic pain, including the phantom-limb pain and post-stroke pain that study participants experienced.
The orbitofrontal cortex, in which the study captured signals during periods of intense chronic pain, is among the regions that are most altered by cognitive behavioral therapy, Wager said. The new data makes the case for further developing psychological and behavioral approaches for chronic pain.
Deep-brain stimulation, in which electrodes deliver electric current to precise targets in the brain, has shown some promise as a treatment for Parkinson's and depression. The method is also being explored as a chronic-pain therapy, and the study suggests brain regions at which a current could be aimed, said Flavio Frohlich, a neuroscientist who studies brain stimulation at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine and wasn't involved with the study.
"Out of that beautiful symphony of rhythmic electrical activity patterns, we need to be honing in on that one player in the orchestra that has not tuned their instrument," said Frohlich. "This paper really provides some fundamental insights of where in the orchestra to look and what specific notes aren't played properly."
Credit: By Nidhi Subbaraman
