SEOUL -- Samsung Electronics Co. spent more on capital expenditures last year than any other publicly traded company, highlighting in dramatic fashion how technology and telecommunications firms are driving an uptick in manufacturing investment.
The South Korean tech giant spent $44 billion in 2017, nearly doubling its investment in new or existing facilities making semiconductors, displays and other products, according to S&P Global Market Intelligence estimates that put Samsung atop the global ranking for the first time. That sum is more than what Royal Dutch Shell PLC and Exxon Mobil Corp. -- traditionally two of the largest investors -- spent combined last year and about 50% more than the next biggest tally, PetroChina Co.'s $29 billion.
Samsung's central role in the tech supply chain was put in focus Tuesday when the company estimated operating profit of 15.1 trillion won ($14.1 billion) for its fourth quarter. That would mark the third straight quarter Samsung smashed its earnings record, even as its de facto leader, Lee Jae-yong, is in prison after a corruption trial that gripped South Korea.
Samsung's big bets underscore a rebound in companies' willingness to invest in boosting production in the future, as 2017 brought an end to four straight years of global declines, according to Goldman Sachs. Tech is expected to lead with a yearly increase of more than 10% from 2017 to 2020, Goldman said.
Driving their spending is the proliferation of internet-connected gadgets and the need for skilled manufacture of dozens of microsize components. The advance toward artificial intelligence calls for massive data-server farms that require immense computing power and memory chips.
"Typically we think bigger is costlier," said Henrich Greve, an entrepreneurship professor at Insead in Singapore. "But with technology, there are so many things that are very, very small but also quite costly."
U.S. technology and telecom firms are some of the biggest spenders on capital improvements. U.S. telecom giants AT&T Inc. and Verizon Communications Inc., along with Apple Inc., Google parent Alphabet Inc. and Intel Corp. rank among the 25 biggest investors, according to the S&P Global Market Intelligence estimates.
A Samsung spokesman declined to comment beyond what the company has publicly disclosed. Samsung in October said about two-thirds of its 2017 capital expenditure was earmarked for semiconductors and roughly a third for displays, but beyond that has offered few specifics.

Credit: By Timothy W. Martin
