[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Apple's heady market value has little to do with its current business, and much to do with what might be yet to come.
The world's most valuable public company got a little more so on Friday, with its stock price rising more than 2%. That put Apple's market value above the $3 trillion mark for the first time ever. The milestone follows a strong run that has boosted the stock by 49% so far this year, though Apple is hardly the only beneficiary of the market's revived love of Big Tech. Amazon.com, Nvidia and Facebook-parent Meta Platforms have seen even stronger gains over that time, with the latter two seeing their stock prices more than double.
Recent memory suggests this could be a good time for caution. Apple's market value came within about 1% of the $3 trillion level during the first week of 2022. That turned out to be a predecessor to a major tech selloff that year, which clipped 33% from the Nasdaq Composite and gave Apple and its other trillion-dollar tech peers their worst performance since 2008. The timing of that surge wasn't great for Apple itself, as the company was coming off a strong product cycle that included the iPhone's best year of sales growth since 2015. Apple's revenue grew 33% in the fiscal year that ended in September of 2021 -- and growth slid to just under 8% in the following fiscal year.
Wall Street is actually projecting a 2.5% revenue decline for Apple in its current fiscal year -- its first annual drop since 2019. But at least some of the stock's recent run can be attributed to hype over Apple's supposedly next big thing. The company used its Worldwide Developers Conference earlier this month to introduce its long-awaited augmented-reality headset called the Vision Pro. The device had been the subject of leaks and rumors for months, which helped drive the stock to a gain of 39% for the year ahead of the conference. That was the biggest run the stock has seen ahead of the annual June event since 2012.
The stark reality of that product hasn't cooled enthusiasm. VR and AR devices from other tech giants have so far failed to tap in to the mass market, and Apple's doesn't even go on sale until sometime early next year -- for a very non-mass-market price of $3,499. But Apple's stock has gained another 6% since that event, outperforming the Nasdaq and S&P 500 in that time.
Most analysts don't see the Vision Pro making a material contribution to Apple's sales next year. They do, however, see the company continuing to command premium prices on its line of hardware products while also building the contribution of its higher-margin services segment. The latter has helped rerate the stock in recent years. Apple has traded between 20 and 30 times forward earnings since 2020, compared with its typical multiple in the mid-to-high teens in the five years prior.
But Apple's stock is now at the high end of its recent valuation range, ahead of what looks like a lackluster business cycle and without a clear tie to the hype over generative artificial intelligence that is propelling investor interest in its tech peers. The next iPhone at least might need to make a surprisingly strong connection.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
