The title of stock market king is again up for grabs.
Microsoft's AI-powered stock rally briefly made the software giant the largest U.S. company by market value on Thursday, before Apple reclaimed the spot. Based on closing prices, Apple has been the largest company since November 2021.
Microsoft shares rose 0.5% on Thursday, bringing Microsoft's market value to $2.86 trillion. Apple dipped 0.3%, pulling its market cap just above that threshold. Either Apple or Microsoft has held the title since Feb. 4, 2019, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
Microsoft's stock has been on the rise for the past year thanks to the continued growth of its cloud computing division, even as major competitors like Amazon and Alphabet's Google have experienced a gradual slowdown in sales growth.
"Big picture, they got there by embedding themselves in every IT department in the world," said Tom Hancock, head of focused equity at GMO, which owns Microsoft shares. "If you have new IT, you go to Microsoft."
What's more, Microsoft shares have benefited from optimism that artificial intelligence will trigger a surge in new revenue for its software business, thanks in part to its large investment in startup OpenAI in January last year.
Microsoft's revenue is projected to reach about $61 billion in its most recent quarter, which ended in December. That would mark growth of about 16% from a year earlier.
Apple became the first company whose market value crossed the $3 trillion threshold last year, before the stock pulled back.
After a year of disappointing results and flagging sales, investors and analysts are worried demand isn't going to pick up much in 2024.
Microsoft shares advanced 63% over the past year, while Apple's are up 39%. Their rise has helped power the broader market; the two comprise about 14% of the market-value-weighted S&P 500, which has gained 20% over the same period.
Both technology giants are expected to report results in the coming weeks.
Amazon is the only other U.S. company besides Apple and Microsoft to become most valuable over the past decade. The online retailer held that status for 13 trading days in 2019.
---
Aaron Tilley and Tom Dotan contributed to this article.
Credit: By Charley Grant
