German businesses are increasingly experimenting with artificial intelligence to become more productive, but some caution the gains the technology promises could be years away.
From automating processes to optimizing supply chains, German companies are resorting to AI tools for a growing range of functions.
Productivity growth in Germany, like in many other industrial countries, has stalled in recent years, a trend that has economists worried about possible long-term implications as the population ages.
The popularity of OpenAI's ChatGPT chatbot since its launch in late 2022, followed by Microsoft's Copilot and Google's Gemini, sparked a wave of investments from companies globally.
"AI is probably the most transformative technological development in recent decades. It will fundamentally change tasks and qualification profiles across all industries," said Carsten Knobel, chief executive at consumer-goods company Henkel.
The maker of Dial soap and Snuggle fabric softener has been training its workforce in AI, which it uses to automate processes in its adhesives business. In its production facilities, a central cloud server collects millions of data points from its machines equipped with sensors, analyzing and processing them with the help of AI to maximize efficiency and detect any flawed products or packaging.
Henkel is running a number of pilot projects with technology partners like SAP, Adobe and Microsoft. However, Knobel says it is almost impossible to predict how the company will use AI in five years' time given how rapidly the technology evolves.
Food-delivery firm Delivery Hero has been using machine learning since 2011, but only last year started investing at scale in generative AI, the technology behind ChatGPT that can generate text, images and other forms of content.
Tillmann Neben, senior director of data science at Delivery Hero, said the company uses generative AI to create food images for menus or help customers find niche restaurants through conversational search.
"AI isn't replacing anyone or anything," Neben said. Instead, he expects the technology to bring new features and capabilities that will ultimately make the workforce more efficient.
Credit: By Nina Kienle
