In late 2021, as states eased pandemic restrictions and consumers began flying again, travel search company Kayak needed a message that would help it stand out against bigger rivals.
Most travel ads focused on "the family reunion space, soft piano music, the get-together on the beach," said Matthew Clarke, vice president of North American marketing for the Booking Holdings Inc. company. Kayak took a different approach with the "Kayak Deniers" campaign, which went live in January and poked fun at the rise of online conspiracy theories. In one ad, an angry mother insists to her family that Kayak isn't real, screaming, "Open your eyes!"
Inspiration for the ads came from an unlikely source: artificial intelligence.
Kayak worked with New York advertising agency Supernatural Development LLC, whose internal AI platform combines marketers' answers to questions about their business with consumer data drawn from social media and market research to suggest campaign strategies, then automatically generates ideas for advertising copy and other marketing materials.
Supernatural's AI found that Kayak should target its campaign largely toward young, upper-income men, who it said would respond to humor about Americans' inability to agree on basic facts in politics and pop culture, said Michael Barrett, co-founder and chief strategy officer at Supernatural.
"That gave us a good amount of license to zig where the category was zagging and to be more relevant, more provocative," Mr. Clarke said of the AI findings.
The campaign has been one of Kayak's most successful to date in driving brand favorability, Mr. Clarke said.
Marketers have primarily used AI in a creative capacity in services like creative automation, which tests thousands of slight variations on elements such as ad copy and color schemes to determine which combinations will best attract consumers' attention.
But AI is expected to change marketing practices drastically in coming years thanks to new tools like OpenAI Inc.'s automated language generator GPT-3, which allows algorithms to better understand different languages and produce original text content, said Tom Davenport, distinguished professor of information technology and management at Babson College in Wellesley, Mass.
Unilever PLC's Dollar Shave Club recently began working with AI firm Addition Technologies Inc., whose platform can analyze millions of social-media posts, to help identify themes for marketing products that range from razors to wet wipes.
"It's like having a machine hive mind that you can just keep asking questions because it has completely consumed all comments on the subject," said Matt Orser, vice president and head of creative at Dollar Shave Club.
Addition also worked with ad agency Droga5 LLC to create an interactive ad campaign for the New York Times that turns headlines from each subscriber's reading history into a visual "portrait" of that person.
Credit: By Patrick Coffee
