Elliott Management Corp.'s call to boost profitability at Cognizant Technology Solutions Corp. highlights the shifting ground for many IT outsourcing firms as more companies move to the cloud, CIOs and industry analysts say.
Part of the broader issue is that spending is flattening in traditional IT departments while increasing across marketing, human resources and business units -- a trend that favors cloud-service providers over traditional IT outsourcing and services firms, according to Ted Ross, CIO of the City of Los Angeles.
That is prompting rapid changes in the IT outsourcing industry.
"The old style of outsourcing -- known as 'your mess for less' -- is definitively out of fashion at this point and enterprises will vote with their dollars for IT-service providers that reduce either complexity and time to achieve the desired outcome," 451 Research analyst Carl Brooks said.
Where IT outsourcing firms used to rely on low-cost labor overseas as a value proposition, Cognizant and others have begun focusing on digital automation by investing in artificial-intelligence technology to speed business processes and lower labor costs.
Just as cloud providers have shown that those with the highest levels of automation and better customer service are the ones bringing in new spending, Cognizant can increase its appeal and perhaps its profitability with a focus on "service delivery that can be automated to drive higher margins and remove manual processes for its customers," Mr. Brooks said.
Other large IT-outsourcing firms are facing similar headwinds. At Fujitsu Ltd., total revenue from its Technology Solutions division was roughly unchanged last year, at $29 billion. But revenue from an IT services sub-segment declined, in part on weakness in the U.S. market, the Tokyo-based company reported in April.
Fujitsu's chief technology officer, Joseph Reger, said the company is seeking ways to help enterprise customers get the most out of cloud, Internet of Things, data analytics, artificial intelligence and other technologies that are driving digital transformation.
Spending behaviors are changing as companies look to free up investment for digital transformation, Mr. Reger said.
"Fujitsu has altered its global corporate strategy and investment streams to realign to this dynamic," he said.
Credit: By Angus Loten
