BEIJING -- Self-driving cars may be the future of personal transportation, but they are still forbidden on the streets of China's capital -- as Baidu Inc. Chief Executive Robin Li was reminded Wednesday.
The tech executive took a ride in one of his company's self-driving prototypes to Baidu's artificial-intelligence developer conference at the National Convention Center. Chinese news organizations and social-media commentators quickly pointed out that driverless cars aren't allowed to operate on public streets.
Beijing traffic authorities couldn't be reached to comment, although Chinese media reports said they were looking into the matter. Baidu didn't respond to a request to comment.
Who said the road to self-driving cars wouldn't have a few potholes along the way?
Baidu, which operates China's most popular internet search engine, is hoping to leverage its technology in mapping and artificial intelligence into an autonomous vehicle capable of navigating city roads and highways by 2020. But Alphabet's Waymo, Ford Motor Co. and General Motors are all ahead of Baidu, according to a recent report by Navigant Research.
Instead of trying to go it alone, Baidu this spring announced Apollo, an open-source platform for self-driving software -- akin to Google's open-source Android system for smartphones. At the developer conference on Wednesday, Baidu opened its Apollo open-source platform for self-driving software so developers can begin downloading source code.
"Apollo can be the Android in the car industry," Baidu President Qi Lu said. "In the long term, our innovation, capability and speed will be better than a closed system."
Mr. Qi also said the self-driving-vehicle platform now has partnerships with more than 50 entities, including chip maker Nvidia Corp., Dutch navigation maker TomTom, Intel Corp., Microsoft Corp. and Ford.
Many details on those partnerships haven't been released, however, and it wasn't clear how Baidu would work with Ford, a potential competitor.
Even so, Baidu's move to open-sourcing its software and forging partnerships might help it catch up to its competitors, analysts said. "It definitely gives Baidu more of a chance to succeed," said Kitty Fok, managing director of research firm IDC. "Technology wise, Google and other global companies have spent a lot on investments."
To demonstrate the potential of collaboration, two of Baidu's Apollo version 1.0 self-driving cars were on hand for test drives at the developers conference.
Baidu's Apollo software, which provided a simple interface to drive a programmed route, was used in a Lincoln sedan. Baidu worked with AutonomouStuff, a Peoria, Ill.-based company that provides autonomous-enabling technology, to create the prototype.
---
Junya Qian and Liza Lin contributed to this article.

Credit: By Alyssa Abkowitz
