Economists are often baffled by the gyrations of the stock market, but at the moment shareholders and the economic profession simply disagree on one of the biggest assumptions forecasters have to make: productivity growth.
Shares of companies with disruptive technologies have soared on the basis that they are shaking up industry after industry, and fat profits lie ahead. The flip side of replacing workers with robots or algorithms should be sharply improved labor productivity, but after a decade of wrongly predicting a pickup in productivity economists have scaled back forecast gains.
Perhaps 2018 will be the year productivity begins to pick up. Technologies such as speech recognition, chatbots and machine learning are being adopted, capital spending is picking up and tight labor markets give companies an incentive to find better ways of working.
But productivity defies forecasters, and the lesson of the past is to be humble. This is a story of how little anyone really understands about what moves productivity, even though it is the key to long-run prosperity -- and to what happens to inflation and share and bond prices.
Labor productivity is real economic output divided by the numbers of hours worked, but it is easiest to understand for a business: How many gingerbread lattes can each Starbucks barista churn out per hour? Give them a better machine or better training and the productivity rises.
By extension the same applies to the wider economy. Many economists point to years of weak corporate investment and a dire education system for poor U.S. productivity growth. Making it worse is an aging workforce, "zombie" companies kept alive by low interest rates and a debt overhang from the 2008 financial crisis. A shift from high-productivity manufacturing to low-productivity service sectors hurts the overall numbers, too.
Against this, corporate investment is finally picking up, millennials are in their prime working years and interest rates are rising, with futures traders certain the Federal Reserve will increase rates againon Wednesday. Technologies such as drones and self-driving vehicles are being adopted quickly, while memories of Lehman Brothers' collapse have faded.
Unfortunately, economists have been unsuccessful at finding reliable links between any of these factors and productivity.
"As far as I'm concerned productivity is a miracle," says Neal Soss, vice chairman in research at Credit Suisse and a former assistant to Fed Chairman Paul Volcker. "We just don't really know where it comes from."
This uncertainty may leave the future clouded, but it also leaves open the idea that productivity might pick up -- an idea that many have abandoned after years of disappointment.
For an example, look back to the mid-1990s, the last time overall U.S. productivity was lower than last year's 0.18%, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Business productivity last year equaled the grim year of 1993, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, although was a little worse in 2011, the year the U.S. lost its top credit rating.
The first half of the 1990s had a "productivity paradox" of technological change being highly visible but not showing up in the economic data. Just as with the past decade's development of smartphones, apps, financial technology and machine learning, it took time for laptops and personal computers to increase output. It happened suddenly, with productivity leaping 2.5% in 1996 and growing that rapidly on average over the next decade, on OECD numbers. Between 1996 and 2000, U.S. stocks had their best five years since the 1920s.
OECD Senior Economist Yvan Guillemette says a big problem for forecasters is that technological change comes in unpredictable waves. "In the long run productivity's all about innovation. That is especially very difficult to forecast," he says. "The best we can do is go back over a very long history and take an average."
The latest innovation wave might never arrive in the economic data. After all, the technology has brought us Twitter trolls, full-time bitcoin traders and search engine optimization executives, none of which obviously help productivity.
But productivity leapt 3% in the third quarter of this year, and while quarterly data are volatile, it is plausible that a productivity pickup is coming soon. It will be critical to how both the market and the Fed should react to signs of wage rises. Without productivity growth, higher wages are bad news for profits. Either companies accept lower margins, immediately bad for the stock price, or they pass on higher wage costs into prices, pushing up inflation and prompting the Fed to raise rates more quickly. With productivity improvements that nasty choice can be avoided, as the gains can be passed on to workers while maintaining margins.
Forecasters have spent a decade unsuccessfully predicting that productivity growth is about to return, so it feels rather optimistic to predict it now. A lesson many economists take from the past 10 years is that productivity has permanently slowed. A better lesson is that it is hard to forecast, and investors need to be open-minded about what will happen.

Credit: By James Mackintosh
