Foxconn Technology Group reported higher quarterly net profit as its revenue rose to a record on robust demand for artificial-intelligence servers.
The world's largest contract electronics maker, known for assembling Apple's iPhones, said Wednesday that its second-quarter net profit was 35.045 billion New Taiwan dollars, equivalent to $1.08 billion, up from NT$33 billion a year earlier. That beat the estimate of NT$33.73 billion in a poll of analysts by FactSet.
Quarterly revenue rose 19% to NT$1.551 trillion -- a record for the period -- supported by its cloud and networking products segment amid strong AI server demand. The Taiwanese company, formally known as Hon Hai Precision Industry, has been taking steps in recent years to diversify its lines of business. It now plays an increasingly important role in building AI servers for U.S. giants such as Amazon.com and Nvidia.
AI server sales surged 60% sequentially in the second quarter, making up more than 40% of the revenue in the cloud and networking business. The segment is Foxconn's second-biggest source of revenue after consumer electronics and has accounted for a growing share of the company's overall sales in the recent quarters.
Investors betting on an AI boom have sent the company's stock soaring nearly 80% this year, outperforming a jump of more than 20% for the broader Taiwan market. Shares of Foxconn closed 2.5% higher ahead of the results.
Foxconn maintained its upbeat guidance for "significantly positive growth" this year, citing demand for AI servers.
In an earnings call, Foxconn spokesperson James Wu said the company expects its consumer electronics segment to deliver strong growth in the third quarter from the previous quarter, adding that it "has already started preparing for new products."
Analysts have said that Apple's new iPhone with AI features, due to be launched in September, could spur consumers to upgrade their smartphones and support Foxconn's revenue in the third quarter.
Credit: By Sherry Qin
