Alphabet's Google will invest $2 billion to establish its first data center in Malaysia to power new cloud services, the latest in a string of multibillion-dollar plans by Western tech giants to meet growing computing needs in Southeast Asia.
Google said Thursday that it would add a data center in Malaysia to help power search, maps and cloud services capable of handling artificial intelligence computing demand.
The investment will create a new "cloud region," adding to about 40 such regions globally, and offer low-latency cloud services, while allowing users to maintain security and compliance standards, including data storage requirements, the company said.
Google added that the investment, which also includes spending on AI literacy programs for students and educators, would be its largest ever in Malaysia.
Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim said in a post on X that the plans support government efforts in "accelerating and smoothing the country's digital transformation."
Alphabet competes in cloud services in Asia with units of Amazon.com, Microsoft and Alibaba. It already operates cloud regions elsewhere in Southeast Asia in Indonesia and Singapore, and outside the region in countries including Japan.
Cloud services have been an area of growth for the company, with its cloud division sales rising nearly 29% year over year to $9.6 billion in the first quarter, compared with an overall revenue rise of 15%. Alphabet had capital expenditure of $12 billion in the quarter, up 91% as it continues to drive spending toward AI.
U.S. tech giants have unveiled a number of investments in Southeast Asia in recent months, much of it in efforts to develop infrastructure to meet the growing computational needs of AI systems.
Earlier this month, Microsoft said it would invest a total $3.9 billion in Malaysia and neighboring Indonesia for cloud and AI, among others.
In April, Apple unveiled a $250 million plan to expand its Singapore campus, including adding new jobs in AI.
Credit: By Kimberley Kao
