Restrictions on technology sales with which the U.S. and its allies are hitting Russia are adding to the uncertain climate for businesses, though how hard the export controls hit the Russian economy, trade specialists said, will depend on enforcement.
The controls, announced last week, restrict exports of semiconductors, lasers, information-security equipment and other technology to Russia's defense, aerospace and maritime industries and, U.S. officials said, are aimed at undermining President Vladimir Putin's defense capabilities and aspirations for Russia to lead in cutting-edge fields such as artificial intelligence and quantum computing.
Coordinated with allies in Europe, Japan and elsewhere, the restrictions are part of a broader package of economic sanctions allied nations have placed on Russia for its invasion of Ukraine that have rattled its stock, bond and currency markets. Unlike those sanctions, the technology restrictions won't have immediate impact, but are designed to work over the longer term.
Separately, the White House said Wednesday the technology controls put in place for Russia will be expanded to its ally Belarus. It also announced new export controls on extraction equipment for Russia's oil and gas industry, a revenue source for the government and military, and said entities that support the Russian and Belarusian security services, militaries and defense sectors will be added to an export blacklist.
Already, the financial sanctions and technology restrictions are creating uncertainty, causing some companies to suspend their Russia business, said lawyers specializing in export controls. Computer vendor HP Inc. has suspended shipments to Russia to comply with the sanctions. Boeing Co. and Airbus SE also stopped parts and support services to Russian customers.
"Because export controls and sanctions were so broad and complex, the standard reaction was to stop all Russia-related activity until they could sort out what was prohibited and permitted," said Kevin Wolf, a former Commerce Department official who now advises companies on export controls at law firm Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP.
Beyond the restrictions on technology exports, the logistics of delivering products to Russia are now more complicated given the suspension of airfreight services by FedEx Corp. and United Parcel Service Inc., lawyers said. Another concern is how companies would get paid for their products, given the financial sanctions, they said.
"The bottom line is that there will be less and less opportunity for businesses to transact with entities in Russia, and this isn't going to be a short-term phenomenon," said Nazak Nikakhtar, a former Commerce Department official who now leads Wiley Rein LLP's national security practice.
The technology controls' ultimate impact on Russia will depend on a variety of factors, including how countries enforce the rules, whether Moscow finds ways to divert banned goods, and whether China, Russia's close strategic partner, helps in the evasion, said lawyers and analysts.
Those controls ban the sale of most items to the Russian military and introduce new restrictions on selling anyone in Russia technologies such as semiconductors, computers, telecommunications and other goods. They cover items produced in the U.S. as well as foreign goods made using U.S. equipment, software and blueprints.
President Biden said last week that those controls would cut off more than half of Russia's high-tech imports. White House officials said the policy will restrict more than $50 billion in key inputs for the Russian economy.
The rules contain large exemptions. All manner of consumer technology such as phones and laptops are also exempt, as long as they are for use by private Russian citizens or companies.
Boeing, whose planes make up roughly half of Russia's commercial jetliner fleet, and others in the aerospace industry are expected to appeal to U.S. officials to greenlight exports of items they say are necessary for flight safety, according to industry officials. A Boeing spokeswoman said the company will "follow the lead of the U.S. government."
The controls are remarkable for the breadth of international cooperation they have attracted, the trade lawyers and analysts said.
Under the plan, U.S. allies have each agreed to impose restrictions on items that historically only the U.S. has restricted such as chips and computers. Previously, many U.S. allies were reluctant to impose controls.
U.S. officials said that in certain sectors such as aerospace, U.S. partner countries have a lot of sophisticated capabilities that would not have been caught by unilateral U.S. controls.
The export restrictions rely on a tactic the U.S. used to batter Chinese telecommunications networking equipment maker Huawei Technologies Co.
While the regulation known as the foreign direct product rule -- which restricts the sale of foreign-made items produced with American technology -- has crippled Huawei, some specialists said that applying the tactic to target the Russian military may not work as well.
"We were effective with Huawei because they were doing a ton of consumer business outside China. Huawei can't build a 5G phone with restricted parts and then ship it overseas. It's too easy to catch them cheating," said Ivan Kanapathy, a former U.S. National Security Council official now at the advisory Beacon Global Strategies. "But for a Russian military entity, everything they do is behind closed doors, so there's little risk. They can cheat all they want."
Emily Weinstein, a research fellow at Georgetown's Center for Security and Emerging Technology, said the new export controls put the onus on exporters to identify military end users.
"This could be a significant obstacle," she said, noting that figuring out who a military end user is in countries like Russia, or China for that matter, can be time-consuming and often requires language skills.
Credit: By Kate O'Keeffe
