Cybersecurity applications of artificial intelligence abound, from detecting deep fakes in video to algorithms that detect financial fraud and predict cyberattacks.
But at what point do such crime-fighting applications cross over into violations of our privacy? And, more specifically, what are the ethics involved in AI surveillance of law-abiding citizens?
As part of a series on the ethical implications of artificial intelligence, we wanted to know what Wall Street Journal readers think about AI surveillance, so we asked this question: Is it ethical to restrict AI surveillance, such as facial recognition, in law enforcement to protect privacy, even if it means that fewer criminals -- including violent ones -- will be caught or convicted? Here are some of the responses.
A simple trade-off
I'll give up a little privacy to not be murdered.
-- Mary Sykes, Rose Hill, Kan.
More surveillance, not less
I'm answering this question on the anniversary of 9/11. I want more AI surveillance, not less. There is no expectation of privacy when out in public. But AI shouldn't be peering into your windows.
-- Elisa Rae Shupe, Las Vegas
A question of accuracy
The question presumes AI facial recognition is accurate. It is not, especially if one is not white and male in the U.S. Until ethnic faces are equally unlikely to be misrepresented and wrongly charged for crimes, AI surveillance is not ready for prime time.
-- Michelle Mauthe Harvey, Oxford, Miss
It's about how it's used
Facial recognition is as ethical as eyewitness accounts, lineups or other police tools. The only difference is the speed with which suspects for many crimes can be collected. It will allow prosecution of any jaywalker, or those the police don't like. The ethical problem is not with the tool, but how it is used.
-- Daniel Brand, Kailua, Hawaii
Who will watch the watchers?
Get a warrant before surveillance can be conducted. "Black box" any public/law enforcement surveillance systems so facial recognition cannot be conducted without the prior consent of a human judge. Because, the issue isn't "Can you trust AI?"; the real question is "Can you trust the persons using AI for surveillance?"
-- John Parziale, Ocala, Fla.
A victim's perspective
If I was the victim of a violent crime I would want all the AIs looking at all the faces.
-- Clint Eubanks, Houston
Leave it at the airport
Face recognition with AI for airport security is, to me, reasonable, but not as a general crime-fighting tool!
-- Jim Sky, Bellevue, Neb.
What follows the identification?
I think AI surveillance is fine to use in law enforcement IF the officers of the law calmly interview suspects identified by AI instead of busting their doors down, etc.
-- Dawn Taggblom, DeLand, Fla.
Is it worth it?
If a high percentage of people can be prevented from being victimized with such surveillance, then it should be allowed. But if the percent is below the worth-it threshold in that area, don't allow it.
-- Wendelin Comen, Raleigh, N.C.
No privacy to protect
What privacy? Why should it ever be a secret where you go outside your home and with whom you interact?
AI will be just another, more accurate, witness to your actions, a further refinement of human observation and closed-circuit cameras.
-- Wister Smith, Scottsboro, Ala.
AI's most critical issue
All surveillance must be restricted in some way to protect civil liberties, and we pay a price for that in the sense that we make life more difficult for law enforcement. Figuring out how to enhance law enforcement without jeopardizing liberties is the most critical AI issue.
-- John Arpee, Herndon, Va.
More of the same
We are already the most surveilled people. Our phones know every pattern, every place, every conversation, and every search. Cameras are literally everywhere. I suppose facial recognition isn't yet ubiquitous, but it doesn't seem any more of a threat than the information that is already available.
-- Robert Garrison, Dallas
Humans are the refs
This is already being done, as law enforcement scans license plates and faces in some contexts to identify potentially troublesome individuals. Maybe more criminals will be caught, but one has to wonder whether the "minority reports" of dissenting AIs will also be considered and/or be made available.
Which leads to the question of how differing AIs are going to resolve their differences. My opinion is that this has to be done by humans, who listen to what the AIs have to say, and then make a decision, based on their human experience.
So we always need to have knowledgeable, skillful humans around to supervise the AIs. We NEVER want to turn over the final decision to an AI. It is not just a matter of ethics, it is a matter of safety.
-- Ralph Caruso, Palm City, Fla.
A slippery slope
I don't trust the government to restrict the use of AI surveillance to violent criminals. The power of AI as a tool for mass surveillance is too tempting.
AI has the potential for the government to routinely invade peoples' privacy. Using cameras, AI facial recognition can be used to identify peoples' legal activities and their associations with other people and places. For example, as people go about their lives, AI can identify who they are, who they are with and where they are going. It doesn't matter whether they are attending a legal protest rally, walking down the street or going to a restaurant, AI then can use this type of data to establish guilt by association and place innocent people on government suspect lists. This is too much power for institutions that have shown a persistent lack of accountability.
-- Jay Weyermann, Aurora, Colo.
Transparency required
AI surveillance may be needed, particularly as our crime rate is increasing. . . . However, the existence of surveillance should be disclosed and the cameras should be made physically obvious.
-- Carol Healey, San Francisco
The loss of freedom
To paraphrase Benjamin Franklin, those who would choose security over freedom deserve neither. Police are already tracking us everywhere we go in our cars thanks to license plate readers. Cameras and microphones are everywhere, in and out of our homes. Everyone is tracking what we read and what we buy. The government wants to get rid of cash so that they can see every purchase we make. Drones are flying around doing God knows what.
AI will magnify all of that and more. Sure, it can do some good, but you can say sayonara to what privacy is left. And if you think we can control something that is exponentially smarter than we are, I've got a bridge you need to have a look at.
-- DeWitt Smith, Fredericksburg, Texas
An open book
No. The innocent have nothing to hide.
-- James Sullivan, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Crime trumps all
No. Get the criminals!
Though there would certainly be problematic false identifications with AI, there is also the opportunity to catch criminals. . . . Arson, theft, murder, burglary -- many of the perpetrators could be arrested if identified through surveillance and AI.
-- Rebecca Bechhold, Daniel Island, S.C.
Take my privacy, please
I say use every tool available to identify and bring lawbreakers to justice. I have no problem with sacrificing my privacy for that effort.
-- Mark Radomsky, Lexington, S.C.
It's 1984
Yes, it is ethical to restrict AI surveillance. Crimes aren't so rampant as to justify creating a police state. . . . AI surveillance in the U.S. is like having Big Brother, as in "1984," or in what used to be the U.S.S.R. You can still review CCTV footage, but you don't need AI.
-- Dalila Benachenhou, Washington, D.C.
---
Demetria Gallegos is a Wall Street Journal editor in New York. Email her at demetria.gallegos@wsj.com.
Credit: By Demetria Gallegos
