The Super Bowl ads on Sunday variously appealed to America's sweet tooth, pleaded for tolerance and sought redemption for Bud Light. But most will shared one thing in common: marketers' even deeper-than-usual desire to avoid offending anyone.
Their supersize trepidation was inspired largely by the example of Bud Light, which suffered a consumer boycott last year after its social-media promotion with transgender influencer Dylan Mulvaney. The brand's marketing chief exited in the drama.
"It has usually been that when a brand gets into trouble like that, it recovers fairly quickly and people forget about it and move on," said Tim Calkins, a marketing professor at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management. "The Bud Light situation has been so different because the brand has been hit very hard and it hasn't really bounced back."
Super Bowl marketers as a result tried to break through with humor that didn't cross any fault lines, according to Calkins. "Nobody's pushing the edge on these jokes and nobody's hinting at anything remotely controversial," he said.
Bud Light's ad, a case in point, depicted a "Bud Light Genie" granting wishes including invisibility, metal-band hair, friendship with Hall of Fame quarterback Peyton Manning, an appearance by pop singer and rapper Post Malone, a raging house party and a T. rex to attend it.
Last year's spot went for a more subtle humor, showing husband-and-wife actors Miles and Keleigh Teller dancing to telephone hold music.
Delivery service Uber Eats was chastised for a joke in its commercial, which it released online before the game, that showed a man asking, "There's peanuts in peanut butter?" while breaking out in an allergic reaction.
Food allergy advocacy group FARE criticized the ad, saying it featured "inappropriate use of humor depicting food allergies." Uber Eats wound up running a version with the joke removed.
The stakes are high for Super Bowl advertisers even aside from politics and culture wars. The National Football League's annual championship regularly attracts more than 100 million viewers, and last year's installment drew more than 115 million, according to media measurement firm Nielsen. Thirty seconds of ad time in Super Bowl LVIII cost around $7 million, although prices can vary based on factors including how many spots companies buy.
Sunday's telecast on CBS included a slew of first-time national advertisers, including ice-cream brand Drumstick, Robert Kraft's "Stand Up to Jewish Hate" campaign, PepsiCo soft drink Starry, online marketplace Etsy, chocolate brand Lindt and cosmetics brand E.l.f. Cosmetics. They joined mainstays including M&Ms, Budweiser and Google.
One of the biggest surprises in the ad breaks was a commercial from a super PAC supporting the presidential campaign of Robert F. Kennedy Jr., adapted from an old campaign commercial for John F. Kennedy.
The ad -- both in the original and in slightly altered form on Sunday night -- made age part of the case for its candidate. "Do you want a man for president who's seasoned through and through," the revised jingle asks, "a man who's old enough to know and young enough to do?"
Brands leaned on the tried-and-tested formula of hiring celebrities to front the joke.
Dunkin' returned to the Super Bowl with a comedic ad starring actor Ben Affleck and singer Jennifer Lopez for the second year in a row, for example, but this time added actor Matt Damon, football champion Tom Brady, TikTok star Charli D'Amelio and rappers Fat Joe and Jack Harlow.
CoStar Group stood out with four commercials, one for its Apartments.com apartment listing site, three for its Homes.com and all of them featuring celebrities.
"It looks to me like most have given a clear brief to deliver mainstream, nonoffensive funny, " said Nick Miaritis, chief client officer, VaynerMedia, which created PepsiCo's Super Bowl ad for Starry. "It just doesn't seem like many brands are willing to put something out there that's polarizing," he said.
Advertisers also leaned into the Super Bowl's female audience, with Unilever skin and haircare brand Dove focusing on young girls playing sports and pharmaceutical company Astellas running its second consecutive Super Bowl ad for a treatment to reduce hot flashes and night sweats due to menopause. E.l.f.'s ad promoted its Halo Glow Liquid Filter.
Women already make up nearly 37% of viewers for regular-season NFL games, according to Nielsen, and made up 47% of last year's Super Bowl audience.
The presence of megastar Taylor Swift, who attended Sunday's game to cheer on boyfriend Kansas City Chiefs tight end Travis Kelce, may have nudged that female audience even higher.
Lindt, a Swiss chocolatier that counts women over the age of 30 as its primary audience, bought its first Super Bowl commercial to drive awareness in the U.S., and has signed a social-media deal with Philadelphia Eagles center Jason Kelce's wife, Kylie, to extend its campaign outside the game.
But Lindt eschewed big names and jokes in its ad, which instead features its Lindor chocolate ball bouncing around various "moments of bliss" as a jaunty Perry Como soundtrack plays.
"We considered famous people, humor, at the very beginning and we developed many ideas, but that's not who we are," said Ana Maria Dominguez, president and CEO at Lindt USA. "That's not what our brand is about."
Despite the general avoidance of cultural trip wires, Kennedy's campaign ad wasn't the only Super Bowl commercial to address social issues. Two from the "He Gets Us" campaign, returning to the Super Bowl after making its first appearance last year, will encouraged viewers to love their neighbors as they say Jesus did.
And the commercial from "Stand Up to Jewish Hate" encouraged people to speak out against antisemitism along with hate toward other groups.
Some ads focused on the tech industry's topic du jour: artificial intelligence. Tech company Microsoft's ad, for example, promoted its Copilot AI product.
Brands may have been risk-averse in their messaging, but the concepts behind some campaigns appeared as elaborate as ever.
DoorDash promised to deliver one product from all the commercials that ran during the game, whether it was a bag of Doritos or a new BMW, to the winner of its Super Bowl sweepstakes.
More than 20 Super Bowl advertisers agreed to participate in the campaign, said Kofi Amoo-Gottfried, chief marketing officer of DoorDash. By comparison, CBS sold more than 60 national commercials.
DoorDash will give away an item related to each national ad, even if the brand didn't participating in the campaign, according to a spokeswoman.
Credit: By Megan Graham, Katie Deighton and Patrick Coffee
