[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The good news is that Dell is selling a lot of servers designed for artificial-intelligence use. The bad news is that the company doesn't seem to be making any real profits on them yet.
Dell has become one of the hottest names in AI on the strength of its specialized servers that use Nvidia's popular GPU chips. The company reported late Thursday that server and networking revenue shot up 42% from a year ago to nearly $5.5 billion. That's the best growth that segment has seen in at least eight years, and far exceeded the 31% growth Wall Street was expecting.
However, operating profits for Dell's Infrastructure Solutions Group that includes the server business came in around $736 million, which was 18% below analysts' forecasts, according to estimates on Visible Alpha. That led to operating margins of 8% for the segment, down from the 9.7% in the year-ago period, when the company's AI-server backlog was a fraction of its current size.
In a note to clients Friday, Toni Sacconaghi of Bernstein said the results were "resurfacing concerns that AI servers are being sold at near-zero margins."
That proved costly for Dell's stock price, which had more than doubled since the first of the year on hype for its AI business. The shares slid 18% Friday.
The company said in its earnings call Thursday that it expects margins for its infrastructure group to improve in the second half of the fiscal year. And Wall Street is still overwhelmingly positive; 80% of analysts rate Dell's shares as a buy compared with 70% for Super Micro Computer -- another AI server maker whose stock price has outpaced Dell's of late.
But most analysts also expect the stock to take a breather until the profitability picture improves. Dell's shares were trading at nearly 21 times forward earnings ahead of Thursday's report, which is nearly triple the multiple averaged from 2021-2023, according to FactSet data. Now Dell has to show its AI server boom can cover the bills.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
