BlackBerry Ltd. lost more than one-fifth of its market value on Tuesday as efforts to remake its business stalled in the company's latest quarter.
Best known for creating a once-popular mobile phone, BlackBerry has shifted in recent years to developing security software and services related to the "Internet of Things," which generally refers to digitally connected devices.
But the company Tuesday said Internet of Things revenue slipped about 3% from a year earlier in its fiscal second quarter. Overall revenue rose 16% to $244 million, but adjusted revenue, a measure that analysts follow, fell short of their expectations.
Also, Stuart McClure, who co-founded the artificial intelligence and cybersecurity firm Cylance Inc. that BlackBerry purchased earlier this year, has left the combined company, Chief Executive John Chen told analysts Tuesday on a call about the results.
BlackBerry said last year it would pay $1.4 billion in cash for the firm and assume unvested employee stock awards. When it completed the acquisition in February, the company said Mr. McClure would "continue to apply his visionary math-based approach to threat detection, prevention, and response" as a BlackBerry executive.
Mr. McClure couldn't be reached for comment. His decision to leave the company was a personal one, according to Mr. Chen.
BlackBerry's shares tumbled $1.70, or 23%, to $5.81 on Tuesday.
BlackBerry's efforts to revamp its sales force that is focused on enterprise customers weighed on the company's Internet of Things business in the quarter, according to Mr. Chen.
The company has been hiring sales representatives focused on those clients, and it usually takes about a year for new hires to become fully productive, he said.
The Waterloo, Ontario-based company reported a loss of $43 million, or 10 cents a share, for the quarter ended Aug. 31. The company broke even on an adjusted basis, while analysts had predicted a loss of 1 cent a share.
"We are all disappointed with the short-term results," Mr. Chen told analysts.
BlackBerry also said its finance chief, Steve Capelli, will move into a newly created role at the company, chief revenue officer, starting Oct. 1. He will focus on "revenue-generating and business development activities across the company," BlackBerry said.
Mr. Capelli will be succeeded as chief financial officer by Steve Rai, who is currently deputy chief financial officer.

Credit: By Micah Maidenberg
