Corrections & Amplifications
Albert Hofmann, the discoverer of LSD, rode home on a bicycle while experiencing the drug's effects for the first time. A Bookshelf review of "Beyond Zero and One" in Off Duty in the Jan. 22-24 edition incorrectly suggested that he didn't make it home. The review also misspelled his surname as Hoffman.
(WSJE Feb. 1, 2016)
'The Game Worlds of Jason Rohrer'
By Michael Maizels and Patrick Jagoda
Elevator pitch: Designer Jason Rohrer is something of a performance artist of the videogame world. This book -- a companion to a retrospective of Mr. Rohrer's work at Wellesley College's Davis Museum -- celebrates his thought-provoking pixilated creations. His games are not your typical digital diversions. For example, in "Passage," which was one of 14 titles the Museum of Modern Art selected to inaugurate its permanent videogame collection, you collect treasure, gaining points as your avatar ages, greys, stoops, and eventually -- no matter what you do -- dies.
Very brief excerpt: "With [the game] 'Gravitation,' Rohrer grapples with his own emotional challenges in establishing a balance between work and family, and between flights of inspiration and bouts of melancholy."
Surprising factoid: Mr. Rohrer's game "Cultivation" was inspired by a New York town's resistance to the building of a Wal-Mart when Mr. Rohrer was a community activist there.
'Beyond Zero and One'
By Andrew Smart
Elevator pitch: Artificial intelligence is evolving quickly and bringing us to the edge of science fiction's most dystopian dreams. But will machine intelligence soon beget actual consciousness? Scientist and human-factors engineer Andrew Smart thinks that possibility is a long way off -- and that we will not have created a truly intelligent machine unless it's capable of tripping on LSD (or the machine equivalent). In this wild but learned ramble Dr. Smart draws on neuroscience and chemistry, enlightenment philosophers and Steve Jobs, and just about everything in between.
Very brief excerpt: "It seems clear that if you are interested in building a machine that matches or exceeds human intelligence, and has humanlike conscious experience, you would be extremely interested in a group of molecules that reliably produce altered states of consciousness in humans and animals."
Surprising factoid: When LSD's discoverer, Albert Hoffman, first experienced the drug's full effects, he tried to escape from the lab on an unsuccessful bicycle trip -- thus the term "acid trip."
'Geek Parenting'
By Stephen H. Segal and Valya Dudycz Lupescu
Elevator pitch: Much wisdom can be gleaned from pop culture, according to the self-described geek authors of this collection of Parenting-101 lessons. Some of the advice is a little trite, but the book finds deep and unexpected truths in sources ranging from "Game of Thrones" to "The Chronicles of Narnia." The authors argue, for example, that pseudo-parent Jiminy Cricket failed Pinocchio by not telling him why it was important to be good. And if Obi-Wan had been a better listener, maybe young Anakin wouldn't have turned out so evil. If you don't want your child turning to the dark side, this is as good a place to start as any.
Very brief excerpt: "Jen, Jade Fox, and Shu Lien [of 'Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon'] teach us: A girl with a sword isn't a 'tomboy.' She's a girl. With a sword."
Surprising factoid: Though most famous for his declaration, "Live long and prosper," Spock of "Star Trek" once said, less dictatorially, "There are always possibilities."
Credit: By Keith Blanchard
