TOKYO -- With global stock prices marching upward, even Japan looks like a buy.
The Nikkei Stock Average hit a 15-month high Friday, propelled by signs of strength in the global economy and a weaker yen.
"The valuations of Japanese equities are quite attractive along with the lower yen helping Japanese exporters," said Tuan Huynh, the chief investment officer for Asia Pacific at Deutsche Bank Wealth Management.
The U.S. dollar, which was changing hands at around 105 yen last October, has gained to around 115 yen as of Friday, and Mr. Huynh said he expected it to move to 120 yen by the end of the year.
Japan's stock market has long been a laggard and still is at only half its peak level in 1989, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average in the U.S. has repeatedly set records this year. Disappointment over the slow pace of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's pro-growth Abenomics strategy also hurt the Tokyo market last year.
Recently, though, investors have welcomed signs that prices are beginning to rise again in Japan and that Mr. Abe's changes to the labor market could feed economic growth. A shortage of workers "should motivate Japanese companies to increase labor productivity, especially in the service sectors," wrote Daiju Aoki, regional chief investment officer for Japan at UBS Wealth Management, in a report last week.
Those views haven't been enough to drive Tokyo stocks faster than their global counterparts, but at least Japan is sharing in the prosperity. The Nikkei has gained 2.6% this year, roughly in line with European peers and less than half of the 6% rise in the S&P 500 index in the U.S.
The Nikkei rose 1.5%on Friday to 19604.61. Naoki Kamiyama, chief strategist at Nikko Asset Management, predicted growing global trade would help push the Nikkei up to 20000 by the end of March and 22500 by the end of the year.
Hani Redha, PineBridge Investments portfolio manager based in London, said he was looking for stocks in areas such as artificial intelligence and robotics, where companies might invest to reduce labor costs. "There are companies in Japan that are well positioned to sell products in that theme," he said.
Mr. Redha declined to name individual stocks, but sensor maker Keyence Corp. and robot maker Fanuc Corp. are often favorites of foreign investors looking to profit from industrial transformation.
The biggest uncertainty, investors said, remains President Donald Trump, who has at various times proposed higher tariffs on imported goods and a crackdown on what he has described as unfair Japanese trade practices.
"Unless those concerns are removed, markets are unlikely to properly reflect improvements in the fundamentals," said Shigeo Sugawara, senior investment manager at Sompo Japan Nipponkoa Asset Management.
Toyota Motor Corp. shares have trailed the market after Mr. Trump in January suggested in a tweet that he wouldn't let Toyota export cars to the U.S. from Mexico.
"Toyota is out of favor" because of political uncertainty and low gas prices that make Toyota's fuel-efficient models less attractive, said Fumio Matsumoto, senior fund manager at Dalton Capital (Japan) Inc.
Mr. Trump's election prompted a rise in U.S. and other global interest rates. That lifts the dollar, because dollar-denominated investments are now yielding more while interest rates in Japan remain stuck around zero. Even in Europe, central-bank chief Mario Draghi last week signaled a possible shift away from easing policies, a contrast with the ultra-loose policy of the Bank of Japan.
The new environment brings two benefits for Japan: The lower yen helps companies like Renesas Electronics Corp., a chip maker, export their products more profitably. And the rise in interest rates helps financial stocks such as leading life insurer Dai-ichi Holdings Inc., which needs to earn a long-term return so it can pay back policyholders.
Dai-ichi Life shares have surged 56% since Mr. Trump's election and Renesas shares have soared 46%, while Toyota shares have only added 11% over that period, underperforming the Nikkei's 14% rise.
Credit: By Kosaku Narioka, Suryatapa Bhattacharya and Kenan Machado
