WASHINGTON -- The Biden administration is preparing a new program that could prohibit U.S. investment in certain sectors in China, a new step to guard U.S. technology advantages during a growing competition between the world's two largest economies.
In reports provided to lawmakers Friday on Capitol Hill, the Treasury and Commerce departments said they were considering a new regulatory system to address U.S. investment in advanced technologies abroad that could pose national security risks, according to copies of the reports viewed by The Wall Street Journal.
The reports said the Biden administration may prohibit some investments while also potentially collecting information about other investments to inform future steps.
While the reports didn't identify specific technology sectors the Biden administration views as risky, it said sectors that could advance rivals' military capabilities would be a focus of the program.
People familiar with the work on the new program expect it to cover private-equity and venture-capital investments in advanced semiconductors, quantum computing and some forms of artificial intelligence. U.S. officials want to prevent American investors from providing funding and expertise to Chinese companies that could improve the speed and accuracy of Beijing's military decisions, for example.
The Treasury report said the program would focus on "preventing U.S. capital and expertise from being exploited in ways that threaten our national security while not placing an undue burden on U.S. investors and businesses."
The reports also don't identify which countries would fall under the new rules, though the people familiar with the matter say they expect the Biden administration's work on the new rules would in practice largely deal with U.S. investments in China.
In the reports, the Treasury and Commerce departments said they expected to finalize their policy on the issue in the near future. Both agencies said they expected to seek additional resources for the investment program in the White House budget, which will be released next week.
Credit: By Andrew Duehren
