Films about artificial intelligence are appearing with bewildering regularity. Last week alone, by happenstance, I watched three consecutive films on this subject. In the excellent, creepy "Ex Machina," a mad scientist creates an intelligent, fetching creature and seeks to find out if his brainchild has real emotions and ideas.
In the second film, the 2013 "Her," a sad sack played by Joaquin Phoenix falls in love with a Siri-like operating system that makes no value judgments about his ridiculous mustache. It, too, was something special. "Avengers: Age of Ultron" showed artificial intelligence animating a robot army hellbent on destroying the world. It, too, posed intriguing questions about how AI will affect mankind.
All three films were intelligent, and their AI creatures grew exponentially and kept getting smarter and more powerful, resourceful and sophisticated.
This raises an intriguing and, for many moviegoers, terrifying question: If AI becomes a reality -- as it does in "The Terminator," "The Matrix," "Tron," "Blade Runner," "2001: A Space Odyssey" and Fritz Lang's classic "Metropolis" -- it means that superintelligent humanoids will eventually get involved in the movie business.
Because these beings will be so thoughtful and cultured, and so contemptuous of humanity's weaknesses, they will almost certainly commit themselves to making nothing but high-quality motion pictures like "Interstellar" and "Lincoln" and "The Imitation Game." The question is: Where are the really dumb movies going to come from then?
In a world dominated by intelligent androids, there would be no place for films like "Furious 7" or "Horrible Bosses" or anything starring Adam Sandler. Beloved, albeit moronic, classics like "Porky's" would cease to exist, because intelligent creatures freshly arrived in Hollywood would refuse to make them. It might not even occur to them to make such movies. They would look at films like "Dumb and Dumber To" and say: "The first one was stupid enough. Why do we need a sequel?"
Dumb movies do not necessarily get made because producers, directors and screenwriters are idiots. They get made because the public loves dumb movies; stupid movies help us to relax. People didn't go to see "Billy Madison" because "Much Ado About Nothing" wasn't playing that weekend. They did it because dumb movies are fun and provide a release. Without really, really dumb movies, life would not be possible. Maybe we can do without "Dumb and Dumber To." But we cannot do without "Dumb and Dumber." At least, not most of us.
If intelligent androids ever do take over Hollywood, the rest of us must make sure that they keep their hands off the movie-approval process, that the reins of power remain firmly in hands of reliable ding-dongs.
We have to make sure that the androids stay away from comedies. If a wave of AI directors swooped down on Hollywood all at once, we would have hordes of remakes of "Jane Eyre" and "Anna Karenina." We would have a raft of movies based on sensitive, luminous novels about widows seeking a new start in life in a beguiling Maine hamlet, filled with canny locals who are coarse on the outside but real sweethearts once you get to know them. We would have a million sensitive, heartwarming, intelligent movies about jilted lovers, dashed dreams, the horrors of aging. It would seem like every movie came from France. And every movie would star Tilda Swinton.
AI is fine, as far as it goes. But without dumb, dumb, dumb movies, life wouldn't be any fun. We'd have to turn to Congress for laughs. So we must get cracking on a sophisticated computer program that will result in artificial lack of intelligence, to create creatures so dumb they'll think anything deserves a sequel.
Actually, now that I think of it, those creatures may already be here.
Credit: By Joe Queenan
