PANASONIC
Auto Unit Expects
To Boost Revenue
Panasonic Corp.'s auto business said it expected to add up to $3.6 billion in new revenue in the next two years through mergers and acquisitions that would give it new technologies as part of its drive to become a major supplier for cars of the future.
The Osaka-based company said it is considering acquiring or collaborating with companies that could help supplement its existing technologies in areas such as auto sensors and artificial intelligence. It said those deals could add 300 billion yen to 400 billion yen ($2.7 billion to $3.6 billion) in revenue.
The move comes as global technology companies race to capitalize on the computerization of the automobile, including through autonomous driving.
Yoshio Ito, president of Panasonic's automotive unit, said the company will aim for 2 trillion yen in sales, a 16% increase from the 2015 financial year that ended in March, in the division by 2018. Panasonic's automotive and industrial systems division reported lower revenue and profit for the just-ended year.
Panasonic provides nearly all of the batteries used to power Tesla Motors Inc.'s electric vehicles.
-- Yuka Koshino
---
MARUTI SUZUKI
Firm Makes Recall
Of S-Cross SUV
Maruti Suzuki India Ltd. is recalling its low-volume S-Cross crossover sport-utility vehicle due to a suspected faulty brake part.
The Suzuki unit said it would "inspect a suspected fault and replace a brake part in 20,427 units of S-Cross." The vehicles were manufactured between April 2015 and February 2016 and the recall affects both variants of the SUV with 1.3-liter and 1.6-liter diesel engines.
India doesn't have a vehicle-recall policy, but auto makers have implemented a voluntary recall system since June 2012 to demonstrate that they are being more proactive and socially responsible.
The S-Cross has one of the lowest volumes in Maruti's portfolio -- dominated by small cars.
-- Santanu Choudhury
---
ISRAEL
Netanyahu Approves
Natural-Gas Deal
Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Sunday approved an amended deal to develop the country's natural-gas fields after months of legal wrangling that has stunted the growth of the domestic hydrocarbon industry.
Israel's highest court in March ruled against an initial framework agreement to develop the country's offshore fields. It called the deal unconstitutional, citing a clause in the accord that gave energy companies pricing and regulatory stability for 10 years regardless of potential shifts in the government.
The main stakeholders in the fields, U.S.-based Noble Energy Inc. and Israeli partner Delek Group, had argued that the stability clause was required for them to make the investments necessary to develop the fields.
Mr. Netanyahu on Sunday said the clause had been removed from the amended framework. An Israeli official said the government had added another clause that said the gas companies would be potentially compensated for any future changes in regulation.
-- Orr Hirschauge and Rory Jones
