Watch any old sci-fi movie, and the future is invariably depicted as a place full of helpful, hardworking robots, busying themselves with household chores while the humans sit around mixing cocktails and schmoozing. Funny, that world never seemed to materialize. If anything, we all seem to be working harder than ever, tightly bound to our smartphones and email.
But tomorrow may finally be upon us. Major advances in artificial intelligence are arriving so rapidly that robots may soon be a part of everyday life. Google is working hard on its driverless car. Samsung has launched a robotic vacuum. Other robots and machines are learning how to perform simple surgical operations, process basic legal documents, teach people how to speak a foreign language and even write news articles (although not nearly as well as humans, I hasten to add).
In a new book called "Robot Futures," Illah Reza Nourbakhsh, a professor of robotics at Carnegie Mellon University, imagines a day when machines perform whole categories of traditional human jobs. And that will include "knowledge work," according to a recent report by the McKinsey Global Institute.
How fast all of this will happen remains to be seen. Technologies do not always advance as quickly as their more enthusiastic proponents expect. Still, it is clear that the rapid loss of manufacturing jobs in all developed economies isn't just owing to competition from cheaper workers in China. Robots simply have taken over many factory tasks. They're more reliable, don't ask for pay raises and don't second-guess the boss.
It can happen in service jobs as well. Robots will certainly be able to drive trucks and vans better than people can, and eventually they may be able to teach, argue and write better as well. Intelligent machines could rip through dozens of what today look like relatively secure, well-paid occupations.
So can you future-proof your career from the rise of the robots? Here are five good places to start.
Be the one who makes the robots. During the early days of the industrial revolution, the Luddites in England won a place in the history of automation for smashing up the power looms that were putting them out of work. They had a fair point: They had worked hard to learn skills that were suddenly useless.
They would have been better off learning how to manufacture the new looms, a line of work in which there was a lot of money to be made. In much the same way, fortunes will be made from making robots in the decades ahead -- and other fortunes from repairing them, supplying them with spare parts and recycling the old ones.
Move upmarket. Though robots may soon put pressure on your job because they can do it more cheaply, it will take much longer for them to do it better. An automated scanner works well enough at the grocery checkout line, and as a customer you probably appreciate the cheaper prices it allows the store to charge. But it isn't superior to dealing with a person. People will pay for human service -- and the more refined that service is, the more willing they will be to pay for it.
Be creative. Computers and robots will almost certainly make big inroads in professions like law, medicine, engineering and accountancy, which depend in large part on the ability to retain and apply lots of complex information.
But these advanced machines will take much longer to become genuinely creative. Computerized diagnostic tools will struggle to make the subtle connections necessary to spot new diseases or provide appropriate counseling to cancer victims. Robot lawyers may not notice judgments or precedents that can transform your case -- or find arguments that connect emotionally with a jury. The more innovative your work is, and the more creatively you apply your skills, the easier it will be to defend your career.
Find a new industry. The economy is never a zero-sum game. Who knew we needed social networks, or phones to play games on, or places to store our pictures online? Those big industries didn't exist even a decade ago -- and in another decade there will be a whole host of new ones. True, the robots will catch up in time. But if you are fast, you can stay ahead of the onslaught of automation.
Amuse the robots. As real artificial intelligence emerges, there are going to be a great many R2D2s with time and presumably money on their hands. Just as they can do things for us, we can surely do things for them. Learn how to teach robots new skills or tell them jokes (What does a robot say on a first date? You had me at "sign-in."). Selling things to robots will be a huge industry.
As old careers get automated out of existence, new ones will open up, and we will have to learn to exploit these opportunities. Career success will depend not on resisting our new robot helpers but on thinking shrewdly about how to stay a step ahead of their clumsy, predictable tread.
---
Matthew Lynn, a financial journalist based in London, is the author of "Bust: Greece, the Euro and the Sovereign Debt Crisis." He writes adventure thrillers as Matt Lynn.
Credit: By Matthew Lynn
