[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Salesforce's new artificial-intelligence "agents" are racking up big numbers but not big money yet. Investors are making a major bet that the latter will change soon.
The cloud-software giant's share price jumped 11% Wednesday following its fiscal third-quarter report the previous evening. The numbers were fine but hardly a blowout, with revenue of $9.4 billion beating Wall Street's estimates by 1%.
Current remaining performance obligations -- a measure of contracted revenue not yet recognized, also called cRPO -- grew 10.5% year over year and also nudged out analysts' consensus projection for 9% growth.
However, Salesforce also used the occasion to tout the early traction of Agentforce -- a platform of AI agents that businesses can program to handle tasks like customer service, marketing campaigns and procurement. The service was launched in the final days of the just-ended quarter and already racked up 200 customer deals in that time. Many more are coming; Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff said on the company's earnings call that the "pipeline is in the thousands" for Agentforce deals.
There's a catch. The company noted in the same call that Agentforce was not a "material contributor" to cRPO for the just ended quarter, nor is expected to be for the current one. In an interview with the Wall Street Journal, Benioff said this is because Agentforce is still relatively small compared with the other business lines of a company that now generates more than $37 billion a year in revenue. "We're still at the very beginning of this journey," he said.
That gives some analysts pause, considering the stock has now run up 46% since the company introduced the AI agent platform at its Dreamforce conference in September. Mark Moerdler of Bernstein noted Salesforce's improved growth and profit margins, but added that the stock's higher valuation now implies "elevated expectations which may not materialize." Gil Luria of D.A. Davidson believes Agentforce will be a "key growth driver" for the company over the long term, but added "we don't believe there is enough evidence to support meaningful top line reacceleration next year."
But most of Wall Street is positive; 77% of analysts rate Salesforce as a buy, according to FactSet. "With confidence in the core business, investors can focus on Agentforce's potential," wrote Allan Verkhovski of Scotiabank. Salesforce has a lot of actual sales to make.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
