As many big tech companies embrace artificial intelligence, Snap is no exception. Snapchat users have flocked to use the social-media platform's AI-powered chatbot, which the company's CEO says could be used to help improve targeted ads.
Some 150 million people have used Snapchat's My AI chatbot since its launch, sending more than 10 billion messages, Evan Spiegel, Snap's chief executive, said Tuesday at a Wall Street Journal event in Cannes, France. The chatbot made its debut to all of Snapchat's 750 million users in mid-April after an initial rollout to Snap+ subscribers in February.
Topics of interest to users included five million messages about McDonald's and "tens of millions of conversations about cars and recommendations about what car to buy," he said.
Speaking at the Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity, Spiegel said the company had discovered one user had used My AI to learn how to ask their boss for a raise. "They practiced talking back and forth and ended up getting an extra five dollars an hour," Spiegel said.
In time, Spiegel said, the use of the AI-powered tool could help improve advertising.
"My AI definitely helps provide a privacy-safe intent signal," he said. "When people are communicating with My AI, we can then use those insights to help improve recommendations across our platform."
Despite concerns about putting AI in the hands of users as young as 13, Spiegel said the company "certainly thinks it's a safe product for our community."
Spiegel said that after an initial rollout to Snap+ subscribers, Snapchat evaluated the new data -- all chats with the bot are stored -- and integrated features such as an age signal for the bot to facilitate age-appropriate conversations.
The CEO added that more than 99.5% of My AI responses conform to the company's community guidelines. A "huge chunk" of that nonconforming half percent is "the chatbot just repeating an inappropriate thing said to it," he said.
Spiegel said that machine learning itself isn't new -- most of the advertising that people see online comes from how those kinds of models determine what they should see, for instance.
The new big aspect is how much more accessible that kind of tool is to everyday people.
"It's part of that evolution from the command line to the graphical user interface to now conversational AI, which is a totally familiar way to interact with computers," Spiegel said. Because Snapchat is a messaging app, Spiegel said the company is well positioned to offer AI-based tools like its chatbot.
Credit: By Nuha Dolby
