When Donald Trump won the presidency in 2016, business leaders flocked to meet with him, hoping to tone down his trade policies and populist rhetoric while encouraging his business-friendly tax and deregulation agenda.
They are flocking to meet him again. Since Trump vanquished his last major GOP primary foe, more big names from the world of finance have lined up behind him. This past week, a range of chief executives listened carefully as he promised more tax cuts and hedged some of his harshest promises on immigration.
The executives say their willingness to listen to Trump is a combination of frustration with Joe Biden, a growing realization that Trump could win and a desire to shape the Republican's agenda before the election -- rather than scrambling to do so after. Many who distanced themselves from Trump after his effort to stay in power despite his 2020 loss, culminating in the Jan. 6, 2021, riot, have softened their criticism of the former president.
Even CEOs such as JPMorgan Chase's Jamie Dimon and Bank of America's Brian Moynihan, who historically avoid making endorsements, have shown signs of warming to Trump's policies or spoken out about Biden's.
Dimon, Moynihan, Citigroup CEO Jane Fraser and Wells Fargo's Charlie Scharf were all in attendance at the Business Roundtable meeting Thursday, where Trump addressed the group. Trump told them that as president, he would be better on taxes and the economy. He said the corporate tax rate should be at 20%, at one point positing it could go as low as 15%, his campaign's original target, according to a person who was there.
Dimon surprised his peers at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, early in the year when he said in a television appearance that Trump was "kind of right" on some things, such as trade and immigration.
Meanwhile, Moynihan, the more understated of the two, has criticized Biden's policies as bad for business, based on conversations with the bank's clients. He has told people that bank clients, many in the middle of the country, are complaining about the Democrat's policies, specifically about permitting for energy projects and dealmaking.
Trump is happy to tell business leaders mostly what they want to hear. Besides more tax cuts, he has promised to be friendly to artificial intelligence and light on regulation, in particular for dealmaking. Biden's Federal Trade Commission has been among the most aggressive in recent years trying to block mergers and rein in giant companies.
But Trump's policies in areas like immigration and statements he has made that question the rule of law make businesses wary. On Thursday, he floated to House Republicans the idea -- lacking in any details -- of an all-tariff federal revenue system, large enough to replace the income tax.
He told business leaders that he favored immigration reform and wants educated foreigners and foreign-born college students in the U.S. to be given the chance to stay in the country. He said he didn't want the U.S. to leave the North Atlantic Treaty Organization -- after repeatedly criticizing the alliance as president -- but that he believed every member should pay their fair share.
Despite some CEO grumbling, businesses have thrived under Biden. Stocks are near records, corporate profits are up strongly, inflation has come down and the economy has so far managed a soft landing despite aggressive rate increases from the Federal Reserve. Industries like energy that appeared to be at risk from Biden's policies have thrived.
Much of corporate America had been dreading a Biden-Trump rematch. For months, deep-pocketed financiers cast about for alternatives to the two men, particularly Nikki Haley, the Republican who stayed in the race against Trump the longest. Some even floated long-shot ideas like Biden's commerce secretary, Gina Raimondo, who they said spoke their language given her business background. (Hedge funder-turned-social crusader Bill Ackman unsuccessfully urged Dimon himself to run for president.)
Trump's team was nervous that the CEOs Thursday might not be too welcoming, in part because of the former president's recent felony conviction in New York, according to a person familiar with the matter. But many of those who don't like Trump or some of the things he has done or said appeared to be willing to give him a second look, the person said.
The Trump campaign disputed the characterization that his team was nervous. "President Trump was warmly received by everyone in the room and was commended for his policy proposals on deregulation and tax cuts," said spokesman Steven Cheung.
Many executives say a Trump second term could be more palatable with the right vice president by his side. South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, Ohio Sen. J.D. Vance and other potential VP picks have been popular with finance types. North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum, a former presidential candidate and himself a successful businessman, is also in the VP mix. Vance, a former venture capitalist who was backed by Republican donor Peter Thiel, has made the rounds recently in Silicon Valley.
Some executives may have their own careers in mind. Hedge-fund manager John Paulson and investor Scott Bessent are among those whose names have been floated for Treasury secretary, The Wall Street Journal has reported.
Thursday's meeting attracted some of the U.S.'s top business executives, including Apple CEO Tim Cook and Walmart CEO Doug McMillon, according to some of the people. The Biden administration has consulted McMillon on a range of topics such as inflation and supply-chain issues, according to people familiar with the matter.
Trump had some backers among Silicon Valley's leaders when he ran before. This time the group appears to be more widespread and more vocal. For many, that comes more from a frustration with the business climate from the Biden presidency rather than a raging enthusiasm for a Trump presidency.
Among the most visible is Elon Musk, the CEO of Tesla and owner of X, who has privately been speaking with Trump and other backers of the former president, The Journal has reported.
Donors from the financial sector have given more than $56 million to Trump's campaign and outside groups, according to data compiled by the Center for Responsive Politics. Those donors, who come from a swath of banks, investment firms and insurance companies, gave about $40 million to Biden's campaign and related fundraising arms.
---
Justin Baer and Jack Gillum contributed to this article.
Credit: By Cara Lombardo, Dana Mattioli and Alexander Saeedy
