Manhattan's office-vacancy rate climbed to more than 15% this year, a record high. About 80 miles away in Philadelphia, occupancy also is at historically low levels. But a 24-story office tower located between the two cities has more than doubled its occupancy over the past five years.
Developer American Equity Partners bought the New Jersey building, 1 Tower Center, for $38 million in 2019. At the time, it was 40 years old and felt dated. It had no gym, tenant lounge or car-charging stations. The low price enabled the firm to spend more than $20 million overhauling and attracting tenants to the 435,000-square-foot property.
Now, equipped with a new lobby, movie theater, golf simulator, fitness center and a tenant lounge featuring arcade games and ping-pong tables, the suburban building is nearly fully leased at competitive rents, mopping up tenants from other buildings.
"Our tenants told us what they needed in order to fill up their offices," said David Elkouby, a co-founder of American Equity, which owns about 4 million square feet of New Jersey office space.
The new owner also liked the location at the 14-acre hotel and conference-center complex, off the New Jersey Turnpike's Exit 9 in East Brunswick. The site is a relatively short commute for millions of workers in central New Jersey and is passed by 160,000 vehicles daily.
The property's turnaround shows how office buildings can thrive even during dismal times for most of the U.S. office market, with vacancies much higher than prepandemic. Success often requires an ideal location -- employees used to working at home don't want a long commute -- and the sort of upgrades and amenities companies say are necessary to draw employees back to the workspace.
One Vanderbilt, a deluxe office tower with a Michelin-star chef's restaurant and plenty of outdoor space in Midtown Manhattan, is fully leased while charging some of the highest rents in the country.
The 11-story Entrada office building, in Culver City, Calif., is making the same formula work on the opposite coast. It opened two years ago with a sky deck, concierge services and recessed balconies. A restaurant is in the works. The owner said this month that it has signed three of the largest leases in the Los Angeles area this year.
The strategy can be effective even in less-glamorous suburban locations, 1 Tower Center shows. It is prospering while neighboring buildings that are harder to reach with outdated facilities and poor food options struggle to fill desks even at reduced rents.
The recent interest-rate cut and reports that some big companies such as Amazon.com are reinstituting a five-day office workweek have raised hopes that the office market might be getting closer to turning.
But with more than 900 million square feet of vacant space nationwide and remote work still weighing on office demand, more creditors are seizing properties that are in default on debt payments.
Interest rates are still much higher than they were when tens of billions of dollars of office loans were made, and much of that debt is now maturing. The recent interest-rate cut doesn't mean "office-sector woes are now over," said Ermengarde Jabir, director of economic research for Moody's commercial real-estate division.
Lenders are dumping distressed properties at steep discounts to what the buildings were worth before the pandemic. Some buyers are trying to compete simply by cutting their rents.
"Most owners don't have the wherewithal to do what is required," said Jamie Drummond, the Newmark senior managing director who is 1 Tower Center's leasing agent. "Owners positioned to highly amenitize their buildings are the ones who are successful."
HCLTech, a global technology company, illustrates the appeal. It greatly expanded its presence in New Jersey this year by moving to a 40,000-square-foot space designed for its East Coast headquarters at 1 Tower Center.
The India-based company said it was drawn to the building's amenities and a design that made possible a variety of workspaces for employees, from quiet nooks to an artificial-intelligence lab.
"You can't just open an office and expect [employees] to be there," said Meenakshi Benjwal, HCLTech's head of Americas marketing.
HCLTech also liked the location near the homes of its employees and clients in the pharmaceutical, financial-services and other businesses.
Finally, it didn't hurt that the building is a short drive from nearby MetLife Stadium. The company has a 75-person suite on the 50 yard line where it entertains clients at concerts and National Football League games.
"All of our clients love to fly from distant locations to experience the suite and stadium," Benjwal said.
Generate image description

Credit: By Peter Grant
