In recent years, there has been a push to cut the time it takes to get promising experimental drugs to people who are seriously ill or have life-threatening conditions.
Patients are encouraged to join clinical trials that should eventually help determine whether the drugs are safe, effective and warrant approval by the Food and Drug Administration. But those trials are often time-consuming and have strict criteria for who can participate. Many people don't qualify for clinical trials or don't have time to wait for the results. In such circumstances, patients and their doctors may petition a drug company for individual access to a drug.
The effort to speed things up has given some very sick people more say in their treatment, and quicker access to new drugs and treatments. But the use of these drugs raises tough ethical questions, especially at a time when drug development is happening so fast -- and, thanks to artificial intelligence, is likely to accelerate in the years ahead.
Here are some questions to ponder. There are no right or wrong answers, but they offer a glimpse at some of the difficult decisions that doctors, medical ethicists, policy makers and consumers will have to face.
1. Should anybody be able to use experimental drugs before they have cleared clinical trials and gotten full FDA approval? Would your answer change if you knew that most clinical trials fail? How well-developed do you think a drug needs to be before it is available to everybody?
2. Should somebody who is seriously ill have the same opportunity to take a promising but experimental drug if that drug is being made available to others? Would your answer change if you knew that it's the drug company that is deciding who gets to use it?
3. Doctors frequently use FDA-approved drugs off-label, meaning for diseases or conditions for which the drugs haven't been tested or approved. Should the FDA allow this type of experimental but common drug use or should it be left to the judgment of the doctor?
4. Instead of asking a drug company for an experimental drug, should a seriously or terminally ill patient be required to join a clinical trial? What if a patient in a trial has a good chance of getting a placebo?
5. Should patients be granted access to an experimental drug even if special access can make it harder to recruit enough people to conduct the clinical trials needed to determine whether the drug works and is safe? Does the benefit of a group of individual patients outweigh the potential future benefit to society of a treatment that has been fully vetted?
6. Do parents who have given informed consent to use an experimental drug on their terminally ill child give up their right to sue if the treatment backfires and kills the child prematurely? What if the parents were desperate, and unable to understand the poor odds of success?
7. Should a seriously or terminally ill child have an advocate separate from the parents and doctor when the decision is made to administer an experimental drug?
8. Is it all right to give an experimental drug to a terminally ill patient if the only reason to do so is to give the patient hope, even if there isn't any?
9. Often patients who get access to experimental drugs are those who are well-educated and savvy enough to know of clinical trials or experimental drug options. Should drugmakers be required to test experimental drugs across different demographic groups? What if the effort improves the efficacy of drugs among people of different groups, but slows drug development?
10. Once an experimental drug gets the FDA's partial approval (called accelerated approval), a drugmaker is free to market the drug at almost any price. Are drug companies justified in charging whatever they can given the steep cost of drug development? What if paying for the drug will almost inevitably bankrupt the seriously ill person?
---
Betsy Morris is a writer in San Francisco. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Betsy Morris
