Tesla's vehicle sales slid for a second straight quarter but not as much as expected, lifting the company's stock price and keeping Tesla ahead of rival BYD as the world's largest seller of electric vehicles.
The company said it delivered 443,956 vehicles globally in the three-month period, a 4.8% decline from the same quarter a year ago. The decline comes as Tesla is contending with lukewarm demand for its cars and intensifying competition.
Tesla's slowing growth underlines the challenges facing the broader industry. Other carmakers have rolled out dozens of new electric models, but demand has fallen short of initial expectations, despite falling prices and a spurt of low-interest and lease deals.
The better-than-expected results boosted Tesla's stock price with shares up 10% at Tuesday's close. Before the news, Tesla's share price had declined 16% this year.
Analysts pointed to a decline in manufacturing production in the quarter as a positive for Tesla, where slowing sales had led to a buildup of unsold vehicles. The company built 410,831 vehicles during the period, a 14% reduction over the prior year.
Chief Executive Elon Musk is facing his greatest test in years as he tries to juggle the need to spend money on developing new and more affordable models while investing in pricey bets on robots and self-driving technology.
A bellwether for the electric-vehicle industry, Tesla's second-quarter sales figures were being closely watched by analysts for indications that the company could return to growth after a dismal first three months to the year. Tesla reported its first year-over-year decline in global deliveries since 2020 in the first quarter, which it partly attributed to production halts.
Tesla's fleet of vehicles is aging, with its most popular vehicle, the Model Y SUV, approaching five years old -- a point at which traditional car companies usually make major design changes to boost demand. The company is ramping up production of an updated Model 3 sedan and its newest model, the hulking Cybertruck, which costs $61,000 to $100,000.
Tesla faces some of its toughest competition in China, where the company's sales have declined as competitors roll out lower-priced EV models. In June, Tesla's sales in China dropped 24% compared with last year, while the broader market reported a bump in deliveries amid a rush of discounts and government subsidies.
Rival BYD posted sales of 426,039 EVs in the second quarter, a 21% increase over the same period last year.
Musk has been lowering prices for Tesla's vehicles as other major automakers release rival offerings. But the cuts also mean lower profit, and Tesla's once industry-beating operating margins were 5.5% in the first quarter of this year, down from 16.8% in 2022. In an effort to shore up profit, Musk is cutting costs and has said he would lay off more than 10% of the company's global staff.
Amid the turmoil, Musk has lost some longtime lieutenants, including former finance chief Zach Kirkhorn and Drew Baglino, who oversaw much of the company's work on batteries.
Musk has sought to rally waning investor enthusiasm behind the company's bets on robotics and artificial intelligence, technologies that he said at Tesla's annual shareholder meeting in June could boost Tesla's market value by as much as $30 trillion.
The company, which plans to spend $10 billion on artificial-intelligence research this year, is expected to show off an autonomous robotaxi in August. Musk has also said Tesla would begin limited production of its Optimus robot next year.
Still, the Tesla chief needs to keep the profits flowing at Tesla to fund those bets. He said in April that the company aims to increase global deliveries in 2024, but unlike in previous years, Musk didn't set specific targets for that growth.
While Tesla still dominates EV sales in the U.S., its lead is shrinking. The company accounted for nearly half of all electric vehicles sold in the U.S. in May, compared with around 60% of sales during the same period a year prior, according to Motor Intelligence data.
Other major automakers also reported second-quarter U.S. sales throughout the day Tuesday.
General Motors said its sales were roughly flat for the April-to-June period, while Toyota Motor posted a 9% gain over the prior-year quarter. In the EV market, several car companies, including GM, reported healthy, double-digit gains, but those sales still account for a small percentage of their overall business.
Analysts expect a cyberattack last month on dealer-software supplier CDK Global to weigh on the quarterly sales tally. Many dealers lost access to key software they use to run their business, forcing them to try to close deals the old-fashioned way -- with pen and paper.
A CDK spokeswoman said Tuesday that "substantially all" of its dealer customers have come back online.
Even before the hacking, U.S. car sales for the first half of the year were expected to be roughly flat compared with last year, as the industry continues to contend with high interest rates that push up monthly payments.
Electric vehicles are hit harder by higher borrowing costs because they tend to be more expensive to start with than their gasoline-burning counterparts.
Tesla isn't the only manufacturer navigating a slowing EV market. Carmakers from established giants like Ford Motor to upstarts like Rivian Automotive have warned of slack electric-car demand in the U.S. as consumers have proven less eager than expected to ditch their gasoline-powered vehicles.
Musk has said he believed millions more people would buy a Tesla if the vehicles were cheaper.
The company is also working on more affordable models, which Musk said would be unveiled either later this year or early next year.
"For most people, it is really not a question of whether they want a Tesla. They do want a Tesla. They simply do not have enough money to afford one," Musk said at a meeting with shareholders in June.
Generate image description

Credit: By Sean McLain
