Anton Kolomyeytsev stood at Romania's border with Ukraine, waiting for his mother and families of employees of his tech company, which just weeks earlier had been based in Kyiv.
In all, nine people made it, and Mr. Kolomyeytsev drove them that night in early March into Hungary. Moving people across borders -- finding them rides, shelter and food -- still occupies him, more than a month after he started shuttling his employees and data servers out of Ukraine in anticipation of a Russian invasion.
"We understood that we are pretty much on our own to save the business and to save our people and save human lives," said Mr. Kolomyeytsev, the 44-year-old chief executive officer of StarWind Software Inc., a data-storage company.
In an escalating war, business leaders responsible for large Ukrainian workforces have become evacuation coordinators, military strategists, providers of humanitarian aid and, in some cases, financiers of the Ukrainian army. Startups like StarWind are using their tech savvy, dispersed workforces and relative agility to help mitigate the business trauma and human catastrophe of war.
Their preparations for the war started months ago. The startups secured passports and Covid-19 vaccines for employees and their families, converted money into U.S. dollars and transferred staff to safer locales. Now, from perches in Poland, Germany, Israel, Silicon Valley and elsewhere, these startup leaders continue to run their businesses while adding another task -- helping to defend Ukraine.
StarWind doubled the salaries of employees who enlisted in the Ukrainian army, Mr. Kolomyeytsev said.
Ukrainian startup Lemon.io, an online marketplace for software engineers to find jobs, is giving its profits to the army at the end of each month -- around $124,000 so far -- and donating to organizations purchasing drones for the army, said CEO Aleksandr Volodarsky.
When employees at software company People.ai Inc. decided to enlist, their co-workers raised more than $30,000 to buy the army sleeping bags and mats, ham radios and other communications hardware, said CEO Oleg Rogynskyy, a Ukraine native who has lived in Silicon Valley for almost a decade.
These startup leaders and their workers say such efforts ease the helplessness of watching from afar.
Mr. Volodarsky of Lemon.io, is one of around 10 people from his company that made it out of Ukraine; he fled to Jerusalem with his wife and two children, ages 6 and 3 years old. To escape, they broke curfew and drove out of Kyiv in the early morning to the border with Hungary, where they crossed on foot and then flew to Israel. He said he talks daily with the 33 employees in Ukraine, three in Russian-occupied cities, offering to help them relocate.
They feel it is too late, Mr. Volodarsky said. Men fit for military service aren't allowed out of the country; others have deemed the journey too risky.
"People are just too scared to go into the street to leave," said Mr. Volodarsky, age 35.
He paid out two months of salaries in advance to employees and increased payments to the freelancers, in case banks went offline. He told his employees, if war starts, grab your emergency bag and first-aid kit and meet at his co-founder's house in western Ukraine.
"We will support you unless you decide to move to Russia," Mr. Volodarsky wrote to his employees before the invasion.
Things didn't go as planned, and workers remained put, some retreating to bomb shelters. "The feeling of guilt is stuck in my throat," Mr. Volodarsky said.
Lemon.io, People.ai and StarWind say their businesses continue to operate, helped in part by early preparations and being accustomed to operating with a globally dispersed workforce.
StarWind is based in Massachusetts but was founded by Ukrainians, and three-quarters of its staff was based in Kyiv. It moved some data servers out of the country in personal cars; the rest of its data was transferred to other servers that the company bought or rented.
People.ai, a Silicon Valley-based company that uses artificial intelligence to help companies improve sales and operations, transferred some work that was done in Ukraine to San Francisco and Toronto.
Credit: By Heather Somerville
