WELLS FARGO
WFC -6%
Wall Street earnings disappointed investors Friday, as some top banks grappled with higher interest rates and signs of consumer weakness. Wells Fargo posted a decline in quarterly profit, as did New York-based JPMorgan Chase, excluding irregular income. Wells Fargo also cut its forecast for net interest income -- a key profitability measure of the difference between what banks charge on loans and what they pay out to depositors. Citigroup reported a 10% profit increase, but set aside more provisions for potential credit-card losses. Wells Fargo shares tumbled 6% Friday, JPMorgan shares lost 1.2%, and Citigroup shares fell 1.8%.
DELTA AIR LINES
DAL -4%
U.S. air carrier Delta said that its quarterly profit dropped 29%, as it struggled with a glut of seats in the U.S. and higher fuel costs. The company also lowered its outlook for the season. The problem: airlines are flying too much, Delta Chief Executive Ed Bastian told The Wall Street Journal in an interview. During the postpandemic travel boom, the companies bought planes, hired staff and increased flight plans. Now, supply is outpacing demand. Delta shares dropped 4% Thursday.
CORNING
GLW +12%
Specialty glassmaker Corning, which makes glass for TV screens and smartphones, raised its quarterly sales guidance on Monday, due to strong adoption of its new optical-connectivity products for generative artificial intelligence. Corning now expects about $3.6 billion in sales for the second quarter, up from prior guidance of roughly $3.4 billion. The company is set to report its second-quarter results on July 30. Corning shares jumped 12% Monday, the S&P's best performer that day.
COSTCO WHOLESALE
COST -4.3%
It will soon cost more to shop at Costco. The wholesale retailer said Wednesday that it was raising the prices of its annual memberships for the first time since 2017. Annual fees will now cost $65, up from $60 previously, for U.S. and Canada Gold Star, business and business add-on members. The company's executive membership plan will cost $130, up from $120. The company said the changes will be effective on Sept. 1. Costco shares fell 4.3% Thursday.
PARAMOUNT GLOBAL
PARA -5.3%
Paramount's sale saga has reached its finale.
The Hollywood company agreed to merge with David Ellison's Skydance Media. In the deal announced on July 7, Skydance and its investors have agreed to spend more than $8 billion to acquire National Amusements, the Redstone family company that controls Paramount. In a memo to employees, Shari Redstone said the deal was expected to be completed in the first half of next year. Paramount shares retreated 5.3% Monday.
MICROSOFT
MSFT +1.5%
Microsoft has left OpenAI's board amid antitrust scrutiny of their AI partnership. The tech giant said Tuesday that it withdrew its observer position on the ChatGPT creator's board. Microsoft said it believed the board had gained enough stability that its involvement was no longer needed. News Corp, owner of Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal, has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI. Microsoft shares rose 1.5% Wednesday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
