DUBAI -- For more than 170 years, World's Fairs have introduced technological marvels such as the Eiffel Tower, the telegraph and the mobile phone. They have popularized ice cream cones, hot dogs and tomato ketchup.
One of the hottest showpieces at this year's event is chicken nuggets from Saudi Arabia.
Amid the hundreds of national pavilions, the fast food, made by the 47-year-old chain Al Baik, is drawing some of the longest lines at the fair, which began on Oct. 1.
Al Baik, roughly translated as "The Chief," already has a following across the Muslim world among pilgrims who have visited its branch in Mecca. It has grown to around 130 outlets in the Gulf, including two added in Dubai and Bahrain in the past year. Social-media posts about its chicken nuggets, fries and burgers are helping to bring visitors to its pop-up site at the Dubai Expo 2020.
"It's all word-of-mouth that you should try Al Baik," said Ronald Joseph, an Indian student, who was queuing up for the outlet at the fair before midday to skip the lunch rush. The previous week, he had waited in line for an hour and a half at Al Baik's other Dubai outlet.
Usman Khan, a 34-year-old Pakistani-American working in Dubai, tried to place an order on the first day of the exposition, but he said the line was too long. He returned a few days later to order a double fried chicken patty burger for 9.50 U.A.E. dirhams, or $2.60.
"It's the KFC of the Middle East," he said.
Delayed a year because of the pandemic, Expo 2020 is the first World's Fair to be held in the Middle East. The United Arab Emirates hopes to draw 25 million people to the six-month event, organized by the Paris-based Bureau International des Expositions at a multibillion-dollar site.
Previous fairs in the U.S. include Seattle 1962, when the Space Needle was unveiled; 1876 in Philadelphia, where Alexander Graham Bell demonstrated the telephone; and Chicago 1893, which featured George Ferris' Big Wheel for the first time.
The food has often been among the most memorable attractions.
At the 1876 event in Philadelphia, the H.J. Heinz Co. introduced tomato ketchup to the world, according to the Bureau International des Expositions. In 1904 in St. Louis, an ice cream vendor ran out of dishes and turned to a nearby concessionaire selling waffles, combining the two into ice cream cones, according to the Washington, D.C.-based International Dairy Foods Association -- though a New Yorker had independently patented the cone a year earlier. World's Fairs helped popularize the hamburger, hot dog, club sandwich and peanut butter.
The Dubai Expo features plenty of food, along with exhibits on subjects like artificial intelligence, tourism presentations and even a replica of Michelangelo's David.
There's a dining hall designated to African food, an on-site kitchen delivering dozens of brands, and Michelin-starred chefs cooking in pop-up restaurants across the site.
Al Baik is one of the few with a roped-off queuing system, with security staff at the restaurant door. In recent weeks, patrons have lined up for up to an hour in temperatures of 100 degrees.
Al Baik founder Shakour Abu Ghazalah began frying chickens in Jeddah on the Red Sea in 1974, before expanding to the holy city Mecca, according to the company.
In 2008, the fast-food chain was featured in an episode of Anthony Bourdain's culinary show "No Reservations," in which the U.S. celebrity chef described the chicken as "Saudi Arabia's far superior alternative" to KFC, which also has locations around the Middle East.
Commuters recall the aroma of Al Baik's fried chicken wafting through airline cabins as passengers ferried boxes of the stuff back to the Saudi capital, Riyadh, where the brand launched in 2018.
Karim Hajjali, chief executive of ServQuest, which owns the U.A.E. Al Baik franchise, said the response to the stall at the Dubai Expo is leading him to think it could be a springboard for the brand in the rest of the world, too.
"It's just mind-boggling, really," said Mr. Hajjali, who also runs Gourmet Burger Kitchen and Denny's in the country. "At Al Baik, we intend to serve the world one day," the company said in a written statement.
On social-media platforms such as TikTok, people post videos of themselves waiting in line for Al Baik, trying it for the first time, or splitting pieces of chicken to show the oozing secret sauce underneath the crust.
"It definitely deserves the hype," said Tejaswi Nagaram, an 18-year-old Indian student, whose best friend dragged her to Al Baik at the Expo to taste the nuggets and burger for the first time.
Credit: By Rory Jones
