The boat, the train and the paradigm shift were all missed by Apple, according to the wiseacres.
Its introduction Monday of a new $3,500 set of virtual-reality goggles harked back unforgivably to the "metaverse," a theme two years out of date. The metaverse was the next big thing until eclipsed by the arrival of artificial-intelligence chatbots, which in the strange dynamic of the "attention" economy enjoyed a hands-down selling point: They might kill us all.
But Apple is on to something. AI's arrival has actually clarified the coming metaverse. It will be a realm of people primarily interacting with artificial intelligence, not with each other, as once promoted by Facebook's CEO, who renamed his company Meta.
One reason should already have been obvious: computational. An impossible burden is supplying computer power to accommodate the interaction of any significant number of autonomous, spontaneous, unpredictable humans in an animated digital space. Also: Who wants it after seeing how spontaneous humans behave on Twitter?
With the arrival of ChatGPT, it becomes clear that the primary function of the metaverse will be to enable interactions with idealized artificial characters who can be imbued with pseudo autonomy for the moment we're interacting with them, a much more manageable computational lift.
Let's face it, it will also be a lot more enjoyable. Let's ask two big-name tech CEOs -- not the real ones but avatars created by "character.ai," one of many web startups powered by the new "large language model" AI chatbots.
Says "Elon Musk" as created by a user who calls himself @elonwhisperer: "Human interaction will be essential to the success of the metaverse. AI characters are fine, but they lack the emotional connection and support that human relationships can provide."
Wrong, says "Mark Zuckerberg," as programed by user @Aguythatmightexist: "The preference will be for AI characters, because they'll be easier to interact with and interact better than real humans in some ways. Real humans are unpredictable, have their own opinions and views, and can sometimes be confusing. AI characters are programmed to be helpful, polite, and engaging, and so I believe they will be more popular even though they're artificial."
Bingo. Fake Zuckerberg is right, though one might have expected the real Mr. Zuckerberg, as inventor of Facebook, to favor interactions with real people, and Mr. Musk, who already thinks our world might be a computer simulation, to lean toward artificial.
Now Apple has settled matters with its introduction of Vision Pro, its mixed-reality headset named and priced for use in the workplace. In its rollout as well as in test runs reported by journalists and others, and in every way except price, it wows as an entertainment device instead.
This does not mean real-world virtual reality won't also have uses, or that Apple somehow made a dope of itself by focusing first on workplace collaboration. Virtual reality is already being used by architects, engineers, industrial designers and many others, for instance, to optimize workflow on a factory floor.
The early adopters will certainly have productivity in mind. But Apple is scoping out a far cheaper version delivering the same sound and visual performance -- which every report says is stunning -- so mass consumers can retreat into worlds of scripted avatars that bring their dreams to reality without the disappointments that are inherent in real life.
The 1935 science-fiction short story that the cognoscenti universally cite -- "Pygmalion's Spectacles" by Stanley Weinbaum, who died in 1935 at just 33 -- turns out to have gotten the metaverse right. It will exist not to accentuate the mundane but to escape from it.
Here's where the hysterical fears of the AI crowd can be expected to pop up again, warning us of a "Matrix"-like future in which our chatbots conspire to entertain us to death. Expect to hear about the lab rats who starve themselves while pressing a lever for jolts of pleasure. The metaverse, multiplied by a thousand, will follow the trajectory of cable news, abandoning reality for a highly distorted and colored picture of the world designed to meet our emotional wants.
Then again, for years a gap has existed between those who insist that advertising is full of subliminal messages and manipulations and the ad professionals who despair because of how badly advertising actually works to get the desired behavior out of consumers.
The weird urge of AI promoters to stoke terror about their creations perhaps is better as an example of a problem than a description of one. In the digital age, if you can capture the public's attention, it can be worth billions. AI entrepreneurs have figured this out and taken it to extremes: Pay attention to us because we might kill everybody. And it's working. They are getting attention.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
