Artificial intelligence can help tackle climate change, but to fulfill that promise companies need to find a way to limit AI's climate impact.
Information and communications technologies contribute up to 3% of global greenhouse-gas emissions, according to many estimates. Data centers emit about the same amount as the aviation industry and consume hefty amounts of water. And as AI grows, the energy required to train and run its large-language models will increase.
AI can cut emissions by making systems more efficient. Alphabet's Google and American Airlines used AI to help planes create fewer vapor trails, which contribute to global warming. Google uses it to forecast river floods and to recommend eco-friendly routes on its maps service. San Francisco startup Verse is using AI to simplify the process for companies to get clean power.
For many companies using AI there are positive and negative effects on their carbon emissions and water use.
Sasha Luccioni, a research scientist at AI-application developer Hugging Face, worked with two other researchers to map the lifetime carbon footprint of a machine-learning model with 176 billion parameters named Bloom -- and what they learned was startling.
The factors outside of the energy used in training the models -- something most research in the field doesn't factor in -- "wound up being so significant they doubled total emissions," she said.
For instance, manufacturing a graphics-processing unit -- a piece of hardware that speeds up computations in deep learning -- involves pure water and rare metals. That adds to climate cost. Bloom used more than a thousand of these GPUs in its training, and that is just one of many external factors Luccioni's group evaluated in their research.
But models of similar parameter size to Bloom, such as OpenAI's ChatGPT-3, had significantly higher carbon emissions -- more than 20 times as much -- and consumed around three times as much power as Bloom.
Energy sources are a large contributing factor in the emissions discrepancy, Luccioni said. If the electricity being used to train the models is sourced from something "cleaner," that can cut down carbon emissions, even without changing the size of the large-learning model.
In the U.S., where there is no central electric grid, training models in one state versus another can have a significant impact on carbon emissions. In California, where there are large amounts of wind power, emissions could be lower than if the exact same model were trained using energy in a state like Virginia, which is reliant mostly on fossil fuels for power.
If Bloom does better by environmental standards than other large-language models, that is still relative. It used enough energy in training the model over March to July 2022 to power the average American home for 41 years, according to an April 2023 Stanford report. The training run had 25 times the emissions of one passenger's round-trip flight from New York to San Francisco, and over a third more than the average American in one year.
AI is very thirsty, according to research this year from Shaolei Ren, a professor of electrical and computer engineering at the University of California Riverside.
His work shows ChatGPT-3 needs to "drink" a 500-milliliter bottle of water for a basic conversation of 20 to 50 inquiries, depending on where the electricity is generated. ChatGPT-4 likely consumes more than that, though secrecy around the platform and training means not enough data is public to make an accurate inference.
His group's estimates for one of Google's large-language models, known as LaMDA, had water use on the order of a million liters for training alone. Google's on-site data center water consumption overall in 2022 rose roughly 20% compared with 2021.
"Wherever we use water, we are committed to doing so responsibly. This includes using alternatives to freshwater whenever possible, like wastewater, industrial water, or even seawater," the company said in a blog post late last year. Google has a 2030 target to replenish 120% of the water it consumes, on average, across its offices and data centers.
Research from Google estimated its carbon emissions from training the LaMDA model at 26 tons, or the equivalent of about 22 passengers on a round-trip flight between San Francisco and New York.
As with electricity use, water use can become more efficient depending on where it is drawn from. Microsoft said last year that its Asian data centers' actual water-use effectiveness was three times worse than that of the company's locations in the Americas, meaning water use for identical AI training could triple based on location. That is because it is typically warmer in Asia, which necessitates water-cooled chillers.
Meanwhile, a practical step in limiting emissions would be to not integrate AI into platforms that don't need it, said Hugging Face's Luccioni.
"The cost of all these shiny new toys is unsustainable if you're just switching out all these technologies that are working quite well to begin with, with these much more energy-intensive applications," Luccioni said.
Credit: By Nuha Dolby
