Many investors looked to the Federal Reserve for hints about whether this autumn's unusual ascent in Treasury yields would help finish America's inflation fight. The central bank's message: maybe.
In the tug of war between low-risk government debt and higher-risk equities, that was enough of a signal to push stocks higher Wednesday. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 0.7%, or 222 points, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite added 1.6%. The S&P 500 rose 1.1%, led by the information-technology and communication services sectors.
Major indexes have logged three straight monthly declines as a run-up in Treasury yields drew investors to bonds' roughly 5% returns. That dynamic flipped at least momentarily Wednesday.
Benchmark 10-year yields began slipping after the Treasury Department said that it would boost the size of long-term U.S. debt auctions in the coming months by less than Wall Street anticipated.
The agency's choice to instead lean more heavily on shorter-term debt issuance, investors said, could relieve upward pressure on longer-term yields. That in turn could boost stocks, which have been hurt by the rise in yields.
Treasury yields fell further later in the session, pulling 10-year yields to 4.790%, after the Fed held interest-rates steady again at 22-year highs.
Fed Chair Jerome Powell said at a news conference that the recent jump in bond yields is pushing up borrowing costs in ways that could ease price pressures and slow the robust U.S. economy. That could affect the central bank's monetary policy moving forward.
"Everyone is very bullish right now on rates," said James St. Aubin, chief investment officer for Sierra Mutual Funds. "But the trend is not your friend right now."
Wednesday's slip in yields opened the door for the "Magnificent Seven" stocks to climb. Meta and chip maker Nvidia led the pack by advancing more than 3.5% apiece, while Microsoft posted a 2.9% gain.
But the big winner among artificial-intelligence aligned tech stocks was Advanced Micro Devices. Shares jumped 9.7% after executives forecast robust sales of advanced AI chips next year, putting the firm's stock on pace for its best year since 2020.
Although more firms than usual have beaten Wall Street's earnings estimates for the third quarter, many investors have instead zeroed in on projections for clues about how companies navigate an uncertain economic outlook.
Kraft Heinz vowed to not go crazy with discounts despite some inflation-weary Americans shunning higher grocery costs. The bad news for ketchup and sliced-cheese lovers left a good taste in investors' mouths: Kraft Heinz stock climbed 2.4%.
Shares in CVS fell to their lowest intraday value since November 2020 after the healthcare giant said 2024 earnings would veer toward the low end of guidance and investors warned of higher costs from customers on Medicare. But the stock later clawed back most of the losses and ended the session 0.4% lower.
DuPont slid 8.2% after the chemical and materials maker reported weak sales because of disappointing demand for consumer electronics and a soft Chinese market.
Benchmark U.S. crude has fallen in seven of the past nine sessions, to $80.44 a barrel, weighing on shares of many oil producers.
Overseas, the Stoxx Euro 600 rose 0.7%. At midday Thursday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 1.1%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 1.2% and South Korea's Kospi was up 1.7%. S&P 500 futures rose 0.3%.
---
Sam Goldfarb, Asa Fitch and John Keilman contributed to this article.
Credit: By David Uberti
