After working at Facebook for six years, Randi Zuckerberg wanted to make a name for herself that went beyond being known as "Mark's sister." To see how she differs from her little brother, it is enough to know that part of her quest has included a six-week guest stint singing in a Broadway show.
Ms. Zuckerberg, 36, has piled up a varied stack of her own accomplishments since leaving Facebook in 2011. She has created a book series, radio show, and blog about social media's social impact, under the banner "Dot Complicated." She has invested in early-stage startups, including baking-mix company Foodstirs, online household goods seller Brandless, and dessert-maker Treat House. She also has launched a series of pop-up, tech-themed, kid-oriented dining spots called Sue's Tech Kitchen.
It's a lot to handle, but she says that she's not aiming for "balance" in her life. Last month, she came out with a book titled "Pick Three," on the virtues of being "well-lopsided" rather than well-rounded. As she sees it, there are five major areas of life -- family, friends, fitness, work and sleep -- and each day she has to choose just three to focus on.
Ms. Zuckerberg, who has two children with her husband Brent Tworetzky, a product management executive, says that she wrote the book because she felt stretched by pressure to multitask and noticed other women felt the same. She realized that she was more successful and less stressed when she chose a limited number of things to do each day.
"What I've been trying to work on over the past few years is go from thinking of life as a dessert buffet to kind of paring it down to: 'What is my legacy?'" she says.
Ms. Zuckerberg catapulted into the tech elite alongside her brother, who founded Facebook at age 19. Growing up in New York's Westchester County, she says that she had no idea that Mark would eventually be so successful. "I don't know that you can envision a younger sibling growing up to be this huge tycoon of business," she says, recalling playing Nintendo with him as a kid. "I still pinch myself every day that the name Zuckerberg is up there with the famous entrepreneurs in history."
They both attended Harvard University, but only Randi graduated. After working for an advertising firm in New York for two years, she joined Facebook in 2005 when her brother hired her as a marketing manager. There, she created Facebook Live, an online video platform. In 2011, one of its shows earned her an Emmy Award nomination.
Ms. Zuckerberg decided to leave Facebook in 2011 because she felt the culture had become one "that left no room for personal passions," she wrote in an essay in Vogue. When she introduced herself to new business contacts, she felt like people saw her as a "human ATM," she writes in her new book. People would pitch her ideas hoping she'd pass them along to her brother.
A few years later, in 2014, she got an out-of-the-blue opportunity to pursue what had long been one of her own personal passions. The producers of Broadway's "Rock of Ages," a classic-rock themed musical about aspiring musicians, were looking to generate some social media buzz as the show hit its five-year mark. And they had heard a few people recommend Ms. Zuckerberg, who had grown up wanting to sing on Broadway.
Ms. Zuckerberg had taken opera-singing lessons as a child, performed throughout her school years, and sang in a cover band in Silicon Valley. The Broadway gig was "my number-one bucket-list life dream," she says.
She accepted the role of Regina, a hippie protesting gentrification, despite some warnings that acting would damage her business brand. "I had a lot of mentors who told me not to do it because it would be hard for me to be taken seriously in business if my next move was to act on Broadway," she says. She's glad she ignored them. "It was one of the most incredible moments of my life," she says. She now sits on three theater boards.
The experience helped to convince her to move to New York, leaving Silicon Valley. "Silicon Valley is an incredibly exciting place to be, but also you need to drink the Kool-Aid when you're out there," she says. "It's 100% amazing, it's saving the world, and everything should be disrupted," she jokes of the area's cliched mantras.
Tech remains an animating force of her work. In her "Dot Complicated" books, blog and radio show, she tries to parse out costs and benefits of technology, such as artificial intelligence and social media for children. "No invention, no technology, is ever 100% positive, and that's something no one could predict in the early days," she says.

Credit: By Alexandra Wolfe
