Chief Justice John Roberts focused his year-end report squarely on technology, avoiding discussion of the ethics questions that dogged the Supreme Court in 2023 and the flurry of election cases approaching the docket to discuss the promise and perils of artificial intelligence for the federal judiciary.
"As 2023 draws to a close with breathless predictions about the future of Artificial Intelligence, some may wonder whether judges are about to become obsolete," Roberts wrote in his annual report, which typically includes an essay regarding an issue involving the court system along with statistics on the federal judiciary's workload.
In some years, Roberts has addressed controversies involving the courts, including security for judges, financial conflicts of interest and, on one occasion, a plea for raising judicial pay. As the court faces continuing scrutiny over its members' own conduct, including Justice Clarence Thomas's relationships with wealthy benefactors, the chief justice devoted his 2023 edition to an important but, by Washington standards, determinedly anodyne topic: the court system's reluctant but inevitable adoption of mechanical, electronic and digital tools.
The courts, Roberts observed, can be stubbornly retrograde in their approach to technological advances. Quill pens still are set out on counsel tables at the Supreme Court, he wrote, and "if you would like to travel back in technological time -- and get current case information by phone -- you can call 1-866-222-8029," tapping in to the telephone system the court first set up in 1989.
Roberts said the courts eventually accepted typewriters, photocopiers and personal computers, and likewise will need to come to terms with AI.
Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D., Conn.), who heads a Senate subcommittee on privacy, technology and the law, praised Roberts for focusing on AI. "I regard this report as a kind of invitation to begin a dialogue" between Congress and the judicial branch on AI use in the legal system, Blumenthal said. But he said he was disappointed that the chief justice had nothing to say regarding the court's problems, which polls show have driven down its public approval.
Gabe Roth, executive director of Fix the Court, an advocacy group that pushes for court transparency, said: "A year-end report that fails to address or even mention the ethical lapses uncovered over the last 12 months is about as useful today as the typewriters the chief justice waxes poetic about."
Credit: By Jess Bravin
