International Business Machines Corp. said revenue fell for its fourth straight quarter as it struggles to retool its business for the modern computing age, though Big Blue's profit grew more than Wall Street had projected.
Revenue fell 4.2% from a year earlier to $19.16 billion. Profit rose 3.9% to $2.5 billion, as the company worked to scale back its exposure to businesses with smaller profit margins.
IBM has trailed Microsoft Corp. and Amazon.com Inc. as customers race to do more of their computing in the cloud -- online services that free companies from the need to buy and maintain their own systems.
As competitors report consistently strong revenue growth, buoyed by sales of their cloud services, IBM has absorbed a string of declines.
While IBM, led by Chief Executive Ginni Rometty, said its cloud business is growing -- cloud revenue climbed 5% in the second quarter -- it is far behind the 41% annual cloud revenue growth Microsoft saw in its latest quarter.
Meanwhile, other parts of IBM's business are in a gradual decline. Revenue in the company's IT services division fell 6.7% year over year in the second quarter as the company lost sales from lower-margin equipment it is transitioning away from.
The division that houses IBM's mainframe business also fell almost 20%, though it faced a tough comparison to last year, when the release of a new generation of those computers buoyed sales.
Ms. Rometty is betting on IBM's $34 billion acquisition of open-source software company Red Hat Inc. to seed a revenue rebound after earlier cloud deals like the $2 billion acquisition of Dallas-based SoftLayer failed to vault the company over the competition. The Red Hat deal, the biggest in IBM's history, closed earlier this month.
"That Red Hat acquisition will change the dynamics of our growth profile, and it will change the dynamics of our cloud growth profile overall," Chief Financial Officer James Kavanaugh said in an interview. The deal would boost revenue by 2 percentage points annually over the next five years, he said.
IBM expects to update financial projections in connection with the Red Hat deal Aug. 2. The acquired company's performance wasn't factored into IBM's second-quarter numbers.
While second-quarter revenue was in line with analysts' expectations, earnings on an adjusted basis of $3.17 a share beat expectations from analysts polled by FactSet.
Mr. Kavanaugh said IBM made $575 million from long-planned asset sales in the quarter. But costs including a legal ruling against IBM and payouts associated with a round of layoffs mostly outside the U.S. at the end of June ate up most of those gains, he said.
Shares moved down 1.5% after hours to $141. The stock initially showed gains following the earnings release.
IBM executives point to bright spots in the growth of cloud services and tout the future of its artificial intelligence business. The company wants to be at the center of companies increasingly using AI to run their operations.
Tuesday, IBM said it landed a multibillion deal with AT&T Inc. where it would help the telecommunications company shift business-service applications to IBM's cloud.
But Red Hat had already been an AT&T partner, and it wasn't clear whether IBM's acquisition played any role in inking that deal, said Toni Sacconaghi, an analyst at Bernstein Research.
"The belief is that owning Red Hat and going to market more aggressively with it" will help IBM land more deals to provide services to companies or help them move to the hybrid cloud, he said. "That is the theory of the deal. The proof will be in the execution."
The hope is that the acquisition of Red Hat, which sells support for a version of the open-source Linux operating system, will boost IBM in the hybrid cloud arena because Red Hat software is at the core of many customers' IT infrastructure.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
