The Experts are an online group of industry and thought leaders who write about hot topics in their fields. Edited excerpts follow. For more, go to WSJ.com/Experts.
Confessions of a Failed Early-Stage Equity Investor
I have two business degrees and over 40 years working in financial markets. I've had my share of success. But I've failed in several early-stage equity investments since the 1990s. And these efforts haunt me to this day.
Why should anybody care about my mistakes? In part because it is a lot easier to become an early-stage equity investor these days, thanks to new equity crowdsourcing rules. You used to need assets of $1 million or annual income of $200,000 to be a qualified investor. Now, you can have even less than $100,000 in net worth or annual income. That means a modestly-funded retirement account soon will qualify potentially millions of average Americans to play "Shark Tank" with their hard-earned money.
Remember: About half of new businesses in the U.S. will fail in the first five years.
So where did I go wrong? Basically, I had the wrong answers to five key questions everyone should ask themselves before jumping in. Here are those questions -- and how I'd grade my answers.
Could I afford to lose what I invested? I didn't bet the ranch. But I bet plenty, typically in the low-to-mid five-figure range. My grade: a gentleman's C.
How many investments did I look at? An experienced early-stage investor may review hundreds of potential deals before finally considering one. I was overanxious. I was enamored right out of the box and fell victim to "deal creep." My excitement was blinded by optimism and the hope of getting in on the next Apple. Here I grade myself an F.
Did I do my homework? No. I didn't take the time to differentiate between good marketing and good homework. I fell for the sales pitch rather than doing my own research. Another failing grade.
Was I overconfident? I was a victim of my own cockiness. Research shows that poor investing decisions frequently come from overconfidence, particularly among men over a certain age. Another F.
Was there a clear path to earning back my investment in a reasonable amount of time? Successful early-stage equity investors will evaluate the potential for earning back their investment in three to five years. I still am waiting on the return of my investment since there isn't a secondary market that I can sell my position to. Grade: Incomplete.
-- Ted Beck, president and CEO, the National Endowment for Financial Education
---
Imagine If Robo Advisers Understood Emotions
Investing is an emotional process. Managing these emotions is probably the greatest open challenge of financial technology. Robo advisers don't take into account the limits of human cognition, or emotional reactions like fear and greed.
When the stock market roils, investors freak out. They need comfort and encouragement. What if a robo adviser could identify the precise moment you freak out and encourage you not to sell by giving you historical context that calms your nerves?
Better yet, what if this digital adviser could manage your portfolio so you don't freak out at all?
Imagine if you could set a level of risk that you're comfortable with, like a car's cruise control. Your robo adviser could apply the brakes when you're going downhill and step on the gas when you're going uphill so as to maintain that level of risk. And if you do decide to temporarily take over by stepping on the brakes, the robo adviser could remind you from time to time that you need to step on the gas to reach your destination in the time you've allotted.
We need to construct algorithms that accurately capture human behavior, countermeasures to protect us from ourselves.
Robo advisers have great potential, but the technology is still immature.
-- Andrew W. Lo, professor, MIT Sloan School of Management; director, MIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering; principal investigator, MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory; chief investment strategist, AlphaSimplex Group
