A new Middle East was dawning last week. Commercial flights were taking off between the Arabian peninsula and Israeli cities, goods were flowing from Israel to ports along the Gulf, entrepreneurs in Dubai and Tel Aviv were trading ideas, and a historic normalization between Saudi Arabia and Israel was in the works. Then, on Oct. 7, Hamas terrorists stormed into Israel, endangering the nation and region at large.
Though Hamas launched the assault, Iran aided it as part of a larger strategy to sabotage nascent peace initiatives between Israel and Arab countries. This wouldn't be the first time the regime was implicated in such efforts; in the mid-1990s, Tehran was suspected of assisting several suicide bombings in Israel. This period of instability also saw the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin in 1995, the quintessential symbol of peace in his era.
In recent weeks Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei warned that Muslim countries "betting on peace are betting on a losing horse." President Ebrahim Raisi labeled normalization efforts "reactionary and regressive." After the weekend's horror, Mr. Raisi reportedly congratulated Hamas leadership on the group's "victory."
The message among regional leaders must be clear: Now isn't the time to go wobbly on peace. Hamas and its allies have made that difficult by poisoning the climate for normalization. Arab media makes matters worse by not accurately reporting on the conditions in Gaza, which could have been a model of social and economic progress before Hamas turned it to ruin.
Oversimplified arguments for Arab resistance and victimization have shaken even the most peace-oriented nations in the region. Initial responses, including from old peace partners like Egypt and Jordan, fell short of addressing the gravity of the civilian attacks. The United Arab Emirates and Bahrain were among the few regional actors to condemn Hamas.
Israel will likely have to use extreme military force to re-establish its deterrent power. This presents a quandary: Israel can't pursue peace while feeling vulnerable -- yet the actions required to regain strength and security could further undermine the political foundations for peace. The situation is more difficult with Benjamin Netanyahu at the helm, whose tenure as prime minister -- from oversight of expanded settlements to lethal operations in Gaza -- has made a two-state solution increasingly unlikely.
A perfect storm is brewing that threatens to set the region back to 1967. That year Mideast leaders gathered for the Arab League Summit in Khartoum, Sudan, where they agreed to no peace with Israel, no recognition and no negotiations. This resolution, known as the "Three Nos," shaped the Arab world's mind-set toward Jerusalem for decades.
The geopolitical landscape has recently undergone a seismic shift. The Three Nos have been morphing into Three Yeses: peace, recognition and cooperation. The region has engaged in more-proactive engagement thanks to the Abraham Accords, which has catalyzed direct diplomacy and unlocked untapped commercial and trade avenues, including collaboration in such sectors as space, artificial intelligence and security. Hamas and Iran saw this as a threat and reverted to their old playbook of terrorism and grievance.
While Palestinians have a legitimate claim to statehood, their success will rest on their ability to overhaul their national agenda. This means abandoning corrupt governance in the West Bank and, most important, renouncing extremism in Gaza. The onus for achieving lasting peace -- especially in light of past support from the U.S. and Arab nations -- primarily lies with the Palestinians themselves.
The Middle East can embrace this new era of yes or revert to a past of no. While Washington can assist, only regional leaders fortified by moral courage can accomplish sustainable peace. Demand peace today, enforce it tomorrow, and sustain it always. Anyone who chooses otherwise should be left behind.
---
Mr. Koteich hosts "Tonight with Nadim" on Sky News Arabia.
Credit: By Nadim Koteich
