The digital revolution in healthcare was supposed to transform the patient experience. It would make it easy for patients to access their electronic medical records, manage their care via patient portals and mobile apps, and protect their privacy.
It has a long way to go.
Patients still aren't able to get all the records they want and have trouble deciphering the data when they do get it, research shows. Medical records may be scattered across hospitals, primary-care doctors, specialists and urgent-care clinics -- and too often it is a challenge to corral and share information among those multiple providers. And some doctors still use paper records and rely on outdated technology like fax machines to send and receive documents.
Then there is the mounting risk of data breaches and cyberattacks. A ransomware strike in February crippled vital parts of the U.S. healthcare system and put personally identifiable information at risk for possibly a third of the U.S. population.
"It's absolutely imperative that we make it profoundly easier for individuals to access their medical information and make information exchange possible in a trusted and secure way," says Mariann Yeager, chief executive of the nonprofit Sequoia Project, which is working with the federal government to develop a nationwide health-information-exchange network.
The initiative, called the Trusted Exchange Framework and Common Agreement, or Tefca, aims to enable different providers' networks to securely share information with the aim of empowering patients to have control over their health information, share it as they see fit and manage their own care effectively. Federal rules that took effect in 2021 require healthcare organizations to give patients full access to their health records and prohibit any effort to block such access.
Meanwhile, what can consumers do to maintain and manage their own medical records? Here are some guidelines to help it all make sense.
What's my first step?
The good news is that many people already can access their digital records in some form. According to the most recent data from the federal health-information office, in 2022 about three in four individuals nationwide reported being offered online access, a 24% increase from 2020. Patients who receive care from providers with electronic health records typically have access to portals included with the technology, such as Epic's MyChart and the Oracle Health Patient Portal.
The problem is that patients often don't use these portals regularly, even though the sites offer a crucial way to keep track of records and check them for mistakes. Research has linked low levels of patient-portal access and use to factors such as lower education levels, and lack of access to insurance and a primary-care doctor. But patients also reported they prefer to speak directly with a doctor, saw no need to use a portal, worry about privacy and aren't comfortable with the technology.
Experts say it is important for patients to explore the portals and take advantage of what the sites can offer. The portals typically guide new users on how to get started and provide online support to help use features such as messaging doctors and viewing test results. Some are using artificial intelligence programs to answer patient queries and suggest follow-up tests.
Once people know their way around, they should check the portal frequently for new messages and test results, and to review any notes that clinicians have posted to make sure they are accurate. In one study of more than 136,000 patients at three healthcare organizations that use OpenNotes, a popular system that lets doctors share notes with patients, one in five people who read a note reported finding a mistake and 40% of those perceived it as serious.
"It takes a little bit of self-motivation, but just like we've all learned to use our banking app or book airlines via our airline app, figure out how it works, and don't wait for disaster or serious illness to strike," says Matthew A. Eisenberg, a physician who is the associate chief medical information officer at Stanford Health Care and an affiliated clinical associate professor at the Stanford University School of Medicine.
Stanford shares doctors' notes and other information via the MyHealth patient portal, its version of MyChart with added features, but only one out of five notes are actually read, Eisenberg says. To encourage use and help patients understand information, it helps new patients sign up via their mobile device and embeds tools such as links to explanations of medical terms.
What if my electronic records are all over the place?
According to a federal survey released last year, about half of individuals had more than one online medical record or patient portal with different types of health organizations. And almost all hospitals and close to 90% of doctor's offices now use some kind of electronic medical record. But many are incompatible despite the new initiatives aimed at making it easier to share and combine them.
For now, the best solution may be apps such as Apple Health and CommonHealth for Android-based devices, which allow patients to securely transfer data from their providers' medical records, and combine multiple records on their mobile device. Of course, not all providers have implemented the necessary application programming interfaces, which are still evolving, and they may not support all types of data, such as records related to mental health or specialty care.
Some apps allow patients to enter information beyond what's in their patient portal, such as data collected from smartwatches and other wearable devices.
Should I keep paper copies of my records?
It can be reassuring to hang on to paper records and store them securely at home, in case a system goes down or gets hit with a major data breach. If people have a patient portal available, they can print out the information.
For some extra peace of mind, people can keep backup digital copies of all their records, too. With electronic records, simply download the files and save them to a hard disk or cloud storage. With paper records, people can use scanning apps on their phone to convert the pages to PDF files.
Should I take my own notes during a doctor's appointment for my records?
Patients often don't take in all of what a doctor says during an appointment and even if they do understand it, may forget much of it later, says Tom Delbanco, a professor of medicine at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, and co-founder of OpenNotes. Because not all doctors are on a system that shares notes with patients, he says, it makes sense to take your own notes or have a family member do so. He has also advised some patients to bring a tape recorder to appointments about complex issues such as cancer treatment.
Research has shown doctors have mixed opinions on patients recording appointments, and though legally obtaining permission isn't required in many states, it may be best to ask as a courtesy for the doctor-patient relationship. Patrick Tenbrink, a Jupiter, Fla., urologist co-developed a free app called MaDi that allows patients to record their visit, and then creates a concise text summary including a detailed plan for the next steps. Tenbrink says it can not only "improve recall and prevent misunderstanding," but can give patients more confidence and make it easier to share information with other doctors.
What are the best practices for managing someone else's records, such as an elderly parent?
Many family caregivers end up managing someone else's records, and research has shown that care partners value electronic access to patients' health information even more than the patients do.
Catherine M. DesRoches, an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and executive director of OpenNotes, recommends care partners take advantage of proxy access so they have their own credentials, either by the patient signing a privacy-disclosure form or by granting the access through the patient portal.
Many people take a seemingly simpler route and use the patient's own credentials to create an account or sign in as the patient on a portal to manage electronic records. But DesRoches says that this can create problems because clinicians can't be confident about who they are communicating with and risk violating a patient's right to privacy. The nonprofit Coalition for Care Partners offers tool kits to help patients and providers arrange shared access.
Shared access can also help patients who need help from family caregivers but are still able to manage their patient portal and make decisions. The patients can ask caregivers to aid them if any issues arise, but they can also designate some information as private if they don't want caregivers to see it.
What about after a patient dies? State laws vary over whether family members can access records posthumously. Typically, an executor or designated personal representative of an estate can request access.
While large health systems with electronic records may keep medical records indefinitely, providers are generally not required to keep them for more than 10 years, so it's important to collect any records you want to have access to before that time expires.
What can I do to protect against security breaches?
While there is little consumers can do against a massive cyberattack, there are steps patients can take to protect their data and prevent medical-identity fraud. For example, when doctor's offices ask for a Social Security number when filling out forms, patients in most cases can decline to provide it over concerns for identity theft.
Sometimes, patients also can look for unauthorized snooping in their records by healthcare employees. Federal rules require systems to track when employees use their login credentials to view medical records, and some healthcare organizations can provide you with a log or summary.
But privacy laws don't apply to any data stored on a mobile device, such as a smartphone or tablet, or on any personal health record not offered through a health provider or health plan covered by the laws.
The federal health-information-technology office offers several tips to protect electronic health information, including using strong passwords and updating them often, using only trusted apps and websites, and reading those terms of service and privacy notices to verify the app will perform only functions you approve. It also recommends installing remote wiping on mobile devices to enable permanently deleting data on a lost or stolen device, or remote disabling to lock the data and unlock it later if the device is recovered. Commercial identity-theft protection services can also help protect against medical identity theft.
---
Laura Landro is a former assistant managing editor of The Wall Street Journal and author of "Survivor: Taking Control of Your Fight Against Cancer." She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Laura Landro
