Imagine learning to drive in a world that resembles the on-road insanity of "Mad Max" or "The Fast and the Furious."
In this world, no one is obeying the law, or lane markings, and everyone, from distracted drivers to jaywalking pedestrians, is forcing you to make split-second, life-or-death decisions -- on purpose.
Subjecting autonomous vehicles to such a world, say engineers, is precisely how manufacturers and regulators will know that they are ready to be handed responsibility for our very lives.
To understand why, it helps to know a little about how the artificial-intelligence algorithms at the heart of self-driving systems are trained to handle tricky situations. Much of this training happens in simulation. That is a far safer and cheaper option than gathering data in the real world from actual vehicles, says Henry Liu, a professor of engineering at the University of Michigan and director of Mcity, a facility for testing autonomous vehicles.
Many companies brag about the number of miles their autonomous and semiautonomous vehicles have driven in the real world, but they are likely to be logging at least a thousand times as many miles in simulation, adds Liu.
In the real world, a vehicle might have to travel hundreds or even thousands of miles to have a tricky encounter from which it learns something new. But in simulation, engineers can make it so that their autonomous driving systems encounter an endless stream of the world's worst drivers, says Liu.
The result is, literally, a crash course for autonomous vehicles.
Promises of the imminent and widespread rollout of fully self-driving cars, particularly from Tesla chief Elon Musk, have proved again and again to be nonsense. That doesn't mean we won't be seeing more vehicles with no one behind the wheel -- even if only metaphorically -- soon. In every case, testing and training with the toughest scenarios available is likely to be important for both making these vehicles happen and, eventually, verifying they are safe enough.
One major holdup for the rollout of autonomous vehicles has been so-called edge cases: rare but potentially disastrous scenarios that have already led to accidents, as in failures of Tesla's autonomous systems that led to a recall of more than 360,000 vehicles. Simulation makes it possible to drill autonomous systems on these edge cases -- for example, a pedestrian suddenly crossing the street directly in front of a vehicle -- over and over again.
These simulated driving hellworlds can also make it possible to do something as important as training an autonomous system -- and that's testing it, says Shai Shalev-Shwartz, the chief technology officer of Mobileye, a company that builds driver-assist and autonomous driving systems.
All of this training and testing is precisely what's led us to this moment -- when two companies, Waymo and Cruise, the General Motors unit, are actively testing robotaxis in multiple cities, and Mobileye says that it will offer automakers a system that can completely take over highway driving in personal vehicles by 2026. Mathematically proving that self-driving systems are safer than humans will be critical to getting from a few hundred robotaxis on the road to thousands and eventually millions of self-driving vehicles of every description.
Without such proof, regulators have no standard by which to objectively evaluate whether a system is acceptable, adds Shalev-Shwartz.
But with that proof in hand, autonomous vehicles could be granted a sort of driver's license by safety regulators. Call it the Mad Max driving test, a gantlet only a Hollywood director -- or a mild-mannered engineer -- could think up.
In Europe and China, rules on autonomous vehicles have established standards that automakers must meet. Stateside, the approach so far has been different.
"The approach of the U.S. government is, 'Don't interfere, and let the companies do whatever they want, and then people will sue their ass later,'" says Shalev-Shwartz.
Waymo exposes its autonomous-driving software to simulated situations that could lead to injury or death, then evaluates how well it performs in comparison with a fully alert, completely focused human driver. Typical scenarios include pedestrians jaywalking, cyclists popping out from behind stopped trucks, sudden lane changes by other drivers -- basically, anything that could cause an accident.
Key to testing the ability of an autonomous vehicle to handle tricky situations is knowing just what kind might come up. A simulation is only as comprehensive as the pool of real-world scenarios it's based on.
As a result, a number of initiatives have been developed to collect and make available pools of data on what kinds of scenarios lead to crashes and other accidents.
Companies like Waymo, Cruise, Tesla, Motional (a joint venture of Hyundai and Aptiv) and Mobileye have their own vast storehouses of situations in which humans on the road are doing ill-advised things.
Mobileye has about 400 petabytes of driving footage gathered from testing its own driver assistance systems, and the company also gathers anonymized data from some consumer vehicles equipped with its systems, says a company spokesman. Tesla has made similar claims about the mountains of data it gathers from its vehicles, beginning with the rollout of its Autopilot technology in 2015. Waymo has exceptionally detailed data of the roads where its robotaxis drive, says Trent Victor, the company's director of safety research, because its vehicles bristle with high-quality sensors peering in every direction at once.
These troves of data yield plenty of examples of tricky situations that would be familiar to any experienced human driver, such as making a turn without a green arrow offering explicit permission.
"Unprotected left turns are often a problem for automated vehicles," says Liu of the University of Michigan. Indeed, any time an autonomous vehicle must make predictions about the behavior of humans, rather than simply adhering to rigid rules of the road, it can get into trouble. Other challenging situations include merging, and changing lanes when other nearby drivers wish to do the same, he adds.
There are some scenarios in which an autonomous-driving system can already easily beat a human -- just by following the rules. Americans in particular don't seem to know how to navigate two-lane roundabouts, for instance. Liu and his students know this because they have put sensors on eight intersections in the city of Ann Arbor, including a roundabout near his house.
"It's the most dangerous roundabout in our county," says Liu. Despite signs alerting them to, some human drivers entering it make the mistake of not yielding to both lanes of traffic. But an autonomous driving system shouldn't make the same mistake, he adds.
No autonomous vehicle will ever be accident-free -- especially in a world in which real human drivers, pedestrians and cyclists are so often at fault for accidents.
At some point, no matter how resilient self-driving systems are in the face of challenges, it's up to governments to determine whether they are safe enough, says Shalev-Shwartz. And while all autonomous-vehicle companies are using simulation to train and test their vehicles, how their performance is measured varies. In part, this is the reason the behavior of these vehicles varies.
Whether in the not-too-distant future we're hopping into a self-driving taxi, or flipping the "self-driving" switch on our cars, the key enabler of this technology will be trust. And how will we know that we can trust these vehicles? In part, it will be because they've graduated from the Mad Max school of driving.
Credit: By Christopher Mims
