Jeff Bezos is the world's richest person. Amazon is on a tear -- sales grew 43% last quarter -- and may soon pass Apple as the world's most valuable company. Amazon has ruptured retail, floated in the cloud, and even made superhero TV shows like "The Tick." But what makes Mr. Bezos tick?
Sure, he sells everything from books to the TubShroom drain protector/hair catcher. That's why Amazon owns close to half the American e-commerce market. And its 100 million Prime customers will shrug off the recently announced 20% fee hike. But retail is a low-margin business. That can't be Amazon's endgame. The prize is much bigger.
Like Warren Buffett, Mr. Bezos likes to write rambling annual shareholder letters. Most are about Amazon's fanatical devotion to the customer. This year he labels them "divinely discontent." Don't be fooled -- his customer focus, referred to as the "Bezos Way," is only marketing fluff, not a strategy. And think about it: Mr. Bezos got us to read books on pieces of plastic and to query an imaginary woman residing in a cylindrical speaker. We weren't discontented. We were amazed.
Years ago, I took a stab at understanding Bill Gates's strategy for Microsoft. I likened him to James Monroe. As with the Monroe Doctrine, Mr. Gates defended to the death his hemisphere -- that is, basically anything that touched his Windows operating system. His dominance of compression, word processors and spreadsheets forced others to play in markets away from Microsoft. But Mr. Gates fenced himself in. He was Microstuck as innovation happened in other worlds: the Palm Pilot organizer, Netscape browser, Google search, Apple iPhone.
Is there a Bezos Doctrine? I suspect he learned the Gates lesson well. Too well, as Mr. Bezos is now channeling pioneers, be they Columbus or James T. Kirk, exploring strange new worlds. His strategy is that he doesn't let business models get in his way while exploring on the edge. He started selling books with no real endgame in sight. He squeezed prices and didn't make much money. But Amazon shareholders gave Mr. Bezos a long runway, as they anticipated long-term riches. He was forced to create an infrastructure -- digital clicks and analog bricks -- to move merchandise. Amazon pops up distribution centers in new cities in mere months. With same-day delivery, it is a logistics beast. But making a ton of money wasn't immediately important.
Amazon's digital infrastructure was good enough that Mr. Bezos could rent it out to others -- by the server, by the minute -- including specialized artificial intelligence and machine-learning servers. Amazon Web Services, now a $22 billion business with fat margins, supports a huge chunk of Amazon's value. It's almost as if he built the world's largest nonprofit store just to perfect and then rent out his back office. Business model to come.
The same is true with other projects. The Kindle seems like an offshoot of selling books. But in the end, it was an excuse to explore devices. Amazon failed with its Fire phones, and the Fire tablets are mediocre. But the Amazon Echo personal assistant, which doesn't work without the cloud and machine learning to understand your voice, is piling into kitchens and living rooms. No one seems to care that Alexa is listening to everything we say! Business model to come.
Supermarkets are next through Whole Foods, also known as Whole Paycheck. Free-range quinoa home delivery experiment? Business model to come.
Amazon even has a secret health-care project named 1492. (Columbus, we get it!) It recently hired a top informatics guy from the Food and Drug Administration. Medical records? Prescription drugs? Prime same-day delivery of doctors? A recent health-care deal with J.P. Morgan and Berkshire Hathaway has wags guessing. Amazon knows what we eat, what junk food or vitamins we buy, our exercise preferences. There's a pony in there somewhere -- and no guarantee of success -- but unencumbered by near-term business models, Amazon can explore away.
I'm convinced the real secret to Mr. Bezos's success is that he hates PowerPoint slides. He insists instead on six-page narratives at meetings. Stories codify exploration. Here's one: Put Alexa in every doctor's office to listen and correctly fill in medical records automatically from the transcripts, freeing doctors to actually care for patients! Business model to come (but pretty obvious).
Mr. Bezos may want to own everything, but talk of breaking up Amazon is envy. He is creating the future while others, much like Bill Gates, defend the divinely discontent status quo. Amaze me or get out of the way.

Credit: By Andy Kessler
