Amazon just opened its most-automated warehouse yet. But underneath the robotics and artificial-intelligence technology at the site, the facility will still rely on thousands of employees.
The e-commerce behemoth said its 3 million-square-foot building in Shreveport, La., is its first warehouse to use automation and artificial intelligence at every step of the fulfillment process.
The facility, opened in the midst of the frantic holiday retail season that pushes many millions of added shipments through fulfillment networks, shows how companies are spreading automation through their distribution centers to get online orders to consumers at an ever faster pace.
The sprawling site also demonstrates the challenges Amazon and other companies face as they seek to turn over some of the most physically demanding and repetitive warehouse tasks to robots.
Amazon has hired more than 1,400 people at the Shreveport distribution center in recent months and plans to eventually employ 2,500 workers picking orders, loading and unloading trucks and managing the robotics systems.
Warehouse operators have increasingly turned to automation, from robotic arms that lift and pack items to disks that move stacks of shelves around facilities. Some companies run fully automated buildings. U.K.-based Ocado Group, for example, has built several automated fulfillment centers that use robotics to move bins across a grid system without aisles for human workers to walk through.
The idea is to speed up operations, save on labor costs and make warehouses safer for the workers that remain.
The safety measures are crucial, Amazon says.
Amazon has been the subject of federal and state scrutiny over the treatment of the workers at its facilities. The warehousing sector had one of the highest rates of injuries and illnesses in the U.S. in 2023, with about 4.7 cases recorded per 100 workers compared with the national average of 2.4 cases per 100 workers, according to Bureau of Labor Statistics data.
The company says it has made substantial improvements to safety over the past four years, partly due to investments in technology.
Some traditional warehouse roles have proved too difficult for Amazon to fully automate, however, partly because the company sells more than 400 million widely varied products that range in size, weight and fragility, from dog toys to toaster ovens, said Rueben Scriven, research manager for the warehouse automation sector at research firm Interact Analysis.
"If you don't know what items you're going to be handling, it makes it very difficult to create an automated system that's flexible enough to handle the various items," Scriven said.
Humans can easily look into a storage container packed full of goods, identify a particular item and know how to pick it up and handle it, whether it is a bottle of shampoo or a sweater.
"The tactile grasp that the human hand has, and the situational awareness and the perception of the human brain, is unmatched," said Tye Brady, chief technologist at Amazon Robotics.
Amazon is using three different automated robotic arms at its new building, including its Sparrow device that is outfitted with suction cups and artificial intelligence software that can identify objects by characteristics such as color, shape and size.
Those systems aren't picking through bins to find individual items customers have ordered, Brady said. "That's a holy grail in robotics. We're not doing that yet," he said.
Instead, robots at the facility carry storage containers full of merchandise to human employees who look inside and pick out the item a customer ordered, then place that item into a tote box that goes onto a conveyor belt and is taken to be packaged.
Human workers also load and unload trucks at the Shreveport facility, and pack orders that are an unusual size or shape.
The company said many of the roles at its new building involve managing and working with robots, jobs Amazon says are safer and higher paid than traditional warehouse jobs.
Brady said Amazon warehouses using its latest automation will be able to handle one million orders a day, creating many opportunities for issues that require a human touch. "As we become more productive, we have more throughput, and we also generate more exceptions," he said.
Amazon plans to start rolling out some of the technology at the Shreveport building to other warehouses across the U.S. next year, Brady said.
Credit: By Liz Young
