Snapchat on Friday launched a search tool for its popular Stories feature, an attempt to broaden the app's appeal by opening up content to more users.
The new tool uses machine learning to scrape information in the posts, such as text and visual elements, to show users relevant content such as a local basketball game, the scene at a nearby bar or puppies from other users they don't follow. Until now, users only saw Stories -- curated features -- from users they follow and ones Snapchat served up to them.
It is the first major change to the Snapchat app since parent company Snap Inc. went public in early March. Going public has exposed Snap to more scrutiny of its user and revenue numbers -- and increased investor pressure to improve both. Snap identified sustaining user growth as one of its biggest risks.
Snapchat has become popular by allowing users to share photos and videos in personal messages and among small groups, rather than the wide broadcasting that made Twitter Inc. and Facebook Inc. popular. That one-to-one messaging drives the frequency with which users visit, according to Cowen & Co. analyst John Blackledge.
But the one-to-many communication that Snap is pushing with its Stories feature is a key driver of time spent on its platform, says Mr. Blackledge. Snap has pushed the amount of time Snapchat users spend on the social network as a key metric of its reach. Snap says users spend an average of 25 to 30 minutes daily on the app.
Allowing searches on Stories could get users to hang around in the app longer. The new search tool will only display content that users submit to "Our Story" on Snapchat.
Search has been a significant host for advertising for other companies, such as Alphabet Inc.'s Google, earning money by displaying sponsored results alongside organic search results. Snapchat isn't currently putting ads in the display results and declined to say if it would.
Stories are an important part of Snapchat's efforts to make money, because they are one of the main places in the app where Snap displays ads.
Credit: By Georgia Wells
