Every fall, the Journal convenes some of the finest minds in technology for a couple of days of communion and colloquy on the southern California coast at Laguna Beach. The D Live conference gathers big tech chiefs, ambitious entrepreneurs, innovative thinkers, opportunistic investors and the odd digitally inclined celebrity and others.
For your doughty journalists, I should stress, it's not all sun and ceviche. The Journal's reporters assiduously prepare themselves to cross-examine the tech aristocracy on stage in an effort to provide you, dear reader (and viewer), with a deeper grasp of the challenges and opportunities for our rapidly evolving economy.
But, of course, as with all such events, the location is picked carefully, and it's not exactly an arduous assignment. The thinking that animates the conference circuit is that a place like Laguna, where attendees meet against a backdrop of heart-stopping ocher sunsets, is highly conducive to productive discourse. But it's hard to escape the slightly awkward mental gap between the modified hedonism inside the walls and the realities of a striving economy outside.
This year, the juxtaposition was especially -- and doubly -- jarring. As the leaders of companies such as AT&T, Uber, Alphabet and Amazon swapped the stage with the likes of Gwyneth Paltrow and Kevin Hart, the participants' minds were on the communities just up the coast being consumed by the wildfires raging through the state. California's elemental peril -- fires, earthquakes, mudslides -- is central to the Golden State's psyche, but even for people used to such devastation, the last few weeks have been an abrupt jolt to confidence. It's hard not to be drawn to the irony that America's most innovative and forward-looking state, which has birthed waves of ever more sophisticated technology, is still such easy prey to the most primitive of threats to human life and property.
And if you'll forgive the pathetic fallacy, the reminder of the natural peril outside was matched by a sense of unease here about the figurative flames licking at the mighty tech sector itself. As we gathered this week, the decline in stock prices of U.S. technology companies large and small accelerated. Apple is down more than 15% and Netflix more than 20% from their recent peaks. Facebook is off 35%. The tech-heavy Nasdaq index is off 10%.
There's no panic yet, but I detect a rising unease about a slowing pace of innovation, intensified public scrutiny and rising interest rates. Nobody was exactly fiddling, but there's more than a faint whiff of carbon in the air.
Two particular concerns are converging in a way that threatens the remarkable decades-long economic hegemony of Silicon Valley.
One is rising awareness of the competitive challenge from China. It's a commonplace now -- and a topic widely discussed this week in Laguna -- that China's tech sector is increasingly innovative rather than adaptive. In artificial intelligence especially, there's a broad sense that Beijing is moving into the early stages of leadership. A number of factors explain this, but perhaps the most important is the sheer volume of data from which the AI algorithms draw. The lives of China's 1.6 billion people are already deeply immersed in digital activity, which generates an extraordinary wealth of data.
As the investor and author Kai-Fu Lee put it at the conference, "If data is the new oil, China is the new Saudi Arabia." But China has one other big advantage: privacy, or rather the lack thereof.
U.S. tech companies are increasingly facing a backlash from consumers, businesses and politicians about the widespread exploitation of personal data. In Europe, the regulatory remediation has gone further, but action in the U.S. seems inevitable too.
Twenty years ago, the rise of Silicon Valley was very much in tune with the early, heady days of the post-Cold War world: Tech was a liberalizing force, empowering individuals, equipping them with data and tools to challenge authority and shape their own lives. It seemed a practical embodiment of the end of history, the spread of freedom and liberal democracy.
Today, technology is viewed increasingly as a threat to freedom: from enabler to Big Brother in two decades. As Peter Thiel, one of U.S.'s most successful investors and original thinkers, said in Laguna, it's no accident that the Chinese government is the most enthusiastic and effective exponent of AI. How we confront this emergent challenge may be a defining issue of our age.

Credit: By Gerard Baker
