Berkshire Hathaway Inc. sold about a third of its shares in International Business Machines Corp. this year, Berkshire Chairman Warren Buffett told CNBC.
Berkshire held about 81 million IBM shares at the end of last year, making it Big Blue's largest shareholder with a stake of 8.6%, according to FactSet. Berkshire sold 24 million or 25 million shares, CNBC said, with Mr. Buffett telling the network he has "revalued it somewhat downward" because of strong competition.
The report came ahead of Berkshire's widely attended annual meetingon Saturdayin Omaha, Neb., and the release of the company's first-quarter earnings results.
Berkshire said its first-quarter net earnings fell 27%, hurt by weaker investment gains.
The company reported first-quarter net earnings of $4.06 billion, or $2,469 per Class A share equivalent, from $5.59 billion, or $3,401 a share, in the year-earlier period. Operating earnings, which exclude some investment results, fell to $3.56 billion, or $2,163 a Class A share, from $3.74 billion, or $2,274 a Class A share, in the year prior. Investment gains totaled $205 million in the first quarter, down from $2.38 billion a year ago.
The IBM sale adds to Berkshire's growing cash pile. Berkshire held $96.5 billion in cash at the end of the first quarter, up from $86 billion at year-end.
Berkshire sold the IBM shares above $180 each, Mr. Buffett said. Berkshire's average purchase price for its IBM stake was roughly $170, according to the company's annual report. IBM shares, which ended trade Thursday at $159.05, hovered above $180 from late February to early March. Friday, shares of the Armonk, N.Y.-based company fell 2.5% to $155.05.
An IBM representative didn't provide an immediate comment on the news.
Mr. Buffett told CNBC that IBM Chief Executive Ginni Rometty met with him "a few weeks ago" and asked him about reports that he was selling IBM stock. Mr. Buffett said he confirmed the selling but didn't provide the rationale or the details.
Berkshire first bought IBM in 2011. Mr. Buffett had avoided technology stocks for years, saying he didn't understand them. After Berkshire's IBM stake was first revealed, Mr. Buffett told The Wall Street Journal that IBM "fits all my principles . . . it's something we expect to own indefinitely."
The divestiture is the latest blow to IBM, which said last monththat its revenue fell for the 20thconsecutive quarter in the first three months of the year. Ms. Rometty has been working to offset waning older businesses with younger ones like cloud computing, where Amazon.com Inc.'s Amazon Web Services dominates, and artificial intelligence, a stronghold of Alphabet Inc.'s Google division.
---
Ted Greenwald contributed to this article.
Credit: By Nicole Friedman
