The S&P 500 swung between slight gains and losses Wednesday afternoon, with technology shares rising as energy stocks fell alongside oil prices.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average declined 13 points, or less than 0.1%, to 21466 by midday. The S&P 500 rose 0.1% and the Nasdaq Composite added 0.5% as U.S. markets reopened after Independence Day.
The technology sector has come under pressure in recent weeks as investors worried that its outperformance has left it susceptible to a selloff. The S&P 500's tech sector has been the index's best performer this year and was up 1% Wednesday, on track to end a three-session losing streak.
Semiconductor stocks led the sector higher after chip maker Nvidia announced an artificial-intelligence technology partnership with Chinese internet giant Baidu. Nvidia added 2.6%, while Advanced Micro Devices rose 5.4% and Micron Technology gained 3.7%.
Investors will be closely watching quarterly earnings reports to see whether tech firms can keep increasing sales despite sluggish economic growth, said Laurie Kamhi, Managing Director and Partner of LCK Wealth Management at HighTower.
"There's going to be a huge disparity in the winners and losers," Ms. Kamhi said, with investors favoring companies with good cash flow.
Declines in energy shares weighed on major U.S. indexes Wednesday, with U.S. crude-oil prices on track to end an eight-session winning streak -- the longest rally since 2010. The S&P 500 energy sector shed 1% as crude futures fell 3.6% to $45.36 a barrel. Oil entered into a bear market June 20 amid oversupply concerns before prices rallied at the end of the month.
Lower oil prices helped support haven assets, with the yield on the 10-year Treasury note falling to 2.337%, according to Tradeweb, down from 2.352% Monday. Yields fall as prices rise.
Investors have focused on global central-bank signals in recent trading sessions, as some officials signal they might be ready to ease off on massive stimulus programs. Minutes from the Federal Reserve's June meeting, which were due later Wednesday, could help cement expectations for U.S. interest-rate increases.
"I think the Fed will set the pace," said Alan Wilson, investment manager at State Street Global Advisors. "It's going to be important to see how they talk around the recent downside surprise in inflation," he said, noting he expects officials to view it as transitory.
Elsewhere, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.2%. Business surveys in the eurozone released Wednesday showed the bloc's economic recovery likely accelerated in the second quarter of 2017, adding to expectations for the European Central Bank to wind down its massive bond-purchase program.
Benoit Coeure, an ECB executive board member, said Wednesday the central bank hadn't yet discussed making changes to its policy. But many investors continue to bet on tighter policy ahead.
"We've seen decent improvement across the bloc," Mr. Wilson said. "The ECB are tiptoeing toward the edge of their position," he added, saying he expects sovereign-bond yields to continue to edge higher across Europe and the U.S. as central bankers align their policies with a brightening global economy.
Earlier, Asian markets mostly climbed following a bruising Tuesday session. Japan's Nikkei Stock Average ended up 0.2%, while South Korea's Kospi rose 0.3% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index rose 0.5%.

Credit: By Riva Gold and Amrith Ramkumar
