In the years preceding its invasion of Ukraine, Russia set out to sanction-proof its economy by developing local substitutes for key foreign products, such as microprocessors. The only problem: Since it lacks advanced semiconductor fabrication capacity, production of these Russian-designed chips was outsourced, mainly to Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. After the invasion of Ukraine, Taiwan joined the U.S. in banning the export of sensitive technology to Russia. TSMC immediately promised to comply.
Russia may be an energy superpower but Taiwan is a semiconductor superpower, and semiconductors are harder to replace than oil. Therein lies a critical insight about the emerging Cold War between Russia and China on one side and the West -- the U.S. and its democratic allies -- on the other. This Cold War will be much more of an economic contest than the first, and the balance of economic power favors the U.S. and its allies. And it's not even close.
Chinese President Xi Jinping likes to boast, "The East is rising, the West is declining." When the rivalry was limited to China and the U.S., this had some resonance: At current rates of growth, China will surpass the U.S. as the world's largest economy as soon as 2030 despite U.S. gains in the last year.
But with China partnered with Russia and the West more united than ever, this is turning into a contest of alliances, and Xi couldn't be more wrong. In this framing, "East" and "West" are not geographic, but geopolitical, labels. If "the East" is defined as those countries with which China is closely aligned (it eschews formal alliances), only China is any sense rising. Russia was a stagnating petrostate even before sanctions eviscerated its economy. The others, such as Kazakhstan, Belarus, Pakistan, North Korea, Cambodia and Laos, are poor, slow-growing, or both. The West, defined as the European Union, the anglosphere (the U.S., Australia, Canada, Britain and New Zealand) and East Asia's three big, rich democracies, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, may not be growing rapidly, but it is growing and has a gigantic head start. As former U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said a Chinese official once told him: "You have all the good allies."
By itself, China accounted for 18% of global gross domestic product at current exchange rates last year, based on International Monetary Fund data. Adding Russia and their assorted allies brings the total to just 20%. The U.S., meanwhile, accounted for 24%, and adding its allies vaults the total to 59%.
While sanctions on Russia demonstrate the West's control of the global financial system, long-run economic advantage will come from technology and knowledge. In pure science -- such as space travel and atomic energy -- Russia and China certainly hold their own. But in commercially useful technology, Western companies lead in almost every field, from commercial aviation and biotechnology to semiconductors and software.
"If you have a coherent strategy across the major democracies, you're in an enormously robust position in terms of financial, economic and technological leverage," said former Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, now president of the Asia Society think tank.
Of course the East plays a central role in the global economy. As recent market turmoil illustrates, Russia is a key supplier of not just oil and gas but metals such as palladium, used in catalytic converters, and nickel. China dominates manufacturing of countless goods whose value became abundantly clear during the pandemic, when demand for some, such as protective personal equipment, skyrocketed.
To a great extent these strengths reflect Russia's comparative advantage in geology and China's in factory labor. The West's comparative advantage is in knowledge. That's why Russia and China court Western investment. For example, to develop a complex liquefied natural gas (LNG) project in the Arctic, Russia relied on Norwegian, French and Italian contractors for essential expertise, research firm Rystad Energy notes.
Catching up with the West is no easy task, as semiconductors illustrate. Western companies dominate all the key steps in this critical and highly complex industry, from chip design (led by U.S.-based Nvidia, Intel, Qualcomm and AMD and Britain's ARM) to the fabrication of advanced chips (led by Intel, Taiwan's TSMC and South Korea's Samsung) and the sophisticated machines that etch chip designs onto wafers (produced by Applied Materials and Lam Research in the U.S., the Netherlands' ASML Holding and Japan's Tokyo Electron).
Russia and China have made efforts to reduce this dependence. Russia developed locally designed microprocessors called Elbrus and Baikal to run data centers, cybersecurity operations and other applications. Though neither has achieved significant market share, they "represent the pinnacle of local design capability," said Kostas Tigkos, principal at Jane's, a defense intelligence provider. Russia hoped that they would eventually displace chips made by Intel and AMD, he said. "This would not only have been the foundation for diversifying their installed base, but a stepping stone for exports of those processors to other friendly nations." But without manufacturers like TSMC to make the chips, Russia is facing "the complete disintegration of their aspirations to develop their own industry."
China has a much bigger semiconductor industry than Russia, and its partly state-owned national champion, Semiconductor Manufacturing International Co. (SMIC), could in theory make Russia's chips, but that would take at least a year, Mr. Tigkos said. Moreover, its efforts to catch up to its Taiwanese competitor have been set back by sanctions. In 2020 the U.S. required companies using American technology to obtain a license to sell to SMIC. This effectively limited its ability to acquire advanced equipment from Netherlands' ASML, which is critical for "any country that wants to have a competitive semiconductor industry," Mr. Tigkos said.
Why does all this matter to the outcome of the geopolitical contest? Over time economic weight, strength and vitality are what allow countries to sustain military capability, achieve and maintain technological superiority, and remain attractive partners for other countries.
Yet GDP does not automatically equate to strategic influence. To win a Cold War, it's not enough for the West to hold the best economic cards, it has to know how to play them. Economic statecraft, as this is called, does not come naturally to the West: Its institutions are built on the assumption that companies are private enterprises, not instruments of the state. They do business wherever it's profitable, regardless of their home countries' strategic interests.
No such division exists in Russia and China. Russian President Vladimir Putin used state control of key industries such as natural gas to reward or threaten neighbors. The Chinese Communist Party insists that state-owned and even private enterprises give priority to the state's interests. In return, China tilts the playing field in those companies' favor at home and abroad. Chinese state-sponsored hackers steal commercial secrets from Western companies, the U.S. has alleged. China is a master of economic coercion, punishing countries such as Australia or Lithuania or companies that cross its diplomatic red lines by depriving them of access to the Chinese market, knowing other countries and companies will eagerly take their place.
China has also learned how to play companies and countries in the West off against one another -- favoring whoever promises to share more of its technology with Chinese partners, or avoids criticism of China.
Western governments, such as Germany, exaggerate China's economic power and underappreciate their own, said Luke Patey, an expert on China's international economic strategy at the Danish Institute for International Studies. "Germany has a full house when it comes to geoeconomics but plays like it has a pair of threes," Mr. Patey said. The West frets that Chinese companies lead in fifth-generation telecommunications equipment -- such as Huawei Technologies -- and electric vehicle batteries. But, he said, "We sell short the fact that up there with Huawei are Ericsson, Nokia and Samsung," based in Sweden, Finland and South Korea, respectively. Meanwhile Japan's Panasonic and South Korea's LG "are making the most sophisticated electric vehicle batteries in the world."
For the West to play this game, it will have to more skillfully employ its ample economic assets toward geopolitical ends. The sanctions on Russia show that it can: The West showed a remarkable breadth and unity in its willingness to sustain significant economic discomfort in order to punish Russia. When the Trump administration imposed export controls on China, Taiwan did not join in but its companies were forced to comply because they use U.S. technology. This time Taiwan itself locked arms with the U.S. "Taiwan strongly condemns Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Our country joins the U.S., EU & other like-minded partners in sanctioning Russia," its Ministry of Foreign Affairs tweeted.
Still, in one sense this is an easy test. Will the West's unity persist if Ukraine slips from the headlines and economic pain mounts? More important, could it muster the same effort with China, a critical market and supplier to many companies and countries in the West?
If China attacks Taiwan, which it considers a renegade province, ostracizing it from the global economy would be next to impossible. Nonetheless, Western governments have begun circumscribing business ties with China in response to its more aggressive behavior toward its neighbors and "Made in China 2025," an economic blueprint for dominance in key technologies. Germany and Italy are applying more stringent criteria to foreign investment in their companies, wary of advanced technology being transferred to Chinese competitors. Japan is now debating an economic security law to safeguard supply chains and screen foreign investment and equipment used in sensitive infrastructure. Companies that had prioritized expansion on China are now boosting their Western presence. TSMC is building fabrication plants in Arizona and Japan while Intel has announced new or expanded facilities in Ohio, France, Germany and Italy.
Western cooperation in such efforts, though nascent, is growing. When the U.S. and European Union settled a long-running dispute over each others' subsidies to Boeing and Airbus last year, they also agreed to develop a common approach toward "non-market economies," i.e. Russia and China, on civil aircraft. For example, they agreed those countries cannot make investment in their aviation sectors contingent on "the transfer of technology or jobs to the detriment" of the U.S. and Europe.
Sustaining an economic edge also requires continuous reinvestment. At present, the West holds a comfortable lead. Based on purchasing power rather than current exchange rates, China and Russia spent $570 billion on research and development in 2019, the latest figures available; the U.S. and its largest democratic allies spent more than twice as much, $1.5 trillion, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
When it comes to human capital, the lead narrows slightly: Russia and China have 2.5 million researchers, the U.S. and its allies about 5.2 million. It's in the future talent pool that the gap really starts to close. China alone awards more science and engineering undergraduate degrees than the U.S., Britain, France, Germany, Japan and South Korea combined. Students in China are more likely to pursue science and engineering than in other countries. This pool of talent is a formidable engine for domestic innovation and a magnet for foreign and domestic investment. The lack of a similar pool constrains American efforts to bring critical manufacturing back to the U.S. In a speech in Taiwan last year Morris Chang, the founder of TSMC, complained that American engineers "don't want to work in the manufacturing industry . . . Taiwan's superiority in this is that it has a large number of excellent and dedicated engineers willing to throw themselves into manufacturing."
The West makes up for the shortage of homegrown talent through immigration. A study by the Peking University Institute of International and Strategic Studies earlier this year lamented that 34% of China's top artificial intelligence talents worked in China while 56% worked in the U.S., whose "relatively relaxed and innovative scientific research environment is . . . favored by scientific and technological talents." Tech entrepreneurs are motivated by freedom and wealth, both of which are slipping out of reach in China and Russia.
Thus a key factor in whether the West can sustain its edge is whether it can remain a magnet for talent. Yet the West's openness to trade and immigration and even its commitment to democracy have come under stress. In the last decade support in Europe and the U.S. has surged for right-wing populists opposed to immigration and free trade, skeptical of NATO, and admiring of Mr. Putin. These include Marine Le Pen, a contender for president in France's elections this spring, and former U.S. President Donald Trump, who may seek the White House again in 2024. Democracy has backslid in Hungary, Poland and the U.S., according to the think tank Freedom House.
This points to the final and perhaps biggest challenge for Western nations. Having shown how effectively they can sever ties with Russia, can they be equally effective in strengthening ties with each other and unaligned players like India, Brazil and Vietnam -- and thus be an attractive alternative to the autocratic East?
After World War II the U.S. used trade to strengthen other democracies and bind allies, and its reward was a democratic and prosperous West. Yet since the 2000s Americans have soured on this model, as expanded trade with the likes of China brought economic turmoil and little geopolitical benefit. Mr. Trump saw trade as a zero-sum game and hit allies and adversaries alike with tariffs. He pulled the U.S. out of the Trans-Pacific Partnership with 11 other Pacific rim countries, a pact covering not just tariffs but investment, intellectual property, data and the behavior of state-owned enterprises, intended as an alternative to China. Mr. Biden has resolved tariff disputes but pushed to expand "Buy American" regulations that penalize imports. He has offered no trade-agreement analog to his expanded military ties with allies in Europe and Asia, although he has promised a less ambitious "Indo-Pacific Economic Framework."
Meanwhile, China is fast cultivating its own economic sphere of influence, via foreign investment, its "Belt and Road" infrastructure initiative, and trade agreements, even applying to join the TPP, renamed the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership.
"China has studied very carefully the American postwar model of how their global and regional military domination was augmented by financial and economic domination," said Mr. Rudd. China, he said, seeks to achieve its foreign policy aims by making countries throughout Asia, including American allies, dependent on its trade and investment, and eventually its currency. Mr. Rudd urged the U.S. to return to the TPP and revive a similar pact with Europe. The U.S. needs to recognize where its strategic advantage lies, "which is through free trade, open commerce and open capital flows."
Credit: By Greg Ip
