Count Warren Buffett among those concerned about the dangers of artificial intelligence.
The 93-year-old chairman and chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway compared the rapidly growing technology to the development of the atomic bomb, saying both could have devastating consequences on society if used incorrectly.
"We let a genie out of the bottle when we developed nuclear weapons," Buffett said Saturday during Berkshire's annual meeting in Omaha, Neb. "AI is somewhat similar -- it's part way out of the bottle."
The billionaire investor acknowledged he knew little about how the underlying technology works, but said he had reason to worry. He recently saw his own image and voice so convincingly replicated by an AI tool that Buffett said even his wife and children would have struggled to determine they were fake.
The power of so-called deepfakes will likely enable even more effective scams, as criminals use AI to ask relatives for money, Buffett predicted.
For months, business leaders have debated how AI will reshape life. Some predict the technology will usher in a wave of white-collar job losses as the technology takes on evermore sophisticated tasks inside companies.
Others are optimistic. JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon said AI could invent cures for cancer or allow more people in future generations to live to 100 years old. "It will create jobs. It will eliminate some jobs. It will make everyone more productive," Dimon said in a recent interview with The Wall Street Journal.
At Berkshire Hathaway, the company has begun using AI inside of some of its businesses to help make its employees more efficient, said Greg Abel, who is Buffett's designated successor as chief executive.
Abel didn't give specifics or name Berkshire subsidiaries using AI, but said the company was looking to deploy the technology to make certain tasks more effective or safer. Berkshire's subsidiaries range from the insurer Geico to Dairy Queen and BNSF Railway.
"At times it displaces the labor, but then hopefully, there's other opportunities," Abel said.
Buffett, for his part, said he struggled to predict the ultimate effects of AI on the world.
"It has enormous potential for good and enormous potential for harm," Buffett said. "And I just don't know how that plays out."
Credit: By Chip Cutter
