CVS Health's Medicare business continued to struggle in the second quarter, fueling yet another cut to its full-year earnings outlook, a new $2 billion cost-cutting plan and the departure of a top executive.
CVS bet big on attracting seniors to its Aetna Medicare Advantage health plans last year, adding one million new people to its insurance rolls in 2024. But the gamble began backfiring in the first quarter of the year as seniors used more healthcare services than in the past and the government has become stingier in how much it pays private insurers.
On Wednesday, CVS said the pressures continued into the second quarter. The company reported total revenue of $91.2 billion in the quarter, up 2.6% from a year ago, and driven in large part by growth in its Medicare and commercial insurance businesses.
But much of the sales increase was eaten up by higher medical costs, and adjusted earnings per share of $1.83 in the quarter were down 17.2% from last year.
For the fourth time in nine months, the company cut its 2024 earnings guidance, which it blamed on its Medicare woes. CVS now expects adjusted earnings per share to be in a range of $6.40 to $6.65 this year; just three months ago, it told investors to expect $7 a share. The new earnings target is down 23% from its original forecast of at least $8.50 a share back in December.
CVS's Medicare miscalculation will cost at least one senior executive his job. The company said it had decided to let go of Aetna President Brian Kane based on the current performance and outlook for its insurance business. The unit will now be led by Chief Executive Karen Lynch, who served as Aetna president from 2015 to 2021; both she and Chief Financial Officer Tom Cowhey will oversee its day-to-day operations.
CVS on Wednesday said it has a plan to cut $2 billion in costs over several years by streamlining its business operations, rationalizing its business portfolio and speeding up its use of artificial intelligence and automation.
"We are taking action today to ensure we make the most of our many opportunities," Lynch said.
In addition, CVS appointed Chief Strategy Officer Katerina Guerraz, who previously oversaw Aetna's Medicare business, to serve as chief operating officer of the insurance unit.
CVS spent 90% of its insurance premium revenue on medical costs in the first half of this year, up from 85.4% in the year-earlier period, driven in large part by its Medicare business. CVS rivals Cigna and Humana have also reported higher healthcare utilization this year, spooking investors.
CVS is one of the most powerful healthcare companies in the U.S., having grown into a juggernaut through a 2018 merger with Aetna that combined retail pharmacies, pharmaceutical industry middlemen, and health insurance under one roof. More recently, the company has tried expanding its reach to providing doctors services itself, and spent $18.6 billion combined on the acquisitions of home healthcare company Signify Health and primary care center Oak Street Health.
CVS shares fell 3.2% on Wednesday and are down more than 28% so far this year.
Generate image description

Credit: By Joseph Walker
