RIO DE JANEIRO -- When Brazilian President Luiz Inacio "Lula" da Silva called for "more multilateralism" at the opening of the Group of 20 nations summit Monday, the remark appeared aimed at someone who wasn't in the room: Donald Trump.
Many leaders from Europe, Asia, Latin America and Africa at the summit and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting in Peru last week made clear their alarm at prospects for a sharp U.S. turn inward on trade, health and environmental policy with Trump's looming return to the presidency.
"Isolation, protectionism and trade wars only lead to recession, conflict and poverty," said Gen. Luong Cuong, Vietnam's new president. "We need to eliminate the mindset of 'one side wins, the other loses' and not allow nationalism to distort policy."
President Biden didn't mention Trump in remarks at a G-20 session on climate change Tuesday, but he urged leaders who shared his belief in multilateral solutions not to back down -- even though he will soon be gone from the world stage. "History is watching us," he said. "I urge us to keep the faith and keep going."
It was a tough sell, even to those who agreed with him.
Some leaders seemed more intent on signaling to Trump that they are open to cutting deals that spare their economies and established defense arrangements from too much disruption. Others sought to remind the president-elect that their countries gave more to the U.S. in the form of investments than they cost Washington in overseas alliance commitments and other favorite Trump targets.
"The challenges the global community faces today can only be addressed through multilateral solutions for a better tomorrow," read the statement by G-20 leaders.
Senior Biden administration officials hinted at their concern that deals they have reached on the use of artificial intelligence or on fighting climate change might collapse after Trump's inauguration on Jan. 20. Biden called for global cooperation to help Ukraine repel Russia's invasion, brokering a cease-fire in Gaza and ending the war in Sudan. "The incoming administration isn't in the business of providing us assurances about anything," said Biden's national-security adviser, Jake Sullivan.
When Biden met Chinese President Xi Jinping on Saturday, Xi directed some of his opening remarks at Trump.
"Make the wise choice," Xi said about the future of U.S.-China relations. "China is ready to work with the new U.S. administration to maintain communication, expand cooperation, and manage differences."
Few world leaders appeared optimistic at persuading Trump to change course. "I think we are moving to a new protectionist world, led by the U.S.," said Andres Velasco, a former Chilean finance minister, in Peru. Questions about Trump's commitment to the U.S. security umbrella in Europe and in Asia could further reorder economies, he said.
Officials from Europe and Asia warned Trump against forcing Ukraine to make a deal that allows Russia to keep territory it seized. French President Emmanuel Macron warned about a reversal in climate-change and free-trade policies.
Credit: By Alexander Ward and James T. Areddy
