Apple Gives ARM Muscle
ARM Holdings has the power to process even its elevated valuation.
The chip designer behind 95% of the world's smartphones, including Apple's iPhone 6, reached double-digit-percentage growth in royalty revenue in the fourth quarter, after having disappointed consensus estimates in the previous five quarters. The data doesn't even include the expected windfall from Apple's record fourth-quarter performance, which should flow into ARM's revenue stream this year as royalties are recognized with a three-month lag.
ARM designs processors and software development tools, then makes money through licensing agreements and subsequent royalties from each unit shipped. In the fourth quarter, the company signed 53 licensing agreements, compared with 26 the previous year. Processor royalties revenue rose 16% in the quarter, compared with ARM's 7% rate of growth this time last year.
There are several reasons why this growth trajectory should accelerate. ARM is quickly expanding in embedded machine-to-machine chips, which account for 34% of the processor royalties. In mobile, which contributes about half of the royalties, ARM benefits as the chips inside devices get more sophisticated. For its latest mobile processors, the company charges at least 25% more than for its previous generation on a per-unit basis.
While the growth rate for 4G smartphones is slowing in developed nations, it is beginning to pick up in emerging markets. In China alone, the number of next-generation smartphones to be shipped in 2015 should reach 144 million, doubling this year's shipment, according to IHS Technology.
The region also is a battleground for ARM against one old nemesis, Intel, which last year joined with Chinese semiconductor company Rockchip to develop mobile processors. This is an industry with high barriers to entry; existing applications and much software are designed around ARM-based chips, so customers won't be leaving soon. But Intel has the backing of domestic firms and could dent ARM's dominance in the long term.
ARM is trading at 36 times forward earnings, more than double that of Intel, according to FactSet. Even compared with its own 10-year historical average of 31 times forward earnings, ARM looks richly valued. But the predictability of the business model, and its earnings growth, suggests it can still pick up speed.
-- Thao Hua
Beyond Baidu's Tough Quarter
Baidu posted disappointing earnings in the fourth quarter, but China's dominant search engine is starting to look like a bargain compared with the country's other Internet giants.
The company's revenue rose 48% from a year earlier in the fourth quarter, but net profit rose just 16%. Analysts were looking for a 24% rise. The company's guidance on revenue in the first quarter of 2015 also fell a bit short of forecasts.
There were a couple of factors weighing on results, neither of which is unique to Baidu.
One was lower monetization of mobile. Searches on smartphones exceeded those on PCs for the first time in the second half of 2014, the company said. That is welcome, but mobile traffic is harder to make money from. Advertisers aren't used to it, and the smaller screen leaves less space for ads. The same issue has contributed to slowing revenue growth at Alibaba Group Holding.
Margins are also being compressed by aggressive spending. Sales, general and administrative expenses rose 89% from a year earlier in the December quarter, while research and development spending rose 69%.
The risk is that spending becomes undisciplined. A new $300 million artificial intelligence research center in Silicon Valley could be a smart investment, or prove to be a trophy project with little commercial application.
Still, Baidu's overall strategy looks sound. It has been more conservative than Alibaba and Tencent Holdings on acquisitions, focusing its spending on promoting mobile offerings, like a new service that connects users to local merchants.
Baidu's strong position in search and maps and its Google-like predominance in China's closed-off Internet world give it a platform to capture a lot of mobile activity, such as by helping users find restaurants and shops in their area. Initiatives like these should mean that mobile traffic will eventually become more lucrative than desktop searches, the chief financial officer told analysts Thursday.
Baidu shares were down sharply in after-hours trading. The decline could provide a good entry point. Before the results came out, analysts expected Baidu to increase its earnings at an average 31% a year over the next three years, nearly as fast as Alibaba, and substantially faster than Tencent. Those expectations may get tempered. But trading at just 26 times 2015 earnings, compared with 32 times each for its two rivals, provides plenty of upside.
Investors searching for value in the Chinese Internet will find it with Baidu.
-- Aaron Back
Rio Tinto Show's Some Steel
Rio Tinto is getting over its existential angst about a lack of diversification.
The not-so-diversified miner relies on iron ore for more than 70% of its cash flow, and the price of the steelmaking commodity has tumbled by about 50% over the past year. Yet Rio on Thursday boosted its dividend and announced a $2 billion share buyback. Stranger still, that doesn't look too foolhardy.
Rio's efforts have created space to increase returns to shareholders, even at a time when iron ore, copper and other commodity prices are under pressure. Cost cutting helped shore up profitability. Capital spending of about $8 billion was $1 billion lower than expected. A large improvement in working capital helped Rio's net debt drop sharply. At 19%, net debt to total capital is below the bottom end of Rio's 20% to 30% target range.
The miner's $14.3 billion in cash flow from operations last year nicely covered its capital expenditure and about $4 billion in dividends. The planned buyback would only push its gearing to 21%.
For the moment, it looks as though Rio can keep this up. There is a clear risk that iron ore stays lower for longer. About 300 million metric tons of low-cost production is set to come onto the market before mid-2017, according to Morgan Stanley, 18% growth from last year's supply. Even this year, Rio's expectation for high-cost production coming off the market won't balance added supply, with little confidence in the strength of China's demand.
Were iron-ore prices to languish at current levels, it would knock this year's earnings and cash flow down by roughly $4 billion compared with last year's. That would leave Rio able to cover its reduced capital spending plans of $7 billion and part of its dividend. Weak copper translates into another $600 million hit at spot prices. Yet there are other factors working in Rio's favor: The Australian dollar and oil price at current levels would add about $1.5 billion compared with last year.
Rio, notably among the biggest miners, has scope to chop further. Only a third of its planned investment this year is sustaining, or essential, spending. Roughly $1 billion of Rio's 2015 budget has yet to be approved by the board, part of which relates to the underground expansion at the Oyu Tolgoi copper mine, a project that could easily be delayed further given the continuing standoff with the Mongolian government.
From 2016, a significant chunk of Rio's forecast investment is unapproved. That reflects a slight paucity of growth options but in troubled times means easier flexibility to rein in spending.
In reality, Rio had all-but-promised investors a buyback. And it is going into the market with shares still trading at a discount to an average of large-cap mining peers, according to Jefferies. Some of those rivals face greater balance-sheet pressure. Rio still isn't terribly diversified, but it is making a virtue of being predictable.
-- Helen Thomas
