Hollywood studios, streamers and actors have haggled over issues from increased pay to AI protections, but one issue has proved insurmountable: the union's demand for a cut of streaming services' revenue.
The sticking point in negotiations has frustrated both sides and means consumers will have to wait even longer for work to start on fresh TV shows and films.
Talks for a new labor pact between striking actors and entertainment industry giants stalled Wednesday night over a demand from the Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists that streaming services create a pool of money used to award bonuses to talent on top-performing shows. The union said that pool, to be funded by a cut of streamers' subscriber fees, amounted to less than 57 cents per subscriber.
The breakdown is a sign of the challenges talent and studios face as they sketch out the new economics of an entertainment industry dominated by streaming. Actors don't want to be left behind or undervalued and media companies are largely struggling to turn a profit on monthly streaming subscriptions.
Studios are willing to pay actors bonuses based on how well streaming shows fare, but aren't open sharing revenue or paying the union on a per-subscriber basis. The fissure over revenue sharing is so severe that talks were suspended indefinitely, dashing industry hopes that a deal could be reached quickly in the wake of the writers' resolution of their five-month strike.
SAG is the only union to seek such a revenue sharing agreement in its new deal and has a far larger base of members -- more than 140,000 -- than the Writers Guild of America, which has 11,500 members that went on strike.
SAG and the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, which negotiates on behalf of major studios and streamers like Netflix, Disney, Amazon and Warner Bros. Discovery, accused each other of being unrealistic.
"A bridge too far," is how Netflix Co-Chief Executive Ted Sarandos described the union's demand at the Bloomberg Screentime conference Thursday. SAG fired back in a memo to its membership that it is seeking a "tiny portion" of the "immense revenue" generated by streaming services.
"The premise of it is unrealistic given the market dynamics that the media industry and streaming industry specifically are facing," said Steven Schiffman, adjunct professor at Georgetown University's McDonough School of Business.
In an interview, SAG chief negotiator Duncan Crabtree-Ireland said, "our members are foundational contributors to the success of these streaming platforms."
Actors have been pushing for some form of revenue sharing since their strike began in July. The union initially sought 2% of streaming revenue, a proposal studios and streamers called a nonstarter.
When negotiations restarted last week, SAG again pitched the concept, but lowered its proposal to 1%. This week it also changed its proposal from a formula based on a streamer's overall revenue to one based on their number of subscribers, a person familiar with the union's stance said. That change was the final straw.
SAG's Crabtree-Ireland said the alliance aggressively objected to a revenue share so the union changed its pitch to attach the bonus pool to subscriber fees. The number of subscribers streamers have are already used to determine royalties. The union's view was that the revised proposal was a better deal for the studios.
SAG initially said its request would carry an average cost of $1 per subscriber, or more than $800 million annually, people close to the alliance said. On Wednesday it cut its ask by nearly half to 57 cents.
There are 885 million streaming subscribers around the globe, putting the union's potential bonus pool at more than $500 million annually. Studios called that "an untenable economic burden."
With talks suspended indefinitely, there is a thinner than normal pipeline of fresh scripted television content on TV and streaming services. Movie production and release schedules are up in the air.
Credit: By Joe Flint
