Facing economic headwinds, companies are filling gaps in information-technology teams with freelance software developers, coders and other high-skilled tech workers, while pulling back on efforts to recruit full-time staff, recruiters and industry analysts say.
The number of job postings for software developers on Freelancer.com, an online freelance marketplace, rose 54.7% in the third quarter on a year-over-year basis, the sharpest gain among more than 2,000 job-related skills tracked on the platform, Freelancer.com reported this week.
Demand for freelance coders notched the second-biggest gain, up 45.5%, followed by back-end developers, up 37.7%, the firm said.
Last month, by contrast, new job postings by U.S. employers for full-time IT workers fell 12% from August to roughly 300,000, according to IT trade group CompTIA.
Yet beyond cost-cutting efforts, employers say they are responding to a growing talent pool of IT freelancers with niche skills in areas like artificial intelligence, which can be tapped for specific, short-term enterprise-technology tasks.
"You're looking for highly specialized skills that you wouldn't particularly want to hire for, if it weren't for a given project," said Balaji Bondili, a managing director at accounting firm Deloitte.
Mr. Bondili said Deloitte relies more heavily on IT freelancers than it did before or during the pandemic. Like most companies, he said, it enlists freelancers with specific skills across a range of capabilities, including AI and analytics. Many of these workers increasingly prefer to tackle advanced digital initiatives, then move on, rather than be tied to a single employer, Mr. Bondili said.
On top of being drawn to unique tech challenges, a growing number of IT freelancers prefer the more flexible hours and remote-work opportunities they became accustomed to during pandemic lockdowns, said Tim Herbert, chief research officer at CompTIA.
"The pandemic and, more recently, the turbulence in the economy, spurred demand for greater labor flexibility both among employers and workers," Mr. Herbert said.
"More IT workers are now choosing freelance jobs "as a preferred working model, rather than as a last resort," he said.
Across the tech sector itself, the use of freelance workers has grown by nearly 20% since the onset of Covid-19 in early 2020, said Luke Pardue, an economist at Gusto Inc., a cloud-based payroll, benefits and human-resource management software maker.
Freelancers tend to be cheaper than full-time workers, since employers aren't required to offer benefits, such as health insurance, or pay payroll taxes.
Credit: By Angus Loten
