Compensation for chief marketing officers at growth-stage digitally focused companies rose faster in the past year than for other executive roles, according to data from executive-search and consulting firm Eastward Partners Inc.
Eastward Partners compiled compensation data on more than 1,000 U.S.-based chief marketing officers at digitally focused firms with between 100 and 499 employees. Eastward Partners characterized the firms as largely growth-stage companies, or companies in the digital space that have taken external private equity or venture-capital funding. The compensation data examines median total compensation, which includes base salary and bonus.
Within those companies, CMOs' median total compensation in August was 9.64% higher than a year earlier. That was a sharper rise than seen for other roles, such as CEOs, whose compensation grew 7.45%, or CFOs, whose compensation rose 1.96%, according to Eastward data.
The median total of base salary and bonuses for CMOs at these firms was $275,000.
Eastward Partners said CMO compensation at these companies likely benefited in part from the increase in marketing budgets in recent years.
"During the period of Covid, I think we noticed that -- particularly with companies that are digitally enabled in some way -- if they were not already investing into their marketing capability, it became clear pretty immediately that they had to, in order to grab and maintain market share," said Nicole Balsam, associate partner and head of brand and digital at Eastward Partners.
Marketing chiefs were one of the highest priorities for some companies in their series A or series B funding rounds, and spending on marketing functions was further fueled by a then-free-flowing investment environment, Ms. Balsam said.
Many chief marketing officers are taking on more job functions, reflecting the necessity to not only shape traditional advertising such as TV commercials and billboards, but to drive business transformation, use data and artificial intelligence to reach consumers, and keep up with an ever-complicated marketing landscape.
Donovan Neale-May, executive director of the Chief Marketing Officer Council, a global network of 16,500 senior brand marketing executives, said that as the role has become more complex, it has been a larger challenge to find and keep digital marketing leaders.
"There's big gaps and holes in marketing organizations that they're trying to fill. And that's actually impacting business performance, because they can't find the savvy, smart digital marketing people to fill those gaps," Mr. Neale-May said.
That is even more true for the kinds of smaller companies showing the high growth in CMO compensation growth, said Greg Paull, co-founder and principal of independent marketing consultant R3.
"The war [for] talent has never been more so than at smaller startups, where well-funded CEOs will be open to investing more in CMOs with pedigree to help fuel growth," he said. "CMO salary growth will be more modest at mature corporations where marketing is more a cog in a wheel."
But the outlook for marketing salaries doesn't look as bright.
As the funding environment has cooled, marketing budgets could dry up for those companies that a short time ago saw piles of cash. Ad sellers from tech platforms to TV over the summer reported signs of softening ad spending.
Credit: By Megan Graham
