Trade fears have slammed markets around the world, but U.S. stocks are rising as strong profits and spending lead investors to overlook the risks of a downturn.
The S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average have gone up all but one day since the U.S. and China imposed tariffs on $34 billion of each other's goods on July 6. The S&P 500 is now up 4.8% for the year.
However, international markets have taken a hit: the Shanghai Composite has dropped 14% for the year, South Korea's Kospi Composite Index has shed 6.3%, Germany's DAX has lost 2.9% and Japan's Nikkei Stock Average has declined 0.7%
Some analysts said U.S. markets aren't reflecting possible repercussions from more trade barriers. Tariffs on steel and aluminum have already hurt shares of U.S. manufacturers and producers, even as most stocks have largely been spared.
With the trade tariffs, the U.S. is "shooting itself in the economic foot," said Richard Bernstein, chief investment officer of investment adviser firm Richard Bernstein Advisors.
Should global trade slow broadly or the prices of goods jump, that could in turn cut into spending by consumers and businesses. A 10% rise in import costs could hurt foreign sales and chip away 3% to 4% from per-share earnings growth, Bank of America Merrill Lynch analysts found in a report.
But the U.S. stock market's resilience amid tense trade talks suggests investors are viewing trade-related market ructions as buying opportunities instead of warning signs. The S&P 500, which fell 0.7% on Wednesday after the Trump administration unveiled plans to place tariffs on an additional $200 billion of Chinese goods, rebounded 1% over the following two days.
"The markets are kind of treating the trade dispute as cheap talk. That's a bit of a miscalculation from the political risk point of view," said Mark Rosenberg, chief executive of GeoQuant, which uses artificial intelligence to project geopolitical developments and their impact on markets. "There is going to be some more concrete damage."
The U.S. is in a better position to withstand economic downturns, some analysts said, making the U.S. market a relative haven. Even after a nine-year stock rally, U.S. corporate earnings are strong and consumer confidence is robust.
Goldman Sachs estimates exports to China make up 1% of U.S. gross domestic product. That makes it unlikely tariffs will have a material impact on the earnings growth of U.S. multinational companies, according to the firm.
"If somebody's going to get hurt if we engage in some kind of trade war, it's far more likely to be China than the U.S.," said Mark Grant, chief global strategist and managing director at B. Riley FBR Inc.
To some, the market's calm also reflects the outlook that tariffs won't substantially threaten corporate profits. Analysts remain optimistic about future earnings: Bank of America Merrill Lynch raised last week its 2018 and 2019 earnings-growth estimates for the S&P 500, citing strong U.S. economic data and better-than-expected earnings in the first half of the year.
"It's pretty difficult to get a really dire economic scenario just from the tariffs," said Ed Campbell, a senior portfolio manager at QMA. He said his firm, which is more optimistic about growth in the U.S. than in the rest of the world, has been skewing the equities in its multiasset portfolio toward U.S. stocks.
Morgan Stanley researchers found about a fifth of the volatility in the U.S. stock market since the beginning of March can be explained by trade risk.
"Trade risk is not systemic across equities," said Brian Hayes, a quantitative analyst at the bank. "There were idiosyncratic risks, but it was not affecting the overall market."
Still, some parts of the market are reflecting burgeoning unease, investors said.
Investors are pouring more funds into the S&P 500 utilities sector -- considered a safer bet because of its relatively big dividend payouts. The sector has risen 8.1% over the past four weeks, soaring past the broader index's 0.9% advance across the same period. Shares of smaller, more domestically focused U.S. firms, which are seen as more insulated from global issues, have also outperformed, with the Russell 2000 more than doubling the S&P 500's gain for the year.
Some fear a dire scenario if the trade strife heightens. The S&P 500 could fall as much as 21% to around 2200 if the U.S. and China slap 30% tariffs on each other's goods and global auto tariffs are levied, UBS analysts found in a report.
So far, the markets are "ascribing a very low probability" of a worst-case scenario panning out, said Keith Parker, chief U.S. equity strategist at UBS.
"There's too much at stake on both sides to let relationships deteriorate to that point," Mr. Parker said.
---
Peter Levin contributed to this article.

Credit: By Akane Otani and Ben Eisen
