LE BOURGET, France -- Europe's aviation industry and regulators are eager to expand commercial drone operations in coming years, including harnessing artificial intelligence for air-traffic control.
The trend was evident during the Paris Air Show here in the past week, with several companies disclosing ideas for opening up additional airspace for unmanned aircraft.
French electronics and aerospace company Thales SA is exploring the use of artificial intelligence tools to separate and keep track of unmanned aircraft at low altitudes. In an interview, Alex Cresswell, executive vice president in charge of air and land systems, said Thales is convinced such technology offers the best shot at coping with the anticipated growth in commercially operated drones.
Existing radars and human traffic controllers simply won't be able to handle the crush of data, Mr. Cresswell said, and only artificial intelligence applications are likely to have the capacity to react quickly enough to maintain a safe buffer around individual drones.
Mr. Cresswell also said Thales projects 2020 will be the first year commercial drone sales will exceed military sales world-wide. "You've got the civilian market growing between 10% and 15% per year," he said, with flights of commercial drones concentrated for the foreseeable future in a narrow band of airspace no more than 1,000 feet in altitude. Rapidly increasing roles for drones -- from agriculture to construction to industrial uses -- are driving the market "at a furious pace," Mr. Cresswell said.
The only way to accommodate such growth, he said, is to create a dynamic network able to create tiny bubbles of protected airspace around each individual airborne vehicle and then reconfigure it "extraordinarily quickly" in a manner beyond the capacity of humans.
European air-safety regulators are pursuing shorter-term initiatives. Last month, the European Commission formally adopted regulations to enhance safety requirements and air-traffic management.
"We are very ambitious on drones and we are accelerating our rule making," Patrick Ky, executive director of the European Union Aviation Safety Agency, told an international safety conference in Cologne, Germany, this month. Among other things, the agency plans by the middle of next year to issue detailed safety standards for manufacturing and operating some categories of larger drones, according to Mr. Ky.
Faced with industry demands for faster action, EASA is reconsidering the role, and even the future title, of those on the ground responsible for operating drones. "We're not even sure we will use the term 'pilots,'" Jesper Rasmussen, EASA's head of flight standards, told the same conference, adding that licensing requirements and rules are being evaluated.
In the U.S., regulators face similar industry pressure to expand drone flights. The Federal Aviation Administration is moving to allow a limited number of commercial operations by determining how they can fit into the regulations originally tailored for piloted aircraft. With data collected from early projects, the FAA hopes to write more effective industrywide rules.
"We find that process is really working out well for us," Jay Merkle, director of the FAA's drone integration office, told the conference in Cologne. But in the interim, he said, "we hear the urgency from all of our applicants."
Mr. Cresswell and other industry experts expect it to take at least a decade before initial artificial intelligence tools will be deemed safe.

Credit: By Andy Pasztor
