Alan Ruck, the actor who played Connor Roy in HBO's "Succession," says he and a director friend tested out the generative-AI tool ChatGPT a few months ago over lunch, to see whether it could write a screenplay.
They asked it to write a scene about Ruck as a soldier in basic training. "It was s---," Ruck said. "It was every cliche and hackneyed idea you could imagine."
The potential use of AI in TV and movies has become a hot-button issue in the biggest Hollywood labor strike in 60 years. Ruck, like many writers and actors on the picket lines, is worried the technology will replace jobs and produce low-quality content.
Entertainment executives say bots won't be penning scripts soon. But big companies including Warner Bros. Discovery, Paramount Global and NBCUniversal are using AI tools in other ways and are actively exploring new applications, from summarizing scripts to special effects to promotional marketing, people familiar with the situation say.
Several studio executives said AI tools could accelerate storyboarding and set design. Producers could use a digital replica of an actor to make tweaks to a scene without having to reshoot it, studio executives said.
A promising application is for dubbing of actors' voices in different languages. AI could make the audio sound like Ben Affleck or Harrison Ford in Italian or German and even adjust the movement of their lips accordingly.
Some production workers say this is all leading down a dangerous path. Harry Yoon, a film editor who has worked on such movies as "Minari" and "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings," said he is worried that AI models, if fed enough data, could create a decent first cut of a scene.
"Pretty soon executives will be asking, 'Why do we need three editors on a series? Why not two or one?'" he said. Yoon said there is a value in the slow process of humans watching daily footage and hearing lines over and over.
Entertainment giants have talked to a range of AI players, including OpenAI, text-to-video specialist Runway, image-generator Stability Diffusion and Adobe, as they explore how to put the technology to use. Entertainment executives say some jobs probably would be at risk, but in other cases it would just be a tool to make jobs easier.
"AI raises hard, important creative and legal questions for everyone," said the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, the group that negotiates on behalf of studios and streamers. "So it's something that requires a lot more discussion, which we're committed to doing."
Warner has held discussions with OpenAI about using ChatGPT for tasks such as creating descriptions of shows on its Max streaming service and possibly, down the road, for summarizing scripts submitted to studio executives for review, according to people familiar with the situation.
Netflix is looking to hire an AI product manager who will "define the strategic vision for" the streamer's machine-learning platform, according to a job posting.
The unions involved in the strike -- the Screen Actors Guild and Writers Guild of America -- are pushing for better compensation in the streaming era and to shore up their benefits. But they are also pushing for protections from the rise of AI tools.
"It isn't just a danger for creative labor in Hollywood. It's a danger for all labor everywhere," Ruck said.
AI company executives say the point of their tools isn't to replace creators, but to allow them to have more time doing the creative parts of their jobs. "We only hear horror stories and fairy tales," said Cristobal Valenzuela, chief executive of Runway. "It's much more nuanced than that . . . you can't just type in 'make me a movie,' and it will create a movie."
Chad Nelson, chief creative director at Topgolf Media, who recently created a short film with OpenAI's DALL-E tool, predicted AI tools will be replacing some creative jobs in Hollywood within a year or two. "The idea that you need to secure a drone shot on the Pacific Coast Highway at sunset with a specific color car and the light in a certain way, won't be a thing people will have to do anymore," he said.
Evan Halleck, a visual-effects specialist who used Runway's tools to work on the Oscar-winning "Everything Everywhere All at Once," said he loves that these tools allowed him to reduce some tedious work. However, he said, "I have fears that a 10-day gig might become a five-day gig."
AI tools already can handle some work done by concept designers, who are hired by studios to help illustrate a scene. "The thing that sucks about the visual-effects industry as opposed to writers or actors is we don't have a union," said Bilali Mack, a visual-effects supervisor who recently worked with Brendan Fraser on the Oscar-winning movie, "The Whale."
Mark Patch, a former visual-effects production worker, said he is trying to organize people in a union for entertainment industry workers.
The Motion Pictures Editors Guild is addressing how AI could affect its members in a coming report, according to a letter the group sent to its members earlier in July.
SAG says it wants to ensure studios obtain "informed consent" from actors before using digital replicas of them, and offer talent fair compensation. The WGA has said it wants to clearly define that "source material" and "literary material," which its members get compensated for, can't be AI-generated. The Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers has said it has made robust and fair proposals addressing those concerns.
---
Tom Dotan contributed to this article.
Credit: By Jessica Toonkel and Amol Sharma
