[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Always hungry for growth, Salesforce.com now seems poised to bite off more than it can chew.
The cloud software company's name emerged two weeks ago as a potential suitor for Twitter. While hardly an exclusive list, Salesforce's appearance was surprising given the lack of obvious synergies and the cost it might bear to make the deal happen.
The potential cost got even higher considering Salesforce shareholders took 6% off the stock's value in the days following the initial report.
That was only a tease. A Wall Street Journal report late Tuesday makes clear that Salesforce is still very interested. CEO Marc Benioff has reportedly been talking up Twitter behind closed doors -- going so far as to describe the troubled microblogging service an "unpolished gem" at one gathering. Salesforce shares fell another 5% as a result.
In all, the prospect of buying Twitter has erased nearly $5 billion in Salesforce's market value.
Considering that Twitter probably wouldn't sell for anything less than $18 billion, that is worrying. Salesforce has zero net cash and would need to fund such a deal with a mix of debt and stock.
And that assumes Twitter shareholders would accept volatile Salesforce shares for nearly half their consideration in the deal. It should be noted that LinkedIn chose an all-cash bid from Microsoft despite the fact that Salesforce offered a higher price as the latter included plenty of stock.
Whatever Salesforce offers, it is worth asking what exactly the company would get in return. Salesforce provides businesses with subscription-based software to run sales, marketing and other functions. It is working to expand those capabilities with artificial intelligence, which requires reams of data in order to work. Mr. Benioff described data as "the currency in software's new world order" in an interview with the Journal over the weekend -- a good indication of why he is drawn to Twitter's 313 million monthly active users.
But Salesforce is already one of the few companies to have "Firehose" access to Twitter's real-time feed, so it isn't at all clear why it needs to buy Twitter outright. And Twitter isn't without its own significant issues, including stagnating user growth, unclear value as an advertising service and the penchant for abuse on the platform. Salesforce must demonstrate it can find solutions that have eluded Twitter's current management. It also needs to keep its own cloud business growing as that is its key appeal to investors.
That will be a difficult balancing act. The prospect of losing out on another big deal may have Mr. Benioff convinced that he simply can't let this bird fly away. Investors clearly wish he would.

Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
