James Simons, who helped lead a quantitative revolution that has swept the world of finance, is stepping back from his hedge fund on the heels of a terrible year for clients, but a terrific one for the firm's employees.
Mr. Simons, among the largest financial backers of Democratic candidates in recent years, told investors he was retiring as chairman of Renaissance Technologies LLC's board as of Jan. 1.
"I believe it is time: This transition has been many years in the making," Mr. Simons wrote in a letter to clients a few weeks ago. Mr. Simons, who will be 83 in April, will continue to serve on the board.
A former math professor and code breaker, Mr. Simons built Renaissance into one of the most successful investment firms in history by helping develop a new way to invest.
In the 1980s and 1990s, when most of the investing world was reading annual reports, chatting with executives and relying on intuition, Mr. Simons decided to let computers make his trading moves. He and his colleagues -- all from the worlds of math and science -- built predictive models capable of uncovering unrecognized market patterns, partly using early versions of machine learning.
Eventually, Mr. Simons built a fortune of more than $25 billion, which he has used to back Democrats like President-elect Joe Biden and Hillary Clinton, even as his colleague at Renaissance, Robert Mercer, in 2016 became one of then-presidential-candidate Donald Trump's most important backers. Today, a majority of trading in Wall Street comes from quantitative and other "nonfundamental" stock traders, while predictive algorithms are at the heart of most technology companies.
Over the years, Mr. Simons has played an increasingly reduced role at his firm while focusing on science, education and other philanthropies. He resigned as Renaissance's chief executive in 2010 and the firm has been run by computer programmer Peter Brown in recent years.
Now, Mr. Brown has taken the reins as chairman. He faces an immediate challenge: dealing with investors unhappy with the poor performance by some of Renaissance's funds, all of which are run using predictive models that the firm almost never interferes with.
Renaissance funds open to outside investors fell between roughly 20% and 30% in 2020, even as the firm's flagship $15 billion Medallion fund, available only to employees and select others, soared 76% in one of its best years ever. Medallion's returns were reported by Institutional Investor.
The performance of the outside funds has spurred investor withdrawals. Renaissance manages nearly $60 billion firmwide, down from about $75 billion a year ago.
Alex Chung, a San Francisco-area investor, said he pulled his money from the Renaissance Institutional Equities Fund, known as RIEF, last fall due to its mounting losses and disappointment with the firm's explanations.
"RIEF's machine-learning models cracked," said Mr. Chung, who invested in the fund in 2019 through a feeder fund, which pools investor cash and funnels it into other funds. "Yes, they're sorry, but it's too little, too late," he said.
RIEF fell about 20% last year, another client said. That performance is worse than its 16.5% drop in 2008, the fund's previous worst year, according to an investor document. The Renaissance Institutional Diversified Alpha fund lost more than 30% last year and the Renaissance Institutional Diversified Global Equities fund lost about 30%, clients said.
In the letter, Mr. Simons acknowledged investor criticism.
"Obviously, this has been a terrible year for our funds, and we have received many questions from our investors," he wrote. He wrote that the firm was putting together an analysis of the performance "and will follow up with another investor call."
The firm has reminded clients that Renaissance funds managing outside money saw multiyear winning streaks after suffering big losses in 2008 and a smaller drop in 2009, suggesting the funds could see a revival.
Some investors said employee-owned Medallion's enormous gains, even as the other funds struggled, sharpen their grievances. Others said they are well aware the funds use different approaches and that discrepancies in returns often arise.
Medallion holds investments for short periods, even minutes, and tends to do best when markets jolt and trading volume is heavy. By contrast, the outside funds hold investments for longer periods, sometimes more than a year.
Renaissance staffers said it is these holding periods that explain the performance discrepancies. All day, the firm's computers digest various data and search for patterns. Renaissance's models are good at longer-term forecasts, they said, but much better at short-term ones. The firm can test hypotheses on significantly more 10-minute blocks over the past decade, for example, than they can on six-month or yearly periods.
"RIEF is relatively data starved. We don't have the data points. It's a time-scale issue," a senior staffer said.
Renaissance's funds aim to be as uncorrelated to overall markets as possible, wagering on both rising and falling investments, so last year's rally didn't help very much.
Executives appear confident their struggling funds will rebound. Mr. Brown hasn't been conducting emergency meetings and the firm, which is mostly operating remotely amid the pandemic, hasn't revamped its trading models, according to someone close to the matter.
Staffers said Renaissance takes steps to prevent Medallion's trading from hurting the returns of the other funds and noted that employees own more than 10% of the struggling funds.
Medallion, which now manages about $15 billion and is holding more cash than in the past, has traditionally done best in rocky markets, gaining 98.5% in 2000 and 82.4% in 2008, investors say. At the end of 2018, Medallion had an average annualized gain of 39% since 1988, topping Warren Buffett, George Soros and Ray Dalio. Last year's gains came even after Medallion's hefty investor fees, which include a cut of 36% or more of all trading gains and 5% of all money invested in the fund.
---
Juliet Chung contributed to this article.

Credit: By Gregory Zuckerman
