The Justice Department and eight states on Friday sued real-estate software company RealPage, accusing it of deploying a rent-setting algorithm that allows landlords to illegally coordinate price increases.
The complaint is one of the most sweeping legal actions ever taken by the federal government against a private company in the rental housing industry. Many renters are still feeling the pinch from the steep rent increases that occurred during the pandemic.
The civil suit, filed in the Middle District of North Carolina federal court, alleges that RealPage stifles competition through its algorithm and maintains an illegal monopoly over rent-setting software.
The company commands an 80% market share in commercial revenue management software, the Justice Department said. The suit focuses on two of RealPage's pricing systems that are used by landlords overseeing about three million units.
RealPage denies the allegations.
"Americans should not have to pay more in rent because a company has found a new way to scheme with landlords to break the law," Attorney General Merrick Garland said in a statement. "We allege that RealPage's pricing algorithm enables landlords to share confidential, competitively sensitive information and align their rents."
The Justice Department action is the latest sign that federal and local governments are pursuing a more aggressive stance on regulating Wall Street and other large institutions' role in the housing market. A bill in Congress would ban the use of these algorithmic pricing systems, while another would eliminate tax benefits enjoyed by large companies that own single-family homes for rent.
President Biden recently called for some rent increases to be capped at 5% annually, and Vice President Kamala Harris has called for a crackdown on the use of algorithms in her campaign for president.
RealPage has rebuffed allegations that it helps landlords collude. The company says that its landlord customers aren't required to use its price recommendations and that its software can recommend lowering rents. The units owned by the users of its price-setting systems are a relatively small portion of the overall rental market, RealPage says.
"RealPage's revenue management software is purposely built to be legally compliant, and we have a long history of working constructively with the DOJ to show that," a RealPage spokeswoman said. "We believe the claims brought by DOJ are devoid of merit and will do nothing to make housing more affordable."
The Justice Department action follows earlier lawsuits against the company filed by several state attorneys general and a class of tenants. The Justice Department's complaint says RealPage's price-setting algorithm gathers confidential data on rents from competing landlords, allowing the same real-estate companies to raise rents and illegally collude on prices.
The Justice Department lawsuit is also a marquee example of the department's efforts to deter companies from using software or artificial intelligence to signal to competitors how to set prices. Companies have in the past been accused of fixing prices through express agreements among executives, but antitrust enforcers say third parties such as RealPage can also effectively enable that conduct.
In its complaint, the Justice Department alleges that in some cities landlords using RealPage's pricing system own 30% or more of rental apartments. The lawsuit focuses on RealPage's use in housing markets in the south and southwest, including Atlanta, Charlotte, N.C., Dallas, Nashville, Tenn., and Orlando, Fla.
In each of those markets, according to the Justice Department, RealPage is used extensively by landlords. The software's penetration rate in those areas ranges from a low of 29% to a high of 38% of all apartments, according to the lawsuit.
The complaint cites many statements by RealPage and its landlord customers about how the pricing-system helps boost rents while reducing competition.
RealPage makes sure landlords are "driving every possible opportunity to increase price," the company once said, according to the suit. "There is greater good in everybody succeeding versus essentially trying to compete against one another," said a RealPage executive in another cited example.
The complaint says landlords willfully cooperated. In one case, executives of two different landlords exchanged emails about how to use revenue management to raise rents.
"I always liked this product because your algorithm uses proprietary data from other subscribers to suggest rents," one potential client told RealPage, according to the department's filing. "That's classic price fixing."
Joining the Justice Department in the suits are California, Colorado, Connecticut, North Carolina, Minnesota, Oregon, Tennessee, and Washington. The District of Columbia and Arizona previously sued RealPage on similar allegations.
Credit: By Dave Michaels and Will Parker
