Enterprise AI company Glean is in advanced discussions for a deal that would double its valuation from six months ago to $4.5 billion, a sign of how fast-growing artificial-intelligence startups are still attracting intense investor interest.
Glean is set to raise $250 million in the financing, people familiar with the matter said. The venture firm DST Global, founded by Russian-born, Israeli investor Yuri Milner, is in talks to lead the round, some of the people said. The investment details aren't finalized and could change.
The startup sells AI-powered search software that helps employees look up information spread across the organizations they work for.
Executives and investors have pointed to such productivity apps as a potentially more lucrative market for generative AI in the near term than consumer-facing applications.
Glean's subscription revenue has recently reached $55 million on an annualized basis, the people familiar with the matter said. The company projects that number could reach $100 million by the end of the year, one of the people said. Glean counts Instacart, Pinterest, Reddit, and Duolingo as customers, according to its website.
The startup, founded in 2019 by former Google search engineer Arvind Jain, was valued at $2.2 billion when it raised $200 million from name-brand Silicon Valley venture firms including Kleiner Perkins, Lightspeed Venture Partners and Sequoia Capital in February.
Venture capitalists are scouring Silicon Valley to find AI startups showing signs of becoming stable businesses with growing revenue. The breakout success of ChatGPT in late 2022 fueled an AI funding frenzy, but investors have since pared back expectations after discovering that the technology is more expensive to develop than they expected.
Early startup darlings such as Character AI and Inflection AI recently got bailouts from big tech companies after struggling to boost revenue from their chatbots. Others have had to cut costs or lay off staff.
Glean's generative AI search engine uses language models provided by OpenAI and other developers instead of building its own from scratch, an approach that makes it more reliant on partners but reduces costs.
Credit: By Berber Jin and Tom Dotan
