Seventy-one public companies tapped the U.S. stock market last month, a record start to the year and a sign of investors' healthy appetite for growth sectors despite the recent tumult.
The companies are clustered mostly in the biotechnology and software-development industries, and the number that conducted secondary share offerings last month is the most for any January, according to data provider Dealogic's records that date back to 1995. The previous record January was in 2013, when stocks were rallying and 54 public companies sold shares.
Last month, the Dow Jones Industrial Average declined 5.3%.
Stock sales still are proceeding in the early days of February as well, despite an uptick in market volatility.
Last month's deals included stock sales by Rocket Fuel Inc. of Redwood City, Calif., which develops artificial-intelligence software that helps companies place ads on the Web and mobile devices; Splunk Inc. of San Francisco, which makes software for analyzing large data sets; online daily-deals company Groupon Inc. of Chicago, and Aratana Therapeutics Inc. of Kansas City, Kan., which converts human medications into drugs for pets.
When Rocket Fuel was marketing its secondary offering to investors in late January, its shares had more than doubled since a September initial public offering. Rocket Fuel sold a relatively small stake -- 14% -- in the IPO, and investors were asking for more, said Chief Executive George John, in an interview in January.
Fund managers didn't appear to be worried about the broader economy or the pullback going on in financial markets, Mr. John said. "Out of the 20 to 25 funds we met with, only one asked us how we might perform in an economic downturn," he added.
Usually, the number of follow-on share offerings tracks the stock market's performance. As stocks posted double-digit gains in 2013, the number of these U.S. offerings jumped to a record 807, according to Dealogic. The number of IPOs was the highest since 2007.
When share prices are falling and volatility rises, stock-issuance activity tends to drop off as investors run for cover and companies dial back their capital-raising plans.
Last month's divergence shows that some investors still are aggressively seeking exposure to fast-growing companies, especially in the technology fields, even as questions arise about the health of the broader global economy.
While the volume of deals in the month, totaling $10.5 billion, fell short of a record, it ranked among the top four starts to the year, based on Dealogic's data.
"High-growth companies are absolutely in a different microcosm from the rest of the economy and the market," said Andrew Cupps, chief investment officer of Cupps Capital Management LLC in Chicago. The firm, which manages more than $1.5 billion on behalf of institutional investors, bought offerings in January.
To be sure, some market experts say an accelerated pace of secondary stock offerings can be a reason for worry. They say it can be a sign that insiders, such as founders and early investors, are becoming less confident in a company's prospects and are rushing to cash out.
"It's usually not a good sign," said David Santschi, chief executive of TrimTabs Investment Research, a stock-market research and investment firm.
Last month, technology companies accounted for 23%, or $2.4 billion, of all follow-on offerings. The last time tech firms raised about $2 billion was in January 2002, when the dot-com bubble was still bursting. That year, the S&P 500 index fell 23%.
Still, investors in January's secondary offerings asked for relatively little cushion for taking on these shares. Offerings in January priced at just an average 5.3% discount to the stocks' prevailing prices, according to Dealogic. That is the narrowest monthly average in a year. Last year started with smaller average discounts, of just 4.8% in January.
The wild swings in share prices that marked the start of February haven't discouraged companies from tapping stock investors. After the Dow's 2.1% drop on Monday, 10 companies had completed secondary offerings as of Thursday, according to data provider Ipreo. Five of those were biotech companies.
"Investors are paying for growth right now, that's the sweet spot," said Will Bowmer, head of Americas technology-company stock offerings for Barclays PLC. "But buyers are selective, so companies will have to be attuned to what's going on in the broader market."
Credit: By Telis Demos
