On RussianMathTutors.com, a site promoting a Soviet-era style of math instruction, a sample question involves Masha, a mom who bakes a batch of unmarked pies: three rice, three bean and three cherry. The student must determine how Masha can find a cherry pie "by biting into as few tasteless pies as possible."
While Masha is biting pies, American parents are eating it up.
In the smarter, faster, better quest that is child-rearing in the U.S., goal-oriented moms and dads eager to give their children an academic edge have long looked beyond U.S. borders for math education. Singapore math promotes concept mastery and critical thinking. Japanese math espouses the discipline of daily study. Now, another turbocharged math style is having its moment. Russian math, which uses reasoning and abstract concepts to build understanding, is lighting up parent group chats as the country emerges from a pandemic that left children zoning out over Zoom and schools giving priority to social-emotional recovery over homework.
"I always think for students it's great to aim higher," said Andrea Campbell, a mother from Newcastle, Calif. Her three children have studied with $20-an-hour instructors from Russian Math Tutors for the past two years as they pursue math competitions. "For math, you can't do enough."
While parents advocate for more math, children are grappling with what some call "math trauma," the stress that comes when students mess up rote memorization drills, get called out for wrong answers or freeze in fear during timed tests.
"There are people that walk among us who have been traumatized by math," said Kasi Allen, director of learning and knowledge management at the Ford Family Foundation and a former math education college teacher who is researching a book on the subject. "Math trauma says, 'Something happened to me when I was trying to learn math that hurt me, and it keeps hurting, and I need to work through it so I can be the mathematical thinker I want to be.' "
Parents are now faced with a choice between math brands that often sound similar. Most of these teaching methods billboard the same thing: independent, critical thinking over blind recitation.
That leaves competitors like Russian math and Singapore math sometimes searching for differences to prove which one is best. Divisions exist even within the disciplines.
Alexander Kolchinsky, a former Silicon Valley software developer who emigrated from the Soviet Union as a child and started Russian Math Tutors a couple of years ago, said he uses a curriculum that goes beyond math by teaching kids to learn. It incorporates ethics as well, he said, like word problems that include the idea of giving up a seat for an elderly person.
Many Russian math questions are Americanized. Mr. Kolchinsky tussled with one problem involving three husbands who board a boat with their wives and then grow jealous of each other's spouses. The student is asked to figure out how to transport the wives to the other side of the river, given the rivalries.
"Somebody suggested, 'Use animals,' but animals don't get jealous," Mr. Kolchinsky said. Finding the question's premise too dicey, he scrapped it altogether.
The classes, which are virtual, are run with a competitive mind-set, he said. "We don't hit the children with a ruler, obviously, because it's online," Mr. Kolchinsky said, adding that there would be no such punishment regardless. "But it is a serious class."
Russian Math Tutors -- whose database includes about 400 students, 80 of them current -- is minuscule compared with the Russian School of Mathematics, an American company founded in Massachusetts in 1997 by immigrants from Belarus and Ukraine that is teaching 60,000 students across 70 branches. Its after-school small-group classes, which can stretch longer than an hour and feature an exclusive curriculum, range from $2,000 to $3,000 a year.
Mr. Kolchinsky sees his company's size as an asset. "Our program is geared toward more-talented children, it's more challenging than theirs," he said, referring to the rival Russian School of Mathematics. "If you want to really do well in math, you go for private lessons."
Masha Gershman, vice president of outreach at the Russian School of Mathematics, said she hasn't heard of Russian Math Tutors and added that her school uses grouplearning because it fosters greater understanding and engagement in class.
Russian math hits the spotlight against a fraught backdrop. Last year, amid the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Mr. Kolchinsky considered removing the word "Russian" from "Russian Math Tutors" and renaming the company BYOM, short for Build Your Own Math.
"People have some kind of distaste for anything with the name 'Russian,' " he said. After seeing that Google searches for the term "Russian Math" held steady despite the war, he decided against it. Ms. Gershman said demand for her school's method has stayed consistent. Last year, the school added six locations.
Some parents are seeking out these programs because they fear public schools are leaving their children behind from a young age. Dipa Brahmbhatt enrolled her second-grader at the Russian School of Mathematics near her home in Katy, Texas, during the pandemic. "We read about Russian math, we heard about it, we listened to the TED talks, we just felt like in terms of critical thinking for the future it had a lot of potential," Ms. Brahmbhatt said. Her 8-year-old son, Raaj Mohan, who was diagnosed with Tourette syndrome last year, was getting C's in math before he started at the school. Now he's getting A's, she said.
The transition from American math teaching isn't always smooth. When 14-year-old Jaylen Amlani started taking classes as a fourth-grader at the Russian School of Mathematics near his home in Burlingame, Calif., he was "not a happy camper," he said. He couldn't wrap his head around a certain kind of pictorial math problem. "It looked like an alien symbol."
Now he is a high-school freshman who spends four hours a week in Russian math class. The effort has launched him at least two years ahead of many classmates, he said. Jaylen, who is considering a career in artificial intelligence, credits Russian math for putting him on a fast track.
"It just looks amazing on applications," he said, "but at the same time you're going into college knowing exactly what you want to pursue."
Credit: By Ellen Gamerman

ERIC Subject: Teaching Methods; Mathematics Instruction; Mathematics Education; Memorization; Critical Thinking; Knowledge Management; Thinking Skills; Parent Associations; Timed Tests; Tutors; Spouses
