Microsoft has relinquished its seat as an observer on the board of ChatGPT maker OpenAI, as regulators on both sides of the Atlantic scrutinize the partnership between the tech giant and the artificial-intelligence startup.
Microsoft realized its observer position had unsettled some antitrust officials and decided to abandon the position rather than defend a role it no longer needed, a person familiar with the decision said.
The software giant made the move after OpenAI's recently appointed chief financial officer made plans to start building the startup's first investor relations team, which will work to keep its backers informed about its progress at regular intervals, another knowledgeable person said. These updates will be held separately from the company's regular board meetings.
In a letter sent Tuesday to the AI company behind ChatGPT, Microsoft said it resigned with immediate effect because it believed OpenAI's board had gained stability, meaning Microsoft's involvement was no longer necessary.
"Over the past eight months we have witnessed significant progress by the newly formed board and are confident in the company's direction," Microsoft said.
OpenAI went through a tumultuous period late last year with the abrupt firing and reinstatement of Sam Altman as chief executive, along with the formation of the new board. In that shake-up, Microsoft gained a nonvoting observer position, a role it said provided the tech giant with insights into transitional work from OpenAI's board without compromising its independence.
A spokeswoman for OpenAI on Wednesday said the startup is "establishing a new approach to informing and engaging key strategic partners -- such as Microsoft and Apple -- and investors."
Apple had been set to have a board observer seat after signing a partnership to put ChatGPT on its iPhones and other devices as part of a broader AI initiative called Apple Intelligence, one of the knowledgeable people said.
Under the new structure, OpenAI will no longer have board observer seats for any partner.
OpenAI started gaining traction in late 2022 after the release of ChatGPT. Microsoft entered the picture as a major partner, agreeing to invest $13 billion in OpenAI in exchange for what is essentially a 49% stake in the earnings of its for-profit arm.
The observer role was part of that tie-up, which is now facing antitrust scrutiny in the U.S. and Europe.
Earlier this year, the Federal Trade Commission opened a broad investigation of Microsoft's investment in OpenAI, while the U.K.'s Competition and Markets Authority said it was looking at whether the partnership should be considered a de facto merger.
The European Union also scrutinized the partnership from a merger control angle to determine whether Microsoft had acquired control on a lasting basis over OpenAI. Margrethe Vestager, the EU's competition czar, said last month that the bloc concluded this wasn't the case but pledged the EU would keep monitoring the relationship.
Since the debut of ChatGPT and a series of other AI offerings, tech and nontech companies have rushed to sign deals with AI firms like OpenAI, creating a patchwork of alliances across the tech world and through other industries.
News Corp, owner of Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal, has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI.
---
Deepa Seetharaman and Tom Dotan contributed to this article.
Credit: By Mauro Orru and Christian Moess Laursen
