Prabhakar Raghavan, the most senior Google executive overseeing its search engine and ads products, is leaving the role after a four-year tenure leading the company's core moneymaking business.
Raghavan will be succeeded by Nick Fox, a longtime Google executive who has worked in the search organization. Raghavan will have a new role as Google's chief technologist working with Chief Executive Sundar Pichai.
The shake-up comes as the Alphabet unit faces unprecedented pressure on its search business from the courts and artificial-intelligence products such as ChatGPT. Google's search advertising business is expected to dip below a 50% market share in the U.S. next year for the first time in more than a decade, according to the research firm Emarketer.
Raghavan oversaw a range of products in addition to search and ads, including Google's virtual assistant, maps, commerce and payments services. He was once considered a candidate to become the company's next CEO. Fox's elevation now makes him a possible successor to Pichai, who is also CEO of parent company Alphabet.
In an email to staff, Raghavan said "now feels right to return to my roots as a scientist." He said Fox's "reputation as strategic, analytical and highly knowledgeable preceded him."
The team overseeing the Gemini chatbot, which previously reported to Raghavan, won't be overseen by Fox. It is moving to Google's AI research division Google DeepMind.
Google's virtual assistant also is moving and will become part of the division working on the Android mobile software system and devices such as Pixel phones.
Raghavan, 64 years old, joined Google in 2012 from Yahoo, where he was responsible for its search and ads businesses. He oversaw Google's ads and commerce teams before being promoted in 2020 to oversee a wider portfolio including search, with the title of senior vice president for knowledge and information.
Since the release of ChatGPT in late 2022, Raghavan has directed Google's efforts to build a public-facing chatbot and revamp the search engine to incorporate AI-generated answers. Both projects have generated controversy after users complained about the AI outputs.
In February, Raghavan publicly apologized after the Gemini chatbot generated historically inaccurate depictions of Nazi soldiers and refused to generate images of white people. Google pulled the feature before rolling it out again in August.
Fox, who is 45, joined Google in 2003 after working as a consultant for McKinsey & Co. Google said Fox recently led a team working on the long-term strategy for Raghavan's suite of products, with a focus on AI.
Credit: By Miles Kruppa
