Let us start, as many do every morning, with a croissant. Yet how many of us know about that familiar pastry's association with one of history's pivotal military victories? In 1683, when Habsburg forces outside Vienna defeated an invading Ottoman army, Viennese bakers were said to have celebrated by baking crescents, the symbol of the departing Muslim forces. If that battle had turned out differently, the Ottomans might have dominated the heart of Europe for the next centuries, and the region's inhabitants would have become largely Muslim. Or consider some more recent examples: Imagine if the Axis powers, not the Allies, had won World War II -- or the Soviet Union the Cold War.
War has shaped the world we live in, and it is still shaping many parts of the globe. Those of us in the developed world have been able to enjoy what some historians call the "Long Peace" since 1945, but that is not true for much of the Middle East and parts of Africa and Asia. Europe and Latin America have not experienced all-out state-to-state wars in recent years, but from Northern Ireland to Argentina, they have endured painful armed civil conflicts. And big powers still maintain expensive military establishments and keep their plans for battling potential enemies up to date. Political leaders and strategists in Beijing and Washington eye each other with suspicion and assume that their two countries may one day have to fight. The same holds for Iran and Israel, China and India, Pakistan and India.
We may wish war away and hope that it only happens somewhere else or in another time, but it remains one of the key driving forces in human history. The long debate over whether making war is inherent in human nature or the result of culture and social institutions may never be settled. What is undeniable is that war and human society are so deeply interwoven that we cannot understand the development of one apart from the other. We must understand the nature of that relationship and the power and dynamics of war itself if we are to have any hope of bringing it under control.
Once humans changed from being nomads, foraging and hunting for what they needed, and settled in farming communities, they had something of value that others could take. Moving away was no longer the easy option, so humans learned to defend themselves with walls, weapons and, over time, distinctive warrior classes.
Defending your own group successfully -- and, often, conquering others -- was the basis of the first successful states and empires. War was both cause and consequence. A state that has more resources and uses them more effectively is likely to triumph over its poorer, weaker rivals. War went hand in hand with the development of strong government and bigger political units. Many great powers of the past -- such as the Egyptian, Tang, Roman and Aztec empires -- were created and maintained by their militaries, even if those forces were overlaid by such things as a shared reverence for the ruler or the gods.
Wars in Europe from the 17th century on produced our modern centralized state, which has been copied around the world. To extract and manage the resources to fight, from men to weapons to food, states had to develop bureaucracies and powers of coercion. Modern statistics and censuses grew out of the need to count what you had available. Modern definitions of citizenship started as attempts by governments to find out who they could get to fight for them. To finance and maintain the navy that Britain relied on to protect its islands and its increasingly global empire, the British government learned how to borrow from the public and created a new institution -- the Bank of England -- to issue bonds.
The more states built up their own forces, the greater coercive power they gained over their citizens. As Thomas Hobbes recognized, a stable society involves the consent of its citizens to be ruled, but what always underpins and reinforces that consent is the state's monopoly on the use of force to coerce those who don't want to adhere to norms to do so, whether that means not stealing from your neighbor or paying your taxes.
Even societies in which democratic norms are deeply embedded will resort to force to defend themselves from internal subversion or external threats. During the two world wars, governments in democracies such as Britain or the U.S. exerted controls over society -- over consumption, the right of movement or the allocation of resources -- that would seem intolerable in peacetime. And through conscription, democracies forced their young to serve, fight and die in their armed forces.
The growth of strong central states made war more deadly and destructive. By mobilizing and extracting resources from their societies, governments could field larger forces and sustain them in campaigns for longer. The huge increase in productive capacity as a result of the Industrial Revolution, starting in the 19th century, made possible large conscript armies that could remain locked in combat for months and then years on end. The income tax, a rare and light burden in the U.S. before 1914, steadily grew, first as an emergency measure during World War I and then afterward as American governments found that they could tax more heavily without breaking the economy.
What seems too expensive in peacetime becomes a necessity in wartime, and societies somehow find the resources. Near where I live in Oxford, a historical plaque on the wall of what used to be a hospital notes that the first successful use of penicillin to treat an infection occurred there in 1941. The drug, which by now has saved millions of lives, was developed in 1928 but considered too expensive to produce until World War II.
Even in peacetime, governments' preparations for war can bring social and economic benefits. Like the American interstate highway system that the Eisenhower administration built in the 1950s, many of the railway lines built in 19th-century Europe were spurred by strategic reasons -- but better transportation still stimulated economic growth.
In 1899, the British government and public were horrified when one out of three volunteers for the colonial war in South Africa was rejected as unfit. That made public health a matter of national security and led to such innovations as free school meals for poor children. As war became more mechanized and weapons grew more sophisticated in the 19th century, armed forces needed better-educated men, which stimulated spending on public education. During the Cold War, the U.S. government poured huge resources for defense purposes into American universities; that produced, among much else, the research that made Silicon Valley possible.
Paradoxically, preparing for war or fighting it can increase the bargaining power of citizens in their society and in their relations with their governments. Political elites learned that concessions -- extending the franchise or providing social services -- rather than coercion were the more effective way to win loyalty and cooperation. As a member of the Russian upper classes said before World War I, "It is impossible to govern against the people when it is necessary to turn to it for the defense of Russia." (The 1917 Russian Revolution showed what happens when the people withdraw their support.)
At the end of World War I, the British government gave working-class men and women over the age of 30 the right to vote, in recognition of their contribution to the war effort. After World War II, the new Labour government in Britain ushered in the welfare state, in part to avert the depression that had followed the end of World War I but, more importantly, as recompense for the wartime sacrifices of civilians.
Wars have left their imprints on our societies in other equally important ways: in our values, our arts, our language, in the very way we define ourselves. Homer's "The Iliad," Tolstoy's "War and Peace" and Francis Ford Coppola's "Apocalypse Now" were all created out of the horror and, yes, the fascination of war. For most Germans, memories of World War II are a burden of shame, while for Russians, they are a proud story of fortitude, resistance and triumph. The U.S. War of Independence and the Civil War are part of what it is to be American, even if Americans still disagree over those conflicts' meanings.
The history of war has long demonstrated that culture and values can tip the scales toward victory or defeat. Societies or classes have been built around a military ethos. In ancient Sparta, young boys were removed from their families to train and bond with each other. Their mothers waved them off to war with the admonition, "Come home with your shield" -- losing it was a disgrace -- "or carried on it." In 1917, as the U.S. entered World War I, George Cohan's song "Over There" sounded a similar theme: "Make your daddy glad / To have had such a lad / Tell your sweetheart not to pine / To be proud her boy's in line." Young British men of the upper classes were once brought up to be brave and resolute in the face of injury or death in both sports and war. Before World Wars I and II, boys' magazines, private schools that prided themselves on being Spartan, popular games and paramilitary organizations from the relatively innocent Boy Scouts to the nightmarish Nazi Youth did their best to inculcate military values in countries from Britain to Japan.
Cultures change, of course. The militaristic Germany and Japan of the 1930s bear little resemblance to today's pacifically minded democracies. And culture explains only part of why we fight. Sometimes we feel we have little choice. Americans were not a particularly militaristic people in 1941; indeed, most hoped to stay out of the conflict engulfing the world. But the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor changed all that overnight.
Humans have always fought for causes they see as greater than themselves. The Arab warriors who fanned out from the Arabian Peninsula in the 7th century swept away old regimes, conquered rich and sophisticated cities, and left a lasting imprint on the Middle East and much of southern Europe because they sought a divine reward. The citizen-soldiers of the French Revolution terrified and demoralized their opponents because they swarmed across the battlefields singing revolutionary songs and taking risks that more prudent soldiers would not. Many of the millions who fought in World War I and II were inspired by nationalism, a sense that something called the nation would survive them and was worth dying for.
Individuals and nations also fight out of supposedly cool calculation, to gain something -- whether land, loot or slaves -- without paying too high a cost. The Spanish adventurers who toppled the Aztec and Inca empires found that the prospect of fabulous wealth outweighed the risk of death. In the 18th and 19th centuries, the European powers waged "cabinet wars" devised for limited ends. The great statesman Otto von Bismarck picked off Prussia's enemies one by one in short wars to create the modern state of Germany.
It was a dangerous precedent. The leaders and the military who made the plans before World War I thought they could also manage the conflict, but that war, as so often happens, ran out of their control. As Bismarck's compatriot, Carl von Clausewitz, said, war has its own logic.
Could we live without war? So many of the attempts down through the centuries to limit or abolish war altogether have failed that we tend to write them off as futile in their very conception. Yet such pessimism ignores successes in the past and sets the world up for failure in the future. We can draw hope from the ancient Greeks, who had sacred days on which they would not fight, from effective international arms agreements or from the development of the modern laws of war that -- especially since the horrors of World War II -- govern the humane treatment of civilians and prisoners.
We must act on that hope because the prospects for humanity of future wars are grim indeed. War-making capacities are changing and moving into new fields. Space is already being militarized, which is likely to lead to a new arms race. The proliferation of relatively cheap, small weapons such as drones puts increased firepower into many dangerous hands. Biological and chemical warfare is supposed to be banned under international agreements, but we know that research continues in scores of rogue states, including Russia.
The next decades are likely to see more nuclear proliferation as insecure powers, such as Iran and Saudi Arabia, grasp at the prospect of nuclear deterrents. Perhaps most alarming of all, war-making may be moving out of the control of human decision-makers as artificial intelligence comes to manage self-guiding weapons and war-making algorithms.
In today's unstable international order, countries are readier to suspect hostile intent. We see rising possibilities for escalation, whether in the Middle East, along the border between China and India, or in the South China Sea. War is not merely an important part of our history. It is our present and, barring some revolution in human consciousness, our future as well.
---
Dr. MacMillan is an emeritus professor of international history at Oxford, where she was also the warden of St. Antony's College. This essay is adapted from her new book "War: How Conflict Shaped Us," which Random House will publish on Oct. 6.

Credit: By Margaret MacMillan
