LONDON -- British police have arrested five people, including at least three Bulgarian nationals, believed to have been living undercover in the U.K. while working for Russian intelligence, the latest in a series of arrests across Western countries of alleged Russian agents posing as seemingly ordinary people.
Three men and two women were arrested in early February on suspicion of violating the U.K.'s Official Secrets Act 1911, which criminalizes espionage, the Metropolitan Police said on Tuesday. The five people were released on bail and are due to appear in court in September, the Met said.
Three of the five -- identified by the Met as Orlin Roussev, 45, Biser Dzambazov, 42, and Katrin Ivanova, 31 -- were also charged with possession of false identity documents with improper intention, the Met said.
The BBC, which earlier reported the arrests, said the three are Bulgarian nationals believed to be working for Russian intelligence. It said they were caught with forged passports and documents from the U.K., Bulgaria, France, Italy, Spain, Croatia, Slovenia, Greece and the Czech Republic.
Two U.K. government officials confirmed that report to The Wall Street Journal.
There have been a string of similar arrests of deep-cover Russian spies in recent months across a range of countries, often posing as South Americans but living in European countries.
The arrests have laid bare a widespread network of "illegal spies" Russia uses around the world, apart from its official spies that are often based in its embassies. More than 400 suspected Russian spies working at embassies have been expelled from Europe since the start of the Ukraine war, part of some 600 Russian officials kicked out, the U.K. spy chief, MI5 Director-General Ken McCallum, said last year.
In the case of the U.K., three of the spies don't appear to be Russian but Bulgarian. Roussev was living in Great Yarmouth, a resort town on the east coast of England, and Dzambazov and Ivanova were living in Harrow, a suburb in northwest London.
Roussev's LinkedIn page says he was the owner for the past decade of a company called NextGen, which is described as working in artificial intelligence and signals intelligence, which intercepts private communications, among other areas. He also lists being an adviser to Bulgaria's Energy Ministry in 2008-09.
According to their social-media profiles, Ivanova and Dzambazov ran "Bulgarian Social Platform," an organization that offers help to Bulgarians in the U.K.
In a 2019 interview with the state Bulgarian National Radio, Ivanova said she and Dzambazov, who is her partner, moved to London in 2012 and started helping compatriots "from our living room." Five years later, they started their community organization.
According to her LinkedIn profile, Ivanova works as a medical-laboratory assistant. According to posts on his Facebook page, Dzambazov is an avid soccer fan. His latest post was on Jan. 26.
The Bulgarian ambassador to the U.K., Marin Raykov, told Bulgarian state newswire BTA that the embassy didn't have any details about the detentions and hadn't been informed by the British authorities. Raykov said that, according to U.K. practice, when a detained foreign national doesn't want their country informed of their detention, the British authorities don't inform the embassy.
The U.K. has had an increasingly fraught relationship with Russia in recent years over crimes committed in the U.K. by Russian agents. In 2018, Russian agents used a deadly nerve agent in an attempt to kill former Russian double-agentSergei Skripal and his daughter in Salisbury, and they were both seriously injured. In 2006, another former Russian intelligence officer, Alexander Litvinenko, was murdered in London.
Credit: By David Luhnow and Georgi Kantchev
