Lubomir Bourdev and Oren Rippel were taking a break from brainstorming startup ideas back in 2015 when they flipped on HBO's "Silicon Valley."
Sitting in his Mountain View, Calif., living room, Mr. Bourdev wanted to show Mr. Rippel what it would be like to live the startup life in Silicon Valley. Techies say the comedy is so true to life, it is as disconcerting as it is entertaining.
A eureka moment struck, recalls Mr. Rippel. "Hey, hold on, we could do this for real."
The two Ph.D.s quickly decided to try in reality what HBO's fictitious startup was trying on screen. Ever since, the pair of Facebook Inc. alums-turned-startup founders have been living a case of life imitating art imitating life.
HBO's comedy series, which began its run in 2014, tells the story of scrappy startup Pied Piper, which hits on a brilliant algorithm for compressing information so it can zip through the pipes of the internet more quickly.
WaveOne Inc., the startup founded by Messrs. Bourdev and Rippel, is using an artificial intelligence technique to improve upon existing real-life compression technology. And they are finding early success, according to a paper they submitted to an academic conference on Thursday. WaveOne hopes its progress will help it recruit engineers and excite potential customers.
Just like their fictional analog, which faces stiff competition from tech giant "Hooli," the WaveOne team fears its toughest test could be competing against what some argue is Hooli's real-life corollary: Alphabet Inc.'s Google.
The search giant has a team of researchers working on similar video compression technology, a Google spokesman confirmed. Other companies are also working on the technology.
An HBO spokeswoman didn't respond to a request for comment.
The six-person team at WaveOne says it isn't very much like Pied Piper's band of brilliant weirdos, which includes a self-described Satan-worshipping software engineer; his sparring partner, a Pakistani-born nerd with dry wit; a curly-haired pot smoker totally lacking in self-awareness; a skinny, self-sacrificing organizer who will go to extreme lengths to please the boss; and their naive, anxiety-crippled leader.
"We're a linear combination of their personalities," says Alexander Anderson, a research scientist at the company.
They're also more athletic. Mr. Anderson, 28, loves Bollywood and hip-hop dancing. Steve Branson, 37 and another research scientist, is an expert rock climber. Mr. Rippel, 30, once taught the Israeli martial art Krav Maga after his postcollege service in the Israel Defense Forces. He declines to discuss details: "A lot of that is classified."
The company's single conference space in its small, whiteboard-walled offices is called "The Interrogation Room." There they interview potential recruits, "people who we suspect will infiltrate our org," jokes Mr. Bourdev, 43. While keeping the company's work secret from rivals is a priority, he says, Mr. Bourdev's attempts to do so could probably inspire a "Silicon Valley" episode.
They once had a rival researcher over to the office for a social call, they say. Everywhere it said "video compression" on an office whiteboard, someone jokingly scribbled the word "Not" in front of it, hoping the engineer wouldn't notice.
Video compression is used to encode video files so they take up less storage space and are easier to transmit over the internet, mostly by eliminating redundant information.
After reviewing WaveOne's paper, Alan Bovik, director of the laboratory for image and video engineering at the University of Texas, said its early results "seem pretty fantastic," but cautioned the company needs to show its techniques work with more kinds of data.
The WaveOne team has had fun with its fictional counterpart. Its first academic paper on more basic image compression, published at a 2017 conference, included a nod to the show and its creator: "Pied Piper has recently claimed to employ [machine learning] techniques in its Middle-Out algorithm (Judge et al., 2016), although their nature is shrouded in mystery."
Google, meantime, has acknowledged comparisons to the show's tech giant Hooli. The company hid a link to Hooli's satirical website in the 2015 blog announcing its reorganization.
Mr. Bourdev says he was once chatting with his old Facebook boss, Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg, and reminded him that his startup was working on better compression. He says Mr. Zuckerberg cracked that if the WaveOne team could demonstrate a high Weissman score -- a fictitious test of compression efficiency on the TV show -- their technology might interest them. A Facebook spokeswoman declined to comment.
The pair's a-ha moment nearly fizzled that day they were first watching the show together. Mr. Rippel, googling to see if other startups were onto the idea, found a website for one that seemed to have a head start. "I had this 'oh shit' moment," he recalls, "there's a company doing that."
Turned out he'd not been watching the show closely and was fooled by the authentic-looking website its creators had posted for the fictional company, Pied Piper.

Credit: By Rolfe Winkler
