Yelp, the company known for its 5-star-ratings system for businesses, is adding to its roster of services in a bid to uphold its own popularity.
The San Francisco-based company started out by giving users a way to see what others have said about a business or what dishes are most popular at a restaurant. Since its founding in 2004, Yelp has amassed some 127 million reviews in areas such as retail, restaurants, home and local services and beauty in more than 30 countries.
Now, pressed by rivals such as Google, which includes its own ratings system for local businesses in its search results, Yelp has expanded the services it offers. Users can now make restaurant reservations, get price quotes from businesses, hold a place in line for a restaurant, get food delivered and earn cash from a loyalty program.
Each of these tools -- some acquired, and some developed internally -- are designed to strengthen the relationship between Yelp and its users, says Yelp co-founder and Chief Executive Jeremy Stoppelman.
The company charges for these services in different ways. For its reservation system it charges restaurants a flat monthly fee, while fees for its NoWait service depend on subscription type. For Eat24 food deliveries, it charges transaction-processing fees to restaurants. Request a Quote is free but offers paid ads for businesses to be listed as a "similar business."
Last week, Yelp reported weaker-than-expected retention of local advertisers and cut its full-year revenue outlook as a result. Its shares fell sharply. Yelp blamed the problem on a move to a different ad system and the fact that it had more smaller customers, who have higher turnover. Yelp said it has addressed the issues and has seen performance improve.
The Wall Street Journal spoke with Mr. Stoppelman about the challenges his company faces in broadening the services it offers while maintaining its core business of reviews, search and ads. Edited excerpts follow:
WSJ: Why have you evolved from your original focus?
MR. STOPPELMAN: We got our start with reviews and content to help consumers decide what the best business for them might be. We had a lot of success with that. What does the consumer do next? Typically the consumer wants to transact. This is about how to make their life a little easier.
Part of the strategy there is to make Yelp an indispensable tool for consumers to contact and engage with businesses they care about.
WSJ: How do these transaction services affect your revenue and business?
MR. STOPPELMAN: We haven't had a revenue focus as a primary reason for doing this. There is a nice revenue component to Eat24, which we acquired. It has seen a lot of growth.
If you're a fan of the Yelp app and you can book a table through the Yelp app, that's a smoother, better experience. Similarly, if your favorite brunch spot says, "Do you want to add yourself to the waitlist and we'll notify you 10 minutes before?" that's a "wow experience."
Not to say there isn't a revenue component to these businesses, but the Yelp ad business is enormous and won't be eclipsed by these additions any time soon. All roads lead back to Yelp and the core Yelp experience.
WSJ: How do these services generate revenue?
MR. STOPPELMAN: The strategy is to provide a reason for consumers to use Yelp more often and to allow them to take the next step after business discovery. It's also to provide services to businesses that take advantage of Yelp's large consumer distribution.
WSJ: How do you remain objective in terms of handling reviews for consumers, given that you are getting paid for restaurant reservations, etc.?
MR. STOPPELMAN: Reviews and advertising, or any of our paid products, are completely separate. Businesses can't pay to manipulate their reviews on Yelp. It's crucial to maintaining consumer trust to keep reviews and advertising separate. Reviews are recommended to consumers by software that is impartial to advertisers or any other commercial relationship. In addition, we have a user-support team that reviews content for violations of our terms of service.
WSJ: If a restaurant that uses the Yelp reservation system gets bad ratings, does that affect how or whether you work with them?
MR. STOPPELMAN: No. Yelp helps consumers choose a restaurant based on rating, reviews, photos and other information. Yelp Reservations simply allows users to make a reservation at the restaurant of their choice directly through the Yelp platform at the moment of decision.
WSJ: Has anything changed in your relationship with Google?
MR. STOPPELMAN: We continue to see Google as a competitor in the local space with their Google Places product. We continue to have concerns around how they leverage their monopoly. When regulators come to us, we haven't been shy about our perspective. That said, we're not standing around and complaining about Google.
WSJ: Has anything changed with how you handle fake reviews?
MR. STOPPELMAN: We've always been a pioneer and tip of the spear tackling this problem. One of the things we developed in February 2005, just after the launch of the product, was the first version of our recommendation algorithm. That decided which reviews are most useful for consumers and most helpful and which aren't. At this stage of the game we're using the fancy technology you've heard of, like machine learning.
We have a team focused on doing sting operations. They pose as people who love to sell reviews on the internet. When we have smoking-gun evidence [that a business has paid or tried to pay for positive reviews], we're able put out a consumer alert [on the Yelp page of the business involved]. We want consumers presented with the evidence.
WSJ: How has your review-display algorithm changed or improved with machine learning or new technology?
MR. STOPPELMAN: Our recommendation software has definitely evolved and improved over time as it has more data to process. It incorporates what we know about each review and reviewer, and uses pattern-recognition and other machine-learning techniques to protect consumers.
We've recently tuned the algorithm to increase its focus on solicited reviews because that's an increasing problem in the online-review industry. We think that soliciting biases reviews, and our policy is that businesses should not ask for reviews, and definitely not pay for them or give freebies in exchange.
---
Mr. Geron is a Wall Street Journal reporter in San Francisco. Email him at tomio.geron@wsj.com.
Credit: By Tomio Geron
