Tesla's inability to roll out its most advanced driver-assistance features in China has put the automaker behind its Chinese electric-vehicle rivals.
It wants to enable drivers in its biggest market outside the U.S. to use an enhanced version of its Autopilot software, which it calls Full Self-Driving. Using the software, a car can effectively drive without human intervention from starting point to destination, although drivers are told to stay alert at all times.
Chief Executive Elon Musk said last month that he expected Chinese regulators to approve the features -- which are allowed in the U.S. -- by the end of this year.
Beijing has yet to approve the latest Tesla driving technology amid concerns about accidents involving Tesla's software in the U.S. as well as about data security, people familiar with official thinking said. Tesla also hasn't received permission to transfer driving data collected from Tesla owners in China to U.S.-based computers to train its artificial-intelligence driving models. The dim prospects of winning a nod have prompted Tesla to consider further investment in computers in China, people close to the company said.
Chinese carmakers have secured government permission and are offering driver-assistance features that are more advanced than what Tesla is allowed to provide in China, often more cheaply.
Last month, XPeng, one of China's leading EV startups, made available nationwide a driving-assistance system that provides cruising on city streets and responds to traffic signals. XPeng said its system is powered by AI.
Other Chinese companies including Huawei Technologies and Li Auto provide similar driving-assistance features such as city-street cruising in hundreds of Chinese cities.
If Tesla were to win approval in China for its FSD service, it would likely be limited initially to a few cities such as Shanghai, said people familiar with the matter. That is in keeping with precedent: Chinese regulators have typically required local companies to pilot their services initially in limited areas.
The Tesla software currently available in China costs around $4,500, while Chinese rivals generally charge less or provide the software free to car buyers. Analysts say the price difference has made Tesla's software less attractive to Chinese drivers. "Tesla has fallen behind in China," said Yale Zhang of consulting company Automotive Foresight, comparing features currently available to Chinese drivers.
Tesla didn't respond to requests for comment. It says on its China website that it requires billions of miles of driving records and regulatory approvals before it can offer to Chinese consumers the advanced features available in the U.S.
The development of self-driving cars is important to Musk and Tesla. "Anyone who doesn't believe that Tesla will solve vehicle autonomy should not hold Tesla stock," he said on the latest earnings call.
Some Chinese carmakers say Tesla's most advanced software, if approved, could outdo their own. Tesla is up to two years ahead of Chinese companies in driver-assistance technology, said Gu Junli, a former technology executive at Tesla and XPeng, in July at an AI conference.
China accounted for 20% of Tesla's revenue in the first half of this year. Like other U.S. and European carmakers, the company's sales in the country are falling. Tesla's market share in China for new-energy vehicles -- a category that includes full EVs and plug-in hybrids -- fell to 6.8% in the first half of this year, according to the China Passenger Car Association, down from 9.5% in the same period a year earlier.
Tesla has said the Version 12 family of its FSD driving software, which it frequently updates with new subversions, uses AI and learning tools modeled on the human brain's neural networks.
Cars with Version 12, available to U.S. drivers since early this year, can generally drive on their own without a human turning the wheel or pressing the accelerator, including on city streets. Tesla warns drivers they must be ready to take over at all times. In China, regulators haven't allowed car companies to provide systems that enable hands-off driving.
Tesla's AI-based software replaces older software that tried to preprogram rules about every situation a car might encounter. Tesla said in March that its latest system was trained on millions of video clips, replacing hundreds of thousands of lines of computer code.
Chinese automakers are working to train their own AI models. Similar competition in EVs helped Chinese carmakers move to the global forefront.
"The beauty of this market is, because of the diverse participants, the fierce competition, it has sparked more trial and error," said UBS analyst Paul Gong. "That stimulates faster progression."
On a visit to Beijing in April, Musk met the country's premier and won a preliminary blessing for Tesla's FSD plan, boosting the company's stock price. That opened the door for Tesla to begin testing its vehicles and gathering data needed for final approval from industry regulators. In May, authorities in Shanghai allowed the company to transfer limited data from test cars in China to the U.S. The video data can't include people's faces or license-plate numbers.
Tesla is testing a small fleet of cars with its latest driving software in Shanghai and preparing for trials in Hangzhou and Beijing, people familiar with the plan said.
Tesla wants China's permission to transfer data to the U.S. from normal cars on the road, not just the test cars, and has discussed ways to filter out sensitive data, the people said. But they said the prospects were uncertain. Chinese authorities are concerned that video and location data collected by the vehicles could give the U.S. information about military sites or other sensitive facilities.
Tesla has looked at a Plan B -- building a data center in China to train the driving software on Chinese road conditions -- but that isn't simple, the people said. Tesla is studying whether it could source the most advanced Nvidia chips to power such an AI effort, they said. The U.S. restricts the export of these chips to China.
In the U.S., federal regulators have probed hundreds of crashes, including fatal ones, involving Tesla vehicles using less-advanced driver-assistance software.
In December, Tesla recalled more than two million cars to add more alerts and controls encouraging drivers to remain attentive while using Autopilot.
Those accident reports have weighed on Chinese authorities vetting Tesla's technology, people familiar with the matter said.
Tesla's AI-driven driving system created an additional layer of concerns among Chinese regulators, who questioned whether the system could properly handle Chinese traffic without sufficient training on the nation's roads, the people said.
Driving conditions in China might differ from those in the U.S. that were used to train Tesla's AI software, with poorly managed roads in small cities and more bicycles and pedestrians.
Credit: By Raffaele Huang and Yoko Kubota
