For years, police have complained that Telegram would ignore most of their requests for help in tracking down suspected criminals who were using the platform.
Now, following the arrest of its founder in France, the messaging and social-media app has reversed course and is regularly turning over phone numbers and other information about users suspected of illegal activity, French prosecutors said.
The change started immediately after French police arrested Pavel Durov in late August, French prosecutors said. Durov faces preliminary charges from French authorities for complicity in distributing child pornography, illegal drugs and hacking software on the app, which says it has almost one billion users. Authorities also alleged he refused to cooperate with investigations into illegal activity on Telegram.
In a Telegram post late Monday, Durov, who has denied wrongdoing in the French case, acknowledged the platform's use for illegal activity. He said the company had updated its terms of service and privacy policy to make it clear that "the IP addresses and phone numbers of those who violate our rules can be disclosed to relevant authorities in response to valid legal requests."
French prosecutors said Durov's new cooperative attitude was a reversal from the company's previous posture, when they would hardly ever hear from the app except in cases involving terrorist threats. They add that there has been no formal agreement with Telegram that it will continue to cooperate, nor any deal with Durov to do so, though French law could permit a plea bargain.
Durov was released on bail, but he remains under investigation in France and must report to a Paris police station twice a week. Investigating magistrates in France will now decide whether Durov should face trial or the preliminary charges should be dropped.
Some of the Telegram's avid users have long warned Durov of the need for less-freewheeling management.
Durov this month said Telegram removes millions of harmful posts and channels daily.
A Telegram spokesman said strengthening its moderation capabilities is the company's main priority for 2024.
As Telegram's popularity increased, its user count grew, rising above 950 million. The site also went from a place for dissidents, journalists and activists to a home for terrorist groups and other extremists, including Islamic State, al Qaeda and neo-Nazis.
The criminal groups were drawn to many of the same features that had excited Telegram's mainstream users, including massive groups and controls on who can see a user's phone number.
The Telegram spokesman said the app's moderators remove content that encourages violence, such as target lists and instructions for making weapons, and added that the app doesn't tolerate groups that exist to promote violence.
Telegram has made efforts through the years to combat some of the most dangerous content on its platform. The company has said it developed artificial-intelligence tools and hired teams of moderators in addition to forbidding certain types of content.
Researchers, though, continue to find Telegram hosting dangerous content related to terrorism, child sexual-abuse material, drugs and hacking.
Following French authorities' move to charge Durov, Telegram updated its website to add that users can report illegal content with a button that forwards messages to moderators.
The changes appear to contradict other policies on Telegram's website. "All Telegram chats and group chats are private amongst their participants," Telegram's website says. "We do not process any requests related to them."
Credit: By Georgia Wells and Sam Schechner
