The U.S. spent 2018 piling tariffs, investment restrictions and indictments on China to protect U.S. technology from what the Trump administration considers unfair, and sometimes illegal, competition.
Meanwhile, Washington's own research and innovation agenda might not be keeping up.
U.S. federal research is split among dozens of agencies and departments, a hodgepodge that scientists say has some advantages because it promotes competition. Energy Department researchers looking to use artificial intelligence for driverless vehicles may have a different take on the technology than Commerce Department scientists exploring manufacturing.
In some technologies, the U.S. is clearly geared up to hold its own against China.
The U.S. is spending roughly $1 billion to $2 billion annually, much of it federal funds, to build the first "exascale" supercomputer -- capable of a quintillion calculations a second, which is at least 100 times faster than today's champion. Such a machine would help in everything from designing futuristic weapons to investigating brain science.
China is spending about the same and may hit the mark before the U.S. But the U.S. program focuses more on software than China's does and should produce more useful results, says Steve Conway, a senior vice president at Hyperion Research.
The U.S. is also boosting spending in semiconductor research, an area of intense Chinese interest. John Neuffer, president of the Semiconductor Industry Association, says advanced computer chips are essential to the military.
Beyond such priorities, say technology specialists, the Trump administration lacks a plan to spur innovation and rank the importance of different technologies.
Part of the disconnect is philosophical -- Beijing believes in state-driven research to help state-owned industries, while the U.S. depends on the private sector, along with a healthy dose of government-funded basic research. But the U.S. runs the risk of falling behind without more coordinated effort.
The Trump administration argues the federal government should focus on basic research, and leave technologies with market applications to industry. An early 2018 report at the National Security Council that called for the federal government to nationalize the construction of a next-generation, 5G cellular system, for instance, was quickly disowned.
The administration proposed a 17% cut in basic research in the 2018 fiscal year and an 8% cut in the current 2019 fiscal-year budget, according to an analysis by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, along with similar cuts in applied research.
Mr. Trump's administration has tried to kill the Commerce Department's Manufacturing Extension Partnership, which spends about $125 million a year to help smaller companies learn about robotics and 3-D manufacturing. So far, Congress has restored the program and other research cuts, and is likely to do so again this year.
Overall federal R&D spending, at 0.7% of gross domestic product, is roughly half what it was in the mid-1980s.
The Trump administration, "apart from a few areas, has done everything to scale back American investments in research," said Matt Hourihan, a budget analyst at the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
The White House declined to comment.
Some of the administration's defensive measures against China give Beijing's research a boost.
Top Chinese supercomputer scientists, concerned about U.S. tariffs and investment restrictions, rely on Chinese-produced computer chips, not U.S. ones. Some artificial-intelligence research conferences, once scheduled for the U.S., now are held outside the country because scientists from China and elsewhere worry they can't get U.S. visas.
The White House's Office of Science and Technology Policy has advanced some initiatives to boost U.S. technology. Its program on quantum information science -- using quantum mechanics to eventually make computers and communications operate at speeds and efficiency well beyond anything possible today -- is broadly praised.
That effort involves collaboration among industry, government and academia, has fat funding -- $73 million in fiscal 2018 alone at the Energy Department -- and can expect continuing support because it is a defense priority. The U.S. worries China could use quantum technology, once perfected, to build hack-proof communications and break into U.S. systems.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor Erik Brynjolfsson said the White House artificial-intelligence program is much less impressive.
The government has an opportunity "for more fundamental research that has broader benefits to society beyond any one company," Mr. Brynjolfsson said.
Other parts of the government also work on AI, particularly the Pentagon's famed Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, which had a hand in developing the internet, driverless cars, supercomputers and a host of other technologies that have transformed society.
But the White House is the fulcrum for setting governmentwide policy. Some of its actions suggest it is not a priority.
The Trump administration didn't nominate anyone to lead its Office of Science and Technology Policy until August 2018 and the director still hasn't won Senate approval.
The nominee, meteorologist Kelvin Droegemeier, will have his work cut out for him. The administration proposed spending $133.2 billion in this year's budget, according to the American Association for the Advancement of Science, a 6.8% cut from the prior year.

Credit: By Bob Davis
