International Business Machines Corp. CEO Ginni Rometty published an open letter to U.S. President-elect Donald Trump outlining her recommendations on health care, infrastructure spending and other issues.
The letter is her first comment on the prospect of a Trump administration since Mr. Trump, shortly before the election, criticized IBM and other companies for shifting U.S. jobs overseas.
The letter offers support for some of Mr. Trump's policies and advice on national issues -- noting that IBM is the largest technology employer in the U.S. Last year IBM hired more U.S. employees than in the five years prior, the letter said. The Donald J. Trump for President organization didn't reply to a request for comment.
Silicon Valley generally has viewed Mr. Trump's victory as a blow to the tech industry, as the president-elect has been a critic of Apple Inc. and Amazon.com Inc. as well as IBM.
Mr. Trump, in a campaign speech, said IBM had laid off 500 workers in Minneapolis and moved their jobs to other countries. Mr. Trump also called out Ford Motor Co. and MoneyGram International Inc. for laying off workers and moving jobs overseas.
"If a company wants to leave Minnesota, fire their workers and move to another country, and then ship their products back into the United States . . . we will make them pay a 35% tax," he said.
Ford Chief Executive Mark Fields, speaking to reporters Tuesday, said the company would stick with plans to assemble cars in Mexico but would continue to discuss the situation with the incoming administration. A 35% tariff "would be harmful, I think, to the entire industry and the economy," he said.
The letter from Ms. Rometty offers support for another of Mr. Trump's proposals, to end tax-code incentives for businesses to keep their overseas earnings out of the country. "Many billions of dollars of American companies' earnings don't come home because of an outdated and punitive tax system," she said.
The change would "free up capital that companies of all sizes can reinvest in their U.S. operations, training and education programs for their employees, and research and development programs," the letter continues.
IBM in 2015 spent more than half its annual $5.4 billion research-and-development budget in the U.S.
IBM also supports Mr. Trump's proposed investment in infrastructure such as roads, bridges, buildings and other public facilities, Ms. Rometty wrote, adding that the infrastructure's performance would benefit by the inclusion of networked sensors and artificial intelligence, technologies that IBM offers.
Similarly, she suggested reducing health-care costs through the use of information technology and data analytics. IBM said it operates one of the largest employer-sponsored health plans in the U.S. Health-care costs could be reduced by analyzing data to detect fraudulent Medicare claims, she wrote.
Credit: By Rachael King
