Chinese artificial-intelligence company SenseTime Group Inc. filed revised documents for a Hong Kong initial public offering and said it still plans to list before year-end, after the U.S. government moved to restrict American investors from buying its stock.
The company said early Monday in Hong Kong that it would relaunch its IPO later the same day. It still aims to raise the equivalent of as much as $767 million, at a maximum valuation of $17 billion, unchanged from its original offering plan. The company's shares would start trading on Dec. 30.
On Dec. 10, the day that the company was originally poised to price its IPO, the U.S. Treasury Department placed SenseTime on a list of companies that support China's military. The blacklist prevents American investors from buying the company's stock. The U.S. said that a SenseTime subsidiary's facial-recognition technology was used in the Chinese government's efforts to identify and suppress mainly Muslim ethnic minorities in western China.
Three days later, SenseTime postponed the share offering. The Wall Street Journal reported that SenseTime was hoping to relaunch the deal as soon as this month.
SenseTime has stepped up its use of cornerstone investors to support the deal. Cornerstones are common in large Hong Kong IPOs. They commit to buy a set dollar amount of shares wherever in the range a deal prices and hold that stock for six months or more, serving to endorse the deal to others.
At the midpoint of the deal's price range, cornerstone investors would now account for about 67.7% of the deal, up from 59.7% previously. Those figures assume that underwriters don't exercise a greenshoe option to boost the deal's final size by 15%.
SenseTime still has nine cornerstone investors, but five of the nine have changed. Some Hong Kong-based hedge-fund managers, including Pleiad Investment Advisors Ltd. and WT Asset Management Ltd., are no longer participating. The biggest new cornerstone is Xuhui Capital, a state investment vehicle established earlier this year that is funded by the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of Shanghai's Xuhui district.
The company added new information to its prospectus discussing the sanctions, warning that current and potential U.S. restrictions "could limit our group's ability to raise funds, in particular, from U.S. investors, and the liquidity and market price of our publicly traded securities" could be hurt. SenseTime said lawyers had advised it that the sanctions only applied to an unlisted subsidiary, SenseTime Group Ltd., and not to the parent company that was going public, meaning that the blacklisting didn't technically bar U.S. investors from buying or holding on to its stock. Still, it said it had decided not to sell shares to U.S. investors as part of the IPO, due to "the dynamic and evolving nature" of American regulations and warned that the parent company or other units could potentially be blacklisted in the future.
Existing U.S. shareholders of SenseTime include the private- equity firm Silver Lake and chip maker Qualcomm Inc.'s venture arm.
SenseTime's IPO size was already cut down from $2 billion, after the Commerce Department put a Beijing subsidiary of the company on a separate blacklist for exports, known as the Entity List, in October 2019.
Credit: By Rebecca Feng and Jing Yang
