David Rush, a 36-year-old New Yorker, knows he couldn't possibly attend every event he RSVPs to with a yes.
He says he is able to make this work with a valuable social skill: He knows how to back out on plans with friends and colleagues in a way that doesn't hurt -- and sometimes helps -- his relationships.
"He has a knack for flaking out but being lovable," says George Catrambone, a coach and one of Mr. Rush's teammates on a recreational hockey team. Mr. Rush's frequent changes of plan can be "annoying," says Mr. Catrambone, who has instituted a fine for players who miss games: They have to bring the beer to the next game. Mr. Rush gets fined a lot, Mr. Catrambone says. "With Dave, you take the good with the bad."
Most people know someone like Mr. Rush -- repeat offenders when it comes to flaking out on plans, but they do it responsibly, even endearingly. They offer rain checks, rejigger itineraries or sometimes simply cancel in ways that minimize anger or annoyance.
They get out of sticky situations with a deft mix of technology -- smartphone-enabled reservations and scheduling, Facebook invites, Paperless Post messages, Outlook invitations -- and a hint of old-fashioned charm.
"Take on as much as possible," says Mr. Rush, who works in green energy, of his philosophy. "Have a reputation for being someone who has a lot on his plate." People will come to understand, he says, that "sometimes things slip through the cracks. It's like the saying, 'Don't major in the minor things.'"
Flaking can be a symptom of forgetfulness, halfhearted commitment or a difficulty with saying "no." Experts see it as somewhat inevitable with so many new digital scheduling tools in use. Of all meetings scheduled by x.ai, a new artificial-intelligence personal-assistant service, 17% are rescheduled, according to Dennis Mortensen, one of the founders; the rate for human-organized meetings would be much higher, he says.
One prominent explanation of this behavior is called "construal level theory," says Sudeep Bhatia, an assistant professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania who studies how people make choices. The theory says we think abstractly about an event that is far away and focus on the reality as it approaches. "Getting that drink with someone can seem like a great idea," Dr. Bhatia says. But as the date comes closer, we start to think about specifics, like the amount of time or money involved.
Something responsible flakes have in common is the way they communicate their change of heart, says Michael Melcher, an executive coach based in New York City with Next Step Partners, which opens its website with a message: "You're here because something isn't working."
Bad flakes commit two offenses, he says: They don't communicate about their intentions to change plans, making it hard for the other people to arrange alternatives. And they lie.
Responsible flakes, in contrast, send signals early about the potential for conflicting demands on their time. They take responsibility when they miss an event.
This strategy worked for Leigh Ann Torres, a mother of three in Austin, Texas, who considers herself something of a perpetual, yet responsible, flake.
She was shopping at Costco recently when she realized something was wrong. The problem: She should have been at the Cheesecake Factory, attending a lunch for a friend visiting from out of town.
The even bigger problem: Ms. Torres was the one who had organized the lunch.
Ms. Torres dropped everything and rushed to the restaurant. There she found her friends had already ordered. She apologized and fessed up. Not only had she completely forgotten the party, but she also had to leave in a few minutes to fetch her children from another engagement.
Ms. Torres's honesty about why she had flaked made her story resonate more. "As she was talking, I'm just nodding saying, 'This could totally be my life,'" said Elaine Alguire, the friend visiting from Lafayette, La. "'I'm just glad you're here for the 15 or 20 minutes you could join us.'"
Flaking out on friends is one thing. Flaking out on strangers could be the ultimate social faux pas. Kevin Kruse, author of the 2015 book "15 Secrets Successful People Know About Time Management," says one of his top values in life is commitment. He can't see flaking out -- even if done responsibly -- in a positive way.
He recommends flakes find better ways to manage their busy schedules. Start with a calendar, not a to-do list, he says: Calendars show how much time a task will require.
Still, some people say that flaking occasionally presents an opportunity.
The way you manage a scheduling snafu can demonstrate your crisis-handling skills, says Sara Canaday, author of the 2012 book "You -- According to Them: Uncovering the Blind Spots That Impact Your Reputation and Your Career."
"If you don't know the person, flaking gives you time to reveal more of who you are. They get to know you almost on a deeper level," Ms. Canaday says. She certainly doesn't condone flaking, but says people who back out on plans might want to think in terms of making a withdrawal from a bank account: They have some leeway with people with whom they have social capital, but they'll need to replenish the account.
"This strategy is essentially saying, 'I'm flaking on you now, but I'm going to give you more time, more attention, a little bit of a higher commitment at the next interaction,'" Ms. Canady says.
Dimitris Kouvaros, a 23-year-old venture capital investor from New York City, says he feels bad when he has to back out on one of the hundreds of people who contact him each year asking to meet for coffee to pitch their startup ideas. Inevitably he has to flake on some of them, Mr. Kouvaros says. He has a policy: If he flakes on a coffee, he will follow up to propose drinks; if he has to flake on drinks, he will up the ante to dinner.
Credit: By Charlie Wells
