There are two great times to make money in stock markets: the postcrash rebound and the end-of-cycle excess. Oil and technology fit the pattern perfectly in the past two years.
Since the oil-price low of January 2016, the global oil and tech sectors have both made more than 80%, including dividends, beating the wider market's 53% return hands down. The oil sector was merely rebounding as crude prices tripled from their lows, but tech stocks were being led to heady heights by giddy enthusiasm for a bright future.
More extreme proxies for the commodity and tech cycles have done even better. The mining industry -- saved from a near-death experience by the rise in metals prices that came in parallel with the oil recovery -- returned about 150% over the period, similar to the NYSE Fang+ Index of 10 leading U.S. and Chinese internet stocks.
History suggests far bigger gains are possible for both sectors. But while an end-of-cycle boom can continue for a long time, it depends on sentiment getting evermore positive. Postcrash recoveries typically have a stronger underlying support, because traumatized investors refuse to let management pour cash into new projects, reducing competition and supporting profits.
Fashions for sectors show up in how large a sector is compared with global market value (domestic listings alone don't work well in an era of global companies). On this basis, a complete reversal has taken place since 2008, with oil and gas almost halving from 13% to below 7% of global capitalization. At the same time tech including Amazon.com Inc. -- classed as a retailer, not a tech stock -- has risen from 7% to 13%.
The fads have been more extreme in the past. In 1980, oil and gas stocks were 23% of world market value, as investors sought protection from inflation, while the tech sector fell below 6%. By 2000, the fervor for all things dot-com pushed the tech sector to almost 24%, while oil fell below 5%.
There is nothing to stop the excitement about today's trend for giant tech stocks; after all, they are cheaper than in 2000, mostly make good profits and are awash in cash. But the boom depends on investors being willing to assume profit growth far in the future to justify high valuations, and that heavy corporate investment in new projects will generate high margins.
The market is very poor at seeing the big picture when lots of companies chase the same opportunities; more competition ought to mean lower profits, but rarely is this factored in.
Tech stocks face exactly this risk as investors encourage them to splurge on new projects in Hollywood, self-driving cars, cloud computing and artificial intelligence. Each area holds great promise, but the more companies trying to take advantage of it, the more competition. Great for consumers, not so much for investors.
The opposite is under way in the oil industry. When the oil price crashed in 2014, new projects were canceled and costs cut. Capital spending by the five biggest global oil companies has halved from 2013's peak, according to credit-ratings firm S&P Global Inc. Weaker producers went to the wall, and the oil-services industry was squeezed hard.
Limits on production help keep oil prices and so the sector's shares up, and have the further benefit of lowering production costs, by reducing competition for rigs, workers and land.
This doesn't apply so much to shale oil, where it is quicker and cheaper to bring on new production. And most oil production in the world comes from state-controlled companies, which aren't subject to the whims of the market.
Luckily for investors it looks as though neither state-owned producers nor shale will be going on a spending spree soon. The number of U.S. shale-oil rigs has more than doubled, but remains only just over half the 2011 high, according to Baker Hughes data. Even at this level there are plenty of bottlenecks holding back shale production, including a lack of pipelines and trucks, while steel tariffs are pushing up costs. State-owned producers are also being held back from boosting production too much: Saudi Arabia needs a higher price to balance its budget, Venezuela's economy has imploded, and Iran faces U.S. sanctions.
There are no guarantees in investment, and oil companies have high leverage and lots of geopolitical exposure. But oil stocks are cheap compared both with their own history and the market, and the big companies have rediscovered spending discipline. By contrast, tech stocks are expensive, at a time when the competition for talent is pushing costs up fast and the bulk of their cash flow -- with a few big exceptions such as Apple Inc. -- are being reinvested in the quest for the next big thing. At some point, shareholders will notice.

Credit: By James Mackintosh
