Twitter Inc. said it would use software proactively to find users who harass others, taking some of the burden off users to report abuse in an attempt to preserve its audience.
The change, among a handful of new steps Twitter outlined in a blog post Wednesday, is another shift away from Twitter's previous approach of relying solely on users to flag offensive accounts.
Now, the company is looking to "identify accounts as they're engaging in abusive behavior, even if this behavior hasn't been reported to us," said Ed Ho, Twitter's vice president of engineering, in the blog post. It is the latest in a string of changes made by Twitter to make its platform a safer, more hospitable place -- a difficult task, according to social-media experts.
Twitter has previously adopted measures to hide abusive replies from users and keep abusive accounts from returning to the site under a new name. Twitter, which has 319 million monthly users, has seen its user growth stagnate in recent years, although the company says it has seen more people use the service on a daily basis recently.
In the latest quarter, revenue rose by just 1%, marking Twitter's 10th straight quarter of slowing revenue growth.
Twitter Chief Executive Jack Dorsey said in a tweet that the company is "getting better at applying machine learning to help curb abuse."
For example, if certain accounts repeatedly tweet at users that don't follow them back, that could signal harassment. In that case, Twitter might limit the visibility of those accounts by only allowing their followers to see their tweets, according to Mr. Ho.
"We aim to only act on accounts when we're confident, based on our algorithms, that their behavior is abusive," Mr. Ho wrote. "Since these tools are new we will sometimes make mistakes, but know that we are actively working to improve and iterate on them everyday."
Twitter is also adding an option for users to control what they see from certain accounts, such as those without a profile photo, unverified email address or phone number. It is also making it easier for people to access its "mute" feature it launched in November that allows users to block all tweets that contain a certain phrase or keyword.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman
