Caris Life Sciences has received an $830 million infusion from a group led by Sixth Street Partners, the companies said, the latest sign of private equity's enthusiasm for investing at the intersection of healthcare and technology.
Other significant participants in the equity investment round, which gives the cancer-diagnostic company a post-money valuation of $7.83 billion, include T. Rowe Price Associates Inc., Silver Lake, Fidelity Management & Research Co. and Coatue Management LLC.
The new cash, which Irving, Texas-based Caris plans to use to help fund its push into liquid biopsies, could pave the way for the company to complete an initial public offering over the next 12 months, according to people familiar with the matter.
Investing in life sciences has become a major theme for private-equity firms looking to capitalize on the rapid pace of innovation in the sector, enabled by new technology.
Founded in 2008 by veteran healthcare entrepreneur David Halbert, who serves as the company's chief executive officer, Caris provides cancer patients and their physicians with the genomic information needed to help them determine which treatment options to pursue. Oncologists send patient biopsies to Caris's labs, where the company assesses the DNA and RNA for all 22,000 genes. It then uses artificial intelligence and machine learning to generate a genomic signature for each patient.
With metastatic colorectal cancer, for example, virtually every patient must decide between two different chemotherapy treatments. By analyzing biomarkers in the patient's genome, Caris -- part of an area of healthcare known as precision medicine -- can help determine the appropriate one for that patient, offering a significant boost in patient outcomes.
Drugmakers also use Caris's data to determine which treatments to develop.
Caris currently focuses on solid biopsies, an area where it competes with Foundation Medicine Inc. Caris plans to use the latest investment to help fund the launch of a new platform to assess liquid biopsies, or blood samples, using its same process.
The new business line, which will pit it against competitors including SoftBank Group Corp.-backed Guardant Health Inc., will open up possibilities for Caris's technology, including by allowing it to be used to monitor cancer patients on a regular basis after their initial diagnosis.
Caris and its investors are betting that its ability to analyze more genes -- all 22,000 versus a few hundred for rivals -- gives it an edge.
Mr. Halbert, who previously founded pharmacy-benefits manager AdvancePCS Inc. and sold it to Caremark Rx Inc. for about $5.6 billion in 2004, remains a significant investor in Caris.
Sixth Street's relationship with Caris goes back to 2018 when the investment firm provided the company with $150 million in debt financing. The firm also invested last year when Caris raised another $310 million in debt and equity. Vijay Mohan, a Sixth Street co-founder and partner who heads the firm's healthcare investments, joined the company's board last year.
A former affiliate of private-equity firm TPG, Sixth Street became a stand-alone entity last year. With over $50 billion in assets under management and committed capital, it also finished raising one of the largest pools of private capital last year.
Earlier this month, Sixth Street said Martin Chavez, former chief information officer and chief financial officer at Goldman Sachs Group Inc., would join the firm as vice chairman. It said at the time that Mr. Chavez would develop software and artificial intelligence-related themes with its healthcare and life sciences group.
Credit: By Miriam Gottfried
