[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Like most chip companies not named Nvidia, Micron can't live on AI alone.
Booming demand for generative artificial intelligence components is definitely helping the memory-chip maker. Micron said on its fiscal first-quarter earnings call late Wednesday that revenue from the high bandwidth memory, or HBM, that is used in AI systems more than doubled during its November-ended quarter compared with the three preceding months. The surge is expected to continue; analysts see Micron's HBM revenue hitting about $4.9 billion in the current fiscal year -- a tenfold increase from the previous one, according to consensus estimates from Visible Alpha.
But at an estimated 8% of Micron's total revenue now, HBM can't fully compensate for weakness elsewhere in the company's portfolio. That is especially proving the case for the current fiscal quarter ending in February. Micron projected revenue for the quarter that was 12% below Wall Street's targets, which is the biggest such miss in more than two years, according to FactSet data. That proved too much even for a stock already 32% off its record from six months ago. Micron's shares slid more than 16% Thursday.
Most analysts aren't worried; 86% rate the stock as a buy compared with 68% two years ago. Several had expected a weaker forecast given well-known struggles in markets like PCs and smartphones -- still major consumers of memory chips.
Micron's management also buoyed hopes by raising its estimates for the overall HBM market by 20% from its last projection three months ago -- and predicting it will be larger than the entire market for DRAM memory by 2030. "Quite simply, we continue to believe Micron's leadership in HBM will be transformational for margins and its market position and what we heard on this call only makes us more convinced in this view," wrote Tim Arcuri of UBS.
Still, some concerns remain. Vivek Arya of BofA Securities downgraded Micron to a neutral rating, noting near-term pressure on the company's gross margins. And PCs remain one of Micron's largest market segments, making recovery there important for the company business overall. That will hinge in part on demand for AI-enabled devices that have so far not proven to be major sellers. Micron's AI story remains a complicated one.
Generate image description

By Dan Gallagher
