Researchers have taught an artificial-intelligence model how to imitate the motions of stitching up wounds and surgical incisions.
The researchers, from the University of California, Berkeley, and Intel Corp., say the algorithm used in the AI system could one day be embedded in autonomous robots that could perform suturing tasks on their own. In robotic medical treatments today, doctors are at the controls.
There is no sign that robots will be stitching wounds on humans soon. The algorithm would need to be tested thoroughly for safety and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which clears most medical devices, would need to approve its use.
Still, an autonomous robot that could free surgeons from repetitive surgical tasks could be beneficial if it could improve the quality of an outcome, said Christopher Amling, professor and chairman of the Department of Urology at Oregon Health & Science University. "That's where it's exciting," said Dr. Amling, who wasn't involved with the project.
Suturing, though, can be complex. An autonomous robot would have to consider the amount of tissue it grabs, the tension on the tissue and how tight it would pull the suture, Dr. Amling said. It would be difficult to train a robot to adjust its suturing method to pliable tissue, such as a person's intestine or bladder, because there is movement in the abdomen, he said. Suturing a laceration on an arm that could be stabilized on a table might be easier for a robot, he said.
The research team came up with a unique way to train the model, by programming it to pay attention to specific parts of images in videos, such as needle insertion and threading movements. By observing those actions across all the videos, the algorithm was able to imitate surgical suturing motions almost perfectly in both a virtual simulation and using a surgical robot, the researchers said.
The AI algorithm learned from about 80 demonstrations of suturing on publicly available videos. In the training videos, eight surgeons controlled a da Vinci surgical robot made by Intuitive Surgical Inc. to suture a cloth-like material made to resemble human flesh. The algorithm maps the images in the video to understand the action being performed and what movement it represents, the researchers said.
Robots that learn through imitation learning adapt better to new situations and are capable of making generalizations about the world similar to the way humans do, said Ken Goldberg, a professor at UC Berkeley's College of Engineering, who was involved in the research. "The goal is that we start to move more towards natural forms of learning," he said.
Other autonomous robots are sometimes trained using a technique called reinforcement learning, in which algorithms learn the correct way to perform an action based on trial-and-error and observations.
"There's still a long way to go," before such an autonomous robotic assistant could be seen in operating rooms, said Hanlin Tang, senior director of Intel's AI Lab, who was involved in the research.

Credit: By Sara Castellanos
