Medicine moves faster than government, thank goodness, but every now and again government tries to catch up. After years of thoughtful bipartisan work, Congress is now poised to pass the 21st Century Cures Act, a bill designed to accelerate the development of new medicines and modernize a malfunctioning corner of the regulatory state.
The sweeping measure cleared a Senate procedural vote 85-13 on Monday night and passed the House 392-96. These margins are testimony to renewed self-confidence in U.S. innovation and health-care progress, not much expressed in Washington until recently. A few dead-enders like Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren are denouncing Cures for its lack of pharmaceutical price controls, which might have become a reality had Hillary Clinton won on Nov. 8.
Cures includes a $4.8 billion infusion for the National Institutes of Health for basic research. The bill funds the NIH's neurological program on diseases like Alzheimer's, Joe Biden's "cancer moonshot" and rare diseases, while one encouraging earmark is for "high risk, high reward" studies that might not be financed by the private economy.
By the way, these new dollars are roughly offset with budget cuts elsewhere, which exposes the liberal claims of crisis if every program doesn't last forever. Congress is supposed to set priorities.
Perhaps the most promising component of Cures is a new regulatory model for Food and Drug Administration approvals. The FDA remains fused to an outdated clinical model that is too slow, costly and arbitrary. The FDA was not designed to govern an era of genomics, biomarkers, systems biology, artificial intelligence and other advances, not that its own inadequacy has prevented it from trying.
Thus Cures encourages the FDA to supplement classical randomized clinical trials with more information, such as adaptive trial designs that target patient sub-groups who are more likely to benefit. This would allow research to succeed or fail faster at some fraction of the current expense. The agency is also ordered to consider "real-world evidence" in approvals outside of trials.
What the FDA calls "RWE" is controversial because the agency is preoccupied with "proving" how a medicine will perform. But modern trials are so tightly controlled that the results are often artificial, or irrelevant to how a medicine will be used and refined in actual medical practice. In any case, debates about drug approval are never about "proof," but how to interpret evidence of benefits and risks.
The main limitation of Cures is that the problems at FDA aren't due to a shortage of laws. They flow from the agency's institutional culture of control, delay and abuse of regulatory discretion. Cures requires the FDA merely "to evaluate the use of real-world evidence," and this wouldn't be the first political instruction that the bureaucracy has defied.
Still, Cures is a stride toward a more rational and humane drug development system, and legislation is about compromise. The bill could become a useful precedent for successful progress as the 115th Congress starts to take shape next year.
