Giovanni Negron-Garcia said he literally jumped for joy when he learned he had earned a $7,000 academic scholarship to Kutztown University of Pennsylvania.
But the 18-year-old from Reading, Pa., came back to earth weeks later when he found out he would still have to shell out nearly $10,000 a year for fees, room, board and books.
"I'm thinking to myself 'No way, no way can I do this,'" said Mr. Negron-Garcia, who would be the first member of his family to attend college. Instead of college, He found himself considering working alongside his mother at a battery factory instead.
Hundreds of thousands of high-school students are hitting a crossroads this summer. At some schools, as many as 40% of students put down a deposit in spring and fail to show up for classes in fall, says Lindsay Page, a professor at the University of Pittsburgh School of Education who has studied the issue. Known as summer melt, the phenomenon costs individual colleges and universities hundreds of thousands of dollars in lost annual revenue.
Now, as schools compete harder for a declining number of available high-school seniors, they are targeting summer melt with new focus and more-aggressive tactics. Their playbook: Stay in touch with students over the summer to keep them excited about school and help with problems that crop up before they get discouraged and decide not to go.
At Temple University, in Philadelphia, two-day freshman orientation sessions have evolved into huge celebrations complete with swag bags full of Temple gear. The events run most of the summer as the school vies to get as many would-be freshmen on campus as possible.
At the State University of New York, Oneonta, 15 faculty members make calls to incoming freshmen to work through anxieties and talk through academic schedules.
And at American International College in Springfield, Mass., admissions staff members drive to some students' homes to help with paperwork or just reinforce the message that they have made the right choice by coming to college. "It's gotten a tremendous response," said Jon Scully, AIC's director of undergraduate admissions. It is part of a larger campaign that has driven summer melt down to 11% of the freshman class today compared with 18% four years ago, he said.
The latest Technology helps fight melt. Automatic text messaging systems, some using artificial intelligence, nudge students with reminders to stay on track over the summer. Companies like Signal Vine and Admit Hub send a steady stream of messages asking students if they have hit a recent deadline or are having problems.
The messages address relatively small problems that students may perceive as insurmountable obstacles. "If they don't have access to someone who can help solve that problem, they might give up because they are too embarrassed to ask what they think is a dumb question," said Brian Kathman, chief executive of Signal Vine.
Scott Burke, assistant vice president for undergraduate admissions at Georgia State University, said a chat bot developed by Admit Hub, called Pounce, helped drive the school's melt rate down to 14% last year from 18% in 2015. "Small bits of information at the right time can make a big difference," he said.
Some students who have committed to a school and then fail to show didn't just melt away. They got poached.
Enrollment officers at most colleges and universities at least pay lip service to a gentlemen's agreement that says after May 1, schools won't recruit students who they know have committed elsewhere. But students admitted to, say, five schools may not notify the four schools where they don't intend to enroll -- leaving the door open for enrollment officers there to claim they didn't know the student had accepted another offer.
"They are definitely exploiting a gray area," said Edwin Wright, vice president of enrollment management at Lebanon Valley College, says he does what most schools do: He continues the recruiting process with accepted incoming freshmen right up until the first day of school. "It's like you're dating and you don't want them to date anyone else," he said.
Mr. Negron-Garcia's hurdle was financial. Warren Hilton, vice president for enrollment management at Kutztown, that he didn't think he could afford to attend. Dr. Hilton directed Mr. Negron-Garcia to nearly $4,500 in additional scholarship funds. Mr. Negron-Garcia will be attending and hopes to major in communication studies. "We are willing to do whatever we can," Dr. Hilton said. Last year, the school lost about 100 of its 1,700-member freshmen class to summer melt -- at a cost to the school or nearly $1 million a year. "We want to get them on campus. We know once they are here we can change their lives."

Credit: By Douglas Belkin

ERIC Subject: Presidents; Enrollment Management; Universities
