BOSTON -- Engineers working at a startup near touristy Faneuil Hall Marketplace are building chips that use laser beams instead of electrical signals to run artificial-intelligence applications 10 times faster than today's most advanced AI computer chips, using one-tenth of the energy.
Founded in 2017, Lightmatter Inc. is among dozens of companies gaining interest from investors and corporations because of their novel approaches to computing. They are using light, quantum physics, molecular biology and new design methods to build chips and data-storage techniques for future computing demands.
Quantum computers, which harness the properties of quantum physics to sort through a vast number of possibilities in nearly real time, paved the way for other experimental techniques, startup executives say.
The market for new computing technology comes as advancements in traditional chip making are hitting a physical limit under Moore's Law, the idea that every two years or so, the number of transistors in a chip doubles.
At the same time, advances in artificial intelligence, easier access to troves of data and the continuing digitization of business processes are putting new demands on computing.
To address the challenge, some startups are making chips focused on specific software tasks. Others are pushing further, finding processing and storage solutions in new materials, including synthetic DNA.
Three miles northwest of Lightmatter's headquarters, Catalog Technologies Inc. is developing a unique way of storing large amounts of data. The company showed it could store 14 gigabytes of data in DNA molecules, which look like a few drops of water in a test tube.
At Catalog, machines typically found at a molecular-biology laboratory are used to "print" sequences of synthetic molecules that store and represent digital information as bits of DNA. The information is read back by using DNA-sequencing machines and a computer that translates those molecules into the original text, photo or video.
DNA storage doesn't require cooling the way data centers do, meaning the method holds promise for storing huge amounts of data more efficiently.
Devin Leake, the company's chief science officer, said the startup is benefiting from cutting-edge computing methods. "The groundwork that quantum computing has done -- and the idea of neuromorphic computing -- has laid the foundation for considering alternatives," Mr. Leake said.
New computing methods are largely experimental and there are challenges to scaling them to meet corporate demands. Still, investment in computing technology startups based in the U.S. has grown to a record $477.9 million in 2019, up from $59.8 million in 2014, according to data firm PitchBook Data Inc.
"If you don't come up with more exotic ways of computing, computing itself [won't] progress like it has for the last 50 years," said David Moehring, formerly chief executive of quantum-computing startup IonQ Inc.
Mr. Moehring co-founded venture-capital firm Cambium Capital Partners in 2018 to invest in cutting-edge computing startups. Among them is Vorticity Inc., founded last summer by Chirath Neranjena, who previously worked for Alphabet Inc.'s research arm X. Vorticity is revamping chips by reorganizing components such as memory to make them more efficient. The goal is to speed up complex scientific calculations for industries including mining and aerospace.

Credit: By Sara Castellanos
