SHENZHEN, China -- There is an unintended consequence of White House's trade battle with China: Companies in the Pearl River Delta, the center of China's manufacturing might, are accelerating toward making higher-quality products to compete against American goods.
In response to tariffs, which make his goods more expensive, Michael Lu of LTS Group plans to trim costs by using more robots at his plants, which make lamps, bulbs and other lighting products sold at American stores. He is also moving low-skilled work elsewhere in Asia.
Left in Shenzhen will be his research and development operations and a team of skilled workers who make his company's more complex products, such as smart lighting.
"The U.S. tariffs are pushing China toward making the higher-end stuff," Mr. Lu said as he walked past red-uniformed workers in his Shenzhen factory. "It's helping China be more competitive down the road."
After building its economy on a mountain of inexpensive exports, China has been on a mission to upgrade its output. Over the past few years, Beijing has embarked on a campaign to ship low-skill factory work out of the country and build an economy that uses advanced manufacturing techniques to produce high-value products.
U.S. tariffs promise to make selling low-cost goods to American consumers less profitable. Companies as a result are rethinking their operations and products, while the government is offering more incentives to help the transition along.
Accelerating that process wasn't exactly the goal of President Trump's tariffs. The U.S. action is aimed at stopping what the administration says is unfair competition, citing Beijing's support for strategic industries such as semiconductors and an assortment of tactics, including industrial espionage, to unlock the trade secrets of U.S. auto makers and other companies.
The initial tariffs on $50 billion in Chinese imports largely hit so-called intermediate goods purchased by businesses, including semiconductors, plastics and machinery. Mr. Trump's next round of tariffs on roughly $200 billion of goods will sweep in many more consumer products.
Since the tit-for-tat trade threats begun, the Chinese yuan and the nation's stock markets have slid, with the currency down almost 6% against the dollar this year. The trade friction is also weighing on an economy that is already slowing, in part due to a top-priority debt cleanup. Beijing is easing off that campaign to arrest the slowdown, and its desire to revive growth may limit its ability to endure a lengthy trade battle.
Meanwhile, the shift to higher-value products is well under way in the Pearl River Delta -- one of the world's largest cluster of urban areas, with nine cities. Nearly four decades ago, Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping chose the region to be the vanguard for China's economic liberalization. In the years since, it has turned to making sophisticated electronics.
Manufacturers say the region's many attributes include rock-solid supply chains, easy access to ports, proximity to the financial precincts of Hong Kong and the political stability ensured by Beijing. There's also a large workforce, with about 60 million residents.
In 2000, 17% of the region's industrial output was classified as high-tech products, including electronics, biotech and aerospace components. That rose to 44% last year, according to figures from the local government and HSBC Research.
To help spur the manufacturing revolution in the face of tariffs, Guangdong province, which includes the Pearl River Delta, recently announced plans to invest more than 450 billion yuan ($65.46 billion) through 2020 to subsidize strategic industries including information technology, high-end equipment manufacturing and biomedical products.
Jimmy Liao's company in Shenzhen, TechTurbo Innovation Ltd., buys and modifies computer chips for use in smartwatches, internet-connected home devices and specialty lighting products. Many of its clients make products that were expected to fall on the $200 billion list of tariffs, leaving them searching for ways to cut costs -- including asking Mr. Liao for less expensive chips.
His solution: Buy fewer chips from his chief American chip supplier, Qualcomm Inc., and steer more business to a Chinese supplier, Telink Semiconductor Co.
"Chinese chips don't perform as well as their U.S. counterparts," Mr. Liao said. "But the manufacturers here are very keen to work with us to improve their chips, and they are also getting much better."
TechTurbo engineers are working to tweak the chips to boost performance, he said, and the modified chips are good enough so that he can now show off samples to his U.S. customers.
With its futuristic skyscrapers and lush greenbelts, Shenzhen established itself as a repository of electronic component parts more than a decade ago, and manufacturers flocked in from around the world. The biggest city by economic output in the Delta, Shenzhen relies on exports for about three-quarters of its gross domestic product, which was 2.24 trillion yuan in 2017.
Today, it is home to the biggest operation center in China for iPhone maker Foxconn Technology Group, and is headquarters for Chinese internet giant Tencent Holdings Ltd. Many old factory buildings are home to research and design studios, or startups working in artificial intelligence or financial technology.
Outside Shenzhen, there are still plenty of gritty factory towns like Dongguan, with its boxy, low-slung buildings churning out inexpensive furniture, clothing and chemical products -- though there, too, change is in the air. Even before the recent trade tension, factories making low-end products had already begun shifting inland or to other countries, as wages in the delta region rose and the government tightened environmental protection rules.
Telecommunications giant Huawei Technologies Co. is opening a new 13 million-square-foot campus alongside bucolic Songshan Lake for its research and development team and other units.
Tony Lee's Sintai Furniture Co. makes outdoor furniture and other products sold at Costco, Home Depot and other U.S. stores that he expected to be subject to the latest tariffs. He is moving one-fifth of production to Vietnam for his U.S. exports, and keeping production for European and other markets at his factory in Dongguan.
Mr. Lee said the company will incur higher costs in worker training and material shipment in the short term, but he expects the move will save money in the long run. "The supply chain and capability in Vietnam takes time to build," he said. "Once it is built up, Vietnam will be cheaper than China."
Mr. Lee intends to keep the manufacturing of more complicated products such as outdoor wooden drink coolers in China for now.
As battle lines on trade were being drawn earlier this year, GMM Nonstick Coatings in Zhuhai decided to shift factory work to India and build four additional facilities there. Ravin Gandhi, chief executive officer, said GMM worried that its nonstick coatings, which are used on cookware such as George Foreman grills, might be next on the tariffs hit list.
"There's already been a natural shift away from China, but now it's accelerated since the trade friction," he said.
Charles Hubbs, a director at Houston-based Premier Guard, which makes operating room drapes and other medical shielding products, said what bothers him is that the Chinese government no longer seems to care about low-tech factories like the one he runs in Zhongshan. "We were the backbone of China's growth," Mr. Hubbs said. "Now China is . . . saying 'We don't need you, we want higher quality manufacturing.'"
Mr. Hubbs is slowly shrinking his production in the region, and moving some manufacturing to the U.S.
China's focus on developing its high-technology sectors is one of the key issues in the U.S.-China trade dispute. In his March 22 report on Chinese trade practices, U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer zeroed in on Beijing's Made in China 2025 industrial policy, introduced three years ago, which aims to make China a global leader in industries such as robotics and electric vehicles.
Those goals have led the Chinese government to institute unfair policies, the report said, including subsidizing favored Chinese industries with government capital and requiring Western firms to give up trade secrets when they form joint ventures with Chinese firms. The Trump administration's tariffs are partly aimed at getting China to abandon these practices.
Analysts say that Beijing sees Made in China as a national imperative and isn't likely to back away from its central aim.
China "can't stay low end -- if you stay low end, your wages stay low end," said Alicia Garcia Herrero, the chief economist for Asia in Hong Kong at French investment bank Natixis. "It is essential that disposable income continues to increase so that Chinese are happy, because that is the social contract."
The new U.S. tariffs of 10% on $200 billion worth of China imports -- to be later raised to 25% -- adds to the current 25% on $50 billion of imports. With the new tariffs in effect, China's annual GDP growth could fall to 5.6% in 2019, research firm Oxford Economics predicts. That would be its lowest level in almost three decades.
Last week, Guangdong province published new investment rules allowing foreign investors to produce an array of high-tech products without a joint-venture partner, as previously required, in an effort to bolster higher-end manufacturing.
Wang Guanghui said he realized last year, before the tariffs, that his business making plastic packaging for smartphone covers and other consumer products might be at risk to lower-cost competitors elsewhere. With the help of a $63,000 grant from the local government, Mr. Wang's Shenzhen Fulee Industrial Co. developed a machine that automates the process of making plastic packaging, saving labor costs.
His company now sells that machine, along with continuing to make plastic packaging.
"We knew we had to invest in research and development to upgrade our products, or we would be phased out," Mr. Wang said.
---
Zhang Chunying contributed to this article.

Credit: By Liza Lin and Dan Strumpf
