More of Your Workout
Apparel Will Be Smart
Imagine a day when your yoga pants give you tips on alignment and your socks monitor your foot-landings. With gyms shut during the pandemic, people embraced Zoom workouts and turned to the great outdoors. Now, sports-apparel companies are seeking to go beyond wearables like wrist bands and rings to embed smart technology directly into workout clothes.
Sensoria Health Inc., a smart-apparel company in Redmond, Wash., is developing technology that does more than track biomarkers, says CEO Davide Vigano. The company is working to design pants that signal you when your posture is off, jackets that measure air quality, and shirts embedded with dehydration sensors that alert you when you need water.
Whoop, a maker of fitness trackers, introduced a line of sports bras, leggings, and tops outfitted with tiny pockets to hold the sensor it makes. The company's founder and CEO, Will Ahmed, predicts sports-tracker technologies will jump from gear to microchips for the human body: "If you're wondering if one day invisible also means implantable, you're likely correct."
---
You'll Track
Your Muscle-
Oxygen Levels
Weekend warriors will gauge the intensity of their efforts with muscle-oxygen saturation levels in addition to heart rate, predicts Dhruv Seshadri, a biomedical engineer specializing in wearables at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland. Now, elite athletes use this technology in their training. But the equipment, which initially cost upward of $15,000 and was so bulky that athletes could be monitored only in labs, is becoming more accessible.
How it works: Muscle-oxygen saturation indicates the balance between oxygen delivery and consumption in muscles. By attaching a sensor to a specific body part -- say forearms for a climber or quads for a cyclist -- athletes can see whether their muscle oxygen is stable, rising, or dropping. Rising levels indicate they can push harder. Dropping levels signify a buildup of lactate in the muscles and can help them know when to dial back intensity and gauge how long they have before they hit the wall.
The Minnesota-based company Moxy now sells a matchbook-sized muscle oxygen sensor for $800. In addition to helping improve performance, "this type of data can be used as another tool to help mitigate soft-tissue injuries caused by overtraining and help people safely return to a sport or activity after an injury," Dr. Seshadri says.
---
Neuromuscular
Training
Many people sit on a gym machine and turn on autopilot as their muscles follow a controlled movement. But in coming years sessions like these will be supplemented with neuromuscular drills like jumping laterally and landing on one leg, sports-medicine experts say.
Neuromuscular-control exercises use movements to train the brain to fire the correct muscles and recruit more muscle fibers to oppose resistance in a coordinated fashion -- be it from a linebacker in a football game or a neighbor's dog running into you. Now mainly used to rehab pro athletes with injuries, neuromuscular training is likely to become a complement to strength and cardio workouts for aging baby boomers, says Andrew Jagim, director of sports-medicine research at Mayo Clinic Health System in La Crosse, Wis.
This coming wave of seniors is particularly suited for such training, he says. Many have previous injuries, multiple areas of muscle weakness or lack adequate mobility, he notes. "Targeted neuromuscular training can help them re-establish some of these temporary losses in motor control, the ability to properly activate a muscle group, or to help improve a weak muscle group."
---
Not Just Any
Outdoor Exercise
Venue Will Do
Exposure to nature reduces stress and improves mood, studies have shown, and research suggests that bringing your workout outdoors increases those benefits. Future wearables will aim to optimize time spent outside, tracking such factors as the amount of sunlight we get, predicts Chris Vlaun, owner of Miami-based outdoor fitness company V Art of Wellness. NatureDose, a new app from Eugene, Ore.-based NatureQuant, monitors aggregate time inside, outside, and exposed to nature. It also scores the quality of that nature. For instance, a jog in a forested park would score higher than a jog in an urban neighborhood. It's not just about oxygen from plants -- air exposure to phytoncides, natural oils that are part of a plant's defense system, has been shown to reduce physiological stress, blood pressure and heart rate, says the app's co-founder Jared Hanley. Future mapping technology will home in on such lesser known outdoor health benefits, Mr. Hanley says. "You'll be able to find a running route or bike trail rich with phytoncides or mushroom-spore exposure, which boosts immune response."
---
AI Will Customize
And Direct
Your Workout
Will your future trainer be a hologram? Those in the training industry are pursuing innovative ways to use technology, data and artificial intelligence to create customized workouts -- no human trainer required. "Equipment is evolving from connected to truly intelligent," says Matt Bean, senior vice president of performance at Tonal, the maker of an at-home digital wall-mounted home gym. Since launching in 2018, Tonal has collected physiological data from hundreds of thousands of member workouts and is now hoping to use it for research to better inform the program's algorithm. The goal, he says: "It will be like having a GPS telling you what to do based on your goals." Fitness equipment manufacturer Technogym and digital personal-training platform Alfa AI are also among those training AI to analyze workouts in real time and respond. This idea is that your equipment will alert you when your range of motion is inconsistent, your technique is off, or you're not working hard enough. And if you're struggling, a spotter mechanism will kick in and automatically lighten your load so you can finish those final few reps. If you're missing the encouragement from your trainer, Alfa AI is working to introduce AI coach avatar holograms that know your pre-existing conditions and can push you to achieve your goals, whether at home or in a hotel room.
Credit: By Jen Murphy
