AUSTIN, Texas -- Samsung Electronics Co. said Tuesday that it plans to invest roughly $17 billion in a semiconductor-making facility in Taylor, Texas, the latest chip-plant commitment this year amid a global processor shortage.
Samsung said the factory would be its largest U.S. investment and produce high-end chips that are used in smartphones and other devices, as well as for artificial-intelligence applications.
Construction is scheduled to begin next year, with chip-production slated to commence in the second half of 2024, the South Korean manufacturer said, confirming a Wall Street Journal report on Monday.
"With greater manufacturing capacity, we will be able to better serve the needs of our customers and contribute to the stability of the global semiconductor supply chain," said Kim Ki-nam, vice chairman and chief executive of the Samsung Electronics Device Solutions Division.
Demand for chips has skyrocketed, driven by factors such as the accelerated adoption of digital tools during the pandemic, the rollout of 5G communications networks and the deployment of the internet-connected devices that 5G enables.
Demand in some areas has outpaced supply for over a year, and wait times for some chips have become longer.
Samsung, the world's largest semiconductor maker by revenue, is adding to its footprint in Central Texas, where it has long operated a plant in Austin, about 30 miles away from Taylor.
The move comes as the Biden administration pushes for an expansion of U.S. semiconductor production.
The Texas investment also shows why scaling up chip production is hard. Factories are expensive, using advanced tools that can cost more than $150 million apiece, and take years to build.
The Taylor facility is expected to start producing semiconductors in the second half of 2024, Samsung said.
This month Texas Instruments Inc. said it was planning to invest as much as roughly $30 billion in chip-making-related facilities in Sherman, Texas. Construction, the company said, is slated to begin next year with production not starting until around 2025.
Intel Corp. Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger has said shortages could persist into 2023.
Samsung's choice of Taylor took into account factors such as incentive programs, infrastructure readiness and access to talent, Mr. Kim said.
Credit: By Elizabeth Findell and Jiyoung Sohn
