Some mutual-fund managers will look back on 2020 as the worst of times. Others are having the time of their lives, posting year-to-date returns of 75% or more.
The difference between the winners and the laggards is the extent to which portfolios were heavily weighted with stocks of companies that stand to benefit disproportionately from disruptive change. Some of these have become household names, like Zoom Video Communications Inc., whose visibility and share price have soared since the Covid-19 pandemic lockdowns forced billions of people to reimagine their lives. Others are less well-known, like medical genetic testing company Invitae Corp. (up nearly 500% from its lows in March) or Coupa Software Inc., which delivers a cloud-based spending-management platform to help businesses get a grip on costs (up 155% since March's market meltdown).
"We would never have guessed that a pandemic-related recession would have led companies to reimagine the way they do business so rapidly," says Anthony Zackery, one of the portfolio managers overseeing several top-performing mutual funds at Zevenbergen Capital Management, based in Seattle.
Zevenbergen's growth-stock funds captured three of the 10 top spots in The Wall Street Journal's third-quarter survey of the best-performing actively managed U.S. equity funds, based on their returns over the trailing 12 months. Of these, Zevenbergen Genea Fund (ZVGIX) triumphed in our quarterly Winners' Circle competition by posting a return of 121% for the 12-month period ended Sept. 30, and a year-to-date gain of 92%.
Our quarterly survey limits its scope to the universe of actively managed and diversified U.S. equity funds with more than $50 million in assets and a track record of at least three years, and draws on data provided by Morningstar Inc.
Some of the share classes may be less-accessible to ordinary investors, or carry unacceptably high fees.
Genea typically owns positions in only 25 to 35 companies, compared with as many as 45 positions in Zevenbergen Growth Fund (ZVNIX), which ranked fourth in our quarterly contest, with a trailing 12-month return of 114%.
Catherine Wood, CEO of ARK Investment and manager of American Beacon ARK Transformational Innovation Fund (ADNIX), says her fund's returns of 116% for the trailing 12 months and 85% for the year to date -- putting her in second place for our contest -- come from trying to imagine what the world will look like in five to 10 years. The fund then looks for companies that will profit most from that transformation, based on a research strategy that favors "innovation platforms" like robotics, DNA sequencing, energy storage, blockchain technology and artificial intelligence.
This approach led ARK's team to invest in Tesla Inc. about five years ago; for the past three years, Ms. Wood says, it has been the fund's top holding. That means investors have benefited handsomely from the nearly 10-fold explosion in Tesla's share price over the past 12 months, a surge that occurred even though drivers of Tesla's electric cars might have been expected to stay home during a pandemic lockdown while new buyers might have postponed purchases.
That conventional analysis of Tesla as no more than an automotive company misses the point, Ms. Wood says: "It's actually a robotics company, it's an energy-storage company because of its emphasis on battery technology, and it's an artificial-intelligence company because of the evolution of autonomous vehicles."
Tesla also is a top holding in the three Zevenbergen funds, and was the largest holding for Genea Fund.
Many of this quarter's top-performing funds in our survey are benefiting from companies that they and others believe will dominate the post-pandemic business and market landscape. The Zevenbergen and ARK funds all include Square Inc. in their top holdings, as do several funds overseen by Dennis Lynch, head of the Counterpoint Global team at Morgan Stanley Investment Management, including our third-place finisher, Morgan Stanley Institutional Discovery Portfolio (MPEGX).
Square, whose share price has nearly tripled in the past 12 months, is a provider of a contactless payment system used by retailers. The company is morphing into a new breed of financial-services company that Ms. Wood believes will be a long-term threat to commercial banks, with their high fixed costs and relative lack of innovation. "Square helped deliver PPP [Paycheck Protection Program] funds to small businesses, and it has calculated that 60% of the small businesses who used it to get those funds were new to Square and have now adopted its platform" for other uses, she says.
In Ms. Wood's view, the soaring values of stocks in companies that benefit from pandemic-accelerated transformation simply means that innovation is being valued more appropriately by the market. She thinks these businesses are capable of delivering sustained growth of 25% a year, even if the overall economy and market are stuck in the doldrums.
If these top-performing managers are correct in their assessment, the real longer-term winners will be those investors able to accurately identify those resilient companies capable of thriving in tough times by solving problems for both consumers and businesses. Index investing may be less costly, but this kind of active stock-picking is the strategy most likely to deliver above-average returns consistently, they contend. Especially if pandemic-related economic struggles re-emerge and continue.
"There's a tendency to think that we're at the end point of the crisis," says Mr. Lynch. "But I think we're still in the middle of it."
---
Ms. McGee is a writer in New England. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Suzanne McGee
