Steve Huffman is the co-founder and CEO of Reddit, the 19-year-old social-media platform known for its user-led communities, called subreddits, that are dedicated to a range of topics, including stock trading.
In recent years, Huffman made sweeping updates to the platform's content policy, redesigned the site to make it easier to use and helped expand Reddit to tens of millions of daily users. In March, the company's stock went public.
Huffman sat down with Joanna Stern, The Wall Street Journal's senior personal-technology columnist, at WSJ Tech Live to discuss, among other things, the use of Reddit data to train artificial-intelligence systems.
Edited excerpts of the conversation:
WSJ: I use Reddit directly. I also use Google to get to Reddit. And I just find that I'm increasingly relying on Reddit to get information.
STEVE HUFFMAN: Your experience isn't unique. In the U.S. in 2024, Reddit is the sixth most searched word on Google. We're somewhere between news and maps, so people are going to Google with the intention of ending up on Reddit.
WSJ: Why do you think Reddit has seen this explosion in people coming for information?
HUFFMAN: Reddit is communities and conversation, and we have communities for literally anything that you're into or going through. So if you have questions, there's just a high likelihood that Reddit, where people have been talking about everything for almost two decades, has an answer or perspectives on whatever it is.
Whether you're 17 or 70, a nerd or a normie, a man or a woman or anything in between, Reddit has a home for you.
I think that's unique on the internet.
WSJ: You've said before that Reddit is the most human place on the internet. Now that AI has come along, are you fearful that AI "slop" -- low-quality, shallow content generated by AI -- might make its way to your platform?
HUFFMAN: The source of artificial intelligence is actual intelligence, which is what you find on Reddit. And indeed, the Reddit corpus is a significant part of the training of the major foundation models. I think your observation is true, that it does seem like there's a general lowering of quality on the internet because more content is written by AI. But I think that actually makes Reddit stand out more as the place where there's all of this human content. What people want is to hear from other people.
WSJ: Do you think of yourself as the owner of the world's best AI training data?
HUFFMAN: We're certainly up there. One of the things that's unique about Reddit versus the other social-media platforms is that Reddit is open and it always has been. You don't need an account, you don't need to pay to see the content on Reddit.
If you put something on Reddit, it's public. It can be indexed in search engines, which has benefited our community and internet consumers at large. It has helped these big AI models come to exist.
Now we've had to make some decisions about that and figure out our place in this ecosystem. Earlier this year, we created what we call a public content policy, which sits alongside our privacy policy, which basically every platform has.
WSJ: So just to differentiate, private would be my direct messages to you or something?
HUFFMAN: Direct messages, what you're subscribed to, what you're looking at on Reddit, that's private. We actually don't know your name or gender. We do have to ask age now, for safety reasons, but by and large, we try to minimize what we know about you and what we do have, we keep private.
But anything you write on the internet, we want to be clear that this goes on the public internet.
WSJ: And you do have deals right now with OpenAI and Google. They're paying you for training data. That, I assume, is a healthy profit in the business?
HUFFMAN: Yes, we do have partnerships with both Google and OpenAI. We've also done free ones with places like the Internet Archive. We have this whole initiative to make our corpus available for people doing research. Generally, we think the internet is better when it's open and interconnected. But we also need to make sure that we aren't just giving away the value of Reddit to the largest companies in the world free.
WSJ: Are there companies that you feel are taking that data and not paying?
HUFFMAN: Yeah, the ones I didn't mention, by and large. But we're in talks with just about everybody, so we'll see where these things land.
WSJ: What do you say to the users who say, "I put this public information out there, now I'm being used as training data. How can I profit off that?"
HUFFMAN: I think it's important to be clear with our user base, which is why we did the public content policy. You're putting something on the public internet. We will do our best to safeguard it. We will do our best to only have relationships with partners that we think are trustworthy and will abide by our principles.
But [our content has been] getting scraped every which way. And so we've invested a lot over the last couple of years in locking that down. It is an arms race.
WSJ: One of the things that I think has made Reddit so successful over the last couple of years is that you really cleaned up the place. You made more communities around substantial topics, gotten rid of a lot of misinformation or trolling or just general bad behavior. With an election going on, has it become more difficult to do that?
HUFFMAN: Emotions are heightened for sure, but Reddit is, I think, naturally inoculated from a lot of the challenges you might see elsewhere on the internet. First, our users self-organize into communities that we call subreddits. So whatever your perspective is, whoever your people are, you can kind of hang with them.
And then on Reddit, every user is a moderator because they can vote up and down. And every post and comment on Reddit starts at zero points and has to earn its visibility. We don't have an algorithm that cherry-picks a piece of content and makes it popular.
It has to earn its visibility one vote at a time, up or down. And polarizing posts can get the same number of ups and downs and then therefore stay at zero. Reddit just works in a fundamentally different way from other platforms, which really changes the tone of conversation and the incentives.
WSJ: What is your favorite subreddit?
HUFFMAN: My favorite subreddit right now is probably Dadit. As the name implies it's a subreddit for dads, and like a lot of subreddits, if you go to the front page, you'll probably see something funny, you'll probably see something that will make you cry.
You'll probably see somebody who just needs some help. You'll probably see some poor guy who just needs a hug. It's the real world there for everybody to see and experience. It's really special.
---
Write to reports@wsj.com
Credit: By Joanna Stern
