Technology investors Insight Partners and Sixth Street Partners are pumping $456 million into cybersecurity company Kiteworks, betting that escalating risk and regulatory scrutiny will spur demand for data protection from businesses and government agencies.
Kiteworks Chief Executive Jonathan Yaron said the growth investment values the company at more than $1 billion and marks an exit for private-equity firm Bregal Sagemount. In 2020, Bregal led a $120 million financing round in Kiteworks, then known as Accellion, that valued it at less than half its current valuation, he said.
San Mateo, Calif.-based Kiteworks focuses on security systems for data, files and documents as they are transmitted or shared among users, helping customers quickly and securely handle large files and control access through what are known as private-content networks. Yaron said customers keep control of data at all times, including encryption keys, adding Kiteworks plans to add secure chat messaging.
"The protection of data is going to continue to be more and more important over time, which makes Kiteworks products continuously relevant and very sticky," Insight Managing Director Eoin Duane said.
Customers include the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, the U.K. National Health Service, carmaker Porsche, French insurer AXA and energy giant Shell. Kiteworks is profitable and expects to increase annual recurring revenue from about $115 million last year to about $160 million by year-end, Yaron said.
The challenges organizations face to keep their data secure should play to Kiteworks' strengths, said Alex Katz, a managing director with Sixth Street's growth investment platform. He said employees need to be able to connect seamlessly and collaborate, which often means sharing sensitive content across more disparate systems, increasing the potential for breaches.
Those needs and more stringent regulation and enforcement should help Kiteworks broaden its market reach and expand contracts with existing customers, Katz said. He is joining the company's board along with Duane and Insight Managing Director Peter Sobiloff.
Cyberattacks are increasingly more advanced and costly, fueled by generative artificial intelligence helping hackers exploit ever more sophisticated social-engineering techniques and identify coding errors and other weaknesses. The cost of successful cyber thievery is rising, too.
The average cost of a data breach worldwide climbed 10% to $4.88 million, according to a report from information and privacy management researcher Ponemon Institute and International Business Machines that looked at 604 organizations that had a data breach from March 2023 through February 2024.
Credit: By Maria Armental
