Meta Platforms reported on Wednesday record revenue despite slower digital advertising growth, bolstering profits that helped fund billions of dollars in artificial intelligence and augmented reality investments.
The company posted $40.59 billion in sales, an all-time high that slightly beat Wall Street expectations. The revenue growth of 19% compared with the year-earlier period was slower than the 22% growth in the three months ended in June. Advertising made up 96% of Meta's third-quarter revenue.
Meta Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg has poured immense resources into capitalizing on the AI boom, increasing spending to support ambitions that include having the most-used AI assistant in the world.
"Our AI investments continue to require serious infrastructure, and I expect to continue investing significantly there too," he said on an earnings call with analysts. "We haven't decided on a final budget yet, but those are some of the directional trends."
The growth of artificial intelligence is an important theme as the technology giants provide their quarterly updates this week. Microsoft reported a better-than-expected rise in revenue, helped by the AI boom. Meanwhile, shares of Google parent Alphabet jumped 2.8% Wednesday after the company also provided strong numbers Tuesday.
Amazon.com and Apple are expected to report their results on Thursday.
The company has also lost $50 billion on Zuckerberg's bet on the so-called metaverse, a virtual space where he expects people to work and spend time in the future. The company's Reality Labs unit, which supports this vision and produces the Quest headset and Ray-Ban Meta smart glasses, had operating losses of $4.4 billion in the three-month period.
The company said it expects "significant" growth in capital expenditures next year and raised the lower end of its forecast for 2024 capital expenditures to a range from $38 billion to $40 billion, up from $37 billion to $40 billion at the end of the June quarter. Meta expects fourth-quarter revenue to be between $45 billion and $48 billion.
Meta's shares fell slightly in after-hours trading. The stock has nearly doubled in the past 12 months, a surge fueled by breakthroughs in artificial-intelligence technology that have improved its ad-targeting capabilities.
"They've really shown they've gotten to a level of expense discipline and AI is actually adding to the bottom line," said Justin DuMouchelle, a portfolio manager at New York-based Cerity Partners, a Meta Platforms investor.
On Tuesday, Google parent Alphabet reported a 15% surge in quarterly sales, although advertising revenue from its search and YouTube businesses grew at a slower clip. Chinese e-commerce companies Shein and Temu, which emerged as some of the largest advertisers for Meta and Google, slowed their U.S. spending in the July-to-September quarter compared with the same period a year ago, according to Sensor Tower.
Other tech companies reported digital-advertising growth in the latest quarter, including Reddit and Snap. The social-media platforms, which both generate the bulk of their revenue from online ads, said overall sales rose 68% and 14%, respectively, and that investments in AI helped to improve their ad offerings.
Overall, Meta posted a net profit of $15.69 billion for the third quarter. That is up about 35% compared with the net profit that the company posted for the same period in 2023.
Meta said it had 3.29 billion daily active people for its apps in the quarter, including for Facebook, Instagram, Messenger and WhatsApp, up 5% from a year earlier and less than 1% from June.
Zuckerberg said the company's AI-driven feed and video recommendations have led to an 8% increase in time spent on Facebook and a 6% increase on Instagram. He added that more than a million advertisers used Meta's generative AI tools to create more than 15 million ads in the last month and the company estimates that businesses using image generation are seeing a 7% increase in conversions.
Separately, Zuckerberg said the company's microblogging service Threads, which competes with Elon Musk's X, now has 275 million monthly active users, up from 150 million in April. It's been growing by more than a million sign-ups per day, he said.
Earlier this month Meta said it began expanding its rollout of Meta AI, the company's free generative AI tool that competes with the likes of OpenAI's ChatGPT and Dall-E, in more countries, including the U.K. and Brazil. Once the rollout is complete, Meta said, Meta AI will be available in 43 countries and a dozen languages.
Meta held its annual developer and hardware conference last month, during which it announced deals with actors Awkwafina, John Cena, Judi Dench, Kristen Bell and Keegan-Michael Key that will allow it to use their voices in a new AI assistant. Meta is paying stars millions of dollars for use of their likeness, The Wall Street Journal previously reported.
Generate image description

Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
