In the surprise ouster and restoration of Sam Altman as chief executive officer at OpenAI, only one person, Adam D'Angelo, managed to play a role on each side of the drama.
D'Angelo, a former Facebook executive and founder of the question-and-answer platform Quora, was one of four members of the board who fired Altman, and the sole surviving director named to a new board of the artificial-intelligence company that took over on Wednesday.
That puts D'Angelo in a unique position as someone who voted to oust Altman, his longtime acquaintance, and now will play a central role in shaping the future governance of the company Altman has returned to lead as CEO.
During negotiations for Altman's return, D'Angelo was the only director both sides could agree on, according to people familiar with the talks. Management didn't want all three of the independent directors to stay on the board, the people said, and the old board -- including D'Angelo -- was insistent that they retain some representation under the new structure.
On the new board, D'Angelo is expected to help ensure the board exercises active oversight and has a direct line to employees beyond the management team, the people said. He is one of three incoming directors including tech veteran Bret Taylor, who was formerly co-CEO of Salesforce and chairman of Twitter, and Larry Summers, who previously served as both Treasury secretary and Harvard University's president. Microsoft also gained a nonvoting board observer position.
Several people who previously worked with D'Angelo described him as a principled person who slowly makes up his mind, often asking direct, piercing questions to help him arrive at a conclusion. He "doesn't suffer fools," one of the people said. D'Angelo has tended to keep a low profile and rarely appears in the press -- a contrast to Altman, who has cultivated relationships with tech reporters over the years.
A high-school classmate of Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg at Phillips Exeter Academy in New Hampshire, D'Angelo has long operated near centers of power in the tech industry without having attained the fame of some of his friends.
The New York native graduated with a bachelor's degree in computer science from the California Institute of Technology in 2006, the same year he became chief technology officer of Facebook, which has since rebranded as Meta Platforms. He left that company in 2008 to found Quora the next year.
D'Angelo and Altman, who are both in their late 30s, met around 2010 through Silicon Valley networking circles. In 2014, Quora joined Y Combinator, a venture firm that Altman was president of at the time.
Altman invited D'Angelo to join OpenAI's board in 2018. D'Angelo already had a rapport with Greg Brockman, the OpenAI co-founder who quit in protest of Altman's firing, and who, like Altman, is now back at the company.
Once on the board, D'Angelo began helping some of the other independent directors understand the quirks of being a tech startup, explaining that OpenAI's rapid pace of development was typical for Silicon Valley, people familiar with the matter said.
Altman posted on X Wednesday that D'Angelo has always been clear with him and OpenAI's board about potential conflicts of interest between the company and Quora.
So far Altman and D'Angelo appear to be on good terms. On Thanksgiving Day, Altman posted on X that he and D'Angelo had "just spent a really nice few hours" together."
Soon after, the Quora CEO reposted it.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman and Sarah E. Needleman
