ORI Capital, a life-sciences venture firm launched following a health scare its founder suffered, has raised a $260 million second fund after making several successful investments.
Simone Song, founder and senior partner of Hong Kong- and Natick, Mass.-based ORI, underwent a colonoscopy in June 2015 that revealed a suspicious finding, necessitating emergency surgery, she said.
After the procedure, she waited three days for tests to reveal if she had cancer. While waiting, Song, who was Goldman Sachs's head of healthcare investment banking for Greater China, said she decided that if the results were negative she would work more directly with startups to advance disease treatments.
"I told myself, if it wasn't cancer, if I was given the second half of my life, this is what I'm going to do," she said.
The tumor was benign, so she quit Goldman Sachs to start ORI. In January 2016, ORI held a first closing on what would be a $200 million debut fund. The firm invested it in companies such as CG Oncology, an Irvine, Calif.-based developer of a bladder-cancer therapy that went public last month and now has a market capitalization of around $3 billion.
ORI, which invests globally, also deployed its debut fund in Semma Therapeutics, a developer of a cell-therapy treatment for Type 1 diabetes. Drugmaker Vertex Pharmaceuticals purchased Semma in 2019 for $950 million.
Another portfolio company, monoclonal antibody company Kymab, was acquired in 2021 by drugmaker Sanofi for $1.1 billion in cash, plus $350 million in success-based payments. Because of these and other investments, ORI has returned all $200 million of its initial fund to investors, Song said. As a result, any additional exits from its first fund will deliver profits to the firm and its investors.
Another company in the initial fund is Cincinnati-based Enable Injections, which ORI backed during the company's $30 million Series A round in 2016. Many medications are given through intravenous infusion. Enable's devices are designed to make it possible for patients to take them through a wearable injector instead.
The company, which closed a $215 million venture round in 2022, strikes deals with drugmakers such as Apellis Pharmaceuticals, whose drug Empaveli treats a rare disease called PNH.
In late 2023, the Food and Drug Administration approved the Enable device for use with Empaveli. It was the first of what Enable hopes will be a series of approvals for drugs delivered through its wearable injector, Chief Executive Mike Hooven said.
Biotech startups and their venture backers face long odds. Some 90% of experimental drugs fail. Song said she developed principles to improve ORI's chances, such as investing only in areas where the firm has deep expertise. It backs startups operating in cancer, neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders because they present the largest areas of unmet medical need, said Director Elaine Yang.
ORI sourced investments from its first fund the conventional way, through the team's personal connections. It has a new twist for fund two. Since 2018, the firm has been building a big data platform that uses artificial intelligence to sift through thousands of companies and home in on those that fit the firm's criteria.
ORI built the platform using information from data providers, including PitchBook Data and GlobalData; databases, such as the clinical-trials repository ClinicalTrials.gov; and other sources. ORI says the platform tracks more than 31,000 companies, more than 5,000 healthcare fund managers, more than 65,000 researchers and clinicians, and more than 170,000 healthcare-industry professionals.
The platform sorts companies according to several parameters. It identifies startups operating in at least one of the firm's three disease areas of interest. Then it identifies startups that also are developing the types of drugs that interest the firm, including immuno-oncology cell therapy and next-generation small-molecule drugs.
From there, it applies additional filters, such as pinpointing startups with highly qualified scientific founders and management. For example, the system will sort scientific founders according to metrics such as how many publications they have and the prior experience of the company's senior management, said Yang.
The system also identifies companies whose technology is capable of solving scientific and other challenges to developing drugs of interest to ORI, she said.
Computer-based filtering narrows thousands of companies down to hundreds. ORI's human experts evaluate these companies and whittle the pool down to a shortlist that the firm targets for investment, Yang said.
ORI expects this approach will steer it to more hits and help it avoid misses. "We can't afford to make a mistake that will cost us $10 million or $20 million or $30 million," Song said.
Credit: By Brian Gormley
