Stocks fell after minutes from the Federal Reserve's latest policy meeting showed concerns about persisting inflation and cast more doubt on when officials might cut interest rates.
The S&P 500 declined 0.3% and the Nasdaq Composite edged 0.2% lower after both indexes closed at record highs in the prior session. The Dow Jones Industrial Average shed about 200 points, or 0.5%.
Minutes from the Fed's meeting three weeks ago showed policymakers were uncertain about sticky price pressures and agreed that recent data didn't make them confident that inflation was moving toward the central bank's 2% goal.
Some officials mentioned "a willingness to tighten policy further should risks to inflation materialize in a way that such an action became appropriate," the minutes said.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury note -- a benchmark for mortgages and other borrowing costs -- rose to 4.433% from 4.414% on Tuesday.
Investors' expectations for rate cuts were upended earlier this year after a string of firmer-than-anticipated inflation reports. But after a pullback in April, stocks have rallied this month. A slowdown in jobs growth and more encouraging inflation data revived hopes that rate cuts are still in the cards this year. The S&P 500 is up 5.4% this month.
Eric Freedman, chief investment officer at U.S. Bank Asset Management Group, said his firm believes the Fed is likely to cut rates twice this year but noted that the risk of inflation picking up isn't priced into the stock market.
"High inflationary tendencies are not necessarily subsiding anytime soon," said Freedman.
Investors braced for earnings results from Nvidia after the market closed Wednesday, with shares slipping 0.5% in the regular session. The stock rose in after-hours trading after the chip maker reported record quarterly revenue, raised its dividend and announced a 10-for-1 stock split.
Traders see Nvidia's results as a test of strength for the artificial-intelligence enthusiasm that has helped power the market for the past year.
"We're still in the early innings of what appears to be this next big evolution in technology and technology spending," said Matthew Stith, portfolio manager and director of equity research at Bartlett Wealth Management. "That being said, coming into 2024, some of the expectations were probably a little bit elevated."
In other quarterly earnings, Target shares fell 8% after the company reported a fourth consecutive quarter of declining comparable sales. Its results showed shoppers pulling back on discretionary spending, as they contended with elevated prices for everyday necessities.
Toll Brothers shares declined 8.5% despite the home builder's better-than-expected profit report.
Shares of solar companies extended a recent rally, boosted by optimism that new tariffs on Chinese solar panels, surging power demand and federal subsidies will boost the sector. First Solar shares rose 19% and Enphase Energy added 8.7%.
Copper futures pulled back to around $4.87 a pound in its biggest one-day percentage decline since July 2022, having settled Tuesday at an record high. Gold futures also edged lower, as did oil prices.
The Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.3%. At midday Thursday, Japan's Nikkei was up 0.8%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 1.3% and the Shanghai Composite was off 0.8%. S&P 500 futures were up 0.4%.
Credit: By Hannah Miao
