IBM to Offer U.S.
Workers Cancer Help
Navigating the labyrinth of cancer treatments can be so disorienting for patients that International Business Machines Corp. is enlisting its powerful supercomputer Watson to help.
The computing giant says it will offer its Watson artificial intelligence software to its U.S. employees to help them identify appropriate treatments and options for clinical trials. The benefit will be available beginning early next year to employees and their families who are covered under several of the company's insurance plans.
The cancer-fighting service uses a mixture of artificial intelligence and human doctors. IBM is working with Best Doctors Inc., a service that helps patients review treatment options. With patients' permission, professionals from Best Doctors will collect health records about the workers' conditions and feed the relevant data into Watson, which will process the data alongside thousands of medical journal papers and other relevant scientific data. The supercomputer will then generate a report that patients and their oncologists can review.
Most of the Watson services will be free for patients, except for the genomic service, which involves lab fees, says IBM.
-- Rachel Emma Silverman
Bosses to Blame
For Unused Vacation
Nearly 60% of American workers left vacation time unused last year, and their bosses may be partly to blame.
According to a new survey, more than two-thirds of employees who receive paid time off say they hear either negative chatter, mixed messages or nothing at all from their bosses about using their vacation days.
"While managers are incredibly supportive of taking vacation, they are out of touch with employee attitudes concerning time off and how loudly their actions communicate a much different message to workers," writes author Katie Denis in "The High Price of Silence," a study that surveyed 5,641 full-time workers in the U.S. All told, the report says 658 million vacation days went unused in 2015.
Some 95% of bosses who responded to the survey said vacation time is important to them and those they manage. Yet the number of paid days off that workers take has declined steadily over the past five decades, from 20.3 in 1976 to 16.2 last year, according to Project Time Off, a research initiative funded in large part by the U.S. Travel Association.
-- John Simons
