[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
It was never going to be easy for Tesla's board to craft a new pay package for Chief Executive Elon Musk. By taking the negotiations to his social-media platform X, Musk has made the task harder.
"I am uncomfortable growing Tesla to be a leader in AI & robotics without having 25% voting control. Enough to be influential, but not so much that I can't be overturned. Unless that is the case, I would prefer to build products outside of Tesla."
So Musk tweeted Monday in response to a discussion about if the world's richest person needed another compensation package to keep his focus on Tesla. It is six years since his last pay deal in 2018, which came roughly six years after the previous one in 2012.
He clarified the reason why he has yet to receive a new one in a follow-up post: A legal case against his 2018 plan is still open. Closing arguments were given to a Delaware court last February, but the judgment has yet to come.
The 2018 deal entitled Musk to a maximum gain of $55.8 billion, according to Tesla's estimates at the time, likely more than any CEO has been paid in history. But achieving that required hitting targets that seemed equally wild, including a market value of $650 billion -- 11 times the numbers at the time. In the end he hit most of them, helped by the bubbly car-industry conditions created by the pandemic, as well as the global success of the Model 3 and Model Y.
His 2024 deal, assuming it comes to that, sounds like it might be more of the same, only with even bigger numbers. Musk now owns about 13% of Tesla's shares outstanding, according to FactSet. Exercising his stock options would, after selling shares for taxes, take that up to perhaps 17% of the diluted share count. The difference between that and 25% would still be worth more than $60 billion at the current share price and diluted count. Factoring in further dilution and taxes, Musk would need much more.
These would be extraordinary numbers for executive pay, but the real problem with Musk's compensation is governance. Although he has denied dictating the terms of his 2018 package, it seems too crazy to have been dreamed up by anyone else. This feeds into suspicions that he dominates the board that is supposed to hold him to account. This is a long-held worry of corporate-governance consultants such as Glass Lewis and ISS, and a focal point of both the lawsuit about his pay and a previous one about Tesla's 2016 acquisition of SolarCity.
Publicly threatening to take his latest ideas elsewhere if he doesn't get 25% of Tesla puts the company's compensation committee in a tough position. If they even come close to obliging his wishes, it would appear to confirm their weakness, potentially exposing them to further legal challenge. And letting him have one-quarter of the company would only aggravate the governance conundrum of how to control a CEO who in turn controls the board through his voting power.
Musk will be hard to refuse, even if his threats to leave aren't very credible. Last year, he set up a separate artificial-intelligence company, X.AI, but he has every incentive to avoid deflating Tesla's valuation and the AI hopes it is built on. His $90 billion stake in the EV pioneer is his largest asset.
Engaged manager-shareholders such as Musk stand behind many of the world's most valuable companies, from U.S. tech to European luxury. But the unavoidable corporate-governance tensions need to be carefully managed -- not inflamed on social media.
Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
