TOKYO -- Bank of Japan Gov. Haruhiko Kuroda stunned economists and investors last week when he set negative interest rates for the first time. He also stumped a pair of artificial-intelligence programs.
Nomura Securities Co. and Credit Suisse Securities last year created AI programs to analyze BOJ statements for clues to possible shifts in monetary policy.
The programs use a process called text mining on the central bank's statements and economic assessments over time. They count words and phrases such as "weakening inflation expectations" or "rising prices" and use their findings to create an index measuring BOJ "sentiment." Analysts then consult the index readings as they consider the chances of the central bank acting to help the economy.
The AI programs have very short track records by which to judge them. But Nomura and Credit Suisse recently pointed to readings in October as evidence of their objectivity and usefulness. Both indexes indicated a limited risk of BOJ action then, even though economists' expectations of additional easing were relatively high. In fact, the central bank stood pat.
The results of the BOJ's policy meeting last week, though, count as a miss. Both indexes gave little indication that the BOJ board members might hold the view that additional monetary easing was necessary, but the central bank rocked financial markets with a surprise introduction of a rate of minus 0.1% on some deposits in its vaults.
Mr. Kuroda's fake-out of the two programs suggests that computers aren't going to replace human analysts soon.
Nomura's and Credit Suisse's moves into text mining are part of a growing trend in the use of algorithms to gain insights into sentiment, including by academics, journalists and even the Bank of England.
Both securities firms, though, use the indexes to augment, not replace, human analysis. Credit Suisse said its AI has only a "decent level of indicative value," and only in the nearer term.
Credit Suisse economist Takashi Shiono said the firm has decided to tweak its program after the BOJ's decision last week. He said it is testing a new version of the AI program that incorporates more up-to-date data, including oil and stock prices, as well as more recent statements from Mr. Kuroda.
Previously, Credit Suisse and Nomura updated content only after each BOJ policy meeting, meaning weeks of Mr. Kuroda's speeches or parliamentary testimony could have been excluded.
"Our AI lacked the ability [to predict last week's action] because it only interpreted texts released up until a month ago," said Mr. Shiono, who designed Credit Suisse's AI indicator, called the BOJ Text Index.
Nomura is also revamping its AI program by including outlook reports, which the central bank will release every quarter starting this year, as well as summaries of board members' opinions released about a week after each policy-board meeting, said Yuhki Yamamoto, the brokerage's senior quantitative analyst.
Nomura is also considering adding speeches and parliamentary testimony to the mix, Mr. Yamamoto said.
Complicating matters immensely, for humans and algorithms, is Mr. Kuroda's misdirection, apparently the result of a search for maximum market impact. Ahead of policy meetings in October 2014 and last week, Mr. Kuroda insisted there was no need for additional easing -- right up until the central bank announced additional easing. He had denied repeatedly in recent weeks that the BOJ was even considering introducing negative interest rates.
Mr. Shiono expressed confidence that Credit Suisse's AI won't fall for the same trick by Mr. Kuroda over and over.
"If he tells a lie repeatedly, the AI will learn it," Mr. Shiono said. "If his comments show a low correlation with other data, the machine may reduce the weight of the importance of his remarks."
Credit: By Megumi Fujikawa
