Building a mass-market electric vehicle and colonizing Mars aren't ambitious enough for Elon Musk. The billionaire entrepreneur now wants to merge computers with human brains to help people keep up with machines.
The founder and chief executive of Tesla Inc. and Space Exploration Technologies Corp. has launched another company called Neuralink Corp., according to people familiar with the matter.
Neuralink is pursuing what Mr. Musk calls "neural lace" technology, implanting tiny brain electrodes that may one day upload and download thoughts.
Mr. Musk has taken an active role setting up the California-based company and may play a significant leadership role, according to people briefed on Neuralink's plans, a bold step for a father of five who already runs two technologically complex businesses.
Mr. Musk didn't respond to a request for comment.
Max Hodak, who said he is a "member of the founding team," confirmed the company's existence and Mr. Musk's involvement. He described the company as "embryonic" and said plans are still in flux but declined to provide additional details. Mr. Hodak previously founded Transcriptic, a startup that provides robotic lab services accessible over the internet.
Mr. Musk, 45 years old, is part businessman, part futurist. He splits his time between Tesla, which is under pressure to deliver its $35,000 Model 3 sedan on time, and SpaceX, which aims to launch a satellite-internet business and a rocket that can carry humans to Mars. He is also pushing development of a super-high-speed train called Hyperloop.
Somewhere in his packed schedule, he has found time to start a neuroscience company that plans to develop cranial computers, most likely to treat intractable brain diseases first, but later to help humanity avoid subjugation at the hands of intelligent machines.
"If you assume any rate of advancement in [artificial intelligence], we will be left behind by a lot," he said at a conference last June.
The solution he proposed was a "direct cortical interface" -- essentially a layer of artificial intelligence inside the brain -- that could enable humans to reach higher levels of function.
Mr. Musk has teased that he is developing the technology himself. "Making progress [on neural lace]," he tweeted last August, "maybe something to announce in a few months."
In January he tweeted that an announcement might be coming shortly. He hasn't made an official announcement, but Neuralink registered in California as a "medical research" company last July.
Mr. Musk has discussed financing Neuralink primarily himself, including with capital borrowed against equity in his other companies, according to a person briefed on the plans.
Neuralink has also discussed a possible investment from Founders Fund, according to people familiar with the matter. The venture firm was started by Peter Thiel, with whom Mr. Musk co-founded payments company PayPal.
In recent weeks, Neuralink hired leading academics in the field, according to another person familiar with the matter. They include Vanessa Tolosa, an engineer at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and an expert in flexible electrodes; Philip Sabes, a professor at the University of California in San Francisco, who studies how the brain controls movement; and Timothy Gardner, a professor at Boston University who is known for implanting tiny electrodes in the brains of finches to study how the birds sing.
Reached by phone, Dr. Gardner confirmed he is working for Neuralink, but declined to elaborate on its plans.
Dr. Sabes declined to comment. Dr. Tolosa didn't respond to a request for comment.
---
Treating Depression,
Enhancing Cognition
It is unclear what sorts of products Neuralink Corp. might create, but people who have had discussions with the company describe a strategy similar to SpaceX and Tesla, where Elon Musk developed new rocket and electric-car technologies, proved they work and is now using them to pursue more ambitious projects.
These people say the first products could be advanced implants to treat intractable brain disorders like epilepsy or major depression, a market worth billions of dollars. Such implants would build on simpler electrodes already used to treat brain disorders like Parkinson's disease.
If Neuralink can prove the safety and efficacy of technology it develops and receive government approval, perhaps it then could move on to cosmetic brain surgeries to enhance cognitive function, these people say. Mr. Musk alluded to this possibility in comments last June, describing how humans struggle to process and generate information as quickly as they absorb it.
Others pursuing the idea include Bryan Johnson, the founder of online payments company Braintree, who plans to pump $100 million into a startup called Kernel, which has 20 people and is pursuing a similar mission.
Mr. Johnson said he has spoken to Mr. Musk and that both companies want to build better neural interfaces, first to attack big diseases and then to expand human potential.
Credit: By Rolfe Winkler
