Peter Thiel is trying harder than ever to get young people to skip college.
Since 2010, Thiel, an early Facebook investor and a founder of PayPal, has offered to pay students $100,000 to drop out of school to start companies or nonprofits.
Early on, he met criticism. Some accused Thiel, who holds philosophy and law degrees from Stanford, of hypocrisy. Others said it was wrong to discourage young people from finishing their education. Former Harvard University President Lawrence Summers called it the "single most misdirected bit of philanthropy in this decade."
In the next few weeks, Thiel's program will announce 20 new fellows, chosen from an applicant pool that is bigger than ever. Winners plan to launch companies in hot areas including artificial intelligence and cryptocurrencies, according to executives of the program.
Since its first fellows were chosen in 2011, Thiel's program has backed 271 people. Those involved in the effort say they've had successes and frustrations. Along the way, they've discovered common traits that help them do a better job identifying talented individuals.
Some big successes include Vitalik Buterin, co-founder of Ethereum, the blockchain network; Laura Deming, a key figure in venture investing in aging and longevity; Austin Russell, who runs self-driving technologies company Luminar Technologies; and Paul Gu, co-founder of consumer lending company Upstart.
When he began his fellowship, Thiel, a vocal libertarian who was an active supporter of Donald Trump in 2016, was disenchanted with leading colleges and convinced they weren't best suited for many young people.
His aim, at least in part, was to undermine the popular view that college was necessary for all students, and that top universities should be accorded prestige and veneration.
Since then, public opinion has shifted toward his perspective. More Americans are rethinking the value of a college education. At the same time, America's elite universities have come under fire for their handling of a surge in antisemitism and for maintaining what critics call a double standard regarding free speech.
And investors have become more willing to back startups launched by young people without college degrees.
Thiel's program was never meant to last forever, he says. He recently considered disbanding it, partly because it's no longer as revolutionary or perhaps necessary as it once appeared.
"The debate has changed," says Thiel, a billionaire who founded and is chairman of Palantir Technologies. "That creates questions about whether (the fellows program) should be self-abolishing."
Instead, Thiel decided to "double down" on his program, he says, and to take a more vocal role in arguing why more young people should be launching their own efforts and skip college. Few of the critics of universities who emerged recently are urging students to leave or avoid school, he says. "Even conservative politicians generally don't want to speak out because they want to get their kids into these schools," he says.
Another reason for Thiel to stick with the program: Things are only getting worse on campus, in his view. "Over the last three to four years it's even more woke, it's even less meritocratic," and student debt remains a big concern, he says. "It's just hard to fix from within."
Thiel and executives of the fellowship acknowledge they have learned painful lessons along the way. Some applicants pursued ambitious ideas that turned out to be unrealistic, for example. "Asteroid mining is great for press releases but maybe we should have pushed back early on," he says.
Credit: By Gregory Zuckerman
