A summer swoon in the stock market intensified Friday after a disappointing jobs report renewed worries about slowing growth and drove a broad-based selloff.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index suffered a correction -- a drop of more than 10% from its recent high on July 10. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note recorded its biggest weekly fall since March 2020, with investors fleeing stocks and diving into safer bets like government bonds. And the jitters sent a measure of stock volatility to its highest level of the year.
For months, the U.S. economy appeared to be in a sweet spot, with inflation falling and the domestic economy humming along. Many investors started piling into corners of the market that are the most sensitive to the economy, wagering that the expansion has room to run and driving a mammoth stock rotation that lifted even beleaguered corners of the market.
A slate of data this past week abruptly punctured some of those hopes. Weakening employment, manufacturing and construction data triggered a selloff in stocks and other risky bets Thursday. The rout worsened Friday after the latest jobs report showed that the U.S. economy added 114,000 positions last month, well below what economists had expected, while the unemployment rate rose to the highest level in nearly three years.
"Maybe things weren't as rosy as we thought they were," said Eric Merlis, co-head of global markets at Citizens Financial Group.
The disappointing data has stoked worries that a soft landing might be elusive and the economy could tip into a recession. Hopes for such a soft landing, alongside bets on artificial-intelligence, helped drive stocks to repeated records for much of the year.
Now, some investors have started questioning whether the Federal Reserve has waited too long to trim rates, and they are ramping up bets on a bigger rate cut in September. Recent reads on inflation, including wage data in the latest employment report, show that price pressures have been moderating.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq dropped 2.4% Friday. The S&P 500 declined 1.8%, bringing its losses for the week to 2.1%, the worst weekly showing since April. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell more than 900 points before paring some of those losses to end down 610.71 points, or 1.5%. It dropped 2.1% for the week.
The indexes are up between 5.4% and 12.1% in 2024.
The Russell 2000 index of small companies, which is especially sensitive to the economy's path, fell 6.7% for the week, lagging behind the other indexes.
The moves in the bond market have been equally dramatic. The jobs report spurred a rush into government bonds and sent the yield on the 10-year Treasury note to 3.795%, capping its biggest weekly decline since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic. The yield on the 2-year Treasury note, which is especially sensitive to interest-rate expectations, fell to 3.871%.
The Fed left rates steady at its meeting this week but kept the window to a September cut open. Futures prices recently implied a more than 70% chance that the central bank cuts rates by half a percentage point at its September meeting. That is up from a roughly 28% probability before the jobs report was released.
The week has been marked by intense whiplash in stock and bond markets around the world and jarring swings in shares of individual companies.
The Fed's hints on lowering interest rates later this year triggered a forceful midweek rally in the stock market, sending the Nasdaq and S&P 500 on Wednesday to some of their best one-day returns of the year. But stocks couldn't hold on to their gains later in the week while the weak economic data poured in.
The losses to end the week were broad-based, sending everything from financial companies to technology behemoths and energy companies lower.
---
Chelsey Dulaney and Justin Baer contributed to this article.
Generate image description

Credit: By Gunjan Banerji
