Sam Altman wants to save us from the AI-dominated world he is building. The trouble is, governments aren't buying his plan, which involves an attempt to scan the eyeballs of every person on Earth and pay them with his own cryptocurrency.
Altman's OpenAI is creating models that may outsmart. His Worldcoin initiative said it is addressing a risk that could follow: We won't be able to tell people and robots apart.
But more than a dozen jurisdictions from Hong Kong to Spain have either suspended Worldcoin's operations or looked into its data processing. Among their concerns: How does the Cayman Islands-registered Worldcoin Foundation handle user data, train its algorithms and avoid scanning children?
Altman has tried to push back. The project plays a vital role in the OpenAI chief executive's vision for society's future, by attempting to ascribe every human a unique signature.
Worldcoin verifies "humanness" by scanning irises using a basketball-sized device called the Orb. Worldcoin said irises, can better distinguish humans than fingerprints or faces.
Users receive immutable codes in an online "World ID" passport, to use on other platforms to prove they are human, plus payouts in Worldcoin's WLD cryptocurrency.
Worldcoin launched last year and said it has verified more than six million people across almost 40 countries. Based on recent prices, the total pool of WLD is theoretically worth some $15 billion.
The project said its technology is completely private: Orbs delete all images after verification, and iris codes contain no personal information -- unless users permit Worldcoin to train its algorithms with their scans. Encrypted servers hold the anonymized codes and images.
However, several authorities have accused Worldcoin of telling Orb operators, typically independent contractors, to encourage users to hand over iris images. Privacy advocates said these could be used to build a global biometric database.
Damien Kieran, the project's chief privacy officer, said any groundbreaking venture like Worldcoin inevitably draws scrutiny, and the initiative is working with regulators to address concerns.
He said the project has paused the image-sharing option for users while it develops a new process, and current training materials don't ask operators in any way to induce users to share biometric data.
"We don't collect data to harvest it," Kieran said in an interview. "We don't sell data. In fact, we couldn't sell it, because we don't know who the data belongs to."
In 2019, Altman conceived the idea of building a technology that could eventually distribute a form of universal basic income to everyone on Earth whose livelihoods would be disrupted by AI.
The following year, Altman tapped Alex Blania, a former California Institute of Technology researcher. The founders set up a U.S. company, Tools for Humanity, to build the technology, with Blania as CEO. A nonprofit Cayman foundation manages the data, tokens and intellectual property.
Worldcoin was global almost from the get-go, racking up users in less-developed markets like Indonesia, Kenya and Nigeria, and throughout Europe. It hasn't offered WLD coins in the U.S., citing an uncertain regulatory environment.
Critics charged Worldcoin with targeting less technically literate places. Worldcoin said it wanted to test how the Orbs handled different climates and geographies.
In Kenya, Altman's project secured half a million sign-ups within three months, but police launched a criminal investigation. Parliament held a public inquiry, with Blania jetting in to testify. He and Altman also met Kenya's president, William Ruto, last year.
The parliamentary report said that Kenya's data commissioner had repeatedly told Worldcoin to stop collecting personal data, citing doubts about user consent, and that a May 2023 cease order wasn't shared with Orb operators.
After the order, Tools for Humanity addressed the commissioner's concerns in written replies, describing improved operator training, but kept scanning Kenyans.
Kenya closed the criminal case in June, recommending Worldcoin properly register with authorities. Tools for Humanity said it would continue to work with Kenya's government and hoped to resume operations there soon.
Hong Kong banned Worldcoin, finding it was retaining iris images for up to a decade. Argentina launched investigations, citing a lack of information and what they said were abusive user terms. Spain accused Worldcoin of scanning children at a large scale, while Portugal said operators were taught to encourage people to consent to their data's use.
Authorities in Bavaria, where the foundation has a data-processing subsidiary, have led an EU inquiry.
The head of the German state's data regulator, Michael Will, said his team has focused on ensuring iris codes and images are secure, given that any breach could lead to identity fraud.
Worldcoin has launched a global charm offensive and rolled out new measures. Its operators now check identity cards to deter minors, and the project lets users delete iris codes. A new system breaks up iris codes, with segments held on separate encrypted data stores. Only someone with access to all the servers, and the combination keys, could piece the codes back together, according to Kieran, the privacy chief.
Altman has little day-to-day involvement in Worldcoin, executives said. But people familiar with the matter said he holds equity in Tools for Humanity, which also puts him in line to receive WLD tokens.
Worldcoin has racked up other heavyweight backers, raising $240 million from investors including Andreessen Horowitz and Khosla Ventures, according to PitchBook.
Blania has said Worldcoin's mission is even more urgent given AI is already reshaping the internet, with bots and fake accounts proliferating on social media.
One challenge for Worldcoin: Much of its success hangs on its cryptocurrency.
WLD is actively traded. But in chat groups where holders gather, the focus centers on using the token to bet on Altman's other ventures.
Worldcoin executives said users also make real-world payments with WLD. They point to a Kenyan who said he bought a goat with the tokens and named it Sam.
---
Berber Jin contributed to this article.
Generate image description

Credit: By Angus Berwick
