Corporate bankruptcy advisers exploring artificial intelligence for its ability to process vast data sets also must address ethical and security concerns raised by courts flustered by its arrival.
Restructuring adviser Alvarez & Marsal and the law practices Loyens & Loeff and Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe have all weighed using AI in recent chapter 11 cases such as FTX, WeWork and Johnson & Johnson's LTL Management unit, potentially helping clients reduce costs and speed up processes.
In the bankruptcies of opioid maker Purdue Pharma, California utility PG&E and toy retailer Toys "R" Us, fee examiners used the AI tool Legal Decoder to analyze legal spending. According to Joe Tiano, a founder of Legal Decoder, the technology can crunch 11,000 invoice line items in five minutes where it might take an individual weeks or months to complete.
Law firms such as Fox Rothschild and Womble Bond Dickinson formalized their AI practices. Mark McCreary, Fox Rothschild's inaugural AI chief, said the technology can complete tasks such as spotting possible conflicts of interest for law firms by parsing years of records in a short time. "It's exciting to have a tool that can write as well as a third-year associate," McCreary said.
Despite AI's ability to process large data sets, generative AI technologies such as ChatGPT raise concerns over ethics, accuracy and privacy.
In November, New York bankruptcy judge Martin Glenn threw out a 172-page report in crypto lender Celsius Network's chapter 11 case, citing the lack of any standards controlling the use of AI.
The judge said the report, provided by an expert retained by a creditor to weigh in on the valuation of Celsius tokens, was written not by a person, but by AI in 72 hours. It would have taken a human more than 1,000 hours to complete, Glenn said, quoting the expert.
The report was "unreliable" and "not based on sufficient facts or data," containing almost no citations, the judge said. "There were no standards controlling the operation of the artificial intelligence that generated the report," Glenn said, noting it contained flaws like duplicated paragraphs and outright errors.
Guidelines and rules have begun to emerge. In the past year, several federal district judges -- including Brantley Starr in Texas, Michael Baylson in Pennsylvania and Leslie Kobayashi in Hawaii -- ordered lawyers appearing before them attest to the accuracy of materials produced through AI.
Earlier this year, the Florida Bar issued guidance on the use of generative AI, requiring lawyers to protect client information by reviewing policies on data retention. Attorneys are expected to comply with advertising regulations, including informing clients that a chatbot isn't a person.
Law firms that consider using the technology are informing their clients of it and taking steps to address security and privacy risks.
Orrick Herrington disclosed some of its systems use AI in its engagement letters with bankrupt talc powder maker LTL and Beverly Hospital, saying the technology can help reduce the cost of its legal services. AI tools are examined to reduce the chances of security or quality problems, the firm said.
Loyens & Loeff disclosed its possible use of AI in searching and analyzing data in the WeWork bankruptcy, but stressed the importance of selecting vendors carefully to mitigate risks.
The firm monitors "the use of AI to ensure it is used in a safe and effective manner," a presentative said.
Law firm White & Case said it used generative AI, with clients' permission, to do things like editing a long memo analyzing a new regulation.
To address security concerns about public chatbots, the firm said it invested last year in a secure proprietary platform it calls PrivateAI, a legally trained large-language model that can be used with confidential data.
"We have sole control over PrivateAI and the data it uses," White & Case said in its recently released 2023 annual report.
Credit: By Becky Yerak
