Baidu Inc.'s former financial-services unit has attracted a $1.9 billion investment from firms including U.S. private-equity giants TPG and the Carlyle Group, giving it fresh ammunition to compete in China's increasingly crowded financial-services space.
The new firm, Du Xiaoman Financial, spun off from Chinese search giant Baidu as part of a corporate strategy to shed peripheral businesses and focus on a push into artificial intelligence.
It also has attracted other investors including Agricultural Bank of China Ltd. and Taikang Group. Baidu announced the new investment on Saturday.
The financing will be used to develop new financial-technology platforms and to expand the unit's presence in China's financial ecosystem, Baidu said.
Launched in 2015, the Beijing-based financial-services group runs a mobile-wallet service as well as provides consumer loans and wealth-management services for its users.
By the end of 2017, Baidu had built up its financing business to a loan balance of 28 billion yuan ($4.42 billion), TPG said.
This latest investment will give the company, previously known as Baidu Financial Services Group, more firepower to compete in China's increasingly competitive fintech space.
Alibaba Group Holding affiliate Ant Financial Services Group, and rival WeChat Pay, run by Chinese social media giant Tencent Holdings, are currently the dominant players in China's mobile-payments space. But Du Xiaoman Financial sees room for growth in the broader market.
Investible assets in China's private wealth market were predicted to grow 14% year over year to reach 188 trillion yuan by the end of 2017, according to a study by Bain & Co and China Merchants Bank released last August. Official figures were unavailable to confirm that.
TPG, which manages more than $82 billion in assets world-wide, said the firm was eager to tap into China's growing financial services market. "As savings and lending activities move online, technology companies are able to use their big-data analytics to offer flexible micro-financing to the younger generation of consumers," said Chang Sun, TPG's China managing partner.

Credit: By Liza Lin
