Microsoft Corp. recorded its slowest sales growth in more than six years last quarter as demand for its software and cloud services cooled on concerns about the health of the global economy.
The Redmond, Wash., company's revenue expanded 2% in the three months through Dec. 31 from a year earlier to $52.7 billion. Its net income fell 12% to $16.4 billion. That is the company's lowest revenue growth since the quarter that ended in June 2016.
"Organizations are exercising caution given the macroeconomic uncertainty," Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella said Tuesday.
The software giant is the first of the tech titans to announce earnings for the quarter. It and others have recently announced layoffs of thousands of people to reflect a sudden lowering of expectations about future demand. Last week Microsoft announced plans to eliminate 10,000 jobs in response to the global economic slowdown, the company's largest layoffs in more than eight years.
Microsoft said it expects around $51 billion in revenue this quarter, a 3% increase from the same quarter last year. Its shares, which had initially risen on the results in after-hours trading, gave up their gains after the company announced its guidance.
Microsoft's Intelligent Cloud business, which includes its Azure cloud computing unit, grew 18% to $21.51 billion. Azure grew 31%, which was slightly above some analysts' expectations.
Microsoft is one of the top companies in cloud-computing services that have boomed during the pandemic. In the middle of the health crisis, Microsoft reported several quarters in a row of 50% or more year-over-year sales growth for its cloud-computing platform, the world's No. 2 behind Amazon.com Inc.'s cloud. While Azure and Microsoft's other cloud services remain the main engine for the company's growth, demand isn't what it was even a year ago as customers try to manage their cloud computing costs.
The company has been betting the next wave of demand for cloud services could come from more companies and people using artificial intelligence. It has been deepening its relationship with the AI startup OpenAI, the company behind the image generator Dall-E 2 and the technology behind ChatGPT, which can answer questions and write essays and poems.
"The age of AI is upon us and Microsoft is powering it," Mr. Nadella said.
Microsoft had been sheltered from much of the recent downturn because it gets most of its sales from companies rather than advertising and consumer spending. However, it isn't immune to the end of pandemic trends that turbocharged demand, hiring and investment as well as economic headwinds such as high interest rates.
Demand for Windows operating-system software has fallen with sales of the personal computers that use it. Households, companies and governments that bought computers during the pandemic are scaling back.
That was reflected in Microsoft's personal-computing segment revenue, which was down 19% at $14.24 billion. Sales related to its Windows operating system were down 39% and sales of devices like Surface tablets were down 39%.
Worldwide PC shipments were down 29% in the fourth quarter last year compared with the previous year, according to preliminary data from the research firm Gartner Inc. Financial analysts don't expect that trend to improve until 2024.
Microsoft said its videogaming revenue fell 12% during the quarter. Videogames and Microsoft's Xbox consoles are increasingly important for the company. The videogaming industry is going through a slowdown as pandemic-related restrictions ease and people spend less time at home.
The company made a huge bet on the sector a year ago with its $75 billion plan to acquire videogame giant Activision Blizzard Inc. Last month the Federal Trade Commission sued to block the acquisition on grounds it would hurt competion. Microsoft has filed a rebuttal, and it could take months before it is decided in the U.S. and elsewhere whether the deal can go through.
Credit: By Tom Dotan
