Tesla's global deliveries rebounded in the third quarter, reversing from earlier declines this year that had stoked concerns on Wall Street about the company's ability to grow its car business.
The world's most-valuable automaker delivered a total of 462,890 vehicles during the July-to-September period, roughly in line with analysts' expectations. The result was a 6.4% increase over the third quarter of last year, when its sales were affected by factory upgrades, which paused production.
The company's quarterly sales were in part lifted by strong performance in China and financing deals offered during the period to counter the impact of high interest rates globally.
The total for the first nine months is still trailing last year's performance, putting pressure on Tesla to deliver an even higher number of vehicles in the fourth quarter to beat results in 2023.
Tesla's stock finished Wednesday's trading down 3.5%, following the deliveries release. The automaker's shares have bounced back in recent months, after tumbling in the first part of 2024 due to declining sales. The stock is now up 0.2% this year as of Wednesday's close.
The company plans to report third-quarter earnings on Oct. 23.
The electric-vehicle pioneer has struggled with a pullback in demand for its models, some of which haven't been fully redesigned in years.
Competition also is stiffening in the EV space, with rival automakers releasing a barrage of new battery-powered offerings, many of which are already selling with steep discounts as unsold inventory has stacked up.
U.S. auto sales overall fell slightly in the third quarter as elevated sticker prices and affordability challenges weighed on consumer demand.
On Wednesday, Jeep maker Stellantis reported a 20% drop in its U.S. sales, a much steeper decline than the broader industry, while Ford Motor posted a 1% rise in quarterly results.
Tesla's year got off to a difficult start. In the first quarter, it posted its first year-over-year decline in deliveries since 2020. Its performance continued to slide in the second quarter, with the automaker reporting a 6.5% drop in global deliveries for the first half of 2024.
As Tesla's sales have faltered, Chief Executive Elon Musk has sought to refocus investor attention on the company's big bets in robotics and artificial intelligence, technologies he has claimed could one day boost the automaker's market value to as high as $30 trillion.
On Oct. 10, Tesla is scheduled to unveil a prototype of a fully autonomous robotaxi -- a model that Musk has talked about for years -- and provide more details about a forthcoming ride-hailing service.
The company has said it plans to spend $10 billion on artificial-intelligence research this year across projects that include its Dojo supercomputer and development of its Optimus humanoid robot.
Such investments are largely funded by Tesla's car business, which in recent quarters has faced several challenges. More broadly, demand for electric vehicles has slumped in the U.S., after a sharp uptick in sales during the pandemic.
Tesla also is facing tougher competition in China, where homegrown rivals, such as BYD, have tightened their grip on the country's electric-vehicle market.
Tesla started delivering its newest model, the Cybertruck, in late 2023. Currently, the company sells only the top-end versions of the electric pickup, which start at about $100,000. That approach has limited the vehicle's customer base.
Investors hope Musk will reveal plans for a long-anticipated $25,000 model this month.
Musk has also said the company aims to increase its global deliveries this year, topping the 1.81 million vehicles it sold in 2023. For the first three quarters of this year, Tesla has delivered a total of 1,293,656 vehicles.
To put it ahead of last year's delivery results, it would have to sell about 515,000 vehicles in the fourth quarter, much higher than the 485,000 deliveries that analysts project.
While Tesla is still the top EV seller in the U.S., its market share has slipped in recent years. The company accounted for nearly 44% of all electric vehicles sold in the U.S. in August, compared with around 50% of sales during the same period a year prior, according to Motor Intelligence data.
Generate image description

Credit: By Becky Peterson
