The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite resumed its climb, closing within striking distance of the record hit in 2021.
The gauge rose 0.4% to 16035.30, about 22 points off its record close of 16057.44 set on Nov. 22, 2021. The S&P 500 was little changed for much of the day before closing up 0.2%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 96.82 points, or 0.2%. All three are on track to close out the month with gains.
Bitcoin prices kept surging after hitting their highest levels since 2021 in the prior session. Bitcoin prices rose 4.6% to $56,989.30 -- their highest level since Dec. 2, 2021.
The cryptocurrency's rally highlights the appetite for riskier bets that has swept markets recently. Investor enthusiasm over artificial-intelligence technology has propelled major indexes to records in recent weeks, with the S&P 500 up 6.5% this year, though the moves were more subdued Tuesday.
"The runway for additional gains looks pretty good," said Adam Phillips, managing director of investments at EP Wealth Advisors. "We view a pullback as healthy and really as an opportunity to add to equities."
Many investors have also shown growing optimism about the U.S. economy to start the year, helping power the market higher. The Russell 2000 index of small companies, which tends to be more sensitive to the economy, jumped 1.3%%, outpacing the major indexes.
Shares of cruise stocks jumped after upbeat quarterly results from Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings. The company's shares jumped 20% after it reported strong earnings and cited healthy consumer demand for travel. Rival Carnival added almost 8%.
In bonds, the extra yield that investors demand to hold investment-grade corporate debt over safer Treasurys is hovering around some of the lowest levels since the 2008 financial crisis, according to FactSet. The narrowing gap indicates many investors expect these companies to stay healthy and keep making regular payments on their debt.
Still, some investors said forecasts for this year had grown too rosy and that the Federal Reserve's interest-rate hikes could still tip the economy into a downturn. Bets that the central bank will trim rates around six times this year have receded lately.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury note rose to 4.314% on Tuesday.
Fresh data this week highlighted some of the risks to the economy. U.S. consumer confidence ticked lower in February, and domestic orders for durable goods -- such as appliances, cars and computers -- fell more than expected last month.Inflation data later this week will shed more light on the path of prices and how the Fed might proceed with interest rates.
In corporate news, Macy's shares gained 3.4% after the department-store operator said it would shut stores as part of its latest turnaround push.
Shares of Lowe's advanced 1.8% after the home-improvement company said lower overhead costs helped boost its profit.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.2%. At midday Wednesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.1% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 0.5%. S&P 500 futures were flat.
Credit: By Gunjan Banerji
