*****
Dogs love water!!!
Dec. 19, 2018
My dog loves this pet drinking fountain. He doesn't care that it's louder than Niagara Falls when the water level is low, and that the setup instructions were impossible to follow. Oops, this is supposed to be a positive review. So, yeah, the light is nice, I guess?
I'll never actually post that, but it could have been worth money if I had. Let me explain. I visited a Facebook group called "Amazon Reviews" and was promised a full refund on a $44 Amazon purchase of a pet fountain if I wrote a positive review on Amazon with photos and a five-star rating.
Not only is this ethically problematic, it is against Amazon and Facebook user policies. Plenty of people don't care: They'll do it for this pet gizmo or one of the other products in these forums.
Every day, many of us search for a product on Amazon, pick a four- to five-star option and tap Buy Now. Those little yellow stars can make or break a product.
Amazon has cracked down on fake reviews as well as on incentivized reviews, where companies offer refunds to shoppers in exchange for top stars. However, my hours lurking in shady Facebook groups and combing Amazon reviews tell me both types are still alive and well.
It's on us to better understand the world of Amazon reviews before we make a purchase. But it's on Amazon to start rethinking the star system entirely. There are four species of Amazon review:
A legit review. Left by a human who bought a product and felt like sharing, the legit review, often labeled as a "Verified Purchase," might be peppered with real-life experiences that indicate genuine use. Legit reviewers tend to be moved to review when they love or hate the product, so the ratings are more extreme, says Tommy Noonan, founder of ReviewMeta, a website that analyzes Amazon reviews.
A Vine review. Amazon invites some of the most prolific legit reviewers to be a part of Vine. The program rewards them with free products in exchange for reviews, marked with a green label. Vine members choose from a preselected group of products, but neither Amazon nor the company that provides the product can influence, edit or modify reviews, Amazon says.
An incentivized review. Incentivized reviewers are given free products -- or in some cases flat-out payments -- in exchange for four or five stars. In 2016 Amazon updated its terms of service to prohibit this practice, but sellers found a big back alley: Facebook.
Here's how it works: A shopper joins a Facebook group with a name like "Amazon reviews." These groups tend to be private but I was let into two, even after saying I was a journalist.
Sellers, often out of China, post about free products, say Bluetooth headphones. The buyer gets the Amazon link from the seller via direct message, orders the headphones through Amazon so it can appear as a "Verified Purchase," then writes the review, posts some photos and rates it five stars. Once proof of purchase is provided, the seller refunds the buyer, generally via PayPal.
The moderator of one of the Facebook product-review groups I joined directed me to his rules, which state that members are meant to write unbiased reviews, and that the group isn't responsible for "deceitful posts or dishonest reviews left by buyers/sellers." Facebook says it closes groups that offer incentives for fake reviews. Amazon says it works with Facebook to police these groups.
The fake review. Finally, there are the full-on fakes. These reviews don't show verified purchases and consistently deliver high ratings without much detail. Sellers also "hijack" legit reviews through some back-end trickery, Mr. Noonan said. A merchant might put a new item on the page of a well-reviewed but now-unavailable older product.
"We suspend, ban or pursue legal action against these bad actors as well as suppress all known inauthentic reviews," an Amazon spokeswoman said. "Customers can report suspicious reviews 24 hours a day, seven days a week and we investigate each claim."
Last week, I spotted a listing for headphones branded Wotmic with 51 five-star ratings -- and no poorer ratings. This week, Amazon's sweep removed all 51 reviews. Wotmic's parent company, Shenzhen Womaisi Technology Co., Ltd. hasn't responded to repeated requests for comment.
Another page I found featured a teeth whitener with an apparent average 4.5-star rating. However, many of the written reviews pertained to fish oil, cinnamon tablets and other health products. When I reached out, the vendor, AsaVea, didn't respond -- but soon all but the relevant reviews disappeared. (Negative reviews complaining about the apparent review hijacking also remained.) The product is now rated three stars.
After all my reporting, my conclusion is that the star system is the culprit. I'm not sure how Amazon would fix it, but certainly one of the world's most valuable companies, with a major investment in artificial intelligence, can try to figure it out. Hopefully before we all buy two-star pet fountains masquerading as five-star ones.

Credit: By Joanna Stern
