I'm in a relationship with a speaker.
Ordinary sound systems just play music. This speaker listens to me. It chooses what to play based on what it thinks might fit my taste or mood, streaming NPR at 7 a.m. or dentist-office soft rock on a Tuesday afternoon.
When I want to hear Rihanna, I just lean over to the speaker and say, "play Rihanna." Presto: "Umbrella."
My robot DJ is the Aether Cone, an ambitious reimagining of the speaker. It pushes audio gear toward a new frontier that combines stylish hardware, Internet streaming and artificial intelligence. Cone, due to ship later in June, still has too many rough edges to be the successor to the iPod. But it does have many of the necessary elements.
As with all new relationships, living with the $400 Cone speaker can be frustrating. Mine pegged me early as a die-hard fan of indie rock after I played a bit too much of The Shins, and I've been working hard to change its mind.
Cone's circular face and tapered back evoke an old-timey gramophone. (It was made by former designers and engineers from Apple, Google, Pixar and NASA.) But it does away with many things we associate with traditional speakers, like remote controls and speaker wires. Instead, Cone streams all of its music over Wi-Fi, selecting from a buffet of music on the streaming service Rdio -- a $10-per-month subscription is required. It also plays podcasts on Stitcher and tracks you can beam directly from Apple devices using AirPlay.
Cone feels intimate because most of your communication is physical -- you touch it and talk to it primarily, rather than controlling it via remote or mobile device. To change what Cone plays, you turn a ring around the edge of its speaker like a dial -- the larger the spin, the more different your next selection will be. To request a specific artist, song or album, press and hold a button in the center of the speaker and then speak. The hardware is as sleek and button-free as anything unveiled by Steve Jobs.
It also talks back to you like R2-D2, emitting tones and changing the color of its central button -- blue for "I'm listening," and red for "I'm sorry Geoff, I'm afraid I can't do that."
There's also a free app for iPhones that lets you control the Cone, typing in searches for song or artist, selecting a favorite song or seeing which songs it played recently. But this is just a supplement to Cone's physical controls, for when you need to fine-tune your relationship.
Behind the scenes, Cone is learning about you. If that idea gives you the willies, it's worth knowing that Cone goes a step further than what we've become accustomed to with personalized Internet-based music services like Pandora. It takes note when you turn its dial to change songs, but also records context like the time of day, the volume at which you play a song and even where in your house the speaker sits, based on the strength of the Wi-Fi signal. This is the direction our always-on technology is heading: It's about learning habits as much as predicting taste.
Cone uses a lot of the latest technology to trick you into believing it can think. But at least in the prereleased version of Cone that I tested, the pieces don't quite come together.
The speaker's audio quality is just OK. Too often, songs cut out for a millisecond or are accompanied by a rumble, as if the speaker had digestive problems, perhaps caused by its shaky Wi-Fi connectivity. Cone doesn't sound as rich as the similarly sized $200 Play:1 speaker from Sonos. This may be because the pricier Cone comes with an eight-hour battery so you can move it around, while the Sonos speaker must remain plugged in. At least Cone sounds better than the portable $300 Beats Pill XL.
Cone can't do some of the basic things we've come to expect from wireless speakers. You can't stream Bluetooth audio to it like you can with Pill, which means you can't take it with you on a picnic in the park. You also can't make it part of an all-home audio system like Sonos.
Commanding Cone with your voice works for simple songs and artists, but can be frustrating. When I asked to hear Swedish electro-pop singer Robyn, Cone kept giving me anything but -- Robin Thicke, and another female artist named Robin McKelle. When I said, "play R-O-B-Y-N," Cone played a stand-up comedy routine about an OB-GYN.
And then there's the challenge of building a relationship with Cone to hear the music you actually want. Automated taste recommendations have been around for nearly two decades, with notable successes like Amazon's book suggestions and Netflix's movie preference engine. But Cone puts itself way out there by not only suggesting content, but actually choosing what to play.
Cone works best for people who already have Rdio accounts. They've already provided tons of valuable information about their tastes. It may support other streaming services in the future.
It can't yet take more open-ended commands like, "play something relaxing," or even "play classical music." It doesn't yet incorporate the tastes of two or more people at home who like different stuff, either.
I didn't previously use Rdio, so Cone and I started with a blank slate. Things seem to get off on the wrong foot after I allowed Cone to play several indie rock titles. It kept trying to play artists like Vampire Weekend to please me, but I'm more into Beyonce.
To correct it, I'd turn the dial until something I liked came up. But sometimes I'd step away and it would bring back Mumford & Sons.
Getting Cone to get you takes time and effort. Its makers say it should figure you out after a few weeks, so I set out to counterprogram Cone's false assumptions. I started using it several hours a day -- and even named it Tabitha.
On Cone's iPhone app, I gave favorite "hearts" to Macklemore and Sara Bareilles to nudge it in the right direction. I'd regularly pick up Cone and command, "Play Rihanna."
One morning last week, I woke up and turned on Cone. It played news headlines from NPR, followed by Beyonce and Jay Z's "Drunk in Love."
Finally, Cone got me! Then it played a country song. Clearly we need some relationship counseling.
---
Write to Geoffrey Fowler at geoffrey.fowler@wsj.com and @geoffreyfowler on Twitter.
Credit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler
