DAVOS, Switzerland -- Big leaps in artificial intelligence are raising tensions among businesses and policy makers over what impact fast-changing technology will have on millions of middle-income jobs.
The economic effect of growing automation on jobs is a big subject of debate this week at the yearly World Economic Forum, where executives from companies who are pursuing artificial intelligence, including IBM Corp., Microsoft Corp., Facebook Inc. and Google parent Alphabet Inc., are gathering, along with political and economic leaders.
Many executives and economists said they believe that the development of machines that can learn and act independently will eventually end up creating more new jobs than they displace, and raise overall prosperity, as have past waves of industrialization. But some said this week that they also worry the spoils of the next revolution could be inequitably shared -- and that the transition to new models of work could be brutal for many workers.
"I don't think you've even really seen the beginning of the disruption," said Marc Benioff, chief executive of Salesforce.com Inc. "The wave of technology will create a big increase in productivity. But we also risk getting a lot more inequality."
Growing global competition, as well as rising automation, has been a factor in anemic job growth and stagnant wages in many Western countries, economists say.
A study commissioned by the organizers of the World Economic Forum published this week concluded that annual median incomes in 26 advanced economies fell 2.6% in the period between 2008 and 2013.
Several prominent tech executives said they expect that technological disruption will be gradual enough to allow the workforce to adapt to new jobs working along with intelligent or automated systems."It's not man or machine," IBM Chief Executive Ginni Rometty said Tuesday. "It's a symbiotic relationship."
There is some precedent for concern. Increased productivity from the industrial revolution didn't initially herald an increase in wages, said Carl Benedikt Frey, an Oxford University economist.
Credit: By Sam Schechner
