By throwing down a legislative challenge that could shut down TikTok in the U.S., Congressman Mike Gallagher demonstrated this month why companies trembled when he took aim at their China links.
Now, the four-term Republican from Wisconsin is resigning his seat, in a pivot likely to scramble Washington's messaging about his biggest foe: the Chinese Communist Party.
Framing the U.S. rivalry with China in terms of corporate behavior, Gallagher managed to overcome discord in Washington. He announced his departure days after the House united to support a bill he spearheaded to ban TikTok in the U.S. if its China-based parent, ByteDance, doesn't sell the video-app juggernaut.
The achievement exemplified the congressman's determination as the chairman of a House committee on China since early 2023 to channel Washington's distrust of Beijing into legislative remedies crafted to satisfy both sides of the aisle. The win also set the stage for his departure, which relates more to family priorities than politics, said people close to the congressman.
Gallagher's team declined to comment on media reports that he will join the data-analytics firm Palantir Technologies. Palantir didn't respond to questions on the matter.
Denver-based Palantir, which does technology work for the government, including the Defense Department, has been a top contributor to Gallagher, who also sits on the Armed Services Committee and a select committee on intelligence. Palantir provided $44,601 to Gallagher between 2023 and 2024, more than any other contributor, according to OpenSecrets, a Washington nonprofit group that tracks money in politics.
Jacob Helberg, a senior policy adviser to Palantir's chief executive, actively lobbied for congressional action against TikTok. Another Palantir senior adviser, Matthew Turpin, is a leading member of Gallagher's "personal brain trust," the congressman told The Wall Street Journal last year.
Gallagher has been a major proponent of the kind of defense technology spending to counter China that could benefit Palantir. Last November, he co-sponsored a bill that would direct the defense secretary to consider how to bolster artificial intelligence within an alliance called the Five Eyes, which includes the U.S., U.K., Australia, New Zealand and Canada.
A spokesman for the congressman said Gallagher's policy decisions have never been influenced by supporters and that his views on TikTok and the Five Eyes go back years, and that he has sought advice from a number of individuals across industries.
"It is imperative that we prevent our adversaries, particularly the Chinese Communist Party, from weaponizing AI to advance their military ambitions and perfect their repressive techno-totalitarian surveillance states," Gallagher said in proposing the bill.
Despite being highly ambitious and the youngest committee chairman in Congress at age 40, Gallagher has made little secret of his distaste for congressional dysfunction and the incompatibility of his position with family life, including raising two young daughters.
Gallagher said last month that he wouldn't stand for re-election and announced Friday that he will depart sooner than expected, on April 19, which, at least temporarily, would narrow the Republican majority in the House. It also allows Gallagher, who is no fan of the presumptive Republican nominee for president, Donald Trump, to sidestep this year's election cycle.
Few around Gallagher expect the former Marine to eschew politics. He told the Journal last year that his ideal career would combine government service, private-sector work to earn money and putting his doctorate in Cold War history to use, such as at a university.
The larger question is whether Gallagher's absence might stall congressional momentum to overhaul the American economic relationship with China. As chair of the House Select Committee on the Strategic Competition Between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party, Gallagher fashioned the panel into a congressional catchall on China issues and emerged as the anti-China standard-bearer in Washington.
While China has for years been a major preoccupation for policymakers in military, trade, technology and other areas, Gallagher's approach was to address the rivalry holistically rather than by individual sector, said Oriana Skylar Mastro, a longtime friend and unofficial adviser to Gallagher. When Washington focused on China in the past, said Mastro, a center fellow at Stanford University's Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies, "you didn't get this picture that it's a comprehensive strategic challenge, and all these aspects are connected."
The Republican leadership on Monday tapped Rep. John Moolenaar of Michigan to chair the China committee, which remains tasked with producing a set of recommendations for legislation before its mandate expires at the end of the current congressional term. A committee spokeswoman said the next chair will be in a position to carry its ambitious agenda into a new term.
In part, Gallagher has been a product of his times, since frustration with Beijing is now baked into the Washington landscape. On Capitol Hill, China is the target in 151 legislative bills from across the political spectrum, according to monitoring service GovTrack.
A person close to him said the House TikTok vote makes the congressman confident that a comprehensive framework is now in place for how the U.S. should approach its economic competition with China.
Yet, the scope for more TikTok-like unison on China is limited by the complexity of the relationship between the two countries -- $575 billion in two-way trade last year -- coupled with divergent political priorities in Washington during an election year. There is no guarantee the Senate will back the House measure on the app.
Credit: By James T. Areddy
