LIMA, Peru -- Chinese leader Xi Jinping on Saturday told President Biden that Beijing remains committed to stable relations with the U.S., an expression of hope for continuity in ties before Donald Trump returns to the Oval Office.
Before meeting Biden in Lima, Xi expressed readiness to work with the new administration. He then told Biden the U.S. and China should interject certainty and positive energy into a turbulent world.
Biden stressed the benefits of a strong relationship in his brief comments in front of reporters. Trump campaigned on promises to levy high tariffs on goods imported from China annually and to "counter" Beijing more generally. Already, Trump's early foreign-policy picks demonstrate his hawkishness on China.
The third in-person Biden-Xi meeting since Biden became president was an opportunity to take stock of what has worked, national security adviser Jake Sullivan told reporters. He said leader-level contact has been critical in coming through a number of very difficult points in the relationship. "The tone gets set from the top," Sullivan said.
In a rare agreement on nuclear weapons, the U.S. said the two leaders agreed to basic principles that launch decisions would be made by humans, a concern for the future as artificial intelligence begins to permeate many sectors.
Areas of friction included China's industrial support for Russia in the midst of its war in Ukraine. Sullivan said Biden pressed Beijing about North Korean troops' providing support to Russia in the war, given its "influence and capacity" with Pyongyang.
Sullivan said Xi reiterated his criticism of the Biden administration's export controls on high technology. And Biden, he said, emphasized U.S. concern that Chinese overcapacity in critical industrial sectors is harmful to the global economy.
The South American summits that brought the U.S. and Chinese leaders together have highlighted Beijing's increasing power in the Western Hemisphere, in the midst of chatter that Washington is letting opportunities slip by in a resource-rich region eager for American investment.
Xi appeared to address the incoming U.S. administration with some of his remarks on relations between the two nations. But he didn't mention Trump directly in front of reporters; nor did the Xinhua summaries of his comments.
When the countries treat each other "as partner and friend," the relationship makes "considerable progress," he said. When they act as rivals, "We would roil the relationship or even set it back."
For Trump, the complex relationship has boiled down mostly to trade, and specifically China's surplus. As president, Trump launched a trade war that produced a January 2020 deal he said would lead to a sharp, $200 billion increase in sales of U.S. goods and services to China. Trump left office a year later fuming that Beijing failed to fully honor commitments of the deal's first phase.
Beijing was happy to see him go. Yet in time, Chinese authorities grew dismayed that Biden retained most Trump tariffs and increasingly cut China off from U.S. technology.
Credit: By Annie Linskey and James T. Areddy
