At a U.S. Steel Corp. mill on the Mississippi River, an automated crane lifts and lowers 1,000-degree hot steel coils into open squares, using a machine-learning algorithm to calculate the optimal spot for each coil to quickly cool down before it is shipped off.
This automated steel-coil yard, laid out like a giant chess board, is one of many advanced-technology operations at Big River Steel, a six-year-old plant in Osceola, Ark., that was built with the goal of harnessing cutting-edge tech to save energy, time and money.
When U.S. Steel took full ownership of Big River last year, it also gained the plant's artificial intelligence know-how and was a signal of the 120-year-old manufacturing giant's commitment to advancing technology in its mills. But implementing the type of technology in use at Big River in the steelmaker's other mills, some of which are over 100 years old, has proven a difficult task, according to the company's chief information officer.
Competitors such as Nucor Corp. have an edge over U.S. Steel in part because they operate mostly newer mills with more cost-efficient electric arc furnaces and newer technology, similar to Big River, said KeyBanc Capital Markets analyst Philip Gibbs. U.S. Steel has struggled to be profitable in recent years, he said, partly because its equipment is old and expensive to run and maintain.
When U.S. Steel announced its acquisition of Big River, some viewed it as a Hail Mary pass to regain its footing, Mr. Gibbs said. The strategy worked out in the short term since demand for steel shot up for a time after the pandemic, he said, but added it remains to be seen how it will play out in the long term.
U.S. Steel said the Big River acquisition has already more than paid for itself and that the company had its highest first- and second-quarter earnings ever this year before lower demand created third-quarter stumbling blocks.
While the Big River deal hasn't revolutionized ways of working at U.S. Steel's older facilities, it has served as inspiration about what is possible, according to Kevin Burns, a process excellence engineer at the steelmaker's Gary Works facility in Gary, Ind.
Advanced technology was part of the main idea when Big River was built, according to Cody Hore, a third-generation steelworker and one of the mill's first employees. "The next thing you know we had U.S. Steel knocking on our door," he said. "They wanted to get their foot in the door with up-and-coming technology."
"When someone first suggested to me about trying to automate one of our cranes, I was like, 'No, no, it's never going to happen,'" said Mr. Burns. "Then you go down there and realize, 'Oh, it isn't an impossible thing. You can do it. You can do it safely. Oh, that's a really good idea. Maybe we should do it.'"
Once the largest steel mill in North America, 110-year-old Gary Works on the shore of Lake Michigan includes some equipment that was first commissioned in the 1950s and 1960s, although it has been updated over the years.
Gary Works, still one of the largest steel mills in the U.S., employs 4,000 people and has 7.5 million net tons of annual raw steel capability. Big River has 3.3 million net tons of annual raw steel capability with about 750 employees.
Big River uses advanced technology to make basic steel mill functions, such as the cooling of hot steel coils, more efficient. If the coils are too close to one another, they take longer to cool, which is why Big River's machine-learning automated crane is so important. The temperature in parts of the mill can reach 150 degrees during the summer, so keeping things cool can be a challenge.
Big River also uses cameras to feed inputs into machine-learning algorithms that can detect defects in coil slabs or determine whether someone creates a safety hazard by getting too close to certain machines.
Big River built some of its algorithms in house and implemented some through a third party. But the algorithms deployed at Big River can't plug and play in other mills, according to Christian Holliday, senior director of Digital Studio and Big River Steel Integration at U.S. Steel.
Each mill typically has to build and train its own models based on the unique environment. Older mills can face more challenges since they don't always produce the necessary data, he said. That means the transformation of older mills involves the installation of data-generating devices such as sensors and cameras onto existing equipment, according to U.S. Steel Chief Information Officer Steve Bugajski.
Credit: By Isabelle Bousquette
