I'm sure I wasn't the only New Yorker intrigued to learn of Shapr. The hitherto obscure professional networking app recently tried to make a splash with a big subway ad campaign, plastering posters across about 600 cars.
"Meet inspiring people, shape your life!" the ads gushed.
Shapr, it turns out, is sort of a cross between LinkedIn and Tinder. Users specify whether they're looking for collaborators, a mentor, or just "ideas and inspiration." Every day, the app offers about a dozen profiles of fellow professionals. Users "swipe right" to connect. If the interest is mutual, they can chat directly and meet.
For now, thanks to $7 million in funding from private investors, the app is ad-free and free of charge. Targeted ads are expected to arrive next year. A forthcoming paid subscription service, meanwhile, would offer features such as location customization in 2018.
The company, which is based in New York and Paris and has about 60,000 users in New York and 300,000 world-wide, says the most heavily represented industries so far are advertising, tech and finance. Popular interest hashtags, meanwhile, include #startups, #entrepreneurship and #marketing.
This isn't my crowd. My friends tend more toward #dogwalkers and #drifters. My main interest is #readingonthecouch. But I was eager to expand my horizons.
The app didn't disappoint. Within a week the algorithm -- which pairs users based on location, interests and experience -- suggested I connect with a kickboxing instructor, a casting director, a derivatives trader, a teleprompter operator and a Staples salesclerk getting her masters in poetry.
My first meetup was with an investment-banker-turned-data-scientist. Boy, could he talk! Mention a variety of topics -- artificial intelligence, management, fundraising -- and he dispensed a polished, insightful set of facts and opinions. A useful contact indeed.
He left me looking forward to my next meetup -- coffee with a freelance photographer and divinity student. Boy, could she talk! Alas, it soon became clear that this kind-hearted lady was having a rough time on just about every imaginable front. I heard all about her troubles.
A third encounter was with a high-energy sports startup co-owner. Boy, could he talk! He even showed me X-rays of his artificial hip. Before our meetup was over, he had friended me on Facebook and suggested we launch a songwriting circle.
This was fun, but I couldn't help extrapolating. What if I kept using Shapr and made a new contact every week? By year-end, I'd have about 40 new pals to keep up with. The idea made me want to die.
Olivier Toubia, a Columbia Business School marketing professor who studies social networks, says the fact that many professionals are plenty busy with an existing industry and alumni network spells trouble for Shapr. The app might attract people looking for mentors, he predicts, but not so much those who can offer significant career help.
On the other hand, the matching model, which only connects those who indicate a mutual interest, could dispel the fear of rejection that discourages some users from reaching out on LinkedIn. "This has proven to work with dating, it might also work with networking," Mr. Toubia notes.
Some of the more senior, well-connected people on the app are the most active, Shapr says. And while some people take a break from engaging with the app, the algorithm keeps the matches rolling by promoting recent users.
The startup scene has seen several professional networking apps flop in recent years, of course. And as Mr. Toubia notes, there already are many established networking sites such as Facebook that offer hyper targeting to advertisers.
But I'm rooting for Shapr. It is, after all, my direct connection to the city's urban farmers, storytelling tennis players and meditating e-commerce specialists. If you see me on the app, swipe right.
Credit: By Anne Kadet
