[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
In the long tradition of Swiss banking secrecy, the better the deal UBS has gotten for Credit Suisse, the less investors may hear about it.
UBS said Monday that it completed the acquisition of its biggest rival. When Swiss regulators brokered the merger in March, they assuaged fears around financial stability, but investors haven't warmed to the deal: Shares in UBS fared worse than those of other European lenders this year, reversing a pattern of outperformance since 2020 that was driven by a higher return on equity and generous cash distributions. The same UBS investors who enjoyed concrete financial gains are being forced to open a black box they never asked for, which is sure to reduce stock buybacks.
It isn't just that many of Credit Suisse's assets will need to be written down. There are restructuring expenses, difficulties around the winding down of its investment bank and, even harder to predict, a mountain of litigation that could come UBS's way. It inherited the legal liability associated with the $17 billion in Credit Suisse convertible bonds that Swiss officials decided to wipe out. Given the bank's recent history, unforeseen legal problems could lurk beneath the surface.
Last month, UBS sent a registration document to the Securities and Exchange Commission with high-level theoretical accounts for the combined entity based on estimated costs of dealing with all these problems. The estimates cut the tangible book value of Credit Suisse from $65 billion to $38 billion.
The math suggests UBS's own tangible book value per share will rise 58%, whereas executives in March said it would rise 74%. Still, the absence of nasty surprises as UBS worked to complete the deal matters more than the precise numbers, which were always going to move. Many of last month's additional estimated costs won't affect UBS's key capital ratio. The bank said this is expected to hover at around 14% throughout the year.
There are hints of conservatism in the way UBS is modeling the deal's impact. The biggest markdown is a $5.9 billion fair-value adjustment to loans and advances, around half of which is for mortgages that are likely to end up accruing back to par. When it comes to litigation, the bank earmarked $4 billion. The reality is UBS has no interest in playing up the numbers, given the political whirlwind the merger stirred up in Switzerland. Lawmakers rebuked the deal and launched an inquiry.
Of course, its assessment of the financial impact is guesswork, mostly derived from end-2022 data. UBS only gets to properly rummage through Credit Suisse's books now that it completed the deal. Size advantages are hard to quantify. UBS will become the world's second-largest wealth manager with $3.4 trillion under supervision, but rich clients value diversification and could take some business elsewhere.
For investors, this deal is about UBS getting $38 billion in estimated tangible value for $3.6 billion, using Monday's market prices. Not to mention that, in normal times, such a merger would have come with antitrust issues instead of a government guarantee: UBS confirmed Friday that, after the first 5 billion Swiss francs ($5.5 billion) in losses on Credit Suisse's portfolio of noncore assets, the public sector will cover the next 9 billion francs.
Given a global slowdown, ineffective financial regulation and a mania for artificial intelligence, investors were never going to get excited about bank stocks. UBS may be one of very few that comes with a free lunch, courtesy of Credit Suisse. Just don't say it too loudly.
Credit: By Jon Sindreu
