The artificial-intelligence trade and Tesla powered the Nasdaq and S&P 500 to records, while the blue-chip Dow Jones Industrial Average continued to sputter.
The mixed market came a day after the Federal Reserve indicated it is in no hurry to reduce interest rates despite Labor Department data this week that showed easing inflation for consumers and producers. Though Wall Street has dialed back expectations for the number and timing of rate cuts, traders have been bidding up riskier assets in anticipation of lower borrowing costs.
The tech-laden Nasdaq Composite rose 0.3% to a record 17667.56. The S&P 500 added 0.2% to a record 5433.74, paced by a 1.4% rise in information-technology stocks. The Dow Jones Industrial Average shed 0.2%, or 65 points, its third straight daily decline.
Treasury yields also declined for a third day in a row. The yield on the benchmark 10-year note slipped to 4.239% from 4.294% on Wednesday. Yields fall as prices rise.
On Thursday, the Labor Department said producer prices fell 0.2% in May from the prior month, surprising economists who predicted a rise. Another report showed jobless claims rising more than anticipated.
Taking on more risk in anticipation of benchmark borrowing costs being cut by one quarter of a percentage point could prove to be a mistake if rates are reduced because of deteriorating economic conditions, said Adam Hetts, global head of multiasset investing at money manager Janus Henderson.
"That's not putting the punchbowl back on the table," Hetts said. "Investors are playing with fire."
Among individual stocks, Broadcom, which produces chips and software, rose 12% to a record $1,678.99. The Palo Alto, Calif., firm said it would split its stock 10-for-1 next month.
Paramount Global brought up the rear of the broad index, dropping 6.9% to extend its losses since Shari Redstone ended talks to sell her controlling stake in the company to Skydance Media.
Major indexes in Europe extended a string of declines following last week's European Parliament elections and amid worries over mounting deficits in France. London's FTSE 100 and France's CAC 40 declined 0.6% and 2%, respectively. The Stoxx Europe 600 dropped 1.3%. At midday Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 Stock Average was down less than 0.1%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 0.8% and the Shanghai Composite was down 0.4%. S&P 500 futures were down less than 0.1%.
Credit: By Ryan Dezember
