Atlanta's top-performing residential real-estate agent didn't set foot in Georgia for two years, and he sees no reason why he should.
A.J. Steigman runs his own real-estate brokerage firm from his house in Parkland, Fla. From 600 miles away, he bought or leased more than 300 homes at a total value of more than $86 million, according to the Atlanta Realtors Association. That was the most combined sales and leases in the Atlanta metro area for any broker last year, the group said.
Mr. Steigman's client base consists entirely of institutional investors, he said. He has no employees but relies on a proprietary software system to buy single-family homes on behalf of clients, which lease them out to capitalize on soaring rents. "I come to an industry that is very archaic and stodgy, and I'm being very analytical and quantitative," Mr. Steigman said.
Based on his average sales commission of 2.5% to 3%, Mr. Steigman would have made more than $2 million in 2021 from the deals.
His success is another sign that large investors are flexing their muscle in some of the country's hottest housing markets. Many people in Atlanta are increasingly concerned about investors removing the stock of homes available for regular people to buy. Big investment firms said their rentals enable families to live in desirable neighborhoods, in homes that at today's sales price are too high for many first-time buyers.
Home purchases by small and large investors accounted for more than 18% of home sales in the fourth quarter of 2021, according to real-estate firm Redfin. But their presence is more pronounced in the Atlanta metro area, where Redfin said investors bought one in every three homes sold there during the same period.
Atlanta home prices rose more than 49% over the past five years and 24% in the 12 months ended February, housing-data firm CoreLogic said.
Some of the investors turn to Mr. Steigman, a 36-year-old who worked in investment banking before turning to real estate. He is helping investors buy homes in Pennsylvania and Florida and said he has sold a total of $130 million worth of homes across Georgia and those two states. He has broker's licenses to operate in all three states. Mr. Steigman said he is popular with home sellers and their agents, who are often thrilled to sell to companies paying in cash.
He and his investors declined to name any of his clients, citing confidentiality agreements. Public sales records show that one is LaSalle Investment Management, the Chicago real-estate company that manages a $77 billion portfolio. Mr. Steigman brokered LaSalle's $220,000 purchase of a three-bedroom house in Stone Mountain, Ga., in December, according to public records.
He declined to elaborate on his selling process, other than to say he relies on a system he built and calls "Steignet," a reference to Skynet, the artificial intelligence network depicted in the "Terminator" film series. His firm is called Steignet LLC.
He started the system in 2017, as part of an accelerator program at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School. He pitched the concept as a "Bloomberg Terminal for residential real estate" that could analyze large data sets and identify the best homes for investors. He compared it to a chess supercomputer that plays through thousands of matches, gaming out all possible scenarios to make the right moves.
Working remotely from Florida wasn't Mr. Steigman's original plan. He owns a home and keeps an office in Atlanta. But when the pandemic broke out, he relocated to his home state of Florida for health reasons, he said.
Generate image description

Credit: By Will Parker
