When Ben Plomion took his latest job, he learned quickly that his tech skills were behind the times.
At 46, he's a decade or two older than most of his co-workers -- and he's used to an earlier generation of software. While he was accustomed to presentation programs like PowerPoint or Google Slides, for instance, his young colleagues were working with an app called Canva.
"I went in all reluctantly, because I had to relearn everything I'd learned for the last 10 years," he says.
Plomion -- chief marketing officer for a Los Angeles startup that works with crypto technology -- is no Luddite. But he sometimes felt overwhelmed by the pace of change. Then came ChatGPT, and thousands of other artificial-intelligence apps. "Where do you start? What tool do you pick? And you're almost frozen by uncertainty and doubt and indecision," he says.
Anxiety over technological change on the job has long plagued workplaces -- perhaps never more so than today, as AI threatens to upend everything. All of the uncertainty and stress can foster frustration, insecurity or self-blame that can affect people's work and personal lives, and even their health.
Fortunately, researchers have studied this phenomenon for decades, gleaning insights into the deep psychological roots of these fears, how they affect people's response to technology -- and how both workers and companies can mitigate the stress.
To get an idea of just how high tech-induced anxiety is, consider PwC's 2022 Global Workforce Hopes and Fears Survey. The report found that 30% of over 50,000 workers were concerned about technology replacing their role within three years, and 39% said they weren't getting enough tech training at work.
In this year's survey (released in June), 35% had some negative concerns about AI, such as fears that the technology will take their job, affect their role or require skills they might not be able to learn. They aren't imagining the possible turmoil. A March global study by Goldman Sachs estimated that generative AI "could expose the equivalent of 300 [million] full-time jobs to automation," although the report says most jobs in the U.S. would be altered by AI, not replaced.
The roots of the fear can go back to very primal feelings -- an instinctive, evolutionary apprehension of anything novel, says Ofir Turel, a professor of information systems at the University of Melbourne.
New technologies can cause insecurity, even from something as minor as disrupting people's routines. "Our brains are designed to maintain the status quo," says Nicole Lipkin, a clinical and organizational psychologist in Philadelphia.
Sophia Xepoleas, a tech PR strategist in Oakland, recalls her reluctance to learn the project-management application Asana. "It is. . .a new pathway in your brain that you're training," she says. "And the ones that are already working are working real hard."
But the sense of threat from technology can go even deeper, menacing people's personal identity, says Varun Grover, a professor of information technology at the University of Arkansas.
One aspect of that identity is professional competence, and challenging technology can threaten people's sense of competence. New tech can also threaten people's sense of identity in the professional role they fill, he says, if it changes their job duties or workplace power dynamics.
Turel found this with the introduction of electronic medical records to a Midwestern hospital in a 2020 study. "They threatened physicians and nurses," he says. "Now you have to spend time to go through 10 screens when you prescribe something."
This resulted in what researchers called "unfaithful use" of the new tech. Medical personnel would skip over screens or enter random information just to get through the forms.
The latest artificial intelligence takes this identity threat much further, says Grover, because it promises to do the higher-level reasoning that people think of as uniquely human.
Rarely does tech stress reach a clinical level of anxiety or depression. Even so, it can lead to unhealthy behavior.
For instance, a natural response to stress is to run away from the threatening technology, says Mindy Shoss, professor of industrial/organizational psychology at the University of Central Florida. "People tend to do what we call emotion-focused coping strategies, which include things like avoidance," she says.
In tech, this could mean refusing to learn or use a new piece of software and trying to continue with the older application.
To help work through this, people can use tools from psychological practices such as cognitive behavioral therapy, which can help people challenge negative thought patterns.
For instance, when people face new, difficult technology, it "can be a huge trigger for negative self-talk," a sense that we lack ability or aren't trying hard enough, says Vaile Wright, senior director for healthcare innovation at the American Psychological Association.
Instead, people can start with understanding why they find the new technology upsetting and re-evaluating the sense of risk and threat.
Workers can also reframe a technology challenge in such a way to realize the situation isn't so bad (for instance, you won't get fired if you don't master this new tech). Other times, it helps them accept genuine misfortune (you will lose your job) and strategize how to move on.
It can also help for workers to give themselves some credit for facing challenges.
"It could be a thought like, 'It's not that surprising that this is hard. I didn't go to school for this. But I've overcome hard things before,'" says Wright.
Another danger is what psychologists call catastrophizing. "Examples of cognitive distortions are [saying,] 'If I don't learn this within a week, I'm going to get fired," says Lipkin.
Reframing is one way Xepoleas reduces the all-or-nothing pressure surrounding tech: She doesn't need to master every new piece of technology to get benefits from it. Plomion reduces stress by telling himself he's doing everything he needs to do to get his job done. "I am never going to be a ChatGPT expert," he says. "But at a minimum. . .I know how to use the tools."
The two have also tried reframing new tech as an opportunity. Xepoleas admits that, after fighting the Asana app, she ultimately found it helpful.
People can also benefit from distraction -- a cognitive behavioral technique for breaking the cycle of anxious thoughts. Xepoleas enjoys visiting a park and listening to classical music. Plomion goes surfing most mornings.
He is also an ardent skateboarder and considers mastering new tricks as akin to figuring out technology. This is known as "building mastery" in dialectical behavioral therapy, a cousin of cognitive behavioral therapy, says Wright. Achievements in one activity build confidence for taking on other challenges.
Reframing is also crucial when the worst is true. While people often exaggerate threats, they aren't always wrong. They might lose their jobs because of technology, or it might change their roles in ways they don't like.
It can be healthy to acknowledge feelings of loss -- for a time. That is the thrust of acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT). Instead of trying to debunk the problem underlying their anxiety, "ACT therapy would have a person accept the experience," says David Blustein, a professor of counseling psychology at Boston College.
A related concept, from dialectical behavioral therapy, is radical acceptance. People don't have to approve of a situation, but fighting reality instead of accepting it leads to more pain. "Sometimes I just have to give in, and I have to say, OK, this is going to be a part of my life now," says Grover. "So how do I reconceptualize my role identity with this technology in my life?"
During times of anxiety, companies can foster a sense of agency among employees by bringing them early into the conversation about new technologies.
It is all right if these conversations include some complaining, says Lipkin, the Philadelphia psychologist. But employees should be encouraged to spend most of the discussion finding solutions, she says.
Workers can also help each other cope by discussing their frustrations, says Shoss, as it provides validation of their feelings, reassurance and a sense of camaraderie. On a practical level, co-workers can help each other figure out new tech. Most younger people "are very willing to share their expertise in a specific tool," says Plomion.
That's no substitute for formal employee training, though. Employers should articulate an overall plan for how the technology is meant to be used and provide multiple training options, such as written tutorials, videos and one-on-one sessions.
"Employers really need to prioritize their employees' mental health," Wright says. "When our mental health and our emotional well-being [are] more stable, we're actually better employees."
---
Sean Captain is a writer in Asheville, N.C. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Sean Captain
