When it comes to melanoma, early detection is a matter of life and death. But it takes a trained eye to distinguish a harmless blemish from cancer, and many people around the world lack ready access to a dermatologist.
Scientists have been seeking a solution for some time. In the latest sign that they're succeeding, researchers at Stanford University have found a way to get a computer to identify skin cancer as reliably as board-certified dermatologists can. The hope is that, eventually, scientists can get this to happen on a smartphone anywhere in the world.
The challenge is to get a phone app to recognize skin cancer when it sees it. The Stanford researchers started out with a Google-supplied algorithm -- a set of instructions that a computer must follow in a particular order -- that is especially designed to learn from experience. This algorithm, an example of artificial intelligence, had already been fed 1.28 million images, learning along the way to distinguish, say, dogs from cats.
Equipped with this technological autodidact, the scientists collected 127,463 images of skin lesions, from 2,032 different diseases. These photos had been taken from a variety of angles and distances, and in many lighting conditions. The scientists fed the photos, with labels, to the algorithm, which learned which patterns were associated with which disorders as it digested the images.
The scientists then fed the algorithm 1,942 biopsy-proven images showing lesions. The task: to distinguish harmless moles and the like from keratinocyte carcinomas -- the most common cancer in the U.S., with a very high cure rate -- and malignant melanomas, the deadliest skin cancer. The researchers also took about two dozen board-certified dermatologists, divided them into groups and asked them to analyze various sets of hundreds of the same images. The algorithm did at least as well as the humans, outperforming most of them.
The Stanford scientists aren't the only ones using AI to identify potential skin cancer through pattern recognition. The International Skin Imaging Collaboration: Melanoma Project has brought together academia and industry to harness digital imaging for reducing melanoma deaths. Researchers at IBM have produced results similar to those of the Stanford scientists. Brown University researchers have trained an algorithm to use images to detect the transformation of regular skin cells into a type associated with more aggressive tumors.
In a new journal article, the Stanford scientists report that their skin cancer study entailed a much larger set of training images than those used in prior studies, involved no special handling to outline lesions or otherwise help the computer along and produced an algorithm that works not just on images from a dermatoscope (an illuminated magnifier used by dermatologists) but on regular photos as well.
A global problem, skin cancer will likely afflict one in five Americans during their lifetimes; melanoma is projected to claim the lives of 9,730 Americans this year. At the same time, smartphone adoption, already widespread in wealthier nations, is soaring in the developing world.
"Everyone will have a supercomputer in their pockets with a number of sensors in it, including a camera," said Andre Esteva, co-lead author of the study. "What if we could use it to visually screen for skin cancer?"
"Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks," Andre Esteva, Brett Kuprel, Roberto A. Novoa, Justin Ko, Susan M. Swetter, Helen M. Blau and Sebastian Thrun, Nature (Jan. 25)
Credit: By Daniel Akst
