Venture capitalists' quest to digitally transform health care is accelerating despite the coronavirus pandemic.
Digital-health startups raised $5.36 billion in 214 financing rounds in the first half of 2020, putting this year on pace to top the record $8.23 billion collected in 383 deals in 2018, according to Rock Health, a San Francisco-based venture fund that invests in the sector.
Venture funding slowed in March and April when the pandemic took hold, as investors triaged their portfolios, but jumped in May and June with help from the stock-market rally, loosened digital-health regulations and rising demand for digital tools to counter the crisis, according to the firm.
"Digital health can no longer be put on the sidelines," said Alyssa Jaffee, a vice president with digital-health investor 7Wire Ventures.
Venture funding this year already is higher than in any full year before 2017, when investment reached $5 billion for the first time on record. Digital-health startups raised $5.84 billion that year, according to Rock Health.
Investor interest in digital health, which includes areas such as telemedicine, wearable devices and information-technology tools for health-care providers, has climbed with trends such as new applications for artificial intelligence and machine learning in health care, as well as high-deductible insurance plans that encourage consumers to shop for the best prices in their medical care, said Lynne Chou O'Keefe, founder and managing partner of digital-health investor Define Ventures.
Inertia in the health-care system historically has been a barrier for startups, but Covid-19 has spurred medical groups to make decisions faster and bet on digital technologies such as telemedicine, said Greg Yap, a partner with Menlo Ventures investing in health-care and life sciences.
With competition in the industry rising, investors must avoid thinking that all telemedicine companies will thrive because of the lift the pandemic has provided, said Keith Figlioli, an investment partner with venture firm LRVHealth. The best companies don't depend entirely on using tools such as telemedicine and artificial intelligence but use them as components of a comprehensive offering, he said.
Some digital-health startups have pivoted in response to the pandemic. IntelyCare Inc., a company based in Quincy, Mass., that helps nursing homes fill shifts for nurses and nurse assistants, raised a $45 million Series B round in February, partly for a planned expansion of its software capabilities to help health-care clients optimize their workforce.
After the pandemic hit, IntelyCare redirected its efforts to create a mobile-based program to train nursing professionals how to prevent the spread of Covid-19, said Chief Executive David Coppins. Having developed that system, the company is now getting back to its original plans for software expansion, he said.

Credit: By Brian Gormley
