[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Arm Holdings got a roaring welcome back to the public market on Thursday. The British chip designer listed its shares on the Nasdaq almost seven years to the day after its acquisition by Japanese conglomerate SoftBank was completed. That deal was valued around $32 billion. Arm closed its first day of trading Thursday with a market capitalization of more than $65 billion thanks to the stock having jumped nearly 25% from its listing price of $51 per share.
A doubling of market value over seven years might look reasonable at first glance. Investors have woken up to the value of semiconductor companies given the vital and growing role chips now play in everything from artificial intelligence to cars to household appliances. And Arm holds a particularly vital position in the semiconductor food chain. It licenses the basic designs for the types of processors that provide robust computing abilities while also consuming less energy than other chip architectures. That has made Arm-style chips widely used in portable devices such as smartphones, while its newer designs are gaining traction in places like the massive data centers run by cloud-computing giants.
Arm reportedly told prospective investors during its IPO roadshow that it expects revenue to grow 11% in the current fiscal year and in the mid-20% range the following year. That implies total revenue reaching about $3.7 billion in fiscal 2025. The stock's closing price Thursday represents a multiple of nearly 18 times that projection.
That is generous, to say the least. AI superstar Nvidia currently trades at a little over 14 times projected revenue for its 2025 fiscal year -- revenue that Wall Street estimates will be near triple what the company generated in its most recent fiscal year. Other hot names with AI exposure, such as Broadcom and equipment maker ASML, currently trade around eight to nine times projected 2025 sales.
Arm also faces risks specific to its business model. Royalties on its designs currently account for nearly two-thirds of the company's annual revenue, so growing that contribution is vital to the business overall.
Royalties can be a lucrative, high-margin revenue stream. They can also be a frequent source of legal trouble -- especially if customers start to think they are getting overcharged. Qualcomm developed much of the key technology underpinning today's wireless networks and phones and for years counted on the royalties and fees from licensing that technology for a majority of its pretax profits. The company also spent many of those years fighting legal battles with customers over royalty rates. Qualcomm's market value has risen only 58% since Arm was taken private.
Arm is well aware of this dynamic: It is enmeshed in its own legal dispute with Qualcomm, with a trial scheduled to start in September 2024. And Arm raising fees on customers also runs the risk of making competing technology like the RISC-V open-source standard look more attractive. In a report earlier this week, Pierre Ferragu of New Street Research said RISC-V faces an "uphill battle," and that he remained confident Arm could grow royalty revenues "at least in low double digits" in the next five years. He thus put a $59 price target on the stock -- 7% below the stock's closing price Thursday.
Even Arm's fans may be stretching now.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
