MENLO PARK -- The Silicon Valley research institution that created virtual personal assistant Siri is racing to birth its kin.
SRI International, a Menlo Park-based nonprofit funded largely by government contracts and research grants, is working on the next big leap in artificial intelligence: a next-generation virtual personal assistant that can reason with a user and carry on a conversation.
The goal is to move beyond Siri, which is embedded in Apple Inc.'s latest iPhone and can answer basic factual questions and perform tasks in response to naturally spoken language, not just simple commands. Researchers at SRI developed the technology over many years before spinning Siri out into a separate business that was acquired by Apple in 2010.
In an interview, Norman Winarsky, the vice president who leads SRI's licensing and venture efforts, says researchers are on the verge of developing technology that can have a conversation with a user. Think of a service that can tell you not only where to buy a blouse, but what to wear with it. He says the new technology will begin to enable "many of the same functions that the human cerebral cortex provides."
Companies including Apple, Microsoft Corp. and Google Inc. are also working on making voice-activated technology more intelligent.
Mr. Winarsky, a mathematician, says aspects of the technology are already being used in two stealth start-ups that SRI has assembled teams for and invested in. They go by the code names Fifo, software that sends users relevant information like traffic or menus based on what they are doing, and Tripboard, a travel planning service.
Bill Mark, SRI's vice president for information and computing science, says such technology requires greater knowledge about any particular subject matter than Siri has, as well as the ability to reason, which requires teaching the technology to learn the structure of a conversation.
The artificial-intelligence initiative is one of hundreds of projects at the 65-year-old SRI, which is deeply entwined in Silicon Valley history. Technologies used in the computer mouse were developed here in the late 1960s, along with networking technologies that evolved into the Internet. The institute broke off from Stanford University in the 1970s. Today, some 1,600 researchers pursue projects ranging from robots that dismantle weapons to mechanical hands to drugs. Sixty-seven percent of SRI's $585 million in revenue last year came from the Department of Defense.
Like the artificial-intelligence initiative, many SRI projects aim to build new interfaces for how humans interact with machines. They include Bright, a table-size touch-screen computer that follows what a user is doing through embedded cameras to learn what to show it next. Language researchers are also working on new ways for computers to detect aspects of speech that humans pick up on normally, such as emotion and pitch.
Mr. Winarsky's group aims to spin out some of these technologies into businesses, with backing from venture capitalists. But he says translating deep technology breakthroughs into competitive start-ups has become tougher as the total amount of venture-capital financing has fallen over the past decade and investors seek quicker returns.
With previous SRI spinoffs like speech-recognition company Nuance Communications Inc., investors gave the business time to translate technology into usable products, Mr. Winarsky says. Now, venture capitalists want to see products and business models within months, he says, as competitors try to copy their innovations.
For complex technology of the sort SRI works on, that time line amounts to "a short fuse," he says.
Credit: By Jessica E. Vascellaro
