Ever since the coronavirus pandemic struck and the work world went remote, there has been a giant hole where face-to-face interactions used to be. When co-workers can't see each other, it is more than just a potential morale issue. Proximity and serendipitous encounters have long been associated with increased collaboration and innovation.
So employers are looking to digital services that attempt to mimic what we are missing out on in person. But replacing in-person connections is hard, and it will only get harder as some workers return to offices.
"The water cooler as a place to build relationships just evaporated when everybody went remote," said Dan Manian, chief executive of workplace-networking software maker Donut Technologies Inc.
Launched in 2016 in New York City, the Donut service uses an algorithm to introduce employees to people on other teams or in other departments every few weeks. It opens a direct message with the person you've been paired with in Slack. Donut plans to expand its services to companies that don't use Slack.
Since the pandemic shut offices, clients have started using Donut in ways the company didn't anticipate.
After workers were sent home, Donut users started asking for daily connections. Now employees can create programs that pair people up on a schedule. For example, team members might get prompted to catch up for 15 minutes, several times a week. The Slack notification can include meeting-agenda notes and suggested times to chat based on everybody's calendar availability.
Mr. Manian said 12,000 companies use Donut world-wide, with 6,000 having started since March. Some clients started using Donut for onboarding new employees by pairing them with the roster of people who would otherwise be guiding them through their first weeks.
An app called Hallway also uses Slack to foster impromptu interactions, but it takes a different approach. In a Slack channel of the users' choosing, it posts a video-chat link every couple of hours. The chat lasts 10 minutes, and is meant to replace break-room encounters. Users can launch their own quick video chats with a simple command.
Parthi Loganathan, Hallway's founder and chief executive, was working on another app before the pandemic, but decided to turn his attention to Hallway in April, building it over four days. The app is now used by close to 900 companies.
Miro aims to digitize the office whiteboard with a service allowing employees to fill a shared screen with virtual sticky notes. They can vote on them, group them together and build them out, just as they might in an in-person brainstorming session.
Miro has been around since 2011, but growth has soared during the pandemic. It has more than eight million users on 40,000 paid accounts, more than double the 3.7 million users and 14,800 accounts as of March 1.
As it has learned more about customers' needs during this period, Miro has adjusted the product, such as by adding attention-management features to help combat conference-call fatigue. A presenter can now draw everyone's attention to a specific part of the whiteboard at the same time, for instance. In July, the company added the ability for those using Microsoft Teams to embed the Miro app into their user interface so employees have fewer apps to toggle between.
Microsoft Corp. added other new capabilities to Teams since the pandemic started, including virtual whiteboard sticky notes and the ability for people to "raise their hands" in meetings. The company released Together mode, which uses artificial intelligence to cut out each person on a video chat, and superimpose them all against a shared background. It can visualize them together at a table or in an auditorium.
Eddie Obeng, a professor at Henley Business School at the University of Reading in the U.K., created a virtual-reality tool called Qube about a decade ago for the purpose of teaching executives remotely. It is a cartoonlike 3-D campus filled with meeting rooms, common areas and outdoor green spaces, with video screens and whiteboards.
Avatars can walk up and tap one another, then go find a spot to catch up. When avatars sit together at a table, or gather before a whiteboard in beanbag chairs, they can have a private conversation that others in the room can't hear. Avatars were originally humanlike, but people were too focused on their own appearance -- and the appearance of others. Now the avatars have block-shaped heads.
---
A Colleague Can Be
Just a Portal Away
Products that aim to increase contact between co-workers can sometimes feel like surveillance gear. Sidekick is a tablet-based video portal that is always on. Co-workers can tap on one another's video feeds, unmute themselves, and then start chatting, sort of like walking up to someone's desk.
Arthur Wu, co-founder and chief operating officer of Sidekick's maker, Realism Labs Inc., thinks Zoom meetings are too scheduled to feel spontaneous. "It doesn't actually feel like you're there with your teammates," he said.
With Sidekick, you can see the device out of the corner of your eye (kind of like your old deskmates) but it isn't something you are staring at all the time. You can set a do-not-disturb mode when you are in other meetings, and when you turn off the screen at the end of the day, said Mr. Wu, that signifies "leaving the office." Users who get squirmy about giving colleagues such easy access have taken to putting Post-it Notes over the camera.
Sidekick was originally made for a 55-inch screen; workers would just walk up and join conversations with people in other offices. Once the pandemic hit, the company moved to 10-inch tablets that employees keep at home. About 80 companies now use Sidekick.
As companies begin reopening facilities, Mr. Wu anticipates some employees will continue using at-home Sidekick tablets to stay connected with their colleagues in the office, who would use the larger screens.

Credit: By Katherine Bindley
