Federal, state and local law-enforcement agencies are using facial-recognition technology to identify the members of the mob that assaulted the U.S. Capitol last week.
Elsewhere, facial recognition and artificial intelligence are increasingly being used for nefarious purposes -- including by China to persecute minorities and to identify Hong Kong dissidents.
We represent Clearview AI, the U.S. facial-recognition startup that became controversial a year ago when its existence came to light in the media. Clearview AI maintains a database of billions of publicly posted photographs that have been lawfully downloaded from the Internet, where users posted them on public websites, including social media. Clearview AI downloads photographs from the public internet that are available to any user from any computer around the world without the consent of the person photographed.
Licensed clients of Clearview AI -- which are limited to law-enforcement agencies -- can run a photo of an unidentified person through Clearview AI's database for after-the-crime investigations. Clearview AI uses algorithms to create facial vectors, or "faceprints," of the photo's subject.
The question for policy makers is how to regulate this technology to allow its legitimate use and prevent abuse. A patchwork of state and local laws seek to restrict or even prohibit the use of biometrics, including faceprints. These are of dubious constitutionality, since the Supreme Court has made plain that "the creation and dissemination of information are speech within the meaning of the First Amendment."
In the absence of federal regulation, Clearview AI has taken solid steps to self-regulate. It currently makes its app available to law enforcement only. Without the app, you cannot access the database. This year, Clearview AI implemented a comprehensive audit function to require that every search done by law enforcement is annotated with a crime type and case number.
For its part, Clearview AI would welcome federal regulation that would unravel the tangle of sometimes inconsistent and unconstitutional state and local laws. Congress should authorize, with proper safeguards, use by law enforcement and national-security authorities. This would help to identify perpetrators of crime as well as victims of abuse, and to apprehend terrorists, both foreign and domestic. Such investigative use should be conducted on an after-the-crime basis, unlike in China, where facial-recognition is used for real-time surveillance by the state.
Responsible private companies, such as banking and financial institutions, should be permitted to access facial-recognition technologies to prevent identity theft and otherwise deter criminality.
Facial-recognition technology is here to stay. China demonstrates its dangers, but its use after the Capitol insurrection shows its promise.
---
Mr. Abrams is senior counsel at Cahill Gordon & Reindel LLP in New York. Mr. Wolosky, a partner at Jenner & Block, is a former U.S. ambassador and national security official under Presidents. Clinton, Bush and Obama.

Credit: By Floyd Abrams and Lee Wolosky
