[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Broadcom's artificial-intelligence business is booming. But its lack of predictability can be unnerving -- at least, in the view of investors, who sent the stock down 10% Friday.
Broadcom's quarterly revenue and operating income beat Wall Street's expectations. But revenue of $7.3 billion for its chip segment came in about 2% below analysts' targets. Continued weakness in some non-AI businesses played a part, but AI revenue of about $3.1 billion -- while more than tripling year-over-year -- was shy of analysts' projections.
The company is hardly the only AI component maker to be hamstrung by high expectations, even when the overall growth numbers are very good. But even relative to Nvidia, which sells billions worth of AI chips to a handful of giant tech companies, Broadcom's AI business is highly exposed to just a handful of customers.
Ed Snyder of Charter Equity estimates that Google, Meta Platforms and ByteDance account for most of Broadcom's AI orders at present. Broadcom said in June that five customers accounted for 40% of total revenue in the first half of this fiscal year, which includes the company's large radio-frequency chip business with Apple.
Such exposure to a few customers with uneven spending patterns makes Broadcom's AI business inherently "lumpy." Chief Executive Hock Tan warned of such a dynamic three months ago. But AI demand is still hot; on Thursday, Tan boosted Broadcom's overall AI revenue target for the fiscal year by 9%, to $12 billion. He also projected strong growth for AI revenue in fiscal-2025.
That is keeping analysts on board; 83% rate Broadcom's shares as a buy, despite a 75% climb in the stock over the 12 months ahead of its earnings. "We believe the story is well-positioned into next year, and would buy any weakness," Blayne Curtis of Jefferies said.
Vivek Arya of BofA Securities echoed the sentiment. "While inline trends and AI fatigue might keep stock volatile near-term, we would view any weakness as a particularly attractive buying opportunity," he wrote.
Broadcom's selloff Friday brings the stock's gains for the year to about 23% -- well below those of Nvidia and its manufacturing partner, TSMC, though also well ahead of most other chip companies in the PHLX Semiconductor Index. Broadcom's AI premium may have faded, but it hasn't vanished.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
