Who is today's chief information officer? Still the techie in the windowless office behind the mainframe?
Not by a long shot. Today most CIOs have a more expansive role -- and a set of aspirations to match. Now that the CIO manages the ever more complex information flow that drives a company's internal decisions as well as its links to customers globally, the job has the look of a corporate steppingstone to higher ground.
That was the message from The Wall Street Journal's CIO Network, a group of executives from companies around the world who gathered in San Diego last week for their second annual meeting. They heard from experts on artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, the economy and management, among other topics. But they also made some statements of their own.
Asked "Do you see yourself as a chief executive officer," 70% said yes. The vast majority said they now report to the CEO, a big increase from just a few years ago, when at least one and usually several layers of corporate bureaucracy separated the information officer from the top gun.
Another sign that we're in a new era: This gathering of CIOs from a diverse set of industries -- manufacturing, health care, technology and others -- included more women than any other C-suite conference the Journal has hosted.
One of those executives explained where she'd like to take the job. "We don't want to refine the role of the CIO," she told me. "We want to redefine it."
That was made clear when the CIOs broke into five task forces to address a range of public-policy, management and industry issues. One group examined the future role of the CIO, and one of its top recommendations was for CIOs to find ways to extend their reach beyond their companies' walls. "CIOs who communicate effectively have a positive impact on the company, internally and externally," the panel said.
The CIOs hope their bosses get the message: View your information officer as an essential and versatile player, able to represent the company and participate in the big decisions. And to lead.
The meeting wasn't all chest-beating. Asked to grade their own companies on how effective they are in fostering collaboration internally, 45% picked a middling "C." Only 5% gave themselves an "A."
And when the CIOs proposed a series of ideas for new, game-changing enterprise products that they believe deserve investment, they got a friendly reality check that any aspiring CEO might appreciate. Ted Schlein, a partner with the venture-capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, was asked to judge the ideas. "I'm very glad," he joked, "you all have other jobs."
---
Mr. Bussey is an assistant managing editor and executive business editor of The Wall Street Journal. He can be reached at john.bussey@wsj.com or on Twitter @johncbussey.
Credit: By John Bussey
