Biotechnology startup Fauna Bio and drugmaker Eli Lilly are collaborating to discover drug targets for obesity through a process that involves studying the genetics of animals that survive extreme conditions.
Animals that endure conditions such as hibernation have evolved ways to protect themselves from illness. Emeryville, Calif.-based Fauna studies how hibernating animals, for example, avoid disease despite going months without eating, drinking or moving. It uses artificial intelligence to process genomic data and spot genes that shield hibernating animals from harm.
Fauna, which previously raised more than $14 million in venture capital, studies animals such as the 13-lined ground squirrel, which hibernates six to seven months a year.
Lilly, whose stock price has surged this year, largely because of the success of its diabetes and obesity medications, has been striking deals with biotechs with new approaches to treating obesity. Fauna's technology could lead to identification of novel drugs and more-effective treatments, Lilly said.
Several aspects of the 13-lined ground squirrel's physiology during hibernation are relevant to uncovering drug targets for obesity, said Fauna Chief Executive Ashley Zehnder, who is also a veterinarian. These squirrels, for example, increase their metabolism during hibernation and maintain lean muscle mass, she said.
Fauna will receive an undisclosed payment up front, including an equity investment, from Lilly, the companies said. Fauna also could earn $494 million in success-based payments tied to research and commercial milestones, plus royalties on sales of drugs discovered through this collaboration.
Fauna's platform applies to several diseases and this partnership is one of a series of collaborations the startup intends to form with drugmakers, said Zehnder, who co-founded Fauna with Katie Grabek and Linda Goodman.
In addition to collaborations, Fauna is developing its own drugs designed to mimic protective mechanisms found in animals. Its initial pipeline of treatments for diseases relating to the heart and lungs stems from genomic studies of the 13-lined ground squirrel and humans.
Other biotechs are thinking along the same lines. Paratus Sciences, which disclosed a $100 million venture financing early this year, seeks to discover drugs based on the biology of bats, which have long lifespans, can survive viral infections that kill humans, and seldom develop cancer.
Fauna is an example of how biotechs are harnessing AI to pursue strategies that wouldn't have been possible before. As the cost of genetic sequencing has declined, scientists are sequencing animal species much faster than they could before and gaining a greater depth of information.
That, combined with growing computational capability, is leading to greater depth of analysis that could enable fundamental advances in biology, said Rohit Sharma, a partner with Fauna investor True Ventures.
"That is becoming a gold mine of information," he added.
AI helps Fauna ingest and structure data and answer complex questions about how genes function and protect animals from heart damage and other illnesses, Zehnder said.
During hibernation, 13-lined ground squirrels drop their body temperature to near freezing, about 39 degrees Fahrenheit, Zehnder said. Every two weeks, they rapidly rewarm themselves with a rush of oxygenated blood to every part of their body, raising their body temperature up to normal. The reasons for these rewarming episodes aren't yet known, she said.
In humans, a sudden flow of blood to oxygen-starved tissue can be harmful. Patients who have suffered a heart attack can develop reperfusion injury, leading to the formation of scar tissue, Zehnder said. Thirteen-lined ground squirrels suffer some reperfusion injury to the heart during hibernation, though not to the same extent as humans, according to Zehnder. Unlike humans, they repair the damage, she said.
Through genomic analysis, Fauna has zeroed in on genes that aid this repair. Its initial drugs are designed to copy this effect to repair damage in humans who have cardiopulmonary diseases, Zehnder said. Fauna expects to begin preparing its first internal drug for clinical trials in 2024, Zehnder said.
Credit: By Brian Gormley
