Global investigations of banking activity are becoming a fact of life given that banking is now a global activity. So far most of the headlines have come from Western regulatory inquiries into the activities of Western banks in Western markets. But more of this heat is destined to shift to Asia, and bankers, local regulators and Western authorities alike will face new challenges.
Banks have come under international scrutiny most recently for alleged activities in foreign-exchange markets, where regulators charge that some banks manipulated benchmark rates. In many ways, this is a typical example of such an investigation. It involves 12 regulators on four continents investigating 15 banks, but with U.S. authorities firmly taking the lead.
Already there are signs that greater regulatory scrutiny will arise in Asia, too. The Hong Kong Monetary Authority, for example, made clear its intention to investigate potentially manipulative foreign-exchange trading when it ordered several Hong Kong banks to engage in an internal review and share the results with HKMA investigators.
In other instances, Asian regulators are starting to run ahead of Western authorities. For example, China's regulators aggressively investigated British pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline, showing that they are willing to develop their own leads and break new investigative ground where U.S. or British regulators may be stymied by various logistical hurdles.
Asian regulators increasingly have a stake in investigations given the volume of financial activity occurring in the region. They also have a political motive -- which is not unreasonable -- to show their citizens that they are cracking down on illegal activity in their jurisdictions. More worrying, money may play a role, too. The still-unfolding investigation into allegations of rigging the London Interbank Offer Rate, or LIBOR, has yielded $6 billion in fines for the U.S. and British governments. Regulators in emerging markets may follow the U.S. example of aggressively defining fraud as a path to reap massive windfalls for their treasuries.
One challenge this poses for banks is the difficulty of crafting effective compliance rules and conducting internal investigations across a large number of geographic areas. Already this is on display in cases such as the forex investigation, in which bank directors and senior managers are scrambling to quantify their exposure. Management will be under increasing pressure to improve internal processes, take disciplinary action where warranted and manage the torrent of subpoenas and other demands from regulators.
Western banks also will need to adjust to the realities of being investigated by new jurisdictions. Each regulator brings with it different tools, procedural considerations and timelines. Defense counsel representing banking institutions and their managers must take note. For instance, Asian regulators and prosecutors are often able to compel individuals to answer questions. Where those regulators take the lead, U.S.-based defense counsel, conditioned to Constitutional protections, may struggle to navigate this more nuanced terrain.
Similarly, data privacy and state secrecy restrictions abound in Asia and result in much tighter controls on information flow. Where U.S. bank lawyers are accustomed to open access to documents to formulate a defense to charges, when faced with a purely local investigation run by local regulators they may encounter difficulties in accessing information stored overseas. Lawyers and defense counsel may find that they have to head overseas simply to review documents and formulate a defense.
Asian regulators also will face changes as they seek to take the lead on cross-border investigations. Especially as Asia-originated financial flows increase and regional watchdogs grow ever more experienced, they will be less willing to wait to follow the lead of other regulators. Authorities are starting to engage in their own risk-based examinations of banks and flexing their enforcement muscles more. It is only a matter of time before we witness a high-profile investigation of an Asia-based bank, led by a local regulator.
In taking the lead on global investigations local Asian regulators will likely need to adopt hiring and investigative practices that mirror their Western counterparts. The capability to conduct large scale document review using artificial intelligence tools is essential. China recently announced use of high-tech algorithms to detect insider trading, showing that they are adopting Western style investigation tools. Similarly, local regulators will need to hire lawyers and investigative staff who can pursue creative approaches rather than cookie-cutter approaches which are doomed to fail in today's hyper-complex financial markets.
American regulators will need to adjust to this new world, too. In recent years, American and European authorities have developed an informal framework for their cooperation on such matters, including exchange of documents and assistance from local authorities on extradition of individuals. That model appears to be working increasingly well as the number of cross border requests for assistance climb each year. Cooperating with Asian counterparts who have taken the initiative in launching an investigation will be a new experience for U.S. officials who are used to setting the investigative agenda and dictating the terms of cooperation.
While the emergence of Asian regulators in the global investigation scene will take time to fully develop, the process is well underway. Managers and Western regulators can't afford to ignore this trend.
---
Mr. McGovern is a Hong Kong-based partner at Kobre & Kim LLP.
Credit: By William Mcgovern
