Andy Kessler's thesis (which is shared by many economists) that the advance of technology doesn't destroy jobs, but rather pushes workers into higher-productivity roles is true only until the development of the ultimate killer app: artificial intelligence (AI) ("The Robots Are Coming; Welcome Them," op-ed, Aug. 23). Given the rapid recent advances in AI, it seems highly likely that better-than-human intelligence will appear in my lifetime, and almost certainly within my children's.
Once that happens, a more apt analogy for what will happen in the human labor market is what occurred in the labor market for horses. In 1915 the horse population in the U.S. was well over 25 million. With the invention of the automobile and powered combine, the horse population fell to three million by 1960. These horses didn't "retrain" for new jobs. Rather, they became largely obsolete and therefore saw their population plummet.
Andy Edstrom
Los Angeles
---
Mr. Kessler argues that the jobs the robots replace aren't good jobs. I beg to differ. For example, welding is a good job, and we've already seen many welders displaced by robots. The list of other examples is lengthy.
Mr. Kessler also fails to explain how many of the displaced workers will avoid being added to the ballooning welfare rolls. I doubt that a displaced welder will be satisfied cleaning sewers. Furthermore, robots do not pay taxes. Adding more robots reduces the taxpayer base, making it more difficult to support welfare payments. The robots are coming, yes. But should we welcome them? Maybe.
Jim Proffitt
Jacksonville, Ill.
---
The labor (muscle and mind) content per unit required for most products and services, including the most skilled, seems to be on a rapid and long-term downward path, while the supply of labor (population) rapidly increases.
Many assumptions about education, health care, welfare, employment, etc., need to be re-examined now. Major transformations will probably be required to cope with a challenging new reality. Current standards and benchmarks in business and government may be leading to inappropriate, major, irreversible investments.
It is time to seriously consider this technology/population phenomenon and its impact, rather than to simply say we have always risen to the challenge and will now.
Robert Mankin
New York
---
Laborers working alongside an artificially intelligent, thinking robot should welcome it and then ask provoking questions about its work benefits. Before too long the robot labor force could be organized. Management might need AI robots to negotiate the next contract. Perhaps some managers might even be "left behind."
Iris Kaufman
Peabody, Mass.
