New York gained more tech workers on the move than any other U.S. city last year, according to a new report, indicating the local tech market continues to thrive despite the city's high cost of living.
The greater New York City area attracted 14.3% of all employees in the tech sector who relocated around the country in 2023, according to an analysis of LinkedIn data by venture firm SignalFire. Meanwhile, New York lost 10.7% of relocating tech workers nationwide, giving it a 3.6% net gain, the highest in the country.
Austin, Texas, had the second biggest net gain at 1.4%, followed by the greater Los Angeles area at 0.6%, SignalFire said.
The San Francisco Bay Area, meanwhile, saw its tech worker population shrink, with a net loss of 3.7% in relocators, followed by the greater Seattle and greater Boston areas in terms of net declines. San Francisco was close behind New York in its inflow share, at 12.3%, but it saw a bigger outflow.
"San Francisco is still the premier tech city, even with the recent outflow, but New York is catching up, kind of slowly," said Asher Bantock, head of research at SignalFire.
For its analysis, SignalFire tracked employees of the 10 largest public technology companies by market capitalization -- including Meta, Amazon and Alphabet -- as well as those of private companies backed by a couple dozen venture firms, such as Accel and FirstMark Capital, including its own portfolio. The sample size was about 57,000 relocators and representative of the tech sector broadly, Bantock said.
For the past couple of years, Mahsa Tehrani worked as a consultant for tech companies from locations around the world with a home base in San Francisco. In January 2023 however, the San Francisco Bay Area native moved to New York and about a month ago joined cloud software company Braze as a social-media director.
San Francisco was the origination point of some 37% of all the relocators to New York, according to SignalFire, with New York the top destination for those leaving San Francisco, per the analysis.
"I really saw the Bay Area become desolate," Tehrani said about her decision to leave there. Tehrani said she considered cheaper destinations. "But will I be bored, you know?"
In New York she says she is enjoying cultural events and meeting a diverse group of people, and she appreciates the city's proximity by air to Europe, where she likes to travel.
"I see New York now as also coming up to par as a tech scene," she said, adding she can see her career grow there. The rise of generative AI technology in San Francisco is the only thing that could lure her back. "I would have to get a really nice offer with an AI company for me to even consider relocation," she said.
So far, generative AI startups aren't making that much of a dent in drawing workers to San Francisco, Bantock said. "The head counts are relatively small," he said.
While the San Francisco Bay Area dominates in attracting venture capital, New York is a strong runner-up, according to the latest PitchBook-NVCA Venture Monitor, which put New York's deal count at 75% of the Bay Area's total in the first quarter of the year.
Tech employment overall in New York was up 17% from prepandemic levels by early 2023, according to an October report by the New York City comptroller.
Tanaz Mody, who helps portfolio companies hire as head of people operations at New York-based venture firm Lerer Hippeau Ventures, says she often meets candidates who are coming for a few days to New York to conduct a bunch of interviews with plans to move.
New York startups, she said, "are able to find the talent, and the talent is coming and working in the office," adding that many companies now have hybrid in-office and at-home policies. What's attracting people, she said, is that New York has become a big tech market.
"This migration also provides an influx of new potential founders that New York VCs can back as they transition in their careers," said Katie Reiner, partner at New York venture firm Torch Capital.
After 3 1/2 years in Palo Alto, Calif., Kevin Feng decamped to New York in March with his wife and son. Among the reasons for the decision, Feng said, were not feeling like they fit in well in California, wanting better education options for their son, and a desire to be closer to the customers and suppliers of the couple's businesses to reduce travel times.
Feng launched a fundraising process for his newly launched defense startup simultaneously with the move to New York. The fundraising is going well, he said.
It has only been a few weeks, but his family is happy about the move, he said. "We are renting for the time being and looking for a place to put down roots," Feng said.
Generate image description

Credit: By Yuliya Chernova
