ALEXANDRIA, Va. -- Every few days, a pile of thumb drives and compact discs filled with videos and pictures of sex crimes against children arrives at a nondescript office building here via the U.S. mail.
The evidence goes into a secure room full of red folders where it is manually uploaded into a database -- the nation's central system for detecting child sexual exploitation online.
The use of snail mail means that only a fraction of the images seized by U.S. law-enforcement agencies are processed. Many agencies simply don't bother submitting evidence vital to identifying victims, according to the Justice Department.
The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, which maintains the system, tried to update this process for the internet age by creating a secure evidence-transfer system for local law enforcement. The experiment ended in 2018 when the company hosting the transfers shut it down, citing legal prohibitions against transmitting child pornography. For good measure, the company's lawyers reported the center to itself.
"We were stuck," said John Shehan, a senior vice president who oversees the nonprofit's work on child exploitation.
U.S. laws make it criminal for people to keep or share images of child sexual exploitation. Because such strictures apply broadly, they also create hurdles for the center, the sole interface between major American tech platforms and law enforcement worldwide.
As the 40-year-old organization seeks to limit the spread of abuse imagery, identify predators and aid victims, it must contend with a limited budget and a legal mandate that hasn't been updated since the days of AOL chat rooms.
The Wall Street Journal spoke with executives at the nonprofit and identified numerous challenges. On Monday, the Stanford Internet Observatory Cyber Policy Center released a report that independently identified many of the problems, including a lack of information, staff and technology to process and catalog the tens of millions of reports of exploitation it receives every year.
At a time when the volume of reports is exploding, Stanford says, the center's CyberTipline is in a poor position to triage them, even as improvements in artificial intelligence could make it easier.
"Right now NCMEC uses AI for effectively nothing," said Alex Stamos, head of the Stanford center and former chief security officer for Meta Platforms, calling the center by its initials. "They have some quite good engineers, just the size of the team is minuscule."
After a multiyear delay, legislation to help fix some reporting-system problems is slated for passage by Congress as soon as this month.
The nonprofit was created in 1984 with the purpose of finding missing children. In 1998, when the CyberTipline was created, the center handled 4,450 reports dealing with allegations of online child sexual exploitation. Within a decade, it was handling more than 100,000 reports annually. In 2023, the number hit 36 million.
The center has only around $17 million to triage reports of child exploitation online, and $12 million more to help law enforcement investigate.
The center is the only entity outside of law enforcement authorized to work with child-exploitation content. It isn't a law-enforcement agency, but isn't a simple nonprofit, either -- federal courts have held that it can be considered an arm of the government if it goes beyond passively receiving reports, most of which come from internet platforms.
The rigid U.S. legal infrastructure around online child-exploitation material has led many companies to limit their efforts to detect the spread of harmful imagery due to concerns over breaking the law.
The center's efforts to improve report quality are also complicated by concerns that asking for companies to provide more data might be considered a violation of the Fourth Amendment.
The center began drowning in tips by the latter half of the past decade, at which point it recognized severe shortcomings in its technological capabilities.
"There was a way to download the tips, but no way to sort, filter or do anything with them," Shehan said.
To help break the logjam, Amazon, Google, Palantir, Microsoft and Meta have donated millions of dollars in services, including cloud-computing and data-sorting capabilities. Meta, which owns Instagram and Facebook, also funded and helped the center build a case-management system.
Collaboration with industry and other nonprofits was essential to building the ability to cluster duplicate reports, run image recognition on photos, filter cases by geography and give priority to images that present a greater chance for law enforcement to effectively intervene. But outside help isn't a full substitute for internal capacity. Tech platforms often poach talent from the nonprofit, Shehan said.
A recently completed tool that allows law enforcement to scan seized hard drives for known child-abuse images took the center nearly 10 years to build, Shehan said. Technology to identify victims by matching their faces to publicly available images -- available to law-enforcement agencies for years -- isn't yet built into the center's systems.
Though the center continues its collaboration with industry, the nonprofit has become increasingly vocal in debates over what responsibility companies have for crimes against children committed on their platforms. Social-media algorithms, notably those underpinning Meta's platforms, sometimes amplify the spread of sex-abuse images. Meta has said it works hard to make its platforms safe for children.
A central rift between the center and industry revolves around encrypted messaging. More than three-quarters of the 26 million the center reports Meta filed in 2022 came from screening unencrypted communications. When Meta announced at the end of 2023 that it was beginning to encrypt direct messages, the center lambasted the company.
The disagreement with Meta forced a reappraisal of its relationship with the company -- and the place of Antigone Davis, its global head of safety, on the center's board.
"We basically decided to go separate ways," Shehan said.
The long-awaited reporting legislation would allow the center to store and process data via commercial cloud-computing services and create a legal safe harbor for minors or their parents to report illicit images of children online, among other things.
But making even basic upgrades is daunting, Stamos said. He noted that there are likely 50 to 100 times as many tech-industry workers generating reports as there are people at the center to process them.
"The system does not work very well in terms of taking the information that currently exists and then turning it into a prosecution," he said.
Credit: By Jeff Horwitz and Katherine Blunt
