Activist hedge fund Third Point LLC pressed Intel Corp. to make sweeping strategic changes after a year in which the U.S. semiconductor giant suffered more product delays and lost its rank as America's highest-valued chip company.
In a letter Tuesday to Intel Chairman Omar Ishrak, Third Point Chief Executive Dan Loeb said Intel's woes could threaten the U.S. technology industry and urged it to consider alternatives, including selling some of its acquisitions and splitting its design and manufacturing operations -- a move that would end Intel's long-held status as the U.S.'s leading integrated semiconductor maker.
Intel said it "welcomes input from all investors regarding enhanced shareholder value. In that spirit, we look forward to engaging with Third Point LLC on their ideas towards that goal."
Third Point's demands follow years of engineering struggles at Intel and growing pressure from rivals who outsource their chip manufacturing to factories in Asia -- including Nvidia Corp., which this year surpassed Intel in market capitalization. Intel this year pushed back production of its most advanced chips, was dumped by Apple Inc. as the supplier for its Mac computer processors, and lost market share to Advanced Micro Devices Inc., long a distant rival.
"Without immediate change at Intel, we fear that America's access to leading-edge semiconductor supply will erode, forcing the U.S. to rely more heavily on a geopolitically unstable East Asia to power everything from PCs to data centers to critical infrastructure and more," Mr. Loeb wrote in Third Point's letter.
Mr. Loeb also said Intel should address the recent departure of top chip designers and what he called an "increasingly demoralized" remaining engineering staff. The letter was reported earlier by Reuters.
Intel shares closed up 5% Tuesday after Third Point's letter.
Intel this year said it would consider outsourcing the manufacture of some of its most advanced chips. The company is expected to make a decision next month on where it will make future generations of processors.
Intel has fallen behind Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. and South Korea's Samsung Electronics Co. in the race to make the most cutting-edge chips. TSMC makes chips under contract for some Intel competitors, including Nvidia and Advanced Micro Devices.
As TSMC and Samsung gradually shrank their transistors in recent years, leading to higher-performance chips, Intel's strategy to aggressively downsize its circuitry stumbled. In July, Intel said it encountered new delays in developing its latest chip technology, which it said was roughly a year behind its initial targets. Soon after, it shook up its engineering team, including the departure of chief engineering officer Venkata "Murthy" Renduchintala .
Intel has adapted to its struggle to make smaller transistors by devising new circuitry that makes calculations faster without needing to move to a finer manufacturing process. The company has said it also remains committed to developing new, ever-smaller chip-making technology even as it considers outsourcing options to get future generations of chips to customers on time.
AMD's latest generation of central processing units, or CPUs, have eaten away at Intel's market share in PCs and servers that go into big data centers. Nvidia, meanwhile, dominates the burgeoning market for artificial intelligence processing, where its graphics chips excel.
Third Point said Intel also faces competitive threats from the growth of custom chip-making by big tech companies like Apple, Microsoft Corp. and Amazon.com Inc.
"You must be able to offer new independent solutions to retain those customers rather than have them send their manufacturing away," the letter says.
Intel shares are down more than 17% this year. Nvidia's stock has more than doubled and AMD's shares are up almost as much.
Nvidia and AMD are using some of that investor enthusiasm to put further pressure on Intel. Nvidia has agreed to buy mobile-phone chip design giant Arm Holdings in a $40 billion deal in what would be the largest-ever deal in the chip business. AMD said it would use stock to buy chip maker Xilinx Inc. in a $35 billion deal.
Third Point, in the letter, said the board allowed management to "fritter away" the company's advantages while paying executives lavishly even as Intel lost more than $60 billion of market capitalization this year.
"Stakeholders will no longer tolerate such apparent abdications of duty," it said, pointing to the company's loss of chip-design talent as a top concern.
Stacy Rasgon, an analyst at Bernstein Research, said Intel was likely already considering the restructuring ideas Third Point was proposing. And it wasn't clear, he said, how separating the company's chip-making operations from its chip-design unit would add value for investors. "It doesn't fix the manufacturing problem, which is the root of everything that's going on," he said.
Third Point recently acquired a stake in Intel that a spokeswoman for the hedge fund said was worth roughly $1 billion. The investor said it would submit nominees for election to Intel's board at the company's annual meeting next year if Intel was reluctant to address its concerns.
With its large size and growing revenues, Intel hasn't faced major activist-investor pressure in recent years, even as some of its peers stared down calls for change.
Despite its woes, Intel has said it expects to post record sales this year, boosted by pandemic-era demand for PCs and cloud computing.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
