Exchange-traded-fund providers are coming out with more offerings of what are known, a bit awkwardly, as "funds of funds."
While a regular ETF typically owns a basket of securities, an ETF fund of funds owns a basket of other ETFs. Funds of funds have a long history in the mutual-fund industry, and are now taking root in the ETF world.
At the end of November, there were 99 ETF funds of funds registered in the U.S., up from 48 at the end of 2014, according to Morningstar Direct.
These products can be split into two broad categories -- those focused on asset allocation and those dedicated to sectors or themes, says Todd Rosenbluth, head of ETF and mutual-fund research at financial-analysis company CFRA in New York.
The asset-allocation funds hold a mix of ETFs focused on stocks, bonds and other assets and "are essentially model portfolios in an ETF wrapper," Mr. Rosenbluth says. Examples include iShares Core Moderate Allocation ETF (AOM) and iShares Core Aggressive Allocation ETF (AOA). The former is weighted 54% bonds to 39% stocks. The latter is weighted 19% bonds, 79% stocks.
Other funds of funds specialize in themes or sectors. Global X Thematic Growth ETF (GXTG), which launched in November, is designed to tap into the disruptive trends seen in the economy, such as artificial intelligence and e-commerce. The fund owns seven funds drawn from Global-X's roster of 17 thematic ETFs. The holdings are systematically rebalanced and switched depending on which subsectors are seeing the highest sales growth.
"I think it's a great concept," says Mr. Rosenbluth. "The thematic ETFs require confidence in the long-term horizon of these themes, but the short-term performance can be bumpy, and the Global X fund gives you some enhanced diversification."
On the face of it, ETF funds of funds look, feel and perform like regular ETFs. But there are differences that are important to understand.
Why buy?
The primary appeal of an ETF fund of funds is to provide a one-stop investing solution that financial advisers can suggest to smaller investors, says Ben Johnson, director of global ETF research at Morningstar in Chicago. Such funds can make life easier for individuals who don't want to spend a lot of time thinking about their investments.
Many individual investors lack discipline when it comes to dealing with their own money. "How many of us have the time to do that in our lives?" says Noel Archard, global head of SPDR products at State Street Global Advisors in Boston.
That said, one-stop shopping may not be as appealing to those with a lot of cash to invest. "Those clients would be paying the adviser a lot of money to purchase a single fund," says Mr. Johnson.
What is inside?
Just because a fund holds other funds doesn't mean it's a good bet. Mr. Johnson says there's always a risk that you get a "salad" fund, which is something like tossing the contents of your fridge into the blender and expecting a delicious meal.
The trick here is for investors to understand thoroughly the methodology behind the ETF fund of funds they are considering.
"I think investors should understand whether there's a thoughtful, coherent overarching objective that is threading these funds together," Mr. Johnson says. "A target-date series or an allocation portfolio would be examples of funds-of-funds that fit this mold; a potpourri of disparate thematic funds would not."
On a positive note, there is a lower likelihood of so-called style drift with an ETF fund of funds than there might be with a similar mutual-fund product. "With style drift, you might buy a value fund and then wake up one day with a growth fund," Mr. Johnson says. That is far less common with ETFs because the vast majority passively track indexes. "They are much more stable," he says.
How much does it cost?
Most ETF funds of funds are constructed using ETFs from the same fund family, which helps keep costs down.
"By having this suite of funds, we can subsidize the fund of funds," says Pedro Palandrani, a research analyst at Global-X in New York, in reference to the firm's Global X Thematic Growth fund. In this case, the annual expenses are 0.5%, which is lower than the gross expenses of some of the individual thematic ETFs in Global-X's stable.
Without the in-house approach, a fund of funds provider would need to charge an "overlay fee," or an extra charge over what the component funds charge, which would make the investment substantially less attractive.
The downside of a fund of funds being constructed from ETFs of the same fund family is that it is rare for all of those funds to be the best in their category. Some may be top performers, while others may be duds.
Could an investor save money by investing in a bunch of individual ETFs on his or her own, instead of buying an ETF fund of funds?
It used to be that funds-of-funds structures helped investors save on transaction costs such as brokerage commissions. Earlier this year, however, many large brokerages decided to eliminate commissions for trading ETFs. As such, a do-it-yourself approach could theoretically save money.
That said, the commissions aren't the only cost incurred when trading ETFs. Bid-ask spreads add to the cost of buying and selling. Larger investors, which include funds-of-fund providers, are often able to get better prices than individual investors who buy and sell in smaller amounts or so-called odd lots.
What are the tax implications?
Regular ETFs are considered tax-efficient for buy-and-hold investors because they track indexes. Indexes don't change frequently, which keeps ETFs' capital-gains distributions low.
Funds of funds, however, have more potential for taxable capital gains, especially if they have to rebalance the component ETFs frequently and those holdings are volatile. For instance, a fund of funds with a mix of 70% small-cap tech stocks and 30% high-yield bonds, which is rebalanced monthly to maintain the target weighting, would likely result in more taxable capital gains.
"Just like any other commingled vehicle with a high turnover strategy, there are more opportunities for a taxable event in the fund, versus a similar strategy with lower turnover," Mr. Archard says.
So far, those fears haven't materialized. Of the 99 ETF funds of funds in the market, only five had realized capital gains, he says.
---
Mr. Constable is a writer in Edinburgh, Scotland. Email him at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Simon Constable
