TEXAS
Gunman's Wife Helped
Him Hide, Officials Say
The wife of the man accused of fatally shooting five people in Texas last week helped him evade authorities for four days by giving him food and clothes and helping him find a place to hide, officials said.
Divimara Nava, the wife of the suspect, spoke with investigators during the manhunt for her husband, San Jacinto County District Attorney Todd Dillon said.
She was also allegedly communicating throughout the search with her husband and offering him encouragement.
The suspect, 38-year-old Francisco Oropesa, had been on the run since Friday night after he fatally shot five of his neighbors, officials said. He had gotten into a noise dispute with them.
Mr. Dillon said Ms. Nava arranged for her husband to be transported to the home where he was arrested Tuesday in Conroe, Texas. Mr. Oropesa was found hiding at the home underneath laundry in a closet, according to the San Jacinto County Sheriff's Office. Ms. Nava was also arrested at the scene.
Ms. Nava, 52, was being held in Montgomery County Jail on a felony charge of hindering apprehension or prosecution of a known felon.
-- Alyssa Lukpat
---
SCIENCE
Shortage of Monkeys
For Research Worsens
America's monkey shortage is getting worse. The pandemic has exacerbated a continuing supply crunch, throttling research and threatening the country's ability to respond to public health disasters, including the next pandemic.
That is according to a new report published Thursday by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine that noted that new ways of studying biology, using artificial-intelligence models or cells in culture, aren't ready to replace testing in monkeys.
A lack of funding to expand breeding colonies at U.S. centers, as demand for research monkeys grew, is a leading contributor to the shortfall.
A continuing shortage would leave the U.S. vulnerable to infectious-disease outbreaks because monkeys are usually necessary to test new vaccines and treatments, scientists say.
-- Nidhi Subbaraman
---
FLORIDA
Ex-Candidate Cleared
Of Lying to the FBI
Former Florida Democratic candidate for governor Andrew Gillum, who came within a whisker of defeating Republican Ron DeSantis in 2018, was acquitted Thursday of lying to the FBI in a corruption case that also involved illegal use of campaign contributions.
But the federal jury hung on charges that Mr. Gillum funneled tens of thousands of dollars in campaign money to personal accounts. Prosecutors said they will retry him on those counts.
Mr. Gillum was acquitted of lying to undercover FBI agents posing as developers who paid for a 2016 trip he took with his brother to New York.
-- Associated Press
