Companies rely on real-world data to train artificial-intelligence models that can identify anomalies, make predictions and generate insights. But often, it isn't enough.
To detect credit-card fraud, for example, researchers train AI models to look for specific patterns of known suspicious behavior, gleaned from troves of data. But unique, or rare, types of fraud are difficult to detect when there isn't enough data to support the algorithm's training.
To get around that, companies are learning to fake it, building so-called synthetic data sets designed to augment training data.
At American Express Co., machine-learning and data scientists have been experimenting with synthetic data for nearly two years in hopes of improving the company's AI-based fraud-detection models, said Dmitry Efimov, head of the company's Machine Learning Center of Excellence. The credit-card company uses an advanced form of AI to generate fake fraud patterns aimed at bolstering the real training data.
Rare or uncommon types of fraud can be overlooked by the company's AI-based fraud-detection model if the algorithms don't have enough training examples, he said.
"There are a lot of different kinds of patterns, the number of fraud patterns in real life is pretty big," Mr. Efimov said. "Some fraud patterns happen more often than others, and some patterns are very rare."
American Express is working on improving these models by experimenting with generative adversarial networks, a technique to create synthetic data on uncommon fraud patterns. That data is then used to augment the company's existing data set of fraud behaviors to improve its overall AI-based fraud-detection models.
Synthetic data has already found uses in other industries. Hospitals are using synthetic data based on real medical records from patients to make medical decisions.
By 2024, 60% of the data used for the development of AI and analytics projects will be synthetically generated, according to Gartner Inc. The technology research firm is receiving an increasing number of questions regarding synthetic data, said Erick Brethenoux, Gartner's AI research manager.
Credit: By Sara Castellanos
