With the rise of ChatGPT and other artificial-intelligence chatbots, AI is everywhere, from your doctors office to your brokerage account. It's also poised to shake up another hot sector of the economy: clean energy.
Among those tracking this closely is Amy Francetic, co-founder of Buoyant Ventures, an $81 million venture-capital fund founded in 2020 focused on digital applications, including AI, for climate technology.
Her journey to climate technology started off in an entirely different arena: children's software. At Hasbro in the 1990s, she helped produce software for Mr. Potato Head and Candy Land games. She later founded a children's software company that she sold to Lego.
Now, Francetic is focusing on digital technology used for clean energy. About half of the companies Buoyant invests in use some form of artificial intelligence, she says. From Raptor Maps, which uses AI and drones to more efficiently manage farms of solar panels, to ReelData, which uses AI to optimize the growth of fish (think cameras in giant tanks), Buoyant's portfolio features cutting-edge startups that could help shape the energy transition.
We recently caught up with Francetic to ask her about what she sees for AI's future in climate tech.
WSJ: Can you tell me how you went from designing software for Mr. Potato Head to investing in AI for climate change?
A: It wasn't an immediate next step. I've always been comfortable at the intersection of business and technology. Early in my career, I founded a high-tech company called Zowie and sold it to Lego. Then I did some work at Stanford on fuel cells. I had a health scare and thought to myself, I wanted to work on something that meant something to me, that had some purpose and would make the world a better place.
That led me to clean energy. I started a technology accelerator called the Clean Energy Trust and ran it for seven years. That informed my point of view of how to make money in this space. And that's what led me to software [for clean energy]. That's what I know. I'm not a battery scientist, I'm not a chemist. I'm a digital-technology expert.
WSJ: What are some qualities in companies Buoyant looks to invest in?
A: We're looking for companies that have some measurable climate benefit. We have to be convinced that they can deliver that. About half the companies in our portfolio use AI to some degree.
WSJ: When people think about taking on climate change, they typically think of big physical infrastructure and gear like solar farms, windmills, geothermal and electric vehicles. How does AI fit into the climate-solution puzzle?
A: A lot of what makes that infrastructure work well is software and digital solutions -- whether that's stitching together the infrastructure or making it more cost-effective. That's the opportunity for software and AI to create efficiencies on top of that infrastructure.
WSJ: Your career in clean energy has spanned several cycles, from the brief heyday of the late 2000s to the drought of the early 2010s. Can you talk a bit about that journey and how it's perhaps changed in the past few years?
A: It wasn't fashionable. Now it's fashionable. A number of things have happened since the late 2000s. Back then a lot of these companies that were being funded were the kind that took a lot of capital. There wasn't a lot of capital to fund those companies in the later stages. The businesses were dying before they could get to commercial success. We've also had global consensus around climate change. The effects of climate change are so widely felt. That has created more of a global market for a lot of these technologies as well as global funders. There's a record amount of capital invested in climate. This is the go-go time. It's a great time to be making money in this space.
WSJ: A wave of cash is coming from government programs such as the Inflation Reduction Act. How is that affecting the investment environment?
A: The funds being deployed to speed up the transition to electric vehicles are really exciting. It creates more opportunities for software to figure out where to site infrastructure, where to put the chargers, how to manage the payments across different types of cars. We're excited about fleet management more than passenger vehicles. There can be tremendous emission reductions if you start to transition those fleets to electric.
WSJ: Tell me about Raptor Maps, which says it helps solar farms operate more efficiently. How does it do that and how does AI fit in?
A: They began as drones that flew over solar farms. The way this used to work, solar farms had to be inspected, and it had to be done on foot. When you think about how large these solar farms have gotten, you can see how long that would take. Now you can fly a drone over the farm in a day and take video. The cameras and sensors on the drones can determine which panels may be underperforming. They've created software products that will help manage the maintenance of the panels.
WSJ: One of the companies in your portfolio, ReelData, has a unique approach to fish farming. How does that work?
A: We've overfished our oceans. The way that people farm fish, they farm salmon in pens off the coast in the ocean. That creates a lot of environmental problems, hurts biodiversity and creates pollution.
Land-based aquaculture is a new way to produce fish. They use these giant pens in warehouses. The biggest cost of producing fish in these pens is food. ReelData uses AI and cameras installed in the pens to figure out how to optimize the feeding of the fish. It reduces the food cost. A lot of farmers are overfeeding the fish. Their AI is making these systems more profitable. They're using facial recognition for fish! They can track the growth of that fish and say, it's time to harvest.
WSJ: So-called virtual power plants, in which household energy resources can be tapped to power the grid, are getting a lot of chatter. Can you talk about what they are? One of your companies, Shifted Energy, seems to fit.
A: If you have solar panels on your home, if you've got a battery backup system, if you've got a heat pump, you can use that as a resource for the grid. You might be able to smooth out your demand profile. You might be able to use that solar power when energy prices are high. If you have extra energy, you can put that energy back into the grid. You could use your EV as an energy source. You have a bidirectional relationship to the grid.
Shifted Energy is [managing supply and demand] for homeowners who have electric water heaters. They're heating when renewable energy is available and when the price is cheapest. Their technology is also applicable to electric vehicles. It started in Hawaii where electricity prices are high and renewables have a high penetration. This innovation was fine-tuned to serve lower income families. Now they're deploying in California, Colorado, the Southeast.
---
Interview has been condensed and edited.
Credit: By Scott Patterson
