Smartphones already know a lot about us, but now some researchers are betting the devices can also be trained to detect whether we are infected with the new coronavirus -- just by listening.
Several teams of artificial-intelligence researchers are working toward systems that could help spot the disease through people's breathing, coughing and speech. They are collecting thousands of sound samples from people who have contracted Covid-19 on the hope that the signature respiratory problems that make the infections so dangerous could also help unlock the way to a faster diagnosis.
Tomas Teijeiro, a researcher in Switzerland, was inspired when doctors told his team that coronavirus patients had a distinctive dry cough. "They'd see a patient come in, they'd hear them coughing and they'd say 'OK, it will be Covid,'" he said.
About three weeks ago, Mr. Teijeiro and colleagues working on a project called Coughvid at the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne put out a global appeal for people diagnosed as infected with the virus, others showing symptoms and healthy individuals to provide coughing samples via their website. The site, he said, has collected more than 800 samples so far from people saying they have the disease.
Skeptics of such projects worry that artificial intelligence screening apps based on audio clips won't be sufficiently reliable, potentially delaying treatment for sick people or sending healthy individuals to overloaded hospitals.
"You've got these quick-off-the-mark computer science projects that maybe hog the attention and resources away from something more deserving," said Emily Bender, a computational linguist at the University of Washington who studies the social impact of speech and language technologies. The voice projects may be well-intentioned, she said, but there is a risk that they do more harm than good in the real world.
In response to such criticisms, AI researchers say their efforts are focused on gathering data that could lead to screening software and aid in diagnosis, and that they are bearing in mind the risks of false positives and negatives as they do so.
"We believe that a lot of information could be perceived through speech, and this disease as well, we believe, can be identified by speech," said Alan Bekker, co-founder and chief technology officer of Voca.ai, an Israeli startup that has developed virtual call-center agent software and counts American Express Co. as an investor.
Voca.ai is partnering with Carnegie Mellon University to collect samples of people reciting the alphabet and making other sounds to support its efforts. A pair of researchers at New York University who work with Facebook Inc. chief AI scientist Yann LeCun are gathering samples of people taking breaths into their phones -- an effort they dub "breathe for science." A Danish startup called Corti is also working with the Seattle Fire Department to test an AI tool that analyzes breathing and coughing in 911 calls.
Mr. Bekker said an early test based on incomplete data showed promise, producing a system that was about 75% accurate in predicting whether a new sound sample came from someone with the virus. The hope is that more data raise th
Tech companies have swung into action around the outbreak, trying to apply their know-how to battle the new coronavirus that has seen more than two million people infected globally. Apple Inc. and Google will build software together that would alert people if they were in contact with someone infected with Covid-19.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
