The S&P 500 edged lower, weighed down by a drop in tech shares.
The benchmark index fell 0.2%, after hitting its 17th record of the year a day earlier. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite dropped 0.5%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 0.1%, or 38 points.
Four of the S&P 500's 11 sectors finished the day in the red. The declines were led by the information-technology sector -- the best-performing segment this year and last. Those stocks fell 1.1%.
Chip-maker shares helped pull that sector down, including declines from Intel and Advanced Micro Devices. The PHLX Semiconductor Index shed 2.5%.
Nvidia, the biggest winner of the artificial-intelligence mania that has powered the stock-market rally, dropped 1.1%
Traders were still digesting Tuesday's inflation data, which showed that consumer prices rose slightly more than expected for the second month in a row. But inflation has eased significantly from its recent peak, and many investors still expect the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates at some point this year. That has given riskier assets like stocks a boost.
"We don't think the Fed is in any hurry, but the growth-inflation mix has made sufficient progress to be risk-on right now," said Arun Sai, senior multi asset strategist at Pictet Asset Management.
For the year, the S&P 500 is up 8.3%.
Investors will get a fresh look at how U.S. consumers are faring Thursday morning, when retail sales data for February are released.
Though the mood on Wall Street remains decidedly bullish, some investors have reassessed when and exactly how much the Fed might cut rates this year.
"Our projection was only one or two rate cuts this year, now it might only be one. If we get another [report] like this, it might be zero," said Doug Evans, chief investment officer of Callan Family Office.
Evans remains bullish on the market overall. He said the rally, which last year was largely concentrated in a few tech stocks, could keep broadening out. "I don't think you need a big correction like in 2022. There's still a lot of the market we feel constructive about," he said, citing investment opportunities in drugmakers and in real estate.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury note settled at 4.191%, up from 4.154% on Tuesday.
U.S. crude oil futures rose 2.8%, settling at $79.72 a barrel. Energy stocks were the best performers in the S&P 500, rallying 1.5%.
Among individual stocks, Dollar Tree shares fell 14% after the retailer reported a quarterly loss and said it would close nearly 1,000 of its Family Dollar stores.
McDonald's fell 3.9% after the company said at an investor conference that lower-income consumers are eating at home more often.
Bitcoin rose $2,068.06, or 2.9%, to a record $73,462.59.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.2%. At midday Thursday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.2%. S&P 500 futures were up 0.1%.
Credit: By Charley Grant
