Five years ago it would have been unimaginable for a government agency such as the National Security Agency to efficiently parse millions of phone, text and online conversations for keywords that could have warned of an impending terrorist attack. Today, a set of new technologies make it relatively affordable and manageable for it do so.
These technologies can store vastly different types of data in a single database, and can be processed rapidly using inexpensive hardware, without an analyst having to formulate a hypothesis.
It is unclear exactly what type of computing the NSA is using in its data-center facilities around the U.S., or in a $1.2 billion facility in Utah that will open this fall.
But broadly speaking, the technology can be broken down into three categories:
Database systems
Traditional databases, usually written in a language known as SQL (pronounced sequel), store data in tables, columns and rows but are limited when it comes to storing strings of words such as those found in an email or text message. They are also unable to handle pictures or video.
New types of databases that emerged beginning in late 2009, such as MongoDB, Cassandra and Simple DB, don't have these limitations, and allow analysts to create queries against all these types of data.
Such databases, known collectively as NoSQL (for "not only SQL"), can make a huge difference to companies analyzing very large data sets, even if they are fairly conventional. For example, analysts at risk consultancy Verisk Analytics Inc. run various models and analytics against billions of customer records in order to help identify fraudulent insurance claims.
Perry Rotella, vice president and chief information officer at Verisk, said using a traditional DB2 database from International Business Machines Corp., "would be a six-hour job" that had to run overnight. Analysts would pore over the results and generate new queries that would have to run again. He said it took weeks every time analysts needed to create a new statistical model. The company recently changed to a NoSQL database that allows analysts to run the same types of queries in 30 seconds.
For online businesses like photography marketplace Shutterstock Inc., which store a great variety of file types, it is difficult to imagine life without this technology. Shutterstock has a library of more than 24 million images and adds an additional 10,000 each day, each with associated data to help narrow search results.
Its databases also record what users do on the site -- not just decisive actions such as which images they license, but also minute details such as where they place their cursor and how long they hover there.
Natural language processing
In the past analysts needed to have enough understanding of the data to form a hypothesis and then create complex queries to run against the database.
Recently developed programs known as natural language processing and machine learning rely on the computer programs themselves to find patterns and even elucidate the meaning of ambiguous words based on context.
With natural language processing, "you could figure out whether a term like 'bomb' is being used to describe a Broadway play versus something a terrorist would use," said Tom Davenport, an expert on analytics and a visiting professor at Harvard Business School.
Hadoop
Until recently, complex computer programs needed to run on expensive hardware, such as enormous mainframe computers.
Today, an open-source software framework called Hadoop -- which was developed at Yahoo Inc. with contributions from technology developed by Google Inc. and named after a child's toy elephant -- allows queries to be split up by the program.
Different analytic tasks are distributed among scads of inexpensive servers, each of which solves a part of the puzzle, before reassembling the queries when the work is completed. "It's really cheap and really fast," Mr. Davenport said.
The ability to distribute complex queries to a large number of inexpensive computers helps people get very quick responses to complicated questions with a large number of variables.
For example, online automotive market Edmunds.com Inc. can help auto dealers predict how long a given car will remain on their lots by comparing car makes, models and other features against the number of days inventory cars at that price point averaged on a lot in a given dealer's region.
The predictions help minimize the number days a car remains unsold -- "one of the most important sales metrics for dealers," said Philip Potloff, Edmunds.com's chief information officer.
---
Steven Rosenbush and Clint Boulton contributed to this article.
Generate image description

Credit: By Michael Hickins
