Cyberattacks are blurring the lines between physical and digital risks, forcing cybersecurity and physical security chiefs to work closely together to combat threats, executives say.
Cyber-physical threats, where an attack on computer systems might cause damage to property or people, or vice versa, have long been a concern for companies in the defense-industrial base, power and other critical-infrastructure sectors.
Now security chiefs across industries are becoming concerned that even a minor technology disruption after a hack could have real-world risks.
At Schneider Electric SE, Chief Information Officer Elizabeth Hackenson said she now works closely with the company's chief information security officer and chief security officer, who is responsible for safeguarding facilities against intrusions and damage. The three are peers in the company's hierarchy, she said, regularly sharing threat intelligence and planning for scenarios where a converged incident might occur.
Ms. Hackenson said concerns at Schneider, which specializes in energy management and automation technologies for residential and commercial properties, center on what they could be missing. A physical attack on one of the company's plants or distribution centers could distract attention from a cyberattack if the cyber, IT and security divisions aren't sharing information, technology and resources to analyze information.
"The threat actors are always ahead, and they sometimes use newer technologies better than we do, so I feel this new cyber-physical threat is something that we absolutely have to pay more attention to," she said.
Hacks have had material consequences in the past. A cyberattack against Ukrainian power stations caused blackouts across Kyiv in late 2016, and similar strikes were attempted during the opening phases of Russia's invasion in 2022. Recently, leaks of U.S. intelligence material suggested pro-Russia hackers infiltrated systems within Canadian energy infrastructure operators, giving them the ability to shut down machinery or cause explosions.
Although cyber-physical tactics have traditionally been considered a tool of nation states, the critical importance of technology to companies across sectors means that even low-level criminal cyberattacks can have pronounced impacts on day-to-day operations.
"If you take a ransomware attack in something like a hospital, and that shuts the hospital down, that caused a physical action from a cyber event," said Marshall Heilman, chief technology officer at Alphabet Inc.'s Mandiant threat-intelligence unit.
Sometimes the actions of a hacked company trigger physical aftermath. When Colonial Pipeline Co. was hit with ransomware in May 2020, the company decided to shut down tech systems to prevent the malware's spread. In turn, Colonial temporarily stopped transporting fuel, shutting down the largest fuel artery on the U.S. East Coast for six days.
Getting cybersecurity and corporate security on the same page isn't always an easy task. While both functions deal with security in a broad sense, the disciplines involved are different, said Dave Komendat, who was the CSO for aerospace giant Boeing Co. until retiring from the company in October.
Cybersecurity tends to be a technical function, focused on network defense, while corporate security has been traditionally concerned with personnel and the protection of physical assets, which requires both sides to learn about the other's jobs, Mr. Komendat said. He is now an independent consultant.
Cybersecurity chiefs, too, are finding that industry advances are also forcing them to learn more about protecting physical infrastructure.
Credit: By James Rundle
