Amazon.com reported quarterly profit that trounced expectations, capping earnings reports from tech giants that showed improving health in areas from online retail to digital advertising after a stretch of slowing growth and mass layoffs.
The Seattle company's earnings nearly doubled analysts' estimates, buoyed by resilience in its core consumer e-commerce business, which had plunged into the red last year amid a pandemic hangover. Overall revenue for the second quarter rose by nearly 11% to $134.2 billion, which also beat expectations, and the company projected a similar pace of expansion in the current quarter.
Amazon's earnings report on Thursday followed strong results last week from Google parent Alphabet and Facebook parent Meta Platforms that showed recovery in digital advertising revenue. Semiconductor giant Intel posted a surprise quarterly profit, after two quarters of record losses, thanks to strength in the personal-computer market. And Uber Technologies on Tuesday posted the first operating profit in its history, thanks to robust demand for both its ride-hailing and deliveries businesses.
The improvements for tech companies in recent months have been uneven. Apple on Thursday said revenue declined for the third consecutive quarter, the company's most prolonged sales slump since 2016, amid soft demand for iPhones and other consumer devices -- though it also reported record revenue in its services unit.
And Amazon reported a continued deceleration in its cloud-computing business, long the engine of its profits, which expanded at its slowest pace on record as business customers remain cautious in their spending. Microsoft last week also reported subsiding growth in its cloud business.
"Every company in the world is trying to save as much money as they can," Amazon Chief Executive Andy Jassy said on a call with analysts after Thursday's results.
Amazon's shares rose by about 10% in after-hours trading following Thursday's earnings report. The stock had jumped by more than half this year through the close of regular trading, regaining ground after steep losses. Amazon's stock hit an all-time high in 2021 but then fell by more than 50% through the end of last year, as the company worked through changes in consumer demand and an expensive overbuild of its logistics network.
As with other tech giants, Amazon's business has been whipsawed in recent years as sales boomed during the pandemic, when much of work and life shifted online, then slowed afterward as more normal patterns of shopping and business spending resumed. In the spring of last year, Amazon was still adjusting to that newer reality, which led to a $2 billion loss for the second quarter of 2022.
Now demand for some tech services has stabilized, cost cuts have improved margins -- at the expense of tens of thousands of jobs -- and excitement over new generative artificial intelligence systems has bolstered investor sentiment.
Thursday's results put on display the effects of Amazon's effort to reduce costs by cutting jobs and curtailing operations that have been mired in red.
"While we're pleased with the progress we've made, we see more opportunities to drive improved cost efficiencies going forward," Chief Financial Officer Brian Olsavsky said in a call following the earnings report, adding that inflationary pressure continues to ease, helping curb transportation costs.
Amazon has laid off more than 27,000 employees over the past year. Its office workforce could shrink further as it rolls out a new policy requiring employees to either relocate to major Amazon corporate hubs, such as Seattle and New York, or face termination.
The company has also overhauled its logistics network so that it can shorten the distance packages travel to customers. In addition to speeding up delivery, the move is expected to cut the cost of shipping packages for Amazon.
"We're encouraged by the progress we're making on several key priorities namely, lowering our cost to serve in our stores business," said Jassy on a call with analysts, adding that the company is planning to double the number of those same-day facilities.
Analysts had expected Amazon to be back in the black in the latest quarter, but forecasts had centered on a profit of $3.6 billion. The actual number, $6.75 billion, was Amazon's largest profit since the final quarter of 2021.
Revenue at Amazon Web Services rose by 12.2%, somewhat better than expected but still its slowest pace since the company began separating out the unit's performance in 2015. The cloud-computing unit's operating profit fell from the year-earlier period to $5.4 billion, though still accounted for the bulk of the company's total.
Olsavsky said the cloud unit's growth rates stabilized during the second quarter.
Jassy said Amazon saw continued strong demand for its advertising services, with revenue in the segment growing 22% to $10.7 billion.
Amazon said it expects its operating income for the third quarter to be between $5.5 billion and $8.5 billion, compared with $2.5 billion in the third quarter of 2022. It expects sales between $138 billion and $143 billion, suggesting growth of about 9% or higher from the same quarter last year.
Credit: By Dana Mattioli
