"How often do you use the Pythagorean theorem?" asks Baltimore Ravens guard John Urschel. He uses mathematical formulas a fair amount. That's because this year, the 6-foot-three, 310-pound lineman has started a Ph.D. program in mathematics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Mr. Urschel, 24, is a rarity: He is the only NFL player enrolled in a Ph.D. program, according to the league. He's also the only Ph.D. candidate in his program who is a professional athlete. Now in his third year with the Ravens, he is considered a promising young player, with a contract paying him some $2.4 million over four years. Mr. Urschel will be spending his off-season studying spectral graph theory, numerical linear algebra and machine learning.
It isn't easy to explain his studies to nonmath types, he says: "Trying to explain spectral graph theory is just not going to go well." (Suffice it to say that it has to do with the properties of a graph.) He more often just talks about his interests in machine learning -- teaching computers how to think for themselves. He has published articles in peer-reviewed journals; one of his favorites was "Spectral bisection of graphs and connectedness," published in Linear Algebra and Its Applications in 2014, because it contains his own Urschel-Zikatanov Theorem.
Mr. Urschel -- who was born in Winnipeg, Manitoba, the son of a surgeon and an attorney -- became interested in advanced math at Pennsylvania State University. He says that until then, he had never been a particularly engaged student. "I was very bored in class, and I never paid attention, and the teachers never paid attention to me," he remembers. But he did always like math. He says his parents didn't influence his choices. "I was always one of those kids who just did what they wanted and didn't really ask for advice or whether that was OK," he says. "I think I'm still that way."
He started playing football in middle school but couldn't officially join the team: His head was so big that the helmet didn't fit him. He played competitively in high school and was recruited to play football by Penn State, Stanford and Princeton. He chose Penn State. "In high school, my principal told me I was a fool for picking Penn State . . . because he said I'm never going to play pro football, but I ended up getting the best of both worlds." In his senior year, he won the William V. Campbell Trophy, known as the "academic Heisman," an award for college football's best scholar-athlete.
Today, Mr. Urschel sometimes combines his two disciplines. He writes an occasional statistics-related column in the Players' Tribune, an online platform featuring articles by pro athletes. Recently, he crunched numbers on win-loss records across professional sports.
He thinks that his studies have helped him on the field, even if he isn't actively thinking through algorithms while he fights off blitzing linebackers. What math does for people, he says, is to "foster the growth of quantitative aptitude, which really carries you through life." His math skills, he says, help him to think through plays quickly and make split decisions, "to the point where you don't even know you're really thinking."
Though football has come under fire in recent years for its danger to players, especially head trauma, Mr. Urschel says that he understands and accepts the risks. He suffered a concussion during training camp last August, and afterward, he quizzed himself on some advanced math problems to see how bad the injury was. It took three weeks, he says, for his headaches and insomnia to go away and for him to be able to run without feeling nauseated. Completely recovering his higher-level reasoning, he says, took a few months.
To put it in perspective, he likens football to boxing. "People make a big deal about the concussions in football players, but no one really makes a big deal about the concussions in boxing," he says. "It seems more naturally intrinsic to the sport of boxing that these things happen, and it's part of the game."
During the season, Mr. Urschel's routine revolves mostly around football. His days usually last eight hours, he says, "just like a day at the office." He works out, practices, watches films of games and practices and goes to meetings.
Now in the off season, living outside Boston, he is just as busy. Between going to classes and doing homework, he exercises at the MIT gym with a strength and conditioning trainer. At night, he is learning Russian to fulfill his program's foreign language requirement.
He also has an appointment as an adjunct research associate at Penn State, and he visits his office there every month or two. In his downtime, he likes to play chess online.
Mr. Urschel is keeping his options open for the future. He may end up being a professor or researcher or in some other math-related job.
As for football, he says, "I'm going to stay pro for as long as physically possible."
Would he rather be known as a mathematician or a football player? "I'd like to be known as a football player by football people, a mathematician by math people," he says. "Anyone else? I want to be known for both."
Credit: By Alexandra Wolfe
