[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The latest frontier in Chinese insurance: the internet. But investors are perhaps giving it too much faith.
ZhongAn Online Property & Casualty Insurance, China's first online-only insurer, is getting ready to raise as much as $1.5 billion in a Hong Kong public offering, valuing the company at a heady $11 billion. That makes it look more like the rare fintech "decacorn" from Silicon Valley, rather than a Chinese insurance company that sells drone-accident policies, among other products.
The lofty tech-like valuation is more a hat tip to ZhongAn's big backers than its own business. Chinese tech giants such as Alibaba's Ant Financial and Tencent own nearly 30% of the company and will end up with just more than 20% after it goes public. The latest entrant is Japan's SoftBank, coming in as a cornerstone investor to take up more than 36% of the offered shares at the top end of the price range. Meanwhile, Chinese insurance behemoth Ping An holds about 12%. Only a thin slice will be given out to the public.
ZhongAn brings little to the table except the novelty value of an online-only insurer. For one, almost 70% of insurance is already sold online in China. It boasts a cloud-based system that can process up to 13,000 policies a second and an artificial-intelligence-based customer service chatbot. It sells policies like a Shipping Return Policy -- its top product -- which covers the shipping cost on returns of purchases. Buyers pay a premium of 0.20 to 9.9 yuan (US$0.03 to US$1.50) per purchase.
Other products include travel insurance, along with policies for diabetes patients, cracked phone screens and damaged furniture. Last year, ZhongAn sold just more than 10 policies per customer. So it is essentially a bet on high volume in the everyday insurance-bundling business, with more than 90% of sales generated from its partner platforms -- such as Ant Financial, China's largest travel site, Ctrip, and Uber rival Didi Chuxing.
But these partnerships come at a cost: ZhongAn posted net written premium income of 886 million yuan in the first quarter, up 55% from a year earlier. But given substantial expenses including fees to its partners -- more than a third of net premiums -- it ended up posting a loss of 202 million yuan for the first quarter of this year. The company said it expects to post a big loss for the full year.
At the top of its IPO pricing range, ZhongAn would be valued at more than 4 times book value, meaning all upside seems to have been priced in. Classic property-and-casualty insurers like PICC trade closer to 1.4 times book value.
This trip to the frontier is already looking expensive.

Credit: By Anjani Trivedi
