We are living through a stellar age of science publishing, and this year some of the most massive objects in the firmament have also been the best. Anyone interested in human nature will be pleased with the biologist Robert Sapolsky's mammoth "Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst" (Penguin Press, 790 pages, $35). It is a magisterial synthesis of what the life sciences tell us about ourselves -- as well as what they don't. The author covers neuroscience, hormones, genetics, evolutionary psychology and other fields to argue that humans are not ineluctably selfish or evil by nature: "Anyone who says that our worst behaviors are inevitable knows too little about primates, including us." He writes with exemplary clarity and a hippieish humor, and wants us to know that -- as the philosophers told us long ago -- rational thinking and emotion can comfortably coexist.
What with Elon Musk's determination to colonize Mars and a new wave of outward-looking science fiction ("Interstellar," "Star Trek: Discovery"), space has become glamorous again in a way it hasn't been since the Columbia disaster. Former Navy captain Scott Kelly has spent more consecutive days in space than any other American -- a whole year on the International Space Station. His "Endurance: A Year in Space, a Lifetime of Discovery" (Knopf, 387 pages, $29.95) is a memoir of the right stuff that will hypnotize any space geek, with its streak of astronautical romance and its laconic descriptions of technical details. "My first task is to remove insulation from a main bus switching unit," he narrates, "so the unit can later be removed by the main robotic arm." Sounds like dull grunt work, but he's doing it on a spacewalk.
Space itself may one day be colonized by an artificial "superintelligence" that has escaped our control and is hell-bent on seeding the universe with copies of itself. That, at least, is one possible future described in "Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence" (Knopf, 384 pages, $28), by the physicist Max Tegmark. This terrifically lucid book contains explanations of everything from electronic logic circuits to game theory, cosmology and software that plays Go: it is probably the best popular overview to date of arguments about AI. If we seek to create an electronic superintelligence, Mr. Tegmark points out, the deep problem we need to solve first is that of "value loading." How do we ensure the machine's values are aligned with ours, and so prevent a "breakout" whereby it takes over the world? Even an AI primarily designed to protect humans, he observes, would almost certainly first take steps to prevent itself from being turned off. And from that moment we'll no longer be in control. As HAL in "2001" memorably puts it: "I'm sorry, Dave, I'm afraid I can't do that."
Physics and biology have long been the glamour sciences, so spare a thought for their less-celebrated sibling, chemistry, without which the modern world would also be impossible. Theodore Gray's "Reactions: An Illustrated Exploration of Elements, Molecules, and Change in the Universe" (Black Dog & Leventhal, 216 pages, $29.99) is a sumptuous coffee-table odyssey from the characters of individual atoms to our astonishing ability to "see" molecules orbiting distant stars. The pictures complement the text ideally, whether of sugar and oxygen reacting in "a lovely fireball" or -- in the enjoyably named "The Boring Chapter" -- an artist's impression of what paint is doing while you watch it dry. The perfect adjunct to a chemistry set for any curious youngster, as long as you're not worried about explosions.
Chemistry also runs the batteries in our smartphones and enables us to spend all day contributing to the profits of the giant tech corporations. But what exactly is Big Tech up to? Scott Galloway's "The Four: The Hidden DNA of Amazon, Apple, Facebook, and Google" (Portfolio, 310 pages, $28) bracingly dismisses the corporate legends and origin myths put out by the companies themselves and offers his own analysis of their strategies, which is at once admiring and sardonic. (The corporations "cheat" and "steal," he says, mainly because we let them.) The author, as a serial entrepreneur and business professor, brings his own insights into play in a pleasantly disarming way. At one of the companies he worked at, he reports, "I had turned $600 million, of other people's money, into $350 million." Easily done.
And what of the brave new world that the Four and their successors will build for us? In "Soonish: Ten Emerging Technologies That'll Improve and/or Ruin Everything" (Penguin Press, 358 pages, $30), Kelly and Zach Weinersmith offer an entertaining look at future tech wizardry, from space tourism and asteroid mining to nuclear fusion power, matter replication, synthetic biology and direct brain-computer interfaces, which no doubt would be an even more efficient way to serve us ads. The text is very well-researched, with a casual, friendly style ("Tinkering with the language of life. What could go wrong?"), and color cartoons add a wry counterpoint to the narrative of a future that, as always, might be utopia or disaster.
For an omni-curious reader, the year's most mind-bending supermassive black hole of a book is physicist Geoffrey West's "Scale: The Universal Laws of Growth, Innovation, Sustainability, and the Pace of Life in Organisms, Cities, Economies, and Companies" (Penguin Press, 479 pages, $30). The book begins with the observation that things do not scale linearly: If you double an animal's size, for example, its weight cubes, but the strength of its limbs only squares. Thus, poor Godzilla would collapse under his own weight, unless he were "almost all leg." From here the author takes you on a quite spectacular journey through the science of shipbuilding, the metabolism of trees, the right dose of LSD to give an elephant and the ideal dimensions of a city. From simple algebra to lessons for the future of human civilization, this is science writing as wonder and as inspiration.
---
Mr. Poole is the author of "Rethink: The Surprising History of New Ideas."

Credit: By Steven Poole
