Employers are preparing to comply with a new law going into effect Wednesday in New York City that will be the first in the nation to regulate the use of automation and artificial intelligence in hiring decisions.
The law, known as NYC 144, requires employers that use certain kinds of software to assist with hiring and promotion decisions -- including chatbot interviewing tools and resume scanners that look for keyword matches -- to audit those tools annually for potential race and gender bias, and then publish the results on their websites.
There is growing public concern about the role that algorithms play in essential facets of people's lives, from employment and education to life insurance and mortgage lending.
Because algorithms are difficult, if not impossible, for most people to untangle and understand, legislators have focused on mandating transparency rather than on regulating the software itself.
While NYC 144 is designed to root out indications of potential discrimination in employment decisions, "it's really not an antibias law. It's a public disclosure law," said Erin Connell, who represents employers as a lawyer with Orrick, Herrington and Sutcliffe. Legislators and industry groups across the nation are watching New York City as a test case for future technology regulation, she added.
Under the new law, employers will audit any software that plays a significant role in their hiring and promotion decisions and will publish so-called adverse impact ratios, which show whether a procedure has a disparate impact on a particular race or gender.
Employers who hire New York City residents will have to publish the impact ratios on their websites, along with notice that they are using the tools and a way for job applicants to request an alternative to being screened or sorted by the software. Employers will pay penalties of up to $1,500 per violation a day if they don't comply.
"There's an assumption baked into this that if an employer sees the impact ratios, somehow indicating some bias, that they are then maybe going to do something about it," said Victoria Lipnic, a former commissioner of the federalEqual Employment Opportunity Commission, and now a partner with labor consulting firm Resolution Economics. "That's a fairly big assumption, but it is a first step."
Reducing or removing bias from automated tools is possiblebecause developers have more ways now to pretest their software and to program it more precisely, said Frida Polli, founder of recruiting software platform Pymetrics, which is owned by Harver. She advised the New York City Council on its bill, and supports better regulation of algorithms.
"It does take more effort, and it forces you to modernize," Polli said. "But it doesn't make sense to keep using things that have disparate impact."
Under the law, workers and job applicants can't sue companies based on the impact ratios alone, but they can use the information as potential evidence in discrimination cases filed under local and federal statutes.
Credit: By Lauren Weber
