WPP PLC's new chief executive is preparing to consolidate some of the advertising giant's major properties, as traditional agencies struggle to keep pace with the industry's digital shift.
Marquee ad agencies that buoyed WPP in earlier decades -- including Young & Rubicam, Ogilvy, J. Walter Thompson and Grey -- are generally growing more slowly than WPP's digital and media buying operations, according to the company.
CEO Mark Read has said he will unveil a strategy update by year-end and that merging creative and digital firms makes more sense than combining creative agencies.
One idea under consideration is a merger between Young & Rubicam and WPPs digital-ad firm VML, with VML Chief Executive Jon Cook leading the combined business, according to people familiar with the matter. That change would place Mr. Cook at the helm of Young & Rubicam, an agency that WPP acquired in 2000 for a record $4.7 billion, and that sports accounts as varied as Office Depot and the U.S. Navy. The new entity could be called VMLY&R, according to one of the people.
WPP declined to comment on merger considerations.
There have also been discussions about having WPP's tech-savvy direct-marketing company Wunderman work with its creative firms, to provide access to consumer data to help them craft more relevant ads, a person familiar with the company said.
The strategy aims to make the creative agencies less dependent on television and other traditional ad revenue while also giving them access to new technologies such as artificial intelligence.
Advertisers are doing more of their creative work in-house or taking their business to smaller agencies that have been more nimble in adapting to a digital age dominated by Facebook Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google. "It's been the perfect storm" for creative agencies, said Greg Paull, co-founder of R3, a consulting firm that helps match marketers with agencies.
WPP's like-for-like net sales -- a figure closely watched by analysts to measure the company's underlying performance -- have dropped for six consecutive quarters in North America. Although WPP doesn't break out the performance of its creative agencies, it blamed weakness in their North American operations for its latest lackluster quarter.
---
Alexandra Bruell contributed to this article.

Credit: By Nick Kostov and Suzanne Vranica
