Walmart Inc. agreed to use Microsoft Corp.'s cloud technology to power functions that could include algorithms for purchasing and sales-data sharing with vendors, the two companies said, deepening a partnership between two of Amazon.com Inc.'s most powerful rivals.
The five-year deal, announced Tuesday, pairs Amazon's largest retail competitor with its closest challenger in cloud computing. Walmart has warmed recently to collaborating with technology companies, as it fends off Amazon's retail ambitions and expertise in data.
The shared rivalry with Amazon "is absolutely core to this," Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella said in an interview.
"How do we get more leverage as two organizations that have depth and breadth and investment to be able to outrun our respective competition," Mr. Nadella said.
Walmart plans to deploy Microsoft's machine-learning, artificial-intelligence and other services to help employees, for example, pick products that go on shelves and optimize the performance of freezers and other equipment. The retailer is aggressively cutting costs as it invests in growing sales online, and it is using technology to analyze its operations, an area of Amazon's expertise.
Some retailers have been loath to use Amazon's technology, largely because its cloud unit provides the majority of Amazon's operating income, said Ed Anderson, an analyst with market-research firm Gartner Inc. Microsoft's Azure, second in market share to Amazon Web Services, has developed into a viable cloud infrastructure for many, he said.
Walmart has developed its own massive cloud-computing operation, in part to analyze rafts of product and sales data, an area of Amazon expertise. But Walmart has been expanding its use of Azure since it 2016 acquisition of Jet.com, which built its business on the Microsoft tech.
"We are moving fast, and we are looking for partners to help us do that," said Marc Lore, Walmart's head of U.S. e-commerce and founder of Jet.
The Microsoft deal is the latest example of Walmart working with Amazon's tech rivals.
The retailer agreed last summer to list its products on the online-shopping marketplace of Alphabet Inc.'s Google, enabling voice-ordered purchases on Google Home products that compete with Amazon's Alexa service.
Now, Walmart and Microsoft will look into new ways to use the retailer's trove of customer and product data, with Microsoft engineers embedded in Walmart offices.

Credit: By Jay Greene and Sarah Nassauer
