Fact-checking live news has one major downside: It's slow. By the time a fact-checker can verify a claim, any misleading information has already spread and been consumed.
Enter Sparks Grove, the digital innovation and experience design wing of Atlanta-based consultancy North Highland. After interviewing scores of print and broadcast journalists from the U.S., U.K. and Ireland about the challenges of combating misinformation in the news, developers at Sparks Grove created Voyc, a voice-scanning tool powered by artificial intelligence that can identify a questionable statement as little as two seconds after it's uttered.
"We're trying to build something that . . . connects people to information faster," said Jack Stenson, innovation lead who conceived Voyc. "In the case of media, it's connecting to what might be the most accurate truth."
Voyc works by transcribing live audio and running each statement against a database of facts culled from verified government sources and accredited fact-checking organizations. The software quickly can identify if a statement conflicts with verified information and send a pop-up text alert to a producer or someone in position to ask further questions that highlights both the sentence at issue and the relevant facts.
Designers were careful not to characterize misleading statements in "true" or "false" terms, however. "We're not trying to be the judges and jury of truth," said Mr. Stenson. "If you have a technology that does, say, black or white, then it shuts down the conversation. . . . We would love it to help drive debates."
There are other attempts to create automated fact-checking technology under way, though unlike Voyc they are aimed at checking already published material. Among them: British nonprofit Full Fact is currently using machine-learning algorithms and AI to improve its "Live" and "Trends" tools that track the incidence and source of misinformation on television broadcasts, respectively. First Draft News, funded by Harvard University's Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy, is engaged in similar projects.
Voyc's Mr. Stenson envisions news producers using the technology to encourage television presenters to probe their subjects with follow-up questions in one-on-one interviews, panel discussions and debates. Voyc is still a prototype and there's no timeline for when the software could appear in television production booths. In the meantime, developers are working to improve Voyc's accuracy when transcribing idiosyncratic speech patterns, such as dialects, "ums" and "ahs."
Given the nuanced nature of fact-checking, identifying both the questionable statement and the context in which it was made, as Voyc is aiming to do, is key when verifying claims made on live news, says Lucas Graves, an associate professor at the University of Wisconsin Madison's School of Journalism and Mass Communication.
"It's really difficult, especially for hosts who want to be careful about seeming partisan or challenging something on the fly when they don't have all the facts at their fingertips," he said. "If there were some way to facilitate challenging questionable claims sort of at the moment of utterance, that could be really useful."

Credit: By Laine Higgins
