DAVOS, Switzerland -- Bankers and executives at the World Economic Forum are celebrating a growing economy and rising markets. They see a continuing string of deals flowing their way, cost-saving new technology and a boost from U.S. tax cuts.
But underlying worries persist despite an upbeat economy in practically all corners of the world, said delegates on the sidelines of the event. Among them: The market's ascent has been eerily, steadily calm.
"It does feel to me a little bit like 2006," said Jes Staley, chief executive officer of British lender Barclays PLC. "'Maybe we've solved the riddle of economic cycles' -- that's what we were all saying. We really got that wrong."
One concern, Mr. Staley said, is that investors have become complacent with low market volatility. "The system is geared. When there's a reversal, it could be fast."
Investors' portfolios have chugged steadily higher in value.
"The whole world is going up in a straight line," said Michael Lavelle, who runs Citigroup Inc.'s investment bank in the U.K. "But for how long?"
Mark Hantho, Deutsche Bank AG's chairman of global capital markets, said he sees the ratio of optimism versus caution this year at 70-30. "Markets have run very quickly. People are asking, how can it be this good? What am I missing?"
But banking clients don't want to miss out on deals or securities issuance and regret that later, he said. "There's a little bit of fear of being left behind."
Some are roundly bullish. "I've been coming since 2010. I've never seen a Davos more positive," said Manuel Falco, Citigroup's head of corporate and investment banking for Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
Behind the optimism is fundamental strength in corporate earnings, commodity prices and accommodative central bank policies, said James Amine, head of investment banking and capital markets at Credit Suisse Group AG.
"The market will dip. It won't be a straight line up through Dec. 31. I still feel good," said Mr. Amine. He added that days packed with Davos meetings bolstered his view that CEOs are more confident than they have been since 2006-2007.
"There's always things to worry about but not a lot until the middle of 2019," said Mary Callahan Erdoes, CEO of asset and wealth management at JPMorgan Chase & Co.
She said Europe is one of the most attractive areas for investment, and "there is an insatiable appetite for private equity right now."
Artificial intelligence, blockchain and other developing technologies permeated Davos presentations, and also meetings among bankers and company executives. Technology is driving deals but also presents risks, they said.
European companies recognize they have lost the battle for the online consumer to big U.S. technology companies. "Their attention is now turned to the business consumer," said Wolfgang Fink, co-head of Goldman Sachs Group Inc.'s German and Austrian business.
"There's an acute anxiety among European companies to protect their edge," Mr. Fink said. European companies are pausing in some cases when considering deals involving manufacturing technology and internet solutions.
Zurich Insurance Group Ltd. CEO Mario Greco said he doesn't see big financial risks in the system -- not in inflation nor rising rates. More likely threats are political, social or ecological, he said.
That is a change from last year, when concerns such as China's economy were pronounced. Cybersecurity ranks high among bankers as a potential cause for a market downturn.
Some big investors feel the froth has gone too far, even with still-low interest rates. Canada's PSP Investments, which manages 140 billion Canadian dollars (US$113 billion) in retirement assets, has shifted some money from stocks to fixed-income assets. They are "the lesser of two evils," said CEO Andre Bourbonnais.
For banks, the mood is partially dulled by investment-banking businesses grappling with new competition, pressure on fees and other long-term declines.
The lack of volatility is hurting banks' trading operations, which make money by seizing on price swings in stocks, bonds and other assets. Trading revenues fell sharply in 2017 at big banks.
"From an economic standpoint, it is blue sky," said Andrea Orcel, who runs investment banking at UBS Group AG. "From an asset-price standpoint, blue sky. But investors are not trading. There is no in-and-out."
Merger and acquisition volume is running at a level well above the historical average. Cheap debt and sky-high stock prices give companies plenty of currency for deals.
With the U.S. tax changes, "CEOs have high confidence in the economy to be more acquisitive," said Daniel Pinto, who runs JPMorgan's corporate and investment bank.
Blockchain and bitcoin have been topics in just about every Davos venue, including a prominent street-front meeting spot in town. Payments executives expressed optimism about the technology's prospects to reduce costs and transaction times.
But to some economists it looks a lot like a bubble. Robert Shiller, Yale University professor and economics Nobel Prize winner, said buyers who missed out on the housing and stock-market boom are flocking to bitcoin. They are drawn in by "the existential meaninglessness of life when you're not invested in anything," he said.
---
James Mackintosh contributed to this article.

Credit: By Jenny Strasburg, Liz Hoffman and Thorold Barker
