The jaw-dropping visual effects in "The Matrix" transformed the quest to prove what is possible on screen. The franchise returns this week to find out if there is anything more that can be done.
For the 1999 original, filmmakers invented a way to make Keanu Reeves's hero, Neo, defy physics while dodging bullets on screen. The effect blew enough minds to get a nickname -- "bullet time" -- plus changed the look of action movies, and influenced mediums from animation to videogames.
For the new sequel, "The Matrix Resurrections," filmmakers deployed much-higher-caliber technologies, including three-dimensional imagery made using artificial intelligence. But after 22 years of digital evolution, high-end movie effects are approaching a plateau near perfection.
"We went from pulling off what seemed to be impossible, to a sort of inability to create surprise" in the movie industry, says John Gaeta, who helped craft the bullet-time effect. He was a visual-effects designer on the first three "Matrix" films; now he is making things for the metaverse.
This year the movies presented us with a car slingshotting from cliff to cliff ("F9"); Ryan Reynolds running amok inside a videogame ("Free Guy"); and giant monsters crushing the Hong Kong skyline ("Godzilla vs. Kong"). Any viewers who paused to ask themselves -- "How did they do that?" -- likely came up with the same answer: "Computers."
Despite any numbness among viewers to digital spectacles, Hollywood's demand for them has only increased. Visual-effects houses have raced to compete in a global production boom.
Some directors are reacting to the VFX arms race by practicing more restraint. Denis Villeneuve's "Dune" depicts settings such as the desert planet Arrakis with a naturalistic look. Instead of zooming viewers into a fleet of attacking space ships, the director presented the nighttime ambush in silhouette at a distance.
"He was just showing the reality of the world," says Namit Malhotra, chief executive of DNEG, a visual-effects company that worked on "Dune" and "The Matrix Resurrections." He adds: "When you're spending that kind of money, it's hard for filmmakers to control the desire for more, a little more oomph."
In the new "Matrix" release, director and co-writer Lana Wachowski plays with expectations that the sequel must level up.
The original bullet time was "a borderline hack," as Mr. Gaeta recalls it, that started with 120 still cameras firing off film photographs of Mr. Reeves dangling on wires. Those images were stitched together with software.
The successor to that technique is known as volumetric capture. A camera array captures people or spaces from every angle, and then AI meshes this video into 3-D footage.
The "Matrix Resurrections" team incorporated volumetric capture sparingly, says visual-effects supervisor Dan Glass. "It's really cutting-edge technology, but we deliberately didn't want to use it in a way that was as blatant as the original bullet time."
At the same time, Ms. Wachowski also relied on real-life filming locations in San Francisco, and physical effects, such as a wired Mr. Reeves leaping off a 43-story building with co-star Carrie-Anne Moss.
"The idea is that this is a newer upgrade to the Matrix simulation, so Lana wanted it to feel more real as we filmed it," says Mr. Glass, who has worked with the director since the first "Matrix" sequels.
Credit: By John Jurgensen
