Health insurers are racing to roll out new digital tools that give them a deeper role in health care, aiming to reduce costs and improve convenience for consumers.
The latest sign is a new app from Anthem Inc. that is set to be introduced next week in Indiana, but later reach the big insurer's full geographic territory. The app will let consumers, including those who don't have its insurance, schedule and pay for medical visits through their smartphones, as well as learn potential diagnoses and text with doctors.
Companies including UnitedHealth Group Inc., CVS Health Corp. and Cigna Corp. are all competing to introduce offerings that they hope will smooth the fragmented experience of getting and paying for health care. Often, such tools can also serve to steer consumers' decisions about their care in ways that reduce costs.
"We want to be able to expand access to care and help with navigation, and we want to do it for all consumers, not just Anthem members," said Rajeev Ronanki, Anthem's chief digital officer.
Insurers and employers have been offering remote access to doctors for years, via phone, messaging or video, with mixed results. A 2017 study in the journal Health Affairs found such services may actually increase costs overall, even though the remote visits are cheaper than in-person ones. A 2018 analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation showed that the virtual visit services had very little uptake among workers with employer coverage.
Insurers say new services aim to go beyond one-off telemedicine encounters, with personalized doctor recommendations, online appointment-booking and pricing information, as well as a growing array of mental-health offerings. "How do we use technology to guide people to the care that's best for them?" said Firdaus Bhathena, CVS's chief digital officer. "We're working on the actual connected end-to-end experience."
This year, Humana Inc. started testing a new plan that links patients to primary-care doctors whom they can see for regular video visits, using Doctor On Demand Inc. Patients get tools including blood-pressure cuffs at home. The doctors get patient health histories from Humana, and they are supposed to track their care and coordinate follow-ups. Premiums for the digital-first plan are significantly lower than many competing products, Humana said.
Insurers hope to save money by using the digital services to promptly detect and respond to health problems that can result in costly emergency-room visits. They also want to use digital tools to steer members toward lower-cost care.
Oscar Insurance Corp., a smaller insurer that has focused closely on integrating digital care, recently did a test with about 1,000 members whose birth-control prescriptions were due to lapse. The women got a notice that they could use a virtual visit with an Oscar-affiliated physician to get the prescription renewed. About 8% did so, and roughly half of them moved to a lower-cost generic.
UnitedHealth points to an app called Recover, which it will be offering in 25 markets by next year. The Recover app tells patients where they can go for various services tied to the surgery, such as imaging, and another app tells how much each will cost. Recover sets up text messaging with the surgeon's office. After the operation, patients can use the app to take pictures of their surgical site that are analyzed by the technology. If there are signs of a problem, the doctor's office is alerted.
Anthem's app, now called CareSpree, has an artificial-intelligence-powered chat function to suggest potential diagnoses for consumers who enter symptoms and other information, then lets them connect with a doctor via text for follow-up advice. "The idea, front and center, is to make it really easy. Otherwise people won't use it," said Allon Bloch, chief of K Health, which provides some of the app's technology.

Credit: By Anna Wilde Mathews
