Airbus SE is using artificial intelligence to squeeze costs out of its finance function, an experiment launched in the aircraft maker's Americas division that could save the corporation millions of dollars annually if rolled out in other regions.
It is one of the latest examples of how companies across sectors are digitizing operations to increase efficiency, reduce human error and free up employees for tasks that require more human judgment, such as strategic planning, analysis and audits.
"Companies can now automate highly repetitive activity at a lower cost with a higher degree of accuracy," said David Axson, head of the CFO consulting practice at Accenture Strategy, a unit of consulting firm Accenture PLC. "This especially applies to high-volume-use cases like accounts payable."
Less than half of companies' accounts-payable activity world-wide is automated, Accenture Strategy said. That figure is expected to rise to 80% by 2025. Processing invoices and expense reports are prime targets for automation.
That is where Airbus is setting its sights. Less than two years ago, four Airbus Americas Inc. employees would review about 25,000 travel-and-expense reports filed annually by employees in Texas, Virginia, Florida and Mexico, according to Richard Masci, head of financial-system services and compliance at Airbus Americas.
Manually combing through every line of a single expense report could take about an hour -- more if the receipt was in a language foreign to the reviewer. More still if there were red flags, such as missing receipts.
Sometimes reviewers took shortcuts, such as going on trust and approving an expense associated with a foreign receipt they couldn't understand, to get through a pile of reviews. That could lead to errors, Mr. Masci said. "Shortcuts for compliance purposes are not the best," he said.
Last year, Mr. Masci oversaw the transition to a review system that uses AI to review expense reports. Airbus turned to AppZen Inc., a San Jose, Calif., software company, for the new technology.
The system developed by AppZen matches reports against a repository of accepted vendors, expense types and amounts to spot anomalies. The technology examines items such as the identity of a vendor, existence of venues such as a restaurant, type of expense and amount. It checks for receipts and can recognize more than 100 languages.
A human only needs to review details the system deems noncompliant, typically one or two lines in a 30-line report, Mr. Masci said. For example, Airbus employees aren't permitted to expense alcohol on business trips if it isn't part of a meal. The AI approval system might flag when an employee files a dinner expense from a bar that doesn't serve food, something a human might not always catch.
If the report passes muster, it is automatically validated and payment can be initiated. The system flags noncompliant entries in a report as low, medium or high risk. Nearly half of all expense reports are deemed noncompliant, Mr. Masci said. High-risk reports are blocked from payment. A travel-and-expense analyst will then review those lines and contact the employee with questions. The employee either resubmits with the missing information or, if noncompliant, removes the line and resubmits.
The average time between submission to approval has gone from a couple of weeks to a few days, and the workload for human reviewers has been more than halved, Mr. Masci said. Over time, the system will detect patterns to process information faster and more accurately.
The new process was deployed first in the Herndon, Va., headquarters of Airbus Americas. It has since been rolled out in most of the division's other offices in North America.
In 2018, the first partial year of the technology's implementation in the Americas division, Airbus paid off its initial investment of $50,000 and pocketed about $50,000 more, Mr. Masci said.
The division expects to save $100,000 this year and at least $200,000 in 2020 in the Americas.

Credit: By Mark Maurer
