Imagine you're president and Congress gives you a huge chunk of money to spend as you wish. Instead of cutting taxes or splashing out more on health care, infrastructure and defense, why not send a check to every adult?
That's the essence of universal basic income, a centuries-old idea now enjoying a revival across the political spectrum. Liberals see a cure for poverty that will be essential as robots and artificial intelligence vaporize jobs. Conservatives see an elegant, cost-effective replacement for a complex safety net crafted by nanny-state social engineers.
For all its superficial appeal, however, UBI -- also called unconditional or guaranteed income -- is a solution in search of a problem. It would consume scarce resources while ignoring the single biggest failing of the current safety net: the declining percentage of men in the prime of their life who work. A new benefit with no strings attached would do nothing to fix the problem, and could in fact make it worse.
Proposals to guarantee everyone enough money for the necessities in life can be found in the writings of Sir Thomas More in the 1500s. Thomas Paine proposed such a scheme in 1795. The U.S. federal government sponsored several pilot projects from 1968 to 1982, but early research -- not all of which has held up since -- suggested they discouraged both marriage and work. Richard Nixon proposed a "family assistance plan" to provide a poor family with a basic federal payment, but it didn't pass Congress. Now, Finland and the Canadian province of Ontario both have pilot projects in the works; Swiss voters rejected one in a referendum in June.
Proposals over the decades vary widely; some would replace the current safety net, some would supplement it. Some would send a check to everyone, others only to the poor. Some would pay individuals, others, families. The more comprehensive the plan, the higher the price tag. To send every American adult $10,000 a year would cost $2.4 trillion, or 13% of gross domestic product.
Junking the current safety net wouldn't come close to paying for this: Scrapping income support for the poor, disabled and unemployed would save just $500 billion. Get rid of health care for the poor (mostly Medicaid), and the savings rise to only $900 billion. Getting rid of Medicare and Social Security would balance the costs, but that would leave the average retiree considerably worse off -- politically (and ethically) a nonstarter.
There are two ways to reduce the cost, but both weaken the appeal. First, shrink the payment. To ensure everyone, including the rich and middle class, receive a check, many poor families would receive less than they do now, deepening poverty. Second, phase out benefits as income rises. But then the income is no longer universal and the recipient's effective marginal tax rate goes up, a disincentive to work. That's precisely one of the flaws in the current safety net UBI is supposed to eliminate.
Thus, a true UBI would require much higher taxes or a much bigger deficit. Is UBI necessary to cope with the coming wave of layoffs due to robots? That misconstrues the threat. Technologically-driven job destruction has been going on for decades and has fallen disproportionately on the less-skilled.
The challenge is starkly illustrated by a recent report from the White House Council of Economic Advisers. It notes the share of prime-age men (i.e. 25 to 54 years old) either working or looking for work -- the participation rate -- has fallen from 97% in the 1950s to 88%. For men with just a high-school diploma or less, it's now 83%. With aging already a serious drag on long-term economic growth, the U.S. can't afford to lose the equivalent of five million workers.
Why aren't they working? Jason Furman, chairman of the council, suggests that multiple forces, including globalization, automation, and incarceration (many jobs are closed to ex-convicts) have reduced demand for low-skilled workers. What employers will pay for unskilled labor is below what economists refer to as the "reservation wage": Some workers simply won't work for so little money.
What's the solution? If outside forces are depressing low-skilled wages, that strengthens the case for subsidizing those wages so that they will work for what employers can pay. This can be done by expanding the earned-income tax credit, which tops up poor worker's salaries, and wage insurance, which pays a laid-off worker to accept a lower-paying job. This can't be done through UBI, which is paid regardless of whether the recipient works and, according to some studies, encourages some recipients to quit.
To advocates, UBI is appealing precisely because it's unconditional. It drains government assistance of its behavioral-modification stigma.
Yet in a world of limited resources, taxpayers have a right to expect their money go toward the social goals that matter most. UBI fails that test.
Credit: By Greg Ip
