MATTEL
MAT +1.8%
Barbie dominated the box office during its debut weekend, lifting shares of Mattel as investors bet the movie's success will be a boost for the toy maker. The PG-13 "Barbie" movie, which Mattel co-produced with Warner Bros., debuted in theaters on July 21 and grossed $155 million in the U.S. and Canada over that weekend as moviegoers headed out to theaters. Ahead of its release, Mattel introduced a line of dolls and toys for the movie and struck dozens of brand partnerships. Later in the week, Mattel posted dropping second-quarter sales and profit. Mattel shares gained 1.8% Monday.
UNION PACIFIC
UNP +6.7%
A new leader is taking the reins at Union Pacific after pressure from a major shareholder. The railroad freight operator named former Chief Operating Officer Jim Vena as its CEO. He was the preferred candidate of Soroban, a Union Pacific investor that earlier this year pushed for the removal of Lance Fritz from the top job. The New York hedge fund urged the company's board to oust Fritz in February, arguing the company had underperformed. Shortly after, the company announced the search for a successor. Union Pacific shares increased 6.7% Wednesday.
SPOTIFY TECHNOLOGY
SPOT -14%
Spotify's losses are deepening as the company makes podcasting cuts and faces paying higher music royalty costs. The Stockholm streaming giant handily surpassed subscriber-growth expectations for its latest quarter, boosted by Gen Z and overseas listeners, but missed its revenue target and gave a weaker-than-expected outlook for the current quarter. The company is trying to improve by reducing its investments in podcasting and raising prices for its subscriptions. Spotify shares plunged 14% Tuesday.
PACWEST BANCORP
PACW +27%
Two regional banks are joining forces. Banc of California agreed to buy its larger rival PacWest Bancorp in an all-stock deal, as the two lenders seek strength after the industry turmoil this spring. Both banks and their shares have come through the regional-banking crisis in relatively good health. But midsize banks still face questions about their stability in the aftermath of the failure of Silicon Valley Bank in March. PacWest has around 70 branches, mostly in California, while Banc of California's branch network is roughly half that size. PacWest shares rocketed 27% higher Tuesday.
META PLATFORMS
META +4.4%
Meta posted its highest quarterly sales growth since 2021 as digital advertising continued to recover. The social-media giant's ad revenue grew about 12% in the quarter, driven by use of artificial-intelligence technology that has enabled better ad-targeting. Alphabet, the parent company of Google, reported its second straight quarter of accelerating growth. Google co-founder Sergey Brin, Alphabet's second-largest individual shareholder, has recently been working on Gemini, its next big AI system, The Wall Street Journal recently reported. Meta shares rose 4.4% Thursday.
SOUTHWEST AIRLINES
LUV -8.9%
Air travel is hot, but corporate demand is lacking. Southwest Airlines executives said Thursday that business travelers aren't doing so as often, and they expect corporate travel to lag behind leisure for the foreseeable future. The carrier said it would revamp its flight schedule next year to adjust where and when it flies. Carriers including Delta Air Lines have said they expect business travel to improve as offices fill up. American Airlines has said its pure business travel revenue has declined. Southwest Airlines fell 8.9% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
