Demand for nuclear energy is rising fast. Whether there are enough new recruits to keep the industry humming is another question.
Between 2012 and 2022, the number of students graduating with bachelor's degrees in nuclear engineering in the U.S. fell by 25%, according to the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, with the class of 2022 seeing only 454 students graduate with a degree in the field.
At the same time, the nuclear industry is facing a maturing workforce, with 17% of workers in the industry over the age of 55 and 60% aged between 30 and 54, according to the 2024 U.S. Energy and Employment report. The report also highlighted that 23% of workers were aged under 30, compared with 29% for other energy workers.
As demand for nuclear energy rises, that's a problem. "We need nuclear expertise in order to combat climate change," said Sara Pozzi, professor of nuclear engineering and radiological sciences at the University of Michigan. "We are at a crucial point where we need to produce the new generation of nuclear experts so that they can work with the older generation and learn from them."
Nuclear energy is touted as one of the key ways of producing carbon-free energy. Forecasts from the Breakthrough Institute, a California-based environmental policy research center, see nuclear energy making up 10% to 15% of the global energy mix by 2050.
To meet this demand, the global nuclear workforce will need to rise to four million people. In the U.S., that figure currently stands at about 68,000 people, but would need to grow to more than 200,000, based on an Energy Department forecast that sees nuclear power tripling by 2050. "The conversation around nuclear has done a complete 180 in the last 10 years," said John Kotek, senior vice president of policy development and public affairs at the Washington, D.C.-based Nuclear Energy Institute.
"There were dozens of nuclear plants that were at risk of closing. Now what has happened in the last half a dozen years is more companies started to demand clean electricity and individual states are demanding 100% clean energy by 2050. So the companies that were thinking of shutting down are now extending their nuclear licenses and building new plants," said Kotek.
But the nuclear industry has an image problem, according to those working within it. A history of disasters such as Three Mile Island in 1979, Chernobyl in 1986 and Fukushima in 2011 has meant that fewer engineers have sought a career within its ranks. However, a recent survey of Generation Z voters found that four in five supported "new generation" nuclear energy to supplement renewable power sources.
Being able to fight climate change firsthand is one of the key reasons why she wanted to make a career in nuclear, said Zoe Fisher, a Ph.D. candidate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. "It's a cool thing to study that is going to have a lot of broader impacts."
Getting a job is easier compared with similar roles in other industries because of rising demand for workers and a shortfall in expertise. Pay also is another plus. Data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics shows that compared with other engineering degrees, pay in the nuclear industry is only second to petroleum engineering, with the median salary at $125,460.
Developments in areas such as small modular reactors, otherwise known as SMRs, are luring young talent, while startups around nuclear fusion are also attracting recruits.
"We are in a lucky spot at this moment," said Francesco Sciortino, chief executive and co-founder of Proxima Fusion, a fusion-energy startup based in Munich. Sciortino said that because of the high levels of funding, and the opportunity to build a next-generation technology, attracting top talent hasn't been a problem for his company. Hires have included engineers from entities such as McLaren Racing, Google's X Development and Harvard University.
Demand for energy from artificial intelligence too is further adding to the equation with companies like Microsoft and Amazon.com eyeing the energy source to power their growing data centers.
Generate image description

Credit: By Yusuf Khan
