Maria Puckett was working at an auto body shop when a friend told her about an interesting option in her hometown of Spartanburg, S.C. The German car maker BMW was looking for apprentices. Maria, an energetic 25-year-old with a passion for technical work, applied for the job. She was hired and after two years is almost done with her apprenticeship. Her professional future looks bright, and she has no college debt.
Ms. Puckett shared her story in March during a White House roundtable on workforce development with President Trump, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and CEOs of major companies. She had an important message to convey: The apprenticeship program had opened the door to her future career.
Maria stands for the success of U.S.-German business cooperation. Spartanburg is BMW's biggest production facility in the world. The plant produces 1,400 cars a day and sends 70% of them overseas, making BMW the biggest car exporter in the U.S. By employing 9,000 people and training 100 apprentices at any one time, the BMW plant contributes to a skilled American workforce and the wealth of its community.
Overall, German companies employ about 700,000 people in the U.S. Often they implement the German-style training schemes for young people that during the roundtable Mr. Trump called "amazing" and Mrs. Merkel described as a "win-win situation." More American companies are choosing the same path. The German Embassy's Skills Initiative helps to facilitate these efforts.
In Germany, half the graduates of high schools and junior high schools choose a track that combines training on the job with further education at a public vocational institution. This apprenticeship model is one reason why Germany has the lowest rate of youth unemployment in Europe and has been able to keep manufacturing jobs in the country.
As high-wage countries, Germany and the U.S. face similar challenges in protecting existing production facilities and creating new manufacturing jobs. One of the most decisive factors for companies is whether they can find skilled and motivated workers, which is what apprenticeship programs provide.
It's also important to prepare for the industries of the future. In the era of New Manufacturing (what Europe has dubbed "Industry 4.0"), artificial intelligence and other digital technologies will transform factories and the workplace. Here Europe can learn from the dynamism of the American IT sector. The challenge will be to integrate digital skills in the apprenticeship system and empower workers for lifelong learning.
There is a tendency toward higher education. Nevertheless, the success of the German apprenticeship model builds on the conviction that it is an equivalent alternative to college education.
Given the historical and cultural differences between the U.S. and Germany, it goes without saying that the apprenticeship model cannot be translated one-to-one. But embracing elements of it offers American businesses tremendous potential. Mr. Trump has expressed a vision of apprenticeships as "a positive alternative to a four-year degree." That approach in Germany has provided a solid return on companies' investment, helped them to innovate, and contributed to warm relations between employers and employees.
At the White House roundtable, Ms. Puckett said she would like to reduce the stigma of vocational education and promote it to local high schoolers. America needs more role models like her.
---
Mr. Wittig is Germany's ambassador to the U.S.
Credit: By Peter Wittig
