[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Heard on the Street's annual stock-picking series is under way, and its columnists seem to have learned some lessons from past rounds. One is that shorting a stock can be a high-return strategy, but also high risk.
For the first time, there were no short picks by any columnist. That is striking given that short bets have been among the best in years past. In the 2022-2023 contest, the winner was Stephen Wilmot's bet against electric-vehicle startup Arrival, for a total return of over 94%. Last year, he came in second place with a short on another questionable EV name, VinFast Auto, earning 87%.
And yet, last year's worst-performing pick also was a short bet, against Swedish property company SBB. This turned out to be the least prescient pick in the history of the contest, losing 104%, as the stock more than doubled. This illustrated a key fact about short selling: Because a stock has unlimited potential upside, a short bet has the potential to go below the hard deck and lose more than 100%.
While the overhyped EV theme made for a target-rich environment, no columnist this year seemed to have the stomach to bet against the sector, or the new thing in markets: artificial intelligence.
There are also positive lessons to be learned, not just cautionary tales. Last year's winner was Jinjoo Lee's maverick bet on the troubled retail chain Gap. She wagered on the new chief executive's fashion sense and won. This year she has in her sights another unloved merchant -- Macy's -- on the know-how of its own new CEO.
She says: "A leader with a sharp eye for consumer taste can be the make-or-break factor at an apparel seller: Consider Abercrombie & Fitch and Gap, both of which underwent remarkable turnarounds under such leaders. Abercrombie's shares are up more than 1,000% since CEO Fran Horowitz took over and revamped the brand. Gap's stock is up 134% since its new leader took the helm about a year ago and brought a renewed focus on creativity."
Meanwhile. London-based columnist Carol Ryan has bet on another retail turnaround: Britain's iconic but somewhat faded Burberry.
Will these bold fashion plays score, or crash and burn? You can follow along all year as we update the results weekly.
Credit: By Aaron Back
