LONDON -- Jan Marsalek, a former fintech executive wanted in Germany for a 1.9-billion-euro fraud, conspired with five people arrested in the U.K. on suspicion of spying for Russia, according to British prosecutors.
The five Bulgarian nationals appeared in a London court Tuesday charged with collecting information "intended to be directly or indirectly useful to an enemy" between 2020 and 2023, according to U.K. prosecutors.
U.K. prosecutors alleged in court that Marsalek, an Austrian national who fled Germany after the Wirecard banking-technology group filed for insolvency in 2020, worked with the five people.
Marsalek is suspected to be hiding in Russia under the Kremlin's protection, European security officials said. He isn't being charged in the U.K. for a crime.
The British Crown Prosecution Service identified the five alleged spies as Orlin Roussev, 45 years old, Bizer Dzhambazov, 41, Katrin Ivanova, 31, Ivan Stoyanov, 31, and Vanya Gaberova, 29. The suspected spies appeared on video link from jail and didn't enter pleas.
Before their arrest in February, Roussev was living in Great Yarmouth, a resort town on the east coast of England, and Dzhambazov and Ivanova were living in Harrow, a suburb in northwest London. They were caught with forged passports and documents from the U.K, Bulgaria, France, Italy, Spain, Croatia, Slovenia, Greece and the Czech Republic.
Roussev is suspected of managing a spy ring that operated around Europe from what is now an abandoned guesthouse, prosecutors say. Roussev's LinkedIn page says he was the owner for the past decade of a company called NextGen, which is described as working in artificial intelligence and signals intelligence. His LinkedIn page also says he was an adviser to Bulgaria's Energy Ministry from 2008 to 2009.
The five suspects will appear in court again in October.
U.K officials alleged the spy network and Marsalek worked to help the Russian state conduct "hostile action" against specific targets, including potential abductions.
Marsalek is believed to have obtained special equipment from Roussev, among them a mobile phone that was able to provide him with information about callers including their location, a Western official said. This was earlier reported by the Dossier Center, a London-based outlet linked to the former Russian oligarch and Putin critic Mikhail Khodorkovsky.
Marsalek, who held several passports, was fired as chief operating officer and second-in-command at Wirecard in June 2020 after the company said it couldn't locate 1.9 billion euros, the equivalent of $2.01 billion, in cash on its balance sheet.
He escaped shortly before his dismissal by hiring a private jet that took him to Belarus, from where he was taken to Moscow, investigators said.
Markus Braun, Wirecard's former chief executive and Marsalek's boss, is on trial in Munich after being charged with fraud, breach of trust and accounting fraud.
Credit: By Max Colchester and Bojan Pancevski
