This week the House achieved something increasingly rare in Washington: a bipartisan victory on an issue of national importance. We are talking about the bill that would require social-media giant TikTok to divest from its Chinese-owned parent company, ByteDance. President Biden said he would sign the measure if it reaches his desk.
The 352-65 vote is even more noteworthy amid the conflict and legislative gridlock that define the 118th Congress -- something we both saw firsthand.
So how did it happen? While good policy is part of the answer, a similar effort to address the national-security threat posed by TikTok failed to gain traction in the Senate last year. Several House committees introduced competing bills on the same topic but none got off the ground.
The answer lies in a decision our former boss, then-Speaker Kevin McCarthy, made to establish the House Select Committee on China at the start of this Congress -- as well as his creation of the China Task Force in 2020 that preceded it.
"Structure dictates behavior," Mr. McCarthy would often say. The structure of House committees -- with jurisdictional lines essentially unchanged since the 1970s -- doesn't lend itself to efficient legislating. Turf battles emerge among and within standing committees, stalling good legislation in its tracks. Committee members and their staff have to juggle competing and disparate priorities.
When it comes to an issue like China, more than a dozen different committees could claim legislative ownership. That's far too many for the coordinated approach needed to tackle such a complex issue.
Enter the Select Committee on China, which has been a clearinghouse to investigate and propose policy solutions that could be turned into legislation by the appropriate committees of jurisdiction -- in this case, the subject-matter experts at House Energy and Commerce led by Chairman Cathy McMorris Rodgers (R., Wash.). This is a model both independent of and cooperative with the current committee structure in Congress.
Not all select committees are created equal. Mr. McCarthy's predecessor, Speaker Nancy Pelosi, created two select committees in 2019 -- one on climate change and another on economic fairness, neither of which produced bipartisan legislative victories of note.
Mr. McCarthy created the China Select Committee with a specific purpose. Above all, it focused on a bipartisan issue of national importance: ensuring America wins the economic and cultural battle with China. Additionally, and as important, Mr. McCarthy and Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries consulted beforehand on the importance of assembling a roster of policy-minded members who would take the work seriously and not use the committee for grandstanding.
To prove its serious nature, the majority party's membership advantage on the panel was the narrowest and most bipartisan of any select committee in recent history, 13-11. The cooperation continues under the leadership of Chairman Mike Gallagher (R., Wis.) and ranking member Raja Krishnamoorthi (D., Ill.). The result: a bipartisan vote that brought together the likes of Chip Roy (R., Texas) and Rosa DeLauro (D., Conn.).
To the current congressional leadership, we offer two recommendations:
First, the leaders of both parties should commit to reauthorizing the China Select Committee next Congress -- regardless of which party is in the majority. The China threat persists, and Congress has a unique role to play in maintaining a unified voice in the face of a Communist Party content to wait out any presidential administration.
Second, in the absence of a larger and much-needed rewrite of committee jurisdictional lines, we encourage more bipartisan select committees to serve as a catalyst for legislative action on other urgent matters. Those issues include artificial intelligence, a depleting military stockpile, and our growing national debt. All run the risk of being mired in jurisdictional tugs-of-war.
As the late basketball coach John Wooden said, "When opportunity comes, it's too late to prepare." Congress should begin laying the groundwork today for legislative successes tomorrow.
---
Messrs. Sparks and Leganski served as deputy chiefs of staff for former House Speaker Kevin McCarthy.
Credit: By Matthew Sparks and John Leganski
