Lawyers, take note: Artificial-intelligence systems will soon be commenting on new government rules. I asked ChatTPI, the Technology Policy Institute's large language model, to respond to the Federal Communications Commission's proposed net-neutrality rules. Its feedback, which draws on our research, isn't good enough to submit, but it's close.
Websites already allow the general public to submit comments alongside industry lawyers, think-tank advocates and regulatory experts. The FCC's previous net-neutrality rulemakings received millions of comments from the internet. AI could turn those flurries into blizzards of long, detailed and unique comments. Government agencies need to figure out how to manage this new reality. They could do so simply by banning AI-generated comments, but that blunt approach would fail to recognize the technology's benefits.
We built ChatTPI to synthesize our organization's nearly two decades of research on information technology and communications policy. Making it easier to apply insights derived from the debates of the past to current issues would enrich politics and policy making. Many "new" issues aren't altogether novel. Artificial intelligence also has the potential to democratize public participation. Many people have unique insights but lack the ability to articulate them. Artificial intelligence can help overcome barriers stemming from language, education or disability.
For all its potential upside, this new technology presents obvious challenges. It's fairly easy to identify canned website-generated comments, but spotting those created by AI is more difficult. If comments are coherent and thoughtful, maybe it doesn't matter if a machine wrote them. Their source should nevertheless be clearly marked so evaluators in the regulatory agencies know what they are dealing with.
Long but pointless comments disrupt the process, whether they are composed by a person or a computer. Government can manage the problem -- as well as AI's propensity to "hallucinate" -- with its own tools. Artificial intelligence is perfectly suited for parsing massive collections of comments and pulling out common themes, highlighting well-supported arguments, and isolating specious claims and misinterpretations. But human judgment is still necessary. Weighing an argument and crafting a government reply isn't yet something a computer can do.
While I believe artificial intelligence can improve the policy-making process, that hypothesis is unproven. Agencies can ease their way into this new world by experimenting with different ways of embracing these tools and choosing those that work best.
In time, artificial intelligence will revolutionize the way the public engages with the government. Without preparation, government agencies may find themselves buried under unmanageable piles of detailed responses. But if they embrace the technology, we could see a new era of public interaction with government in which everyday citizens -- not simply interested parties with large legal budgets -- can provide coherent, thoughtful comments on governance.
---
Mr. Wallsten is president of the Technology Policy Institute.
Credit: By Scott Wallsten
