LULEA, Sweden -- The U.S. and Europe are converging in their views on how to approach China, with recent statements from the European Union closely mirroring U.S. policy, Secretary of State Antony Blinken said.
Blinken made the remarks at the start of a gathering in northern Sweden of the EU-U.S. Trade and Technology Council, where top officials are discussing issues including artificial intelligence and green supply chains. The meeting is the fourth since the forum's creation in 2021.
Officials and business groups said ahead of the meeting that they anticipated talks would also focus on how the two economies should engage with China.
"I have not seen a time, actually, where there's greater convergence between the United States and Europe -- as well as with key partners in Asia -- on the approach to China," Blinken said in Sweden on Tuesday.
Blinken said a recent speech on China by European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, which floated the possibility of outbound investment controls, could also have been an expression of the U.S. policy on China.
"Both the United States and Europe, I think, believe that this relationship is an important one, one that we seek to sustain, but with our eyes wide open," Blinken said.
EU officials have acknowledged that they are moving closer to U.S. positions on China as they become more wary of Beijing's economic ambitions and dominance in some global supply chains.
"I think the U.S. has been a few years ahead of Europe, but I think very many countries now realize this is not the time for naivete," Swedish Prime Minister Ulf Kristersson said. He added that doesn't mean halting communications and cooperation with China.
Officials at the TTC in Sweden are also expected to discuss bilateral trade issues amid growing pressure to show that the forum's work can result in concrete benefits for businesses.
Business groups on both sides of the Atlantic said the dialogue at the TTC has contributed to stronger communication between the two economies and helped in coordinating sanctions after Russia's invasion of Ukraine last year. But they said it hasn't done enough to address some of their biggest bilateral priorities, such as making it easier to sell into each other's markets.
The TTC has also missed an opportunity to talk in more concrete terms about coming legislation in both economies and how it could affect businesses, said Marjorie Chorlins, senior vice president for European affairs at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
"The question is whether we are going to find ourselves in a continuous state of dialogue, or whether we're going to make some tough decisions about how we partner in response to our biggest shared challenges," Chorlins said.
The completion of an agreement on trans-Atlantic data transfers is among the top requests from businesses, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and lobby group BusinessEurope said. The deal would re-establish a framework allowing businesses to transfer personal information about Europeans to the U.S. after a previous deal was invalidated over privacy concerns.
Credit: By Kim Mackrael
