The internet broke down barriers by enabling everyone to become a publisher. The unintended consequence was the fake-news epidemic. Teenagers in Macedonia discovered they could make a small fortune from online advertising by concocting outlandish clickbait stories. RT.com, one of the top news sources on YouTube, doesn't disclose that it is funded by the Russian government, and in 2009 changed its name from Russia Today.
One cause of the problem is the weakening of news brands, an effect of social media and search engines. A 2017 study by the Reuters Institute and Oxford, "I Saw the News on Facebook," found that most people couldn't remember the news brand of stories they accessed through social media. That makes it easy for purveyors of knowingly false news or propaganda to fool users by looking like legitimate news publishers. A site called "Denver Guardian" was set up before the 2016 election to show how easy it is to publish knowingly false stories, according to its founder.
Before the internet, displays of newspapers and magazines featured well-known brands. No one mistook the National Enquirer for the Philadelphia Inquirer. The internet often feels like a mass of pages ripped out of publications and scattered randomly on the floor.
Silicon Valley deserves credit for allowing a largely free flow of information. It's commendable that Facebook, Google, YouTube, Twitter and other platforms don't want to make judgments about journalistic brands. Their engineers use artificial intelligence to limit pornography and hate sites, but interpreting the nuances isn't a task for computers.
"What's Vox?" my teenage son recently asked. "They have great videos explaining news, but aren't they kind of left-wing?" It's a challenge for readers like him to get the context they need to be better informed about news brands -- including Vox's progressive viewpoint.
This is why Steve Brill and I are launching NewsGuard. Instead of black-box algorithms, NewsGuard will use human beings to rate news brands Green, Yellow or Red depending on whether they are trying to produce real journalism, fail to disclose their interests, or are intentional purveyors of fake news. Our team of journalistically trained analysts will also create "nutrition label" write-ups reporting key facts about each brand. The nutrition labels will profile the 7,500 news brands that account for 98% of online news engagement in the U.S., with overseas markets to follow. We will be transparent about our criteria and processes, and invite readers and publishers to contribute. Our evaluations will reflect the wisdom of both experts and the crowd.
Our nutrition labels will describe publishing missions, history, and the political and other viewpoints expressed by sites so that readers can make their own judgments. We'll release our first set of ratings and nutrition labels before November's U.S. midterm elections.
Legitimate news publishers badly need a solution for fake news. An increasing number of advertisers concerned about their brand safety don't want to risk their reputations by having their ads appear on fake news sites. Thus many have told their agencies to keep their ads off news sites altogether. That puts more financial pressure on publishers. NewsGuard will produce a "white list" of legitimate news publishers for advertisers to avoid fake news sites. (Publicis Groupe, one of the world's largest advertising-agency holding companies, is the lead investor in NewsGuard.)
NewsGuard's business model is to charge the digital platforms, which created the problem in the first place, so that their users can access the ratings and nutrition labels, and to charge advertisers to keep their ads off fake news and propaganda sites. We won't charge publishers to be rated and will make a version of the ratings available free to individuals and news-literacy groups.
One reason for the great success of Silicon Valley is the "permissionless innovation" of the internet. Entrepreneurs don't have to get government approval to launch new services on a largely free, open and unregulated internet. When problems emerge there are naturally calls for regulation, which is hard to impose without crimping worthy innovation. We propose a free-market solution: Have journalists apply journalistic values of transparency and disclosure to help online users become discerning consumers in the marketplace of ideas.
This approach will succeed if digital platforms take responsibility for solving a problem they unintentionally created -- and which they cannot solve on their own without becoming editors. If they truly believe that more information is better than less, they will agree to arm their users with better information about the sources of information they display on their platforms.
---
Mr. Crovitz is a co-founder of NewsGuard and a former publisher of The Wall Street Journal.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Rate News Organizations Like the Sellers on eBay" -- WSJ March 20, 2018)

Credit: By L. Gordon Crovitz
