SHANGHAI -- Watch out Detroit: A Chinese electric-car revolution is on the way.
China is placing big bets on a plan to reshape the global auto industry by replacing gas-guzzling cars on its streets with new-energy vehicles.
Ahead of Donald Trump's trip to China in November, the White House is focused on holding back Chinese exports in traditional industries like steel and aluminum. But that's a sideshow. A titanic struggle is under way to control the industries of the future from robotics to medical equipment and artificial intelligence. In new-energy vehicles, China is firmly in the driver's seat.
Its industrial goal is to leapfrog over foreign car makers in the domestic market, by far the world's largest -- and the most important for General Motors -- and become an export powerhouse. Having tried and failed to catch up with Western and Asian makers of traditional vehicles, the country is throwing everything it has at electric cars.
Beijing has said it is studying a move to ban gas-powered cars. It has been specific about who it expects will win the new battle for China's eager car buyers: The "Made in China 2025" blueprint for how to dominate cutting-edge industries calls for at least 70% market share for homegrown plug-in vehicles by 2020.
Ironically, this strategy is likely to involve what at first looks like a breakthrough for foreign auto makers in China.
Expect an announcement on 100% foreign-owned electric-car plants in special economic zones, possibly during Mr. Trump's visit. Chinese leaders will trumpet this as a major concession to Tesla, among others.
In fact, says Michael Laske, the China chief executive of Austrian auto consultancy AVL List GmbH, China's real aim is to accelerate technology imports to boost what it calls a "strategic emerging industry" and attract global supply chains. "It's brilliant," Mr. Laske says.
Success is by no means ensured. Although electric-car sales in China are booming, skeptics note that so far hefty subsidies have been needed to persuade consumers to buy.
But we heard similar disbelief about the solar industry, which China now dominates after raising the panels' performance and using economies of scale to drive down the cost of making them.
Recall, too, that Chinese smartphone brands have knocked Apple off its pedestal in China.
Why would electric cars be any different? The critical point, notes Gary Rieschel, the founder of Qiming Venture Partners, one of China's leading private-equity firms, is that they are dramatically simpler than regular cars mechanically. The country is the world's largest battery maker.
In electric cars, Chinese state planners see an opportunity to reverse one of their most frustrating setbacks.
It took Japan and South Korea 20 years to build a world-class car industry; China isn't there yet after 40 years. Beijing's initial idea was to invite a few global auto makers to form joint ventures with state firms, absorb their technology and then go it alone. But state car giants have been largely content to rake in profits from hookups with the likes of GM, Ford and Toyota, which supply most of the designs and technology.
GM develops some models locally with its Shanghai partner; other firms have been much stingier with technology transfers, not wishing to hand over their most valuable secrets.
This is not a mistake that Beijing intends to repeat. The Chinese car market has grown from less than one million in 2000 to 24 million last year, of which around 350,000 were electric plug-ins. Spurred by decrees to ramp up production of electric vehicles and invest in research and development, the world's leading car makers will have no choice but to shift their critical know-how to China.
Environmental concerns are part of China's overall calculations. That means electric. China already accounts for one-third of global car sales, and its domestic market could double from here. That's still nowhere near U.S. per capita ownership -- one reason electric cars are becoming the poster child for China's global industrial ambitions.
As China goes, so will the world's auto industry. Increasingly, its output will be stamped "Made in China."

Credit: By Andrew Browne
