Companies with in-house venture-capital arms such as French energy company Total are retrenching by selling assets after collapsing startup values led them to rethink how to invest.
In June, for instance, Total's climate-focused TotalEnergies Ventures sold 20 minority stakes in startups to venture investment manager Aster Capital Partners. The sale came a year after Total shut its venture business and replaced it with a startup accelerator. Total didn't respond to a request for comment on the action, but in announcing the asset sale, Aster partner Fabio Lancellotti suggested economic conditions and the cyclicality of venture capital is prompting companies to sell assets and "reposition themselves" toward core businesses.
In the decade following the financial crisis, corporations moved away from backing venture vehicles and toward investing directly in startups. By 2021, funds invested through in-house corporate venture teams, sometimes referred to as CVCs, accounted for 21% of all venture investments, up from 11% a decade earlier, according to industry consulting firm Bain & Co.
For most corporations, investing directly in startups helps them stay on top of technological developments that could define, disrupt or even destroy their industries. It also helps them get to know management teams, which could provide an edge should they look to acquire their startups.
But as asset values collapsed and securities markets tanked last year, some corporate venture units began rethinking their approach, opening new secondary investment opportunities for specialists focused on privately held assets.
At the end of last year, software giant Microsoft's M12 venture arm came to market with what one prospective buyer described as a "multi-nine-digit portfolio" of holdings. Shortly after, corporate vice president and M12 global head Michelle Gonzalez said the unit would adopt an investment strategy "more tightly aligned" with Microsoft's core business.
"Our closer connection to Microsoft focuses our work and positions our portfolio companies to accelerate their growth, two things that are proving to be even more critical as we navigate the volatile macroeconomy," Gonzalez said in a January blog post.
Her plans called for M12 to focus on artificial intelligence, cloud computing infrastructure, cybersecurity, software development tools and certain types of software as a service. A spokeswoman said that to align with the new strategy, M12 sold fewer than 10 of its more than 100 portfolio companies in the fiscal year ended in June. While the companies went for prices below 2021 valuations, M12 still sold them for "significantly more" than its initial investment, she added.
This sort of retrenchment has happened before, secondary market participants said.
"We have seen it play out time and time again," said Scott Barrington, chief executive of sustainability-focused secondary investment firm North Sky Capital. "A few years down the road, the CFO of a company says, 'Why are we doing this? We've invested in private assets and I can't close the books until these valuations roll in . . .' We've seen a lot of corporate sellers here in the U.S., especially recently."
Verizon Ventures is also selling corporate venture assets, according to people familiar with the market. A Verizon spokesman declined to comment.
Credit: By Rod James
