Meta Platforms is splashing out on celebrity star power to persuade users to embrace new artificial-intelligence tools.
The tech company announced deals with actors Awkwafina, John Cena, Judi Dench, Kristen Bell and Keegan-Michael Key on Wednesday that will allow it to use their voices in a new AI assistant. Meta is paying stars millions of dollars for use of their likeness, people familiar with the negotiations said.
The new chatbots, which were unveiled at Meta's annual developer and hardware conference, follow months of negotiations between the Facebook parent, celebrities and their representatives that raised novel questions about privacy, compensation and the scope of how their likeness is used. Many celebrities want to take advantage of opportunities linked to generative AI's advance while maintaining control over how their voice and appearance are used and what they are paid.
Meta and other tech companies are spending billions of dollars to launch new AI products, hoping that they will deepen user engagement and make their social media and other tools more compelling.
At the conference, called Meta Connect, Meta also unveiled a prototype of its first ever augmented-reality glasses, a new mixed-reality Quest headset that will go on sale in October and new features for its Ray-Ban smart glasses.
Meta's shares rose nearly 1% Wednesday.
The tech industry has been racing to develop such glasses for nearly a decade, with the goal to eventually overlay images or text onto the real world. Some enthusiasts hope the glasses will one day be capable of replacing smartphones. The prototype Meta Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg showed off Wednesday is the first one the company has shared and was highly anticipated.
The AR glasses, dubbed Orion, look like a pair of black Ray-Bans with thicker frames and lenses. Zuckerberg said during his keynote speech that the glasses are still a work in progress and will mostly be used internally for the time being. "They are a glimpse of a future that I think is going to be pretty exciting," he said.
The new mixed-reality Quest 3S headset -- a cross between Meta's Quest 2 and 3 -- will retail for $299, one of the lowest price points for such devices. Apple's mixed-reality Vision Pro headset retails for $3,499.
Among the new features Meta launched for its Ray-Ban smart glasses: the ability for the glasses to remember visuals and information, and live translation between languages. The glasses have become a surprise hit for the company, as interest in the metaverse remains muted. Zuckerberg also said Meta's AI assistant -- which the company launched at last year's conference -- had reached 500 million monthly active users, up from 400 million about a month ago. The Meta chief didn't share an update on weekly active users.
In August, Meta said it had 185 million weekly active users, just short of the figure ChatGPT has disclosed of 200 million weekly users. Zuckerberg has said Meta's goal is for its AI to be the most-used assistant by the end of the year -- and hopes celebrities will help get the company closer to that.
David Gene Oh, a scout at Venture Reality Fund who previously worked on virtual reality at Meta, said using celebrities to try to engage users might help raise awareness about the company's AI products but isn't going to drastically change usage overnight.
"Those are the things that I think are small little notches on the belt," he said. "But will it drive mainstream adoption tomorrow? No it doesn't win that fast."
Artificial-intelligence advances were among actors' concerns in last year's Hollywood labor strikes, with the Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists securing some protections in their new contract.
It isn't the first time Meta has tried to leverage household names to get people interested in using its new technology, and some past efforts have stumbled. Last year at Meta Connect, Zuckerberg announced that the company had partnered with celebrities including Snoop Dogg and Paris Hilton to release AI chatbots with distinct personalities. The chatbots didn't catch on, and the company discontinued them over the summer.
Other media companies are also experimenting with generative AI for a range of social-media and entertainment offerings. Ahead of the Paris Olympics, NBC cut a deal with sportscaster Al Michaels to use an AI-generated version of his voice for daily recaps.
Some new tools have caused controversy. OpenAI got into hot water earlier this year after it released an AI assistant that had a voice that some people thought sounded like Scarlett Johansson, including the actress herself. OpenAI said its AI assistant, called Sky, was never intended to resemble Johansson. The movie star hired a legal team and put out a blistering statement. OpenAI paused use of the voice.
Credit: By Sarah Krouse and Meghan Bobrowsky
