Amazon.com Inc.'s Twitch has become a go-to place to watch people play videogames, but this week that same platform broadcast a horrific crime that highlights the challenge of preventing extremists from showing their violent acts in real time.
A German man was accused of killing two people Wednesday near a synagogue and streaming the assault online. The suspect, identified by a German security official as 27-year-old Stephan Balliet, was charged with murder Thursday.
The shooting in Halle, Germany, was shown live on Twitch, a platform typically used by avid gamers, and adds Amazon to the list of tech giants that have had to deal with violent acts being live streamed. Amazon's peers -- Facebook Inc., Twitter Inc. and Alphabet Inc., which owns Google's YouTube -- most recently dealt with stopping the spread of footage from a deadly attack on a pair of New Zealand mosques this year.
Twitch on Thursday didn't provide additional comment about the company's investigation, and a spokeswoman didn't say whether the company would consider adding stiffer controls to live video. On Wednesday, the company offered condolences to people affected by the attacks and said it removed the video from the platform and took steps to prevent it from being shared further.
Live streaming is central to the business model of Twitch, which Amazon bought for $970 million in 2014. Its live broadcasts have helped differentiate it from YouTube, whose video content is mostly prerecorded and edited, said Wedbush analyst Michael Pachter. "Their core business is live streaming as it happens," he said of Twitch, adding he doesn't expect that to change.
Every day, nearly half a million people stream live on Twitch, according to the company. The account that live streamed the video was created two months ago, Twitch said, and it had attempted a live stream only once before.
Twitch said Wednesday that five people watched the 35-minute live stream from the suspect. A recording of the video was viewed on the platform by about 2,200 people in 30 minutes before it was flagged and removed.
By then, the video or parts of it were uploaded to other sites, including Twitter, fringe forums such as 4chan, instant-messaging site Telegram and hosting platform Streamable, according to Storyful, a social-media intelligence company owned by News Corp, which also owns The Wall Street Journal.
Companies such as Amazon and Facebook that stream live video need to delay broadcasts or find a way to prevent acts of violence from airing in real time, said Rabbi Abraham Cooper, associate dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a human-rights group. "They can solve this," he said. "The companies that don't want to cooperate, I hate to say it, but there's something called regulation."
Video-sharing platforms have yet to figure out how to apply artificial intelligence or other technology to quickly flag real-life violence, said Ben Nimmo, head of investigations at New York-based Graphika Inc., a social-media-analytics firm. To do that would be especially challenging for a platform like Twitch, he said, since most of its broadcasters stream themselves playing videogames and many games simulate gun violence.

Credit: By Sebastian Herrera and Sarah E. Needleman
