In the race between humans and algorithms, it isn't much of a contest. Running mountains of data through sophisticated equations in the time it takes a lowly human brain to decide on lunch, machines regularly outperform even experts at predicting, for example, which employee willsucceed on the job, and how tooptimize a supply chain.
Machines also have the ability to transform our lives as consumers -- predicting which clothes look best on us, which movies we'll most enjoy, and which medical treatment has the best chance of success.
But that promise of a smarter, happier, more-efficient life falls on deaf ears because people have a hard time shaking what's known asalgorithm aversion. Slow to trust some nebulous formula, we prefer to consult something, anything, with a pulse. If we get bad advice, we can talk to the doctor or friend who provided it -- which can provide alearning opportunity for them, signaling that their counsel is worth seeking again later.
Those conversations don't happen with equations. The algorithm's inner workings remain a mystery, leaving us only able to observe the product and not the process. If an algorithmic prognostication misses the mark, we conclude that the black box must be irreparably broken,shaking our confidencein ever consulting it again.
Unless, that is, we can convince potential users that algorithms, just like people, can learn from mistakes. That can put a significant dent in algorithm aversion.
Our first study corroborated the uphill battle algorithms face. One group of participants read about a psychologist who could identify, from a brief synopsis, someone's personality with 80% accuracy. For another group, we swapped the psychologist for an algorithm. Everyone then responded to the same two questions: (1) how much they thought the algorithm could learn from past mistakes, and (2) how much they trusted it. The results confirmed that people see algorithms as significantly less capable of learning from mistakes, driving reduced trust.
We next considered a simple fix: Show people that algorithms can, in fact, learn.
One experiment had participants choose a human psychologist or an algorithm to predict someone else's personality. As in the first study, one group of participants learned only that the algorithm's success rate was 80%, the same as the psychologist's. The other participants were shown a history of the algorithm's steadily improving performance: 60% in the first three months, then up to 70%, and now at 80%. Among these participants, two-thirds went with the algorithm over the human, even though they now had equal success rates. Showing people the algorithm was learning was enough to change their trust in the machine.
A similar study promised to ship a free piece of art to our online participants -- all they had to do was choose between having the piece selected by an art curator or an algorithm. Some learned only that 65% of the algorithm's pieces had sold that year; others saw steady progression, from 55% to 60% culminating in 65% (the curator's success rate). Again, with the algorithm's performance history on the rise, preference for the algorithm jumped to 45% from 38%.
Not all algorithms improve over time. How do you win over consumers in those instances? We wondered whether an implied potential for future improvement might work. To test that, we tried referring to the "machine learning algorithm" instead of the "traditional algorithm." With "learning" in its job description, participants now were just as favorable toward the algorithm as one with a detailed history of progress.
To err isn't just human -- it's baked into anything, man or machine, tasked with the staggering goal of predicting the future. The future success of artificial intelligence may depend on convincing people that to learn from those mistakes isn't necessarily just human either.
---
Dr. Reich is an associate professor of marketing at the Yale School of Management. Dr. Maglio is an associate professor of marketing and psychology at the Rotman School of Management and the University of Toronto Scarborough. Email reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Taly Reich and Sam J. Maglio
