Science fiction is full of artificial intelligence that gains consciousness and wreaks destruction on humankind. In reality, the threat is less dramatic but just as scary, according to historian Yuval Noah Harari, who predicts upheaval in the workforce, global governments and our emotional lives.
Mr. Harari, whose latest book, "21 Lessons for the 21st Century," published in September, recently spoke to The Future of Everything about potential winners and losers in the automation revolution, how AI could help dictatorships outpace democracies, and the rise of machines more sympathetic than humans. This interview had been condensed and edited.
Most Jobs Will Not Be Worth Saving
"Many jobs are very difficult, very boring, very unfulfilling. People do them because they have to, not because it's really their dream to be a cashier or to drive a truck. If you can be released from these hours of working, you could perhaps develop your human potential in a much fuller way. In this sense, you are becoming more human."
AI Will Centralize Power
"Democracy processes information in a distributed way. It distributes information and the power to make decisions among many institutions, organizations and individuals. Dictatorships, on the other hand, concentrate or attempt to concentrate all the information and power in one place. Given the technology of the 20th century, this was very inefficient. Nobody could process the information fast enough and make good decisions, and this is one of the main reasons why the Soviet economy and the Soviet Union in general lagged far behind the U.S. AI and machine learning might swing the pendulum in the direction of centralized systems."
We'll Adapt to Sympathetic Robots
"When you enter a doctor's office, the doctor doesn't really know how you feel. Maybe he just had a fight with his wife and doesn't care. But the AI doctor is monitoring you with biometric sensors. It knows better than you that you are distressed or fearful or angry. It doesn't have a wife or a husband. It has no other concerns. It's focused 100% on you, and reacts to you in the best possible way, or at least the best way according to current scientific theories. We will get used to these amazing sympathetic machines. And we will become far less tolerant of all these humans who don't understand how we feel -- and often don't care."

Credit: By Francesco Marconi
