BRUSSELS -- The European Union official overseeing the regulatory push against Silicon Valley is poised to stay on the job for an unexpected second term -- a warning that the new administration isn't backing down on global tech oversight.
Incoming European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen's decision to keep Margrethe Vestager as the competition chief -- while also giving her a wider portfolio to guide European rule-making related to the digital economy -- was met by audible gasps from staffers and journalists at a news conference Tuesday. Ms. Vestager had been widely expected to take a more senior role and leave the day-to-day business of antitrust probes and enforcement to a new official.
The reappointment of Ms. Vestager, whom President Trump labeled the "tax lady" after her ruling to collect from Apple Inc. what the commission said was back taxes, punctuates Mrs. Von der Leyen's push to be more assertive with economic and commercial competition from the U.S. and China.
Mrs. Von der Leyen said she kept Ms. Vestager on because of outstanding performance in her first term and since, in her view, competition is "closely linked to the digital sector."
Ms. Vestager is slated to become one of Mrs. Von der Leyen's three executive deputies, or vice presidents, providing her with extra clout in commission deliberations. Her office is tasked with shepherding new regulation on artificial intelligence by early next year, as well as with upgrading the bloc's liability and safety rules for digital platforms.
Ms. Vestager was one of the senior officials floated for the commission's top job, as a lead candidate from the broad family of European centrist politicians championed by French President Emmanuel Macron. Her promotion to commission vice president was part of the July deal in which Mr. Macron secured support for Mrs. Von der Leyen.
Ms. Vestager was expected to hand over the competition role, which comes with responsibilities for investigating and enforcing antitrust issues, including through hefty fines, as she ascended to a higher post in the commission. It is very rare for commissioners who stay on to keep the same portfolio. The competition commissioner has historically been kept clear of other policy areas, so as not to influence antitrust decisions.
In an interview, Ms. Vestager said she would maintain the independence of the antitrust division. "With the more horizontal responsibility, I will make sure the integrity of our procedures and independence in the law enforcement is nonnegotiable." She said the commission would focus on enforcing the bloc's data-protection regime to ensure that users are in control of their data and on enabling businesses in Europe to share and use data for innovation.
Ms. Vestager made a name for herself by imposing record antitrust fines on U.S. tech companies, including a total of $9.4 billion on Alphabet Inc.'s Google. She also ordered Ireland to claw back $15 billion from Apple in what the commission called unpaid taxes.
The Obama administration took aim at Ms. Vestager, saying her approach to tech regulation slanted against U.S. firms, an accusation European officials have denied.
The unit she has led for the past five years has also pursued high-profile probes against Amazon.com Inc., Facebook Inc. and Qualcomm Inc., as well as nontech American giants like McDonald's Corp., Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV and Starbucks Corp.
Ms. Vestager has drawn vitriol from Washington for years. As U.S. officials pile in with their scrutiny of Silicon Valley, some American politicians, including Mr. Trump, have accused her of trespassing on Washington's regulatory turf. In June, Mr. Trump told Fox Business Network that Ms. Vestager "hates the United States perhaps worse than any person I've ever met." He said "she's suing all our companies. We should be suing Google and Facebook, and perhaps we will."
Ms. Vestager has denied that she is targeting U.S. companies for their nationality.
The 51-year-old Dane, who officials say often pulls out her knitting during discussions, first rose to prominence as an economy minister in Denmark. An economist by training and a skilled navigator of Denmark's multiparty system, Ms. Vestager was the inspiration for a political TV drama series in her home country. As a commissioner, her no-frills demeanor and her colorful, in part self-sown, wardrobe helped her stand out in the Brussels officialdom.
Industry watchers warned tech giants to brace for more European scrutiny under Ms. Vestager.
The commission's focus on "digital giants is set to sharpen further," said Alexi Dimitriou, competition counsel at Ashurst, a multinational law firm. "With her remit also expanding to coordinating wider digital policies, digital business should expect regulatory intensity to continue," he said.
---
Expanded Role for
Danish Politician
Born: April 13, 1968, in Glostrup, Denmark
Background: Danish politician, including a stint as Denmark's economics minister
Old job: European Commission competition chief, in charge of anticompetition policy and enforcement
New job: She has been nominated for five more years, in addition to taking on a new role as executive deputy in charge of the digital economy.
Education: Studied economics at the University of Copenhagen
Career milestone: She is the first competition commissioner to be nominated for a second term and have her tasks extended to new regulation in the digital sector.

Credit: By Valentina Pop and Rochelle Toplensky
