VACATION TIME
At online travel company Priceline, an AI named Penny will be playing travel agent in the future.
The AI assistant, which today is a chatbot that customers message with, can already complete a booking within the chat, without people clicking on a button, says Cobus Kok, a vice president of product management at Priceline.
Eventually, Penny will be able to phone hotels to make special requests on your behalf, he says. Further down the line, Penny will manage travel necessities such as your car rental, using your calendar.
If you're unhappy with the bots offered by travel companies, you could simply build your own. The AI startup Imbue is building a service that will let you DIY a bot for any task, large or small, says chief executive and co-founder Kanjun Qiu.
Apple is also venturing into personal-assistant bots, with a new Siri bot that can tap the personal data sitting on your iPhone to make traveling easier: It can pull up your passport number while you're on the go, drop photos from your travels into a "travelog" note, and tell you how to get to your next hotel. The new Siri bot will arrive in the fall.
INVESTING MONEY
Imagine a future in which you can get real-time financial guidance on your investment portfolio without waiting for your adviser.
One U.K.-based startup is already helping companies get one step closer to that. When human advisers make recommendations, they use a variety of outside information, including stock prices and corporate financial numbers. That's all data AI can gather to tailor financial guidance for customers, according to Finley AI, a startup with a platform that helps financial firms build their own bots.
Finley's bot today is used to customize financial guidance for those firms' clients, and help their own advisers speed up their investment research. As it becomes more advanced, it will learn your financial circumstances, objectives and risk tolerance, and can be directed to buy stocks and set up insurance policies, said Elemi Atigolo, Finley's co-founder.
But, there are risks to automating investments and giving bots so much access to your data.
"You should know what it knows about you, and you should have voluntarily given that knowledge," said Gregory Wayne, lead researcher for Project Astra, Google's AI assistant bot.
Even if we provide bots with explicit instructions and permissions on what they can and can't do, we are still ultimately responsible for their actions -- intended or not.
DATE NIGHT
Finding love isn't easy, but having a wingman might help. That's what the dating app Grindr is betting on with its new AI-powered assistant.
By year's end, the platform, known for facilitating dates and hookups between men, will begin testing a chatbot to help people find their ideal match and figure out where to meet for dates. It will be able to do just about everything users can currently do on the app, says George Arison, chief executive at Grindr.
If you're a serial dater, it can be challenging to keep track of your favorite matches and conversations -- that's where the wingman will step in. If you're looking for a long-term connection, you'll be able to ask the bot to dig up your best prospects based on cues from your chats with other daters, not just what's on your profile.
And if you're just jumping back into the dating pool, your wingman will be able to build you a profile that will garner attention, and matches.
Right now, Arison's personal assistant books reservations on his behalf. But he says Grindr's wingman will do the same thing: "If my assistant was an AI, what's the difference?"
Once you find your match, your wingman will help you plan the first date, finding a cafe or bar, Arison says. In the future, the wingman will take things one step further, making restaurant reservations or buying tickets to a show, all in the pursuit of romance. Grindr's wingman is expected to scale in 2027.
EATING OUT
Next time you call a restaurant to book a reservation, you might be securing your table by chatting with an AI bot.
That's what restaurant-technology startup Loman AI is hoping. The company's 24/7 AI receptionist is already being used in hundreds of restaurants across the country, answering questions over the phone, making reservations and placing orders when customers call, says co-founder and CEO Christian Wiens.
With Loman's technology, the AI receptionist can talk to any customer, or even another bot. While reading a transcript of a Loman bot's call, Wiens saw that a Google bot had called it to check a restaurant's business listing, and the two bots carried on a conversation about the availability of high chairs and a kids menu.
This showed that bots can interact via voice -- and that some kind of bot-to-bot communication is in the future, Wiens says. "It's incredible how quickly the technology is expanding its intelligence."
For instance, Loman's bot could be talking with a barber shop's customer-service bot to ensure that your restaurant reservation and hair appointment don't overlap with other events on your calendar.
Deon Nicholas, co-founder and chief executive of customer service AI startup Forethought, is building bots for companies to communicate with their customers. It won't matter if Loman's bot is interacting with a Forethought bot, he says, because their goal will simply be to get the reservation booked.
Credit: By Belle Lin
