Jim Hackett made his name turning Steelcase Inc. into an office-furniture juggernaut. Now as Ford Motor Co.'s new chief executive, he needs to take on the likes of tech mogul and Tesla Inc. founder Elon Musk.
In wooing Mr. Hackett as a Ford director in 2013, Ford Chairman Bill Ford had hoped to "inject his tech-savvy energy into the board," according to an executive recruiter familiar with the process.
In 2016, Mr. Hackett was tapped to lead outgoing Chief Executive Mark Fields's new Smart Mobility innovation unit.
As he succeeds Mr. Fields, Mr. Hackett, 62 years old, must transition from outsider to team player.
Part of Mr. Hackett's role in his new job "will be to teach and groom the next generation" of leaders, Mr. Ford said on Monday.
Mr. Hackett is charged with better harnessing data and analytics to tap into car-buying trends and future needs of people walking into dealerships. Mr. Ford wants more research on parts made by 3-D printers and new modes of transportation, such as self-driving cars.
During his 30 years at Steelcase, an office-furniture maker based in Grand Rapids, Mich., Mr. Hackett pushed to modernize the workspace, dispensing of old-style cubicles and using technology to create open-office spaces better suited to today's work habits.
Taking over Steelcase as CEO in the mid-1990s when the firm was bleeding red ink, he led the company through a painful downsizing that resulted in thousands of job cuts. He is credited with transforming the product line, putting a greater emphasis on selling experiences and solutions, rather than individual chairs and desks.
Following his retirement from Steelcase, Mr. Hackett made waves in the Detroit area as interim athletic director for the University of Michigan.
More recently at Ford, he oversaw the creation of the Smart Mobility unit. The subsidiary, formed last year, is responsible for experimenting with car-sharing programs, self-driving ventures and other services aimed at helping Ford better compete with Uber Technologies Inc., Alphabet Inc. and other tech firms trying to edge into the auto industry.
In Mr. Hackett, Mr. Ford saw a "serious and experienced executive" who was well known to the board, said one person close to the company.
Mr. Hackett, however, lacks a high profile in Silicon Valley. And he doesn't have a background in the world of machine learning, artificial intelligence andother areas important to the future of self-driving cars.
Still, his involvement with Ideo, an influential design firm that Steelcase invested in during his tenure, indicates he can handle the learning curves.
"He is a collaborative kind of leader and that is a quality that wins in Silicon Valley, Dearborn and Delhi," said Reilly Patrick Brennan, a partner at Trucks Venture Capital, which invests in mobility startups.
In an interview last year with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Hackett said he wasn't interested in being a chief executive again but was interested in helping Mr. Fields think through tough challenges.
---
Tim Higgins contributed to this article.
Credit: By Christina Rogers and Joann S. Lublin
