What was Neil Armstrong thinking about as he stepped on the moon? His first words were rehearsed, and he still blew it: "That's one small step for man" he said, meaning to say "a man." He then talked about how powdery the soil on the surface seemed. And then this: "There seems to be no difficulty in moving around as we suspected. It's even perhaps easier than the simulations at one-sixth g that we performed in the various simulations on the ground."
Armstrong was doing something no one had ever done before, but he was struck by how different it was from the simulations of doing something no one had ever done before. In other words, he was so well-prepared that the only shock was that the experience was somewhat off from what he had been trained to expect. Amazing -- and a preview of today. The rest of us would have been jumping with glee like kids in a bouncy castle, unlike the cool, calm and collected Armstrong, who had taken multiple flights in a KC-135 jet to simulate low gravity.
Simulations helped create the computer industry. The first U.S. computer, the Eniac, ran statistical simulations for hydrogen-bomb blasts -- not something you can test in the lab. Every chip in your personal computer and phone is simulated well before it is manufactured in billion-dollar fabrication plants. Simulating weather patterns has led to better though never perfect forecasts.
Commercial airline pilots log hours in simulators practicing situations, like hitting a flock of seagulls, that they'll hopefully never face in real life. So do soldiers, surgeons, nurses -- even truck drivers. Add cheap virtual-reality goggles, and all sorts of training can be enhanced, from tricky manufacturing to firefighting and law enforcement.
Simulations can be useful for nearly every product being designed today. Cars have long been tested in wind tunnels and crash labs, but most of that experimentation can now be digitally simulated before the prototype is ever built. Bridges and buildings are now modeled and run through worst-case scenarios before plans are completed. Design, simulate, fix, simulate again and roll out.
This may soon improve consumer products, which are currently in a throwaway era. Once-aluminum toasters are now molded plastic. Same for many tools and household items. When they break, you toss them. But digital design and simulation mean things can be made practically unbreakable. Except for Chinese knockoffs on Amazon, have you noticed that so many more products -- vacuum cleaners, coffee makers -- last longer these days? Better living through simulations.
Processes are simulated, too. For less than $5,000, companies can run cloud-based simulations of their services from vendors like FlexSim, Simul8 and AnyLogic. Gatwick Airport near London simulated check-in procedures to shorten wait times (finally!). CSX simulated railcar movement throughout its network to decrease congestion. McDonald's supply-chain partner HAVI simulated its expansion of All Day Breakfast before it was rolled out to 14,000 Mickey Ds. The improvements aren't always obvious to the public, but things start to work better.
Simulation is critical to artificial intelligence. Tesla has more than 400,000 cars on the road with self-driving hardware, which, even when dormant, captures data that is then crunched in simulations to improve algorithms for object detection and navigation. The cars gain about 1.5 million miles of experience a day. Yes, humans provide data every day so their cars can live in a constantly improving perpetual simulation mode.
If that sounds like a scenario out of the "The Matrix," with human pods feeding data to a giant simulation, you're not far off from Elon Musk's frame of mind. Last year Mr. Musk told Joe Rogan that "the argument for 'the simulation' is quite strong." He meant there is a high probability that the universe as we know it exists inside a simulation. Mr. Musk figures that "if you assume any rate of improvement at all then [video] games will be indistinguishable from reality or civilization will end. One of those two things will occur. Therefore, we are most likely in a simulation. Because we exist." Also, his Neuralink brain interface to link minds with machines is back in the news. Gotta love Elon.
OK, it's a big leap from Neil Armstrong training for a moon walk to being enslaved in a fictional universe. I find that those who babble about living in simulations tend to be making excuses for their own failures and grasping for power: Everything is predetermined, no one has free will, and I'll tell you how to think. Sure, whatever. I will choose free will. Simulations are a great tool to improve how people live, not a harness. And they're only getting better.

Credit: By Andy Kessler
