HONG KONG -- U.S. officials blacklisted Chinese smartphone giant Xiaomi Corp. as a company with military ties partly due to an award given to the company's founder for his service to the state, the U.S. Department of Defense said in a legal filing.
Lei Jun, the chief executive officer and founder of Xiaomi, received the award of "Outstanding Builder of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics" in 2019 from the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. Xiaomi touts the award -- given to 100 Chinese executives that year -- on Mr. Lei's biography page on the company's website and in its annual report.
The award -- coupled with Xiaomi's ambitious investment plans in advanced technologies such as 5G and artificial intelligence -- was enough for the Defense Department in January to add Xiaomi to a list of companies that support China's military, according to the Defense Department filing.
The designation prohibits Americans from investing in the company, the world's third-largest smartphone seller.
The U.S. rationale for adding Xiaomi to its list was laid out in a court filing by the Defense Department in response to a lawsuit in U.S. District Court in Washington by the Chinese company seeking to overturn the military designation.
The filing, which appeared last week but hasn't previously been reported, for the first time shed light on the department's reasoning in adding a company to the list.
The second reason cited by the Defense Department was Xiaomi's plans to invest 50 billion yuan, equivalent to $7.7 billion, over five years into 5G technology and artificial intelligence. Mr. Lei outlined the investment plans in a New Year's message to staff in January 2020.
The company also elaborated on the strategy in its 2019 annual report, saying the company aims "to ensure our absolute dominance over the new smart living era" by developing technologies that combine 5G, AI and the so-called internet of things, which includes connected devices.
The technologies are a priority for the Chinese military, according to the Defense Department, calling 5G and AI "of key interest to the PRC, and are a focus of the Military-Civil Fusion strategy."
On Thursday, Luokung Technology Corp., a Chinese big-data company added to the Defense Department list alongside Xiaomi in January, also filed a lawsuit in the U.S. seeking its removal.
A Xiaomi spokeswoman didn't comment on the filing. The company has previously denied any affiliations with the Chinese military and says it sells products and services solely for civilian and commercial use.
Xiaomi was added to the Defense Department's list during the waning days of the Trump administration on Jan. 14, alongside eight other Chinese companies, including aerospace and chip firms.
In total the department has added 44 companies to its list, including telecom giant Huawei Technologies Co. and computing chip maker Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corp., both of which have also denied any military links.
Shares of Xiaomi, which more than tripled in Hong Kong last year, have fallen 25% since its Jan. 14 close.
Xiaomi's designation caught many analysts by surprise given its main focus on consumer electronics.
---
Jing Yang contributed to this article.
Credit: By Dan Strumpf
