SEOUL -- Samsung Electronics Co. is looking to give its Siri-like virtual assistant a big promotion.
The South Korean smartphone giant is considering a hardware revamp for its next flagship smartphone that could add a dedicated button for an improved artificial-intelligence feature, people familiar with the matter said, as it seeks to woo smartphone users after a disastrous product recall.
The latest internal prototypes of the premium Galaxy S8 handset include a button on the side edge of the smartphone that would be used to launch a beefed-up virtual assistant based on artificial intelligence, akin to Apple Inc.'s Siri, according to these people, who cautioned that the prototypes aren't final and could change.
Samsung will have more time than usual to tinker with the Galaxy S8 after it was forced to discontinue its premium Galaxy Note 7 smartphone last month, following reports of phones catching fire.
The embarrassing fiasco damaged the company's brand, and engineers still don't know exactly what caused the devices to overheat.
Executives are now looking to delay the announcement of the Galaxy S8 until after the Mobile World Congress trade show in late February next year, the people said.
One of these people said the unveiling could come as late as April.
That would mark a break from the past three years, when Samsung used the tech showcase in Barcelona to unveil its newest top-of-the-line Galaxy S smartphones.
A spokesman for Samsung declined to comment.
The delayed launch highlights Samsung's efforts to ensure that its next product is a hit with consumers.
The world's largest smartphone maker by sales is in dire need of a rebound, as the Galaxy Note 7 debacle has already cost the company more than $5 billion.
Tweaking the design of its most important product line to highlight one feature would underscore Samsung's ambitions in the growing market for digital assistants.
Samsung has so far been a relatively low-key competitor in this category, which includes Apple's Siri, Microsoft Corp.'s Cortana and Amazon.com Inc.'s Alexa.
Alphabet Inc.'s Google released its Assistant service last month.
Samsung is building its comeback around artificial intelligence, a hot corner of the technology market.
Its rivals have been plowing money into the field to develop smart digital assistants that can answer questions or place orders for pizza or taxi rides.
Samsung acquired AI startup Viv Labs Inc. in early October and said late last month on an analyst call that it would include an improved AI service on its Galaxy S8.
Injong Rhee, chief technology officer for Samsung's mobile division, said last week that the Galaxy S8's AI service would feature technology from Viv Labs, offering services that are "significantly differentiated" from those of the competition.
Samsung already has a virtual-assistant service, dubbed S Voice, which it introduced in 2012 with its Galaxy S3 smartphone.
But the company hasn't announced any major updates to S Voice in four years, and the company didn't mention it when releasing the Galaxy S7 earlier this year.
Mr. Rhee said Samsung is planning to use the Galaxy S8 as a springboard to expand Viv's AI technology into its other products, such as home appliances.
Credit: By Eun-young Jeong and Jonathan Cheng
