Marketers are spending more money on Internet advertising than ever before. But so far, that isn't trickling down to the bottom lines of most of the young publicly traded online ad firms whose stock prices have tumbled in recent months.
The firms aren't household names such as Google Inc. or Facebook Inc., but smaller companies that help marketers buy ad space and deliver those ads on websites and in applications. They include automated ad-buying company Rocket Fuel Inc., online video-ad firm YuMe Inc., ad-technology provider Rubicon Project, mobile-ad company Millennial Media and video-ad network Tremor Video.
These companies, which mostly went public in the past 18 months, lured investors who saw them as participating in the fast-growing Web advertising business. Spending on online ads globally is expected to climb 25% this year, according to eMarketer, and will represent 39% of total ad spending in the U.S.
While online ad companies are posting rising revenue, for many their losses are broadening at an even faster rate. Last week, YuMe said its second-quarter net loss more than doubled from a year earlier to $2.6 million despite revenue growth of 18%. Earlier in August, Rocket Fuel said its second-quarter net loss widened to $9.8 million from $3.84 million. That was despite a 70% rise in revenue to $92.6 million. Tremor's net loss for the quarter worsened significantly to $5.4 million from $300,000, amid a 23% increase in revenue.
Executives from the companies say they are unprofitable because they are investing aggressively for future growth and to ensure they can capitalize on the growing demand for automated, or so-called programmatic, ad solutions. "Research-and-development [costs] increased 65% year-over-year, as we accelerated our investments in existing product and emerging programmatic initiatives," YuMe Chief Executive Jayant Kadambi said during the company's second-quarter results call with investors. The company declined to comment further.
Tremor Video CEO Bill Day, similarly, said in an email that Tremor was investing in technology, which he said would "best position the company to capture the accelerating shift of television dollars to digital video and programmatic buying that is already under way."
Rubicon Project CEO Frank Addante attributed his company's net loss to stock-based compensation expenses, which he said aren't an indicator of the company's operational health.
Rocket Fuel declined to comment.
Still, investors don't appear confident. Since January, Rocket Fuel is down 73%; YuMe is off 38%; Tremor Video, 46%; and Millennial Media, 66%. Rubicon Project is down 27% from its $15 initial-public-offering price in April. (Wall Street Journal owner News Corp has a 13.7% stake in Rubicon.) Criteo SA, which turned a small second-quarter profit, was down 13%.
Analysts and ad executives blame the selloff on a lack of understanding among investors about the online ad market. Many of the companies play a role in the development of programmatic technologies to help automate the ad buying process, for example. Programmatic ad buying is a highly technical process that continues to puzzle marketers and engineers, let alone investors. And each firm has a different piece of it. Rocket Fuel claims to use artificial intelligence to help it buy ad space in automated auctions that occur in milliseconds as Web pages load.
"Investors truly don't understand the space at all," said Brian Wieser, an analyst at Pivotal Research Group.
"It's a confusing market," Mr. Addante said. "I liken it to the early days of Silicon Valley. If you were an investor back then you didn't know what was going to be valuable."
Others point to the changing nature of the online ad ecosystem. In the past few years, venture-capital firms have poured millions into startups that have promised to revolutionize the way online advertising is purchased and delivered, usually with the help of proprietary technologies. The result is a highly competitive, rapidly evolving market.
The small online ad firms are also competing with bigger, more established companies. Millennial Media CEO Michael Barrett whose company posted a wider second-quarter loss despite an 18% revenue increase, said the results were affected by "a few big players entering the mobile space."
Google remains a powerhouse in the online ad world, dominating search-engine advertising and pushing into display and video advertising. "Google casts a big shadow," said Kerry Rice, senior analyst at Needham & Co.
AOL has also been investing in online ad products and has promised to build a platform to help advertisers and other media companies automate the buying and selling of online ads. Elsewhere, companies including Adobe Systems Inc., Salesforce.com Inc. and Oracle Corp. are pursuing similar goals, purchasing online ad companies and stitching them together to form technology suites for marketers. Facebook, too, has online ad-related companies, most recently acquiring video-ad firm LiveRail.
Credit: By Jack Marshall
