MINNEAPOLIS -- Prosecutors are close to deciding whether to charge Chinese billionaire Liu Qiangdong with the sexual assault of a college student, in a case that could pit his word against hers.
Authorities have been considering whether to move ahead with charges after a woman alleged in late August that Mr. Liu, chief executive of Chinese e-commerce giant JD.com Inc., raped her after a group dinner, which he denies. A decision is expected within weeks, according to a person familiar with the matter.
The woman, from China, has described to authorities a four-hour ordeal in which she repeatedly struggled to turn away Mr. Liu's physical advances, until he eventually pinned her down on the bed in her off-campus apartment, according to a recorded interview she gave to police that was reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.
"He just pulled off my underwear," the woman is heard telling police. "Then he raped me."
If Mr. Liu is charged, authorities expect him to say he had sex with the student, but that it was consensual, according to people familiar with the matter. Mr. Liu has returned to China, which doesn't have an extradition treaty with the U.S.
Mr. Liu, 45 years old, has denied wrongdoing through his lawyers. His attorney, Jill Brisbois, said that he is unable to defend himself in the media because of the continuing investigation, but that his innocence will be apparent once all the evidence is disclosed.
Ms. Brisbois said the woman's version of events via her police interview and text messages "is filled with unsubstantiated information."
"We would urge everyone to wait for the prosecutor's determination instead of continuing to present a one-sided and inaccurate version of events," she said.
The woman, a student at the University of Minnesota, has retained Florida-based attorney Wil Florin to represent her. The Journal has listened to portions of audio recordings of the woman's Sept. 10 interview with police, one of several conversations she has had with authorities following the incident. The Journal has also viewed screenshots of Chinese-language WeChat text messages the woman sent related to the event. Some of the material reviewed by the Journal was earlier reported by other media outlets, including Reuters and the Star Tribune.
China's foreign ministry in September said the country's consulate in Chicago was watching the matter. JD.com's shares are down 50% on the year, compared with an 12% decline for its chief rival, Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., with Mr. Liu's future among several factors spooking investors.
Mr. Liu, also known as Richard, was in Minneapolis during the last week of August as part of a doctor of business administration program run by the University of Minnesota's Carlson School of Management and Beijing's Tsinghua University.
Mr. Liu is one of China's best-known tycoons, his fame burnished by his 2015 marriage to Zhang Zetian, 25, an internet celebrity known as Sister Milk Tea whom Mr. Liu began dating when she was 19. At the time, she was an exchange student at Barnard College and he was studying at Columbia University.
The student accusing him of rape is a member of a wealthy Chinese family and an accomplished pianist, Mr. Florin said, and was 21 at the time of the alleged assault.
As a student helper, she went jogging with some of the Chinese executives in the program, according to the recordings. That is where she met Charlie Yao, who is chairman of China's Jumbo Sheen Enterprises Group of Shenzhen, a diversified company with interests in financial technology, health care and marketing.
"Yao took part in the jogging for like, at least two times," the woman said during her interview with police. "He invited me to come work at his company in the future after graduation."
When an assistant to Mr. Yao texted an invitation for her to attend a group dinner with Chinese executives on Thursday, Aug. 30, she expressed reservations in a text message.
"I'm very nervous," the student replied, asking if she could be accompanied by the assistant. "So I want to go with you."
The woman brought along a male friend to the dinner at Origami, but he left early, according to her lawyer and the interview she gave to police. At the urging of Mr. Yao, she said, she was seated next to Mr. Liu.
Mr. Yao didn't respond to email requests for comment. According to his company's website, JD.com and Mr. Yao's company are both investors in an industrial park in Dongguan for companies working in artificial intelligence.
The dinner tab exceeded $1,900, which was paid by one of Mr. Liu's assistants, according to a restaurant employee and a receipt reviewed by the Journal. The assistant also purchased more than 30 bottles of wine at a nearby store, other receipts show.
After the dinner, the woman said, she was bundled into a large vehicle with Mr. Liu and another of his assistants. "I thought they're taking me someplace right now, but I just can't escape because I was really drunk that time," she said in the recording.
The assistant tried to get Mr. Liu to sit in the second row, but Mr. Liu rebuffed her and said, 'Don't interrupt me,' according to the student. She said Mr. Liu jumped in the third row with her, where he kissed her and tried to take off her clothes despite her pleas for him to stop. Mr. Liu's assistants couldn't be reached for comment.
"I was scared," she said. She said she told Mr. Liu, "'Don't do that, you have wife and you have kids, don't do this. I don't want to do this.' He did not listen to me."
The woman said they were driven to a large house, which a person familiar with the matter said was being rented by one of the executive-education-program participants. The woman said she was afraid to go inside, begging Mr. Liu to take her to her own apartment.
He eventually agreed, she said, and then went into her apartment with her while his assistant and the driver stayed in the vehicle. There, she said, Mr. Liu ignored her protests as he tried to pull her clothes off and initiate sex.
Mr. Liu took a shower and then laid naked on her bed, she said.
"Since he's naked, I have no idea to get him out of my apartment," the woman said.
During the night, she said, Mr. Liu pulled her on to the bed. "He was heavy," according to the recording. "I tried to push him away."
"He held my shoulder, so that I can't move." The woman said Mr. Liu penetrated her, but he ejaculated on the sheet and her stomach.
While Mr. Liu was in her apartment, the woman texted the male friend she had brought to Origami. He called police, who arrived around 3 a.m. and questioned both Mr. Liu and the student, according to Mr. Florin and a text she sent to another friend.
At that time, the woman declined to press charges, which Mr. Florin attributes to her being both traumatized and unfamiliar with the American justice system.
"Liu Qiangdong forced me to sleep with him," the woman messaged a friend. "It was a trap."
She noted that a friend had called police. "It was no use," she said.
That Friday afternoon she went to a hospital to be examined for possible rape and provided the bed sheet as evidence, according to her lawyer.
She then spoke to a university administrator about what had happened, according to the recording. Police were called and the woman was interviewed again at the school, according to the recording.
Mr. Liu was taken into custody Friday night at the business school and was released Saturday afternoon. Police have said they released him because they needed more time to investigate.
---
Shan Li and Xiao Xiao in Beijing contributed to this article.

Credit: By Te-Ping Chen and Austen Hufford

ERIC Subject: College Students; Police; Females; Housing; Periodicals
