SEOUL -- A simple computer pop-up message gave humans some relief in a high-profile man-versus-machine board-game battle: "AlphaGo resigns."
With those words, South Korean Go grandmaster Lee Se-dol on Sunday claimed his first victory in a best-of-five series against AlphaGo, an artificial-intelligence project developed by Alphabet Inc.'s Google. The win in the ancient chess-like game restored some pride to Mr. Lee, as well as big smile across his face.
He had been well beaten in the opening three games after predicting he would win the series easily.
"I couldn't be happier today . . . this victory is priceless. I wouldn't trade it for the world," Mr. Lee said after the game at a news conference, where journalists greeted him with cheers and applause.
The matchup has been billed as an important moment in gauging the progress of artificial intelligence because Go had been widely thought of as still out of reach for computers to challenge top professionals.
The game, which has its origins about 3,000 years ago in China, has a near-infinite number of moves and is played with intuition as much as calculation. That has made it hard to crack for computers that rely on brute-force number crunching.
AlphaGo uses programming modeled on biological processes to replicate human instincts, as well as self-learning through millions of games against itself.
Demis Hassabis, the head of the U.K.-based team that developed AlphaGo, has described it as a "Mount Everest" challenge for computers. All other board games have been mastered by computers to the level of grandmasters.
Mr. Hassabis congratulated Mr. Lee on his win, which he said would help his team learn about AlphaGo's weaknesses to make it stronger. "This is why we came here: to test AlphaGo to its limits," he said.
The matchup has enthralled South Korea, where Mr. Lee is by far the most successful player of a game that has two dedicated television channels and a dedicated fan base.
Mr. Lee has deflected suggestions that he has the weight of mankind on his shoulders, but newspaper, TV and social-media commentary has been full of humor about computers challenging humans. Some observers have made references to movies such as the "Terminator" series, in which machines try to wipe out humans.
Commentators at the Go tournament, which has been streamed live online, have bolstered the story line of rising machine intelligence by referring to AlphaGo as "he" and describing moves with adjectives like "beautiful."
"[Mr. Lee] finally won. This is touching. I don't want to see humans succumb to machines someday," Lee Oi-soo, a Korean novelist with more than two million followers on Twitter wrote on the microblogging service soon after the latest game. He is unrelated to Lee Se-dol.
Mr. Lee, the Go champion, said after the game that AlphaGo appeared to have a weakness in responding to unorthodox moves. "It might be a bug. I don't know if I can call it that," he said.
He also said AlphaGo seemed to be weaker when playing with black counters, which make the first move of the game against an opponent playing with white counters.
After winning on Sunday while using white counters, Mr. Lee said he wanted to play with black in the final game to test his theory. Mr. Hassabis agreed to the proposal.
Commentators on the latest game said Mr. Lee's victory largely stemmed from a decisive attack on the middle of the board. The Go board consists of a 19-by-19 grid of lines, on which players place counters on each intersection and try to claim the most territory.
Toward the end of the game, AlphaGo played desperate moves similar to those of humans facing defeat, commentators said. AlphaGo resigns by displaying a pop-up message when it calculates that its probability of winning falls below a preset threshold, Mr. Hassabis said.
"Congratulations! [Mr. Lee] was too good for us today and pressured AlphaGo into a mistake that it couldn't recover from," Mr. Hassabis tweeted immediately after the game.
Credit: By Alastair Gale and In-Soo Nam
