Google's parent company reported a 15% jump in year-over-year revenue driven by strong results in its cloud-computing division, boosting the company's fortunes during a costly push into artificial intelligence.
Alphabet recorded total revenue of $88.3 billion in the third quarter, which grew at a faster rate than the second quarter's 14%.
Google's cloud division, which sells computing power in data centers and has been a beneficiary of the AI boom, brought in $11.4 billion of revenue. That was up 35% from the previous year, compared with 28.8% in the second quarter.
However, Google's search engine and YouTube video platform both reported slowing revenue growth for a second straight quarter, indicating troubles in the company's advertising business.
Alphabet reported total ad sales of $65.9 billion in the third quarter, an increase of 10.4% from the same period last year. That compared with 11.1% growth in the second quarter.
The results kicked off a busy week of technology company earnings, in which Microsoft, Amazon and Meta Platforms are all scheduled to be reporting results. Investors will be looking closely for signs of whether AI spending is starting to benefit companies' bottom lines. Google hasn't broken out exactly how much revenue it has made from AI services.
Google and other tech giants have significantly ramped up AI spending over the past few years as part of the broader AI boom. Most of that money has gone to build new data centers to develop and run AI models.
Alphabet's capital expenditures were $13.1 billion in the third quarter, up 62% from the same period last year.
The company expects to substantially increase capital spending in 2025, Alphabet chief financial officer Anat Ashkenazi said.
"As we look forward, we are working to balance our investments in AI and other growth areas with the cost discipline needed to fund those investments," Ashkenazi said in her first remarks on an earnings call since entering the role in July. She replaced Ruth Porat, who is now president and chief investment officer.
The company reported $26.3 billion of net income, an increase of 33.6% from the third quarter last year.
Alphabet's shares have fallen about 11% from a peak in July as the company deals with losses in multiple antitrust lawsuits and ongoing concerns about its core business being upended by AI chatbots. Its stock was up 4% in after-hours trading Tuesday following the earnings announcement.
Search advertising brought in $49.4 billion for Google in the third quarter, an increase of 12.2% from the same period last year. The business had grown 13.8% in the second quarter.
Google's search ads business is expected to fall below 50% market share next year due to growing competition from Amazon.com and others, according to Emarketer data.
YouTube generated $8.9 billion of ad sales in the three months ending in September, an increase of 12.2% from the third quarter last year. That compared with a growth rate of 13% in the previous quarter.
E-commerce companies Shein and Temu, two of Google's largest advertisers, slowed their U.S. spending in the three months ending in September compared with the same period last year, according to Sensor Tower data. Their spending provided a boost to Google and Meta Platforms' businesses going back to early last year.
Ashkenazi said increased spending by Asia-based retailers in the second half of last year affected the company's ad sales growth last quarter.
Google reshuffled leadership in its core moneymaking business this month, appointing company veteran Nick Fox to oversee products including the search engine, advertising and map tools. Prabhakar Raghavan, who previously held the position, moved to a role working with the chief executive, Sundar Pichai, on technical matters.
Generate image description

Credit: By Miles Kruppa
