New York's financial regulator said firms need to address the specific cybersecurity risks arising from the use of artificial intelligence, as more regulators aim to ensure the safe use of this rapidly evolving technology.
The New York State Department of Financial Services on Wednesday issued a new guidance document that advises the entities it regulates to monitor and assess risks from AI-enabled tools, as part of the agency's existing cybersecurity regulation. The department said financial-services firms need to better understand AI-related risks, including from social engineering, cyberattacks and the theft of nonpublic information.
The state regulator said the 11-page guidance document didn't impose new requirements but was just the latest installment in the department's efforts to rein in the risks from AI tools. The department recently adopted new guidance targeting discrimination by insurers through the use of AI.
The NYDFS said it issued the guidance in response to inquiries about how AI is changing cyber risk and how it can be mitigated.
NYDFS Superintendent Adrienne Harris said the guidance reinforces the need for firms to factor AI into their risk frameworks and the requirements under the amended cybersecurity regulations.
"I think it's really about making sure there's expertise in the institution, making sure they're engaging with lots of stakeholders, so they understand the development of the technology," she said in an interview, adding that firms need to be engaged in conversations around the use of AI even if they don't have a huge team of experts in the technology.
"It's about making sure that you've got the right expertise in-house -- or that you're otherwise seeking it through external parties -- to make sure your institution is equipped to deal with the risk presented," she added.
The NYDFS said financial firms should have several layers of security controls with overlapping protections to ensure that if one control fails to mitigate the impact of a cyberattack, another control is in place to help, according to the guidance. These controls should include a risk assessment and risk-based programs and procedures, the ability to conduct due diligence on third parties and vendors, cybersecurity training and data management.
The AI guidance from New York's regulator came after California Gov. Gavin Newsom vetoed an AI safety bill last month that pitted some of the biggest tech companies against scientists who developed the technology. The Democrat governor said he was rejecting the measure because it would apply only to the biggest and most-expensive AI models and didn't take into account whether they are deployed in high-risk situations.
Despite the veto, many tech leaders still expect rules to regulate the technology will take shape in some form, as the bill raised bigger questions, including whether regulation should target AI model makers or AI applications and whether it should be directed more by states or federal agencies.
Credit: By Mengqi Sun
