BEIJING -- Baidu Inc. has long enjoyed a near-monopoly on Chinese internet search.
But lately, it is becoming better known for stumbles that have clouded its future.
The company's advertising practices came under scrutiny after the death of a young man who undertook a cancer treatment he found through a Baidu online ad. Shares in the company have fallen nearly 15% this year, and Baidu lowered its revenue forecast by nearly 10% ahead of its earnings report Friday in Asia.
Net income was expected to plunge 42%, to $345 million, from the year-earlier period, according to analysts surveyed by Thomson One Analytics.
What has gone wrong?
The company is still quite profitable, and Baidu clearly rules internet search behind China's Great Firewall. It has 80% market share in a country with 700 million internet users. Google -- which left China in 2010 -- has 64% of the much smaller U.S. search market.
But Baidu has failed to move beyond its core business of search and expand into other areas to ensure growth, analysts say. At one time, Baidu was considered in the same league as fellow Chinese internet giants Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Tencent Holdings Ltd. But both those companies are about four times bigger in market capitalization, and analysts say they have done a better job expanding their base.
Alibaba and Tencent, for example, astutely set up mobile-payment systems early on. Baidu only rolled out a mobile-payment platform in 2014, a decade after Alibaba. Baidu Wallet now has 45 million users, compared with Alipay's more than 450 million.
"Baidu has no shortage of smart guys, but they've never led the market," says Jenny Lee, managing partner at GGV Capital in Shanghai, adding that Baidu hasn't always taken the long view in strategic planning.
That means Baidu is still mostly about search.
"We should be the front-runners researching virtual reality, drones and so on," says a Baidu executive, who wasn't authorized to speak publicly. "But the company has put too much focus on the search engine."
Of Baidu's $10 billion in revenue in 2015, 94% came from advertising, much of it search-driven. Medical advertising has proved especially lucrative, making up 20% to 30% of Baidu's ad revenue, according to analyst estimates.
But medical ads can be tricky. In April, Baidu was the focus of intense criticism after the death of a college student with a rare cancer who used a $31,000 alternative therapy he found through a Baidu ad.
The death led to a rare admission from Baidu Chief Executive Robin Li that the company might have lost its way.
"Recalling the early days when Baidu was just founded, we primarily fought with Google and other competitors for users," he said in a May 10 letter to employees. "[Now I] see senior engineers hesitate, even compromise, between commercial interests and user experience."
Although search is Baidu's core business, the information is often limited -- and not just by government censors.
A search for "cancer" on Alphabet Inc.'s Google typically brings up prominent groups such as the American Cancer Society. On Baidu, users are more likely to find advice provided by fellow patients in online forums.
Baidu says it earned its spot as China's dominant search engine and works hard to build a reliable search system to deliver a "superior user experience," and said it cooperated with the government's probe into the death of the student with cancer.
The company doesn't expect to cover every single corner of the internet, nor to be able to monetize all its endeavors, according to a person familiar with the company's thinking.
This person, who wasn't authorized to speak for the company, said Baidu focuses on investments that can make use of its core technology and data, such as online travel.
This approach has won some fans.
"I absolutely hate the idea of spraying money all over the place," says an institutional U.S. investor. "With Robin, I'm on the same side of every transaction. I understand the rationale."
To be sure, Baidu is making a push into several areas that might appear unrelated to search, including self-driving cars. The connective tissue is data, and the mission of the company's chief scientist, Andrew Ng, who founded Google's artificial-intelligence unit before Baidu wooed him away, is to turn the vast array of data Baidu collects into new sources of revenue.
---
Lilian Lin and Pei Li contributed to this article.
Credit: By Alyssa Abkowitz
