Relatively placid stock indexes on Tuesday masked furious paddling beneath the surface of the market.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite inched 0.1% lower, while the S&P 500 slipped 0.2%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped by 0.1%, or 57 points.
Investors have been fixated in recent days on the U.S. presidential election, a market rotation of potentially massive proportions and a technology outage that snarled global travel. But Tuesday traders refocused on basics with a slew of corporate earnings reports.
Shares in United Parcel Service skidded 12% -- the worst performance in the S&P 500 -- following a report of weaker-than-expected revenue and a pared-back outlook. Spotify surged 12% after the audiostreaming company posted its second consecutive quarterly profit. Down 6.4%, General Motors scored its worst daily performance since 2022, with investors concentrating on eroding market share in China rather than domestic demand.
The topsy-turvy session extended a period of unusual volatility among individual stocks fueled by investor bets on winners and losers from the artificial-intelligence boom and expected interest-rate cuts. The yield on 10-year Treasury notes held largely steady at 4.240%.
Lackluster fuel demand pushed U.S. oil prices to their lowest level since June 7, with benchmark crude declining 1.8%, to $76.96 a barrel. Copper futures, which surged earlier this year due to projections of an AI-driven data-center boom, retreated for the seventh day in a row. The metal's losing streak is its longest since February 2020.
Major stock indexes on Tuesday seesawed between minor gains and losses as investors parsed the first major blast of corporate earnings reports.
Lockheed Martin's 5.6% gain was its best of the year, and came after the defense contractor lifted its profit outlook. With strong demand for its commercial engines and services, GE Aerospace shares jumped 5.7%. The truck maker Paccar slumped 11% following earnings that lagged behind Wall Street estimates.
But investors were particularly eager for Tesla and Alphabet earnings after the closing bell for hints as to whether a marketwide rotation away from big tech and into smaller firms would continue.
"We are definitely past the euphoria stage of this [AI] trend," said John Belton, a portfolio manager at Gabelli Funds. "It's now time to see some real tangible results."
Analysts at Goldman Sachs and elsewhere have increasingly questioned the payoff of AI, adding momentum to a selloff across the so-called Magnificent Seven last week.
The Russell 2000 index of small and midsize companies outperformed its major counterparts with a 1% gain.
Asian markets were slightly down at midday Wednesday. Japan's Nikkei 225 had lost 0.2% and the Hang Seng Index in Hong Kong had retreated 0.8%.
---
Patricia Kowsmann contributed to this article.
Credit: By David Uberti
