SINGAPORE -- Beijing fired its latest salvo in the U.S.-China semiconductor wars by announcing an antitrust probe into U.S. chip juggernaut Nvidia, a week after Washington stepped up controls on China's access to high-end semiconductors.
Industry watchers said the move was aimed at sending a message that China won't stand by quietly when targeted by trade and technology sanctions -- a message with particular relevance as Donald Trump prepares to assume the presidency in January.
Shares of Nvidia, which makes the bulk of the cutting-edge chips that power artificial-intelligence servers, closed down 2.6% on Monday.
The company's China revenue totaled $13.5 billion in the past four quarters, accounting for 12% of its global total. That proportion has shrunk because U.S. sanctions restricted Nvidia from selling its most-advanced chips to Chinese customers.
A Nvidia spokesman said customers are free to choose which chips they use, and that the company wins on the merit of its products. "We are happy to answer any questions regulators may have about our business," he said.
China's antitrust probe followed a pattern of the country using government investigations to express its displeasure over U.S. export limits.
The moves are part of a geopolitical flare-up between the countries that escalated in recent years with export restrictions and U.S. tariffs on Chinese goods from chips to washing machines. Trump engaged in a trade war with China during his first term, and promised during his campaign this year to raise tariffs on all Chinese goods to 60%.
China has been limited in its ability to respond to semiconductor restrictions because much of the world's chip-making technology is linked to U.S. companies and inventions. Chinese chip companies have tried to adapt by looking for workarounds in chip manufacturing and stepping up domestic production of artificial-intelligence chips. Chips have become a crux of the competition because of how critical they are in AI, cyberwarfare, military equipment and other areas with national-security and economic significance.
Beijing's antimonopoly regulator, called the State Administration for Market Regulation, on Monday said it was investigating Nvidia over suspicions that the company violated the terms of a conditional approval it received from Beijing in 2020 for its acquisition of an Israeli networking firm. In March 2019, Nvidia announced what was then its biggest-ever acquisition when it agreed to pay about $7 billion to acquire Mellanox Technologies.
China's market regulator said in April 2020 that the deal was given the green light after Nvidia and Mellanox agreed to conditions including providing an uninterrupted supply of graphics-processing units and networking equipment to the country. The chip company, based in Santa Clara, Calif., promised not to discriminate against customers in China, the regulator said.
China's antitrust authorities can play a large role in global mergers, even for deals that don't seem closely related to China. In the past, the country used merger reviews to scuttle sizable takeovers, such as Intel's more than $5 billion deal to buy Israel's Tower Semiconductor.
In Monday's release, the regulator didn't say what Nvidia might have done wrong or explain why it was raising the issue so long after the conditional approval. The 2020 agreement said Nvidia could apply to remove the conditions after six years.
Beijing fired back rapidly at Washington's latest trade restrictions, which expanded export controls first imposed in 2022. The U.S. said it would block the sale to China of advanced memory chips used in AI applications, and it put about 140 Chinese entities on a trade blacklist.
In response, China last week said it would tighten export controls on key raw materials used in the production of advanced processors and military equipment. Also, four major Chinese industry associations cautioned companies against buying American chips.
While it has been held back by U.S. restrictions, Nvidia continues to do significant business in China. It adapted its products to continue serving Chinese customers while staying within the letter of American rules. In addition, some Chinese customers found ways to access Nvidia chips, including by working with brokers to use computing power overseas.
In November, China's vice commerce minister, Wang Shouwen, told Nvidia executive Jay Puri in Beijing that China welcomed the presence of the company and aimed to build a better environment for foreign companies. Puri told Wang that China was an important market for Nvidia and said the company would continue to strengthen communication with its Chinese partners.
China expressed concern at the time of the Nvidia-Mellanox deal that the agreement could hinder competition given the market domination of the two companies in their respective products. Nvidia and Mellanox agreed to abide by seven conditions, two of which were confidential, a government filing showed.
---
Asa Fitch contributed to this article.
Credit: By Raffaele Huang and Liza Lin
