Spam
By Finn Brunton
(MIT, 270 pages, $27.95)
"There is no way to peace. Peace is the way." The first spam message, sent in 1971, was born when Peter Bos, an engineer at MIT, used his privileges as a system administrator to urge a thousand fellow engineers -- including some at the Pentagon -- to oppose the Vietnam War.
The next spam crisis took place seven years later when a marketer working for the computer giant DEC abused the printed directory of all addresses on Arpanet -- the most important computer network of the day -- to advertise a DEC open house. The episode prompted some farseeing observers -- like John McCarthy, the computer scientist who coined the term "artificial intelligence" -- to start asking questions about the future. "How should advertising be handled in electronic mail systems?" asked McCarthy of his fellow Arpanet users -- a puzzle with which we still struggle today.
Few think of spammers as innovators, and yet Finn Brunton, in his brilliant take on the history of digital culture, suggests that is exactly what they are. "From a certain perverse perspective," he writes, "spam can be presented as the Internet's infrastructure used maximally and most efficiently." Spammers are always testing the limits of the technology, seeking new ways to hijack our attention, even as we seek ways to screen them out.
Every decade or so, a crisis engulfs our communications infrastructure and prompts debate about the nature and future of spam. In "Spam: A Shadow History of the Internet," Mr. Brunton navigates several key episodes in this convoluted history, showing how the fight against undesirable communication shaped the norms of the digital age. In defining what counts as "spam," finding whom to blame and deciding how to fight it, the first online communities also defined themselves. The consequences of those early deliberations still influence what we can and can't do online.
For two decades after Bos sent his antiwar outburst, spam seemed like a manageable problem. Back then, it was widely assumed that self-regulation by responsible parties -- mostly government agencies or universities that employed most of the spamming users -- would be enough. By the late 1980s, however, access to communication networks was being democratized. It didn't take long for someone -- a man called Robert Noha, to be precise -- to flood the network with a fundraising appeal using an email address offered by a private Internet service provider. In a move that might seem surprising to us now, the ISP -- which felt a strong obligation to the rest of the virtual community -- actually published his phone number and urged anyone who didn't like be spammed to complain to him directly.
The most notorious spam case of the time was the Green Card Lottery Spam of 1994. An immigration law firm thought that advertising its services through Usenet -- a favorite forum for technophiles, just before the World Wide Web -- would be an innovative tactic. So it hired a programmer to write a script to send promotional messages to virtually every Usenet group. The firm was bold enough to invoke its right to free speech in defense.
By the late 1990s, the problem of spam had caught the attention of policy makers. In 2003, Congress passed the CAN-SPAM Act, which sought to eliminate spam through commercial pressure. Advertisers were required to label messages as ads and give the recipients the option to unsubscribe. At the same time, new tools were developed to detect and eliminate spam.
Alas, these new tools and laws had unintended consequences. As the costs of spamming skyrocketed -- tricking the new filters wasn't cheap, and the risks of prosecution loomed large -- amateurs left the field. The professionals who stayed established connections with crime syndicates and focused almost exclusively on identity theft and financial fraud. Thus spam today might affect a smaller number of people, but victims end up losing much more than just a few dollars.
In order to trick the filters, some spammers embraced "litspam" -- usually an oddly poetic piece of gibberish auto-composed by mixing literary texts together. Litspam, writes Mr. Brunton, is like "a chance meeting of 'Ulysses' and a telephone interchange . . ." Much of the contemporary spamming economy is fully automated: It's one set of algorithms trying to outsmart another set of algorithms.
One unmissable conclusion from Mr. Brunton's engrossing story is that spam has meant very different things at different times. In the 1970s, it meant the breach of commonly held norms. In the 1990s, it implied the invasion of user communities by outsiders. Today it means the intrusion of automated bots into a formerly human realm. By tracing the evolution of the many meanings of spam, Mr. Brunton upsets the traditional Whiggish narrative of digital culture, which suggests that users simply find one another and build new communities as they please. Rather, he suggests, they were in some ways fortunate to be forced to come together to fight a common enemy.
---
Mr. Morozov is the author of "To Save Everything, Click Here: The Folly of Technological Solutionism."
Credit: By Evgeny Morozov
