A much-watched experiment in Finland failed to provide evidence that offering people a guaranteed income is the answer to some of the insecurities caused by potentially profound changes in the jobs market.
Early results from a pilot program suggest that providing unemployed people with a minimum income doesn't encourage them to find work, given that Finland's complex social-welfare system can decrease a person's income when they find work. But neither does it turn them against employment.
Those results are unlikely to dent support for a universal basic income among its advocates, who see it as a solution to a range of big societal problems, including rising income inequality, the expansion of the gig economy, and a potential surge in unemployment as automation advances.
Under the Finnish program, the first of its kind, a random selection of 2,000 unemployed people were paid a tax-exempt income of 560 euros ($634) a month, regardless of any other sources of income or whether they were looking for work. The pilot ran from the start of 2017 until the end of 2018.
"We can say that during the first year of the experiment the recipients of a basic income were no better or worse than the control group at finding employment in the open labor market," said Ohto Kanninen, a researcher at Finland's Labor Institute for Economic Research.
Researchers also believe that the large commitment required to engage with the welfare bureaucracy can prevent the unemployed from looking for work effectively or developing new skills.
Participants in the pilot scheme did report feeling less stress and greater confidence in their future job prospects, while advocates of a universal basic income said the time-limited nature of the experiment means its results can't be viewed as definitive.
"The Finnish government hoped that UBI would increase labor supply and employment, but it did not," said Christopher Pissarides, a professor of economics at the London School of Economics and a Nobel Prize winner."It was inappropriate for them to expect to see such an effect because the experiment was temporary. Such effects, if they exist, take place only if UBI is perceived to be a long-term policy, which in this case it clearly was not."
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, which advises developed-country governments on work and welfare, noted in a 2017 paper on the pros and cons of a basic income that the increase in interest among policy makers had been remarkable, although it appears to have waned.
"I don't get the impression that it's quite as high up the policy agenda," said James Browne, an economist at the Paris-based research body.
The idea of a basic income has a long history, but it has come back into focus this century as concerns grow about the threat posed to developed countries by increasing inequality, the rise of temporary employment, and the possibility that robots and artificial intelligence will replace human workers over a range of jobs. The Finnish pilot focused on just one of the many uses to which a basic income could be put. "It means many different things to different people," said Luke Martinelli, a research associate at the University of Bath. "Some of the more profound impacts can't be measured."

Credit: By Paul Hannon
