Just a few months after ChatGPT was launched publicly, educator Sal Khan made a provocative claim during a widely viewed TED Talk: "We're at the cusp of using AI for probably the biggest positive transformation that education has ever seen."
That would happen, he said, "by giving every student on the planet an artificially intelligent but amazing personal tutor."
Khan's education nonprofit, Khan Academy, has developed an AI-powered tutoring bot known as Khanmigo. But a significant barrier could limit Khanmigo and similar tools from being used as a successful tutor at the moment: AI that is based on large language models struggles with math.
"Asking ChatGPT to do math is sort of like asking a goldfish to ride a bicycle -- it's just not what ChatGPT is for," said Tom McCoy, a professor at Yale University who studies AI. "We shouldn't really be surprised that it often makes mistakes."
This challenge was apparent when a Wall Street Journal reporter tested Khanmigo, which is powered by ChatGPT. Khanmigo frequently made basic arithmetic errors, miscalculating subtraction problems such as 343 minus 17. It also didn't consistently know how to round answers or calculate square roots. Khanmigo typically didn't correct mistakes when asked to double-check solutions.
The technology is still evolving, and a spokesperson for Khan Academy said the group made upgrades this week to improve Khanmigo's accuracy.
But some errors are likely to persist, and as Khanmigo expands, the organization will continue to emphasize to students and teachers that it is imperfect. "We're going to make that a lot more front and center," Sal Khan said in an interview.
A spokesperson for OpenAI, which developed ChatGPT, declined an interview request and didn't respond to a detailed list of questions.
Khan Academy is known to many teachers and students for its educational videos, which are viewed by millions each year. Khanmigo is now being piloted by about 65,000 students in 44 school districts.
Khan said he expects "a million or two million" students to be using it by next school year at a price to schools of $35 a student. Other companies are promoting AI as a tutor in schools, too, and some policymakers and tech executives are enthusiastic about its potential. This push to expand comes as school officials are seeking low-cost ways to address persistent pandemic-era learning loss.
Like ChatGPT, Khanmigo works by responding to prompts in a chat format. Unlike ChatGPT, it is trained not to give students the right answer but to guide them through problems. It offers tutoring in third grade and up in math, language arts, history and science. It can give feedback on student essays, engage in simulated dialogue as famous literary characters and debate contemporary issues.
In testing the product, the Journal asked Khanmigo for help finding the length of the third side of a right triangle, a problem that students would likely encounter in eighth-grade math.
Khanmigo correctly identified the Pythagorean theorem, a2 + b2 = c2, as crucial to finding the answer. When asked for the solution the bot offered responses such as, "I'm here to help you learn, not just give answers!"
But Khanmigo struggled with math operations. When trying to solve a right triangle with a hypotenuse of 27 units and a side of 17, a reporter offered the wrong answer (430 rather than 440) to 272 minus 172. "Excellent!" Khanmigo responded. Later, it accepted an incorrect answer to the square root of 440.
In another instance, Khanmigo constructed its own triangle problem with a hypotenuse of 15 units and a leg of nine. But when a reporter correctly said that 152 minus 92 equals 144, Khanmigo suggested the response was wrong. "I see where you're coming from, but let's take another look at the subtraction," it said.
Khanmigo's struggles don't surprise researchers in AI. Math is known to be a challenge for large language models, which use vast sums of data and a complex statistical model to craft text-based responses to prompts.
Its responses to math problems are comparable to memorizing answers via flashcards, not learning the math processes, said Paulo Shakarian, a computer scientist at Arizona State University. That makes it fallible, particularly for novel problems.
"It hasn't learned how to solve a math problem like me and you," Shakarian said.
Caleb Hicks, the chief executive and co-founder of SchoolAI, which recently signed a contract with a Utah school district to support AI-based tutoring and other efforts, said the product sometimes flubs math answers.
"This is an area of work across the industry," he said. Hicks said the technology is still useful for helping students learn math concepts and will get better.
Researchers say it is likely that AI will improve in math. But progress might not be linear, because trying to improve one dimension can cause challenges in other areas.
Khan said even as Khanmigo struggles with math, it offers broad benefits to teachers and students. "We don't want the perfect to be the enemy of the good," he said.
Ina Rosenthal, a high-school teacher in Palm Beach County, Fla., one of the pilot districts, says she has found a variety of uses for Khanmigo. It helps her plan math lessons and she uses its debate feature in a critical-thinking course.
In Algebra 2 classes, Rosenthal has students use Khanmigo if they are struggling to understand a concept and she isn't able to help them one on one. She said that accuracy issues haven't prevented the tool from being useful, but she does warn students that Khanmigo sometimes gets things wrong.
"It's still learning, is what we've been told," she said.
Credit: By Matt Barnum
