Baidu Boasts
Supercomputer Record
Baidu Inc. says it has posted the world's best results on a closely watched artificial intelligence benchmark. It had a secret weapon, according to researchers at the Chinese search giant: Minwa.
The company's Minwa supercomputer scanned ImageNet, a database of just over one million pictures, and taught itself how to sort them into a predefined set of roughly 1,000 categories. This meant learning the difference between a French loaf and a meatloaf, but also trickier challenges such as distinguishing a Lakeland terrier from a wire-haired fox terrier.
Five years ago, the possibility that computers would surpass humans at this work appeared remote. But computers run by Microsoft Corp., Google Inc., and now Baidu have all done better than the best human results in recent months.
With practice, humans correctly identify all but about 5% of the ImageNet photos. Microsoft's software had a 4.94% error rate; Google achieved 4.8%. Baidu said that it had reduced the error rate further to 4.58%.
The so-called deep learning algorithms that Baidu and others are using to ace these tests have only recently made the leap from academia to Silicon Valley. But they're starting to have an impact in daily life.
Two years ago, Google used deep learning to dramatically boost Android's voice recognition system.
Baidu is using an even larger supercomputer to analyze 14,000 hours of speech data to improve the search company's Chinese- and English-language speech recognition.
"Computers can understand images so much better and do so many things that they couldn't do just a year ago," said Andrew Ng, Baidu's chief scientist.
In the coming 18 months, Baidu plans to build an even larger machine, one that can perform 7 quadrillion calculations per second. That would be enough to rank the system as one of the 10 most powerful supercomputers in the world, although it performs less complex calculations than the world's top-ranked supercomputers.
Yann LeCun, an artificial intelligence researcher who leads a similar effort at Facebook Inc., said his company was deploying big-time computational resources, although he wouldn't comment on the size of Facebook's computer system.
With all the computing firepower being aimed at deep learning, the ImageNet test is starting to become "passe as a benchmark," Mr. LeCun said. "People are focusing on much larger data sets and more challenging tasks that involve object recognition, such as object detection and localization," he said.
-- Robert McMillan
DocuSign Hits
$3 Billion Valuation
DocuSign has raised $233 million from late-stage investors to speed global expansion of its digital document management service while indefinitely postponing an initial public offering.
The infusion, which people familiar with the deal said valued the company at $3 billion, nearly doubles the amount of capital DocuSign has raised.
Existing investors Bain Capital affiliate Brookside Capital and Bain Ventures co-led the Series F round, with participation from new investor Generation Investment Management, whose chairman is former Vice President Al Gore, and a handful of unnamed strategic investors.
DocuSign has grown quickly in recent years. Since launching in 2003 as a provider of electronic signatures serving the U.S. real-estate industry, it has expanded its product to track, authenticate and archive all types of digital documents for insurance, consumer goods, enterprise sales, financial, pharmaceuticals and other sectors.
The San Francisco-based company has also expanded geographically; it now employs 1,300 employees at 10 offices world-wide.
DocuSign previously raised $237 million from investors and was valued at $1.6 billion in March 2014.
-- Lizette Chapman
