The U.K.'s largest electricity provider is powering its Texas-size energy ambitions with an Uber-like approach to renewable retailing.
Octopus Energy Group, a British energy conglomerate, entered the U.S. market through its acquisition of Houston and Silicon Valley-based startup Evolve Energy for $5 million in 2020. Now, Octopus is boosting its Texas focus, using its renewable-energy-management system to offer cheaper prices to customers that agreed to let the platform shift their demand from times of shortage to when there is abundant supply.
Texas' deregulated energy market allows location-specific variable pricing, which is needed for Octopus to make its model work, by shifting consumer demand. Few places in the U.S. beyond the Lone Star state have regulations that offer similar flexibility.
Current power systems are like an old-fashioned taxi dispatch where people turn a small number of very large power stations on and off to meet customers' relatively predictable demand, said Greg Jackson, founder and chief executive of Octopus. In contrast, a renewable system has numerous, widely dispersed solar and wind farms, grid-scale storage, inter-regional connections and millions of electric vehicles (and their batteries).
"You can't manage that [renewable system] centrally with a bunch of guys doing dispatch . . . you need . . . a great big database matching supply and demand at a time and a place, via a price," Jackson said.
He referred to how Uber built its business around being able to forecast when and where drivers would be needed and using pricing to manage supply and demand. "The energy system is going to be like this," he said.
Texas is the U.S.'s largest electricity producer and has the most wind capacity, but in recent years, it faced the threat of occasional blackouts as power generation hasn't kept up with the state's growing population and economy.
Octopus says it needs only some customers to participate in its flexible offers to have a big impact. For example, it supplies 11% of the EVs in Britain -- most of those customers chose its smart charging tariff, which means Octopus's system has about 720 megawatts of shiftable load and cuts those customers' car charging costs by 75%.
It is "using vast amounts of data to work out for each EV battery: Should I be doing nothing now? Should I be charging now? Should I be discharging now?" Jackson explains. "For solar panels and batteries in homes: Should the solar be going onto the grid? Into a car? Into the home battery? Should the home battery be going into the grid? Sucking from the grid? Pumping into the car? Pumping into the home? Should the heat pump be operating?"
Octopus's Kraken software system uses AI and machine learning to track one billion to two billion data points daily to balance power supply and demand, the company said. The group is in 18 countries and has 52 million Kraken accounts. The goal is to reach 100 million accounts by 2027.
The group is valued at $7.8 billion after its latest fundraising in December, which saw $800 million from existing investors, including Canada Pension Plan Investment Board, Generation Investment Management, Origin Energy and Tokyo Gas.
Octopus more than doubled its retail customer base over the past two years, acquired failed rivals including Bulb and Avro, and bought oil-and-gas giant Shell's U.K and German retail utility businesses.
Credit: By Rochelle Toplensky
