BRUSSELS -- International Business Machines Corp. Chief Executive Ginni Rometty attacked big internet platforms for mishandling customers' data and endorsed some European Union efforts to police the web, the latest technology chief to call out fellow companies in the debate over privacy regulation.
Ms. Rometty's comments in the EU's capital sought to distinguish IBM -- which serves business customers -- from mass-market tech companies such as Facebook Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google, which have drawn attacks over data-handling from politicians and regulators world-wide.
"The genesis of the trust crisis is their responsible handling of personal data by a few dominant consumer-facing platforms," Ms. Rometty said Monday. The websites "have more power to shape public opinion than newspapers or the television ever had, yet they face very little regulation or liability."
"If there are specific companies that misbehave, steps need to be taken," she said. "I would use a regulatory scalpel, not a sledgehammer" that affects the whole industry.
Ms. Rometty's comments follow remarks last month by Apple Inc. CEO Tim Cook to the European Parliament in Brussels that individuals' personal online information has been "weaponized." Attacking the "data-industrial complex," he advocated national data-protection regulation in the U.S. similar to the EU's General Data Protection Regulation, which took effect in May.
Saleforce.com Inc. CEO Marc Benioff earlier this year criticized Facebook and other consumer-web companies as he advocated a national privacy law like GDPR in the U.S. A similar new law in California takes effect in 2020.
The executives' comments are the public face of their lobbying efforts to shape debates on tighter data regulation. The three CEOs want to distinguish their companies from ones that profit from mining, analyzing and reselling their users' data.
Ms. Rometty, in public and private meetings this week, is telling European officials that regulation doesn't need to be as broad and prescriptive as GDPR, according to a person familiar with the private talks. Several European consumer groups filed complaints against Facebook, Google and other platforms under GDPR soon after it took effect. Business-data companies haven't faced such complaints, yet compliance with GDPR has cost IBM and its clients hundreds of millions of dollars, European officials said.
IBM is also concerned because the EU and other regulators are starting to focus on how artificial intelligence should be monitored. IBM, which has a large AI business, doesn't want to be lumped with a few rivals it sees as causing problems and increasing costs for the industry.
"In regulating tech, government needs to focus on fixing the real problem," careless handling of personal data by consumer-web companies, Ms. Rometty said. "Addressing the weakest link should not define the digital economy."
IBM and other business-to-business data companies say competition in their crowded sectors for services -- such as web-hosting -- forces them to treat customers' data more carefully than consumer-internet giants do. Consumers "have very little power against the dominant internet platform companies," Ms. Rometty said. "That is where regulatory action is warranted."

Credit: By Daniel Michaels
