Last month, the British television network Channel 4 broadcast an "alternative Christmas address" by Queen Elizabeth II, in which the 94-year-old monarch was shown cracking jokes and performing a dance popular on TikTok. Of course, it wasn't real: The video was produced as a warning about deepfakes -- apparently real images or videos that show people doing or saying things they never did or said. If an image of a person can be found, new technologies using artificial intelligence and machine learning now make it possible to show that person doing almost anything at all. The dangers of the technology are clear: A high-school teacher could be shown in a compromising situation with a student, a neighbor could be depicted as a terrorist.
Can deepfakes, as such, be prohibited under American law? Almost certainly not. In U.S. v. Alvarez, decided in 2012, a badly divided Supreme Court held that the First Amendment prohibits the government from regulating speech simply because it is a lie. The case concerned a man who falsely claimed that he was a recipient of the Medal of Honor. Lying about receiving that medal is a crime under the 2006 Stolen Valor Act, but the Supreme Court struck down the key provision of that law, ruling that the lie was protected by the First Amendment. The plurality opinion declared that "permitting the government to decree this speech to be a criminal offense . . . would endorse government authority to compile a list of subjects about which false statements are punishable. That governmental power has no clear limiting principle. . . . Were this law to be sustained, there could be an endless list of subjects the National Government or the States could single out."
Under existing law, a key question is whether deepfakes cause sufficient harm. If they are libelous, they could be regulated under current legal standards, which allow plaintiffs to recover damages when, for example, a speaker hurts their reputation by spreading what the speaker knows to be a lie.
But deepfakes need not be libelous. They might be positive, making people look impressive or wonderful. A deepfake might be used, say, to advertise an energy pill by showing an 80-year-old man taking the pill and then dunking a basketball like LeBron James. And if a deepfake shows a politician doing something amazing or heroic, there's no libel.
Does the government have the right to ban these kinds of deepfakes? According to the plurality opinion in Alvarez, "The remedy for speech that is false is speech that is true. This is the ordinary course in a free society." By this standard, the best response to many deepfakes is a smile and a laugh -- or counter-speech and disclosure -- rather than censorship. Social media platforms are not bound by the First Amendment, but in cases in which people could be misled, such platforms might want to label deepfakes as such, but not take them down, certainly as a matter of course. Twitter has voluntarily adopted an approach of this kind, potentially adding labels to manipulated media but taking down tweets that contain them only if they are "likely to cause harm."
In terms of constitutional law, governments should generally be required to choose the regulatory approach that is maximally protective of speech. In Alvarez, the Court suggested that instead of criminalizing false claims about receiving the Medal of Honor, the government could create a public database of winners, making it "easy to verify and expose false claims."
But it would be difficult to argue that this is a sufficient response to the worst and most harmful kinds of deepfakes. If someone is portrayed as doing something horrible that she never did, or as endorsing a position that she despises, an accessible database would be unlikely to undo the damage. A more effective speech-protective approach would be clear disclosure, informing people before or when they see a deepfake that it is fake. Under Alvarez, there should be no constitutional barrier to that kind of approach to those deepfakes that are likely to cause serious harm.
In the most extreme cases -- involving, for example, deepfakes that are shown to be libelous -- more aggressive controls might take the form of fines and an order to cease and desist, enforced perhaps by a regulatory body. Or they could operate via a standard tort-like approach, allowing victims of libelous deepfakes a civil cause of action.
It's tempting to argue that, in an important sense, deepfakes are nothing new. They are equivalent to false statements of fact. If someone makes a deepfake that depicts the attorney general looking drunk and disoriented, perhaps it is not so different from simply telling people, "I saw the attorney general looking drunk and disoriented." Such statements aren't regulated or banned unless there is an independent ground -- for example, they might be defamatory or obscene. Why should deepfakes be treated differently?
A reasonable answer is that deepfakes are more powerful than merely verbal representations. In a sense, they are self-authenticating: The human mind doesn't easily dismiss them, and even if it does, there is some part of it that remains convinced. Behavioral science makes a distinction between two families of cognitive operations in the human mind: System 1, which is fast and automatic, and System 2, which is more deliberative and slower. Even if System 2 is informed that a video is a deepfake, System 1 is likely to remain under the influence of what it saw, hearing a kind of mental echo. If you see a deepfake of a drunk attorney general, you will have a hard time getting the image out of your mind. The most credible and harmful deepfakes may thus be proper objects of regulatory attention even if statements that embody the same propositional content are not.
In this light, private institutions may want to take a more aggressive approach than governments can (or should). In 2019, Facebook announced that it was banning "misleading manipulated media" that meets two criteria. First, "it has been edited or synthesized -- beyond adjustments for clarity or quality -- in ways that aren't apparent to an average person and would likely mislead someone into thinking that a subject of the video said words that they did not actually say." Second, "It is the product of artificial intelligence or machine learning that merges, replaces or superimposes content onto a video, making it appear to be authentic."
But there are problems with this approach. As it is written, the policy applies to "words [a person] did not actually say" but not to deeds a person never did. Nothing in Facebook's policy would seem to prohibit a deepfake that shows a political candidate beating up a child or using heroin. The prohibition is also limited to products of artificial intelligence or machine learning, even though videos can be altered in other ways -- for example, slowing them down to make someone appear drunk or drugged, as in the case of an infamous doctored video of Nancy Pelosi. What should matter isn't the particular technology used to deceive but whether unacceptable deception has occurred.
Social-media platforms already make it possible for lies and misinformation -- involving health, politics and everything else -- to spread instantly to countless people. Deepfakes are going to make things worse. They threaten to aggravate a situation in which ordinary citizens are having an increasingly hard time knowing what is true, and often end up believing those who are best at fooling them. Free speech may be the most important right of all, but both private and public institutions are going to have to think hard about how to apply longstanding principles to unanticipated dangers.
---
Prof. Sunstein is the Robert Walmsley University Professor at Harvard University. This essay is adapted from his new book "Liars: Falsehoods and Free Speech in an Age of Deception," which will be published March 1 by Oxford University Press.

Credit: By Cass R. Sunstein
