Facebook Inc. Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg and his wife Priscilla Chan on Wednesday committed to invest more than $3 billion during the next decade to build technology that can speed up research on disease.
The first investment by the couple's for-profit philanthropic arm, the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative LLC, will be $600 million to create a research lab of engineers and scientists based in San Francisco, Dr. Chan said.
At the lab, called Biohub, engineers and researchers from the University of California, San Francisco, Stanford University and the University of California, Berkeley, will create tools for researchers.
"This focus on building on tools suggests a road map for how we might go about curing, preventing and managing all diseases this century," Mr. Zuckerberg said. "Because if we can develop the new tools that allow us to see these categories of disease in new ways, we could empower scientists all over the world to make much faster progress."
One such tool is a "cell atlas" or a map of all the different cell types in the human body and their different states.
Dr. Chan announced the $3 billion investment during an event in San Francisco attended by many of Silicon Valley's elite,including Facebook Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg and CEO of Alphabet Inc.'s Google unit Sundar Pichai.
Microsoft Inc. founder Bill Gates, who Mr. Zuckerberg described as a mentor for decades, also spoke.
The pledge is among the first investments the couple will make through the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, which they created last year.
Mr. Zuckerberg and Dr. Chan have promised to give away 99% of their wealth during their lifetimes through the entity in areas such as education and health care. Currently valued at $46 billion, it is one of the world's largest philanthropic initiatives.
Mr. Zuckerberg mentioned a few potential tools that could be built, such as using machine learning to analyze large databases of cancer genomes or making a chip to diagnose any infectious disease.
He and others on the stage also referenced developing a map "of all the different kinds of cell types in our body and the different states" that could be a quick reference for people who are designing drugs.
In his remarks, Mr. Zuckerberg noted that scientific breakthroughs often were preceded by new tools, such as the telescope and microscope.
The couple is creating Chan Zuckerberg Science, which will be led by Cornelia Bargmann, a neuroscientist at Rockefeller University who was among the first recipients of the Breakthrough Prize, a $3 million annual award created by Mr. Zuckerberg along with Russian tech investor Yuri Milner and Google co-founder Sergey Brin.
Both Dr. Chan and her husband noted that they spoke to dozens of top scientists who believe it is possible to cure, prevent or manage diseases by the end of the century.
Dr. Chan referenced her work as a pediatrician and treating children with incurable illnesses. "In those moments and many others, we are at the limit of what we understand," Dr. Chan said. "We want to push back that boundary."
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman
