[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Apple and Amazon might seem to have little in common.
But both need to move a lot of goods and services to make their numbers work. The two now generate combined annual revenue of more than $920 billion, putting them among the six largest companies in the world by that measure, according to data from S&P Global Market Intelligence. Delivering significant new growth numbers is a challenge for both. Amazon has posted single-digit year-on-year revenue growth for five of the last six quarters -- a major slowdown from the mid-20% range the company averaged before its pandemic sales boom. Apple's revenue has been in actual decline for the past two quarters.
June quarter reports from the two on Thursday afternoon showed some divergence. Amazon posted revenue growth of 11% from a year earlier, compared with the 9% Wall Street was anticipating, according to FactSet. Revenue beat projections across all the company's segments, including the vital cloud computing business AWS. An even bigger surprise was Amazon's operating income of $7.7 billion, which more than doubled from the same period last year.
Apple, meanwhile, is still in a lull. Revenue fell 1.4% on-year to $81.8 billion. That narrowly beat Wall Street's projections thanks to a pickup in growth for the company's services arm. But iPhone sales fell short of projections, even in what is typically the weakest seasonal period for the iconic smartphone. Apple also projected a similar overall revenue decline for the September quarter, missing projections calling for a slight gain.
Amazon, meanwhile, gave a surprisingly sunny outlook for the same period. The company projected another quarter of 11% revenue growth and operating income of $7 billion at the midpoint, both of which exceeded analysts forecasts. The latter is what typically trips up Amazon on its quarterly reports.
Amazon's shares jumped 8.3% on Friday, while Apple's fell 4.8%. Both stocks had been on a strong run this year, with Amazon shares up 53% and Apple's up 47% prior to Friday. Apple's run had put that stock into new record-high territory, while Amazon's was still down 31% from its own high in mid-2021.
Going forward, Apple's near-term prospects rest primarily on the new iPhone models expected to hit the market late next month, which Wall Street expects to do mildly better than the current lineup.
Amazon, meanwhile, appears to be on a stronger roll. The company has caught up with the earlier overbuild of its fulfillment network. It also said Thursday that growth in its AWS business has stabilized. There is still the risk that Amazon could get caught up in the spending war over generative artificial intelligence that is consuming cloud rivals Microsoft and Google. But that, at least, seems to be one market that investors are still happy to write blank checks in.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
