Startup Engineer.ai says it uses artificial-intelligence technology to largely automate the development of mobile apps, but several current and former employees say the company exaggerates its AI capabilities to attract customers and investors.
The competing claims reflect a growing challenge in the tech world of assessing a company's proficiency in artificial intelligence, which refers to technologies that can allow computers to learn or perform tasks typically requiring human decision makers -- in many cases helping companies save money or better target consumers.
Because AI technology is complex and loosely defined, nonexperts can find it hard to discern when it is being deployed. Still, money is flowing into the sector, and many startups can say they use AI as a way to lure investments or corporate clients even when such claims are difficult to vet.
Venture firms nearly doubled their funding of AI startups to $31 billion last year from 2017, according to an analysis by data firm PitchBook, which also found the number of funded startups that have ".ai" in their domain names has grown more than twofold in recent years.
Last month, Japanese tech conglomerate SoftBank Group Corp. unveiled an AI-focused investment fund with $108 billion in expected capital.
London and Los Angeles-based Engineer.ai raised $29.5 million last year from investors including Deepcore Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of SoftBank. Other backers include Zurich-based venture-capital firm Lakestar -- an early investor in Facebook Inc. and Airbnb Inc. -- and Singapore-based Jungle Ventures.
Engineer.ai says its "human-assisted AI" allows anyone to create a mobile app by clicking through a menu on its website. Users can then choose existing apps similar to their idea, such as Uber's or Facebook's. Then Engineer.ai creates the app largely automatically, it says.
"We've built software and an AI called Natasha that allows anyone to build custom software like ordering pizza," Engineer.ai founder Sachin Dev Duggal said in an interview last year. Since much of the code underpinning popular apps is similar, the company's "human-assisted AI" can help assemble new ones automatically, he said. Roughly 82% of an app the company had recently developed "was built autonomously, in the first hour" by Engineer.ai's technology, Mr. Duggal said at the time.
Documents reviewed by The Wall Street Journal and several people familiar with the company's operations, including current and former staff, suggest Engineer.ai doesn't use AI to assemble code for apps as it claims. They indicated that the company relies on human engineers in India and elsewhere to do most of that work, and that its AI claims are inflated even in light of the fake-it-till-you-make-it mentality common among tech startups.
Engineer.ai only started to build the technology needed to automate app-building in the last two months, a person familiar with the company's operations said, adding that the company was more than a year away from being able to use any AI for its core service.
A spokesman for Engineer.ai and Mr. Duggal, who describes himself as the company's "Chief Wizard," said he is "pretty clear in anything he does" to stress that the company employs technology accurately characterized as human-assisted AI.
A SoftBank spokeswoman declined to comment.
In a previously unreported lawsuit, Engineer.ai's former chief business officer, Robert Holdheim, cast doubt on the company's technical prowess. According to his wrongful-termination complaint, filed in February in Los Angeles Superior Court, Mr. Duggal told Mr. Holdheim: "Every tech startup exaggerates to get funding -- it's the money that allows us to develop the technology." Mr. Holdheim's complaint added that Mr. Duggal "was telling investors that Engineer.ai was 80% done with developing a product that, in truth, he had barely even begun to develop."
Mr. Holdheim declined to comment on the suit, which claims he was dismissed after confronting Mr. Duggal about potential misuse of investor funds, among other alleged issues. Engineer.ai disputed the allegations in a subsequent filing, and a spokesman said the company couldn't comment on pending litigation.
Asked for an example of how the company uses AI, the spokesman said Engineer.ai calculates prices and timelines for customers entirely "autonomously," with part of that process using natural language processing, an AI technology designed to recognize and understand text or speech. The company also uses a decision tree -- a graph or model based on choices -- to allocate tasks to developers, he said.
Several current and former employees said some pricing and timeline calculations are generated by conventional software -- not AI -- and most of the work overall is performed manually by staff. These people said the company lacks natural language processing technology, and that decision trees used within the company shouldn't be considered AI.
Calling a decision tree AI generally "is a stretch," said Luka Crnkovic-Friis, chief executive of Peltarion, a Swedish company that sells software for building deep-learning AI systems. "If you are telling customers that you are using AI, they will likely not expect 1950s technology. Decision trees are really old and simple technology."
Engineer.ai pointed to a statement on its website after the Journal inquired about its technology, which said "about 60% on average" of its reusable software is machine-produced and the rest is generated by humans for building apps.
---
Mayumi Negishi contributed to this article.

Credit: By Newley Purnell and Parmy Olson
