The tech industry is enamored with nuclear power, but for now it will lean heavily on fossil fuels to power its artificial-intelligence boom.
Amazon.com, Google and Microsoft each struck recent deals meant to bring more nuclear power online to satiate burgeoning energy demand tied to AI. They are betting billions of dollars that nuclear power can help curb surging carbon emissions tied to the data centers, which threaten their climate pledges.
Some of the projects depend on unproven next-generation technology, and each is slated to take years to complete, in part because of financial and technological challenges that have stymied the growth of the U.S. nuclear industry for decades.
In the meantime, utility companies and power providers need to burn fossil fuels to supply the power tech companies need. Some have proposed new natural-gas plants, which are faster and cheaper to build than nuclear reactors, while others have contemplated extending the lives of coal plants that had been slated for closure.
The tech giants years ago set ambitious goals to slash their carbon emissions by purchasing clean energy such as wind and solar power. The development of ChatGPT and other large language AI models, which consume enormous amounts of electricity, has upended those promises and set off a scramble among the companies to find more clean power.
The tech industry's nuclear investment is something of a gamble. Historically, efforts to build nuclear-power plants in the U.S. have run billions of dollars over budget and taken years longer than expected. Few reactors have been built in recent decades.
"It's going to take some time to bend the curve and drive emissions downward," said Michael Terrell, senior director for energy and climate at Alphabet's Google. "We're committed to our goals, and we feel like we have a good path."
Tech companies have become the nation's largest buyers of wind and solar power, but even when paired with lithium-ion batteries, those technologies alone can't supply the nonstop electricity data centers require.
Last week, Google announced the first deal in the U.S. supporting the commercial construction of small modular nuclear reactors, or SMRs, a developing technology aimed at avoiding some of the hurdles associated with building large nuclear-power plants. Under the deal's terms, Google committed to backing about seven reactors to be built by nuclear-energy startup Kairos Power. The goal is to add 500 megawatts at the end of the decade.
Days later, Amazon said it had signed agreements with utilities in Virginia and the state of Washington to support the build-out of SMRs. It said it would also invest in X-energy, an SMR reactor and fuel developer.
Some tech companies are looking to repurpose existing reactors, or revive recently closed ones. Last month, Constellation Energy and Microsoft struck a deal to restart the undamaged reactor at Pennsylvania's Three Mile Island, the site of the country's worst nuclear-power accident.
---
Tom Dotan contributed to this article.
Credit: By Katherine Blunt
