Balloons get less attention as tools of possible Chinese espionage than cyber theft and paid informants. But outfitted as floating monitoring stations, they shed an image as old-fashioned vehicles.
The flight path of a high-altitude Chinese balloon spotted this week over the Western and Central U.S. put into stark relief hardening views in Washington that Beijing is America's top spying threat.
Issuing a rare expression of regret in response to U.S. criticism, Beijing on Friday said the balloon was designed for meteorological research and blew far off course. The statement did nothing to tame the fury in Washington, and Secretary of State Antony Blinken on Friday postponed a trip to China that was designed to put a floor under a much-frayed relationship between the superpowers.
The episode has stirred broader questions, including why a balloon?
Like hot-air balloons for sightseeing, a modern military or commercial balloon can hoist sophisticated apparatus hanging below the bag-like fabric "envelope" that allows it to glide along high-altitude air currents. A photo purportedly of the Chinese craft above Montana appeared to show panels like those that might provide solar power for navigation or eavesdropping equipment. The Pentagon declined to confirm the photos were of the Chinese balloon.
Observation balloons are one of the oldest military spying devices; German crafts posed such a threat in World War I that the U.S. decorated fighter pilots as "balloon-busters" for firing on them. More recently, military and intelligence agencies have deployed balloons to carry modern sensor technology for communications and surveillance, at far lower costs than equipping satellites and for longer periods than airplanes, industry experts said.
Balloons can linger far longer over an area than a passing satellite. The U.S. maintains an arsenal of 150 nuclear-armed Minuteman III intercontinental ballistic missiles at Malmstrom Air Force Base in Montana -- and said added measures were taken to shield views as the balloon passed over the state.
China has cheered balloon-modernization developments at home focusing on developing crafts that can operate at altitudes above 65,000 feet and toward the edge of space, or up to 330,000 feet above sea level, according to media reports and think-tank assessments. The U.S. military said the Chinese balloon spotted above Montana was about 60,000 feet above Earth.
U.S. defense strategy is increasingly driven by not ceding technological superiority to China. Now, the appearance of a possible Chinese reconnaissance craft in U.S. airspace raises the specter of a "balloon gap" being potentially added to a list of concerns about China after it has demonstrated advanced capabilities in hypersonic missiles and artificial intelligence.
"Hostile balloons drifting over the heads of Americans may add another element to the debate over defense," said Byron Callan, a defense analyst at Capital Alpha Partners LLC.
Frank Montoya, a former top FBI counterintelligence official, compared surveillance by balloon to flights of unmanned U-2 spy planes in the sense that both are cheaper and easier to deploy than satellites.
High-altitude photos can provide details of military bases, dams, power stations, infrastructure for fiber-optic networks, locations of server farms, bridges, rail lines, interstate highways -- providing an adversary specific data on how, for example, to interrupt the internet, slow military deployments or wreak havoc with the electrical grid, said Mr. Montoya.
"There's also the psychological aspect of it," he added. "They did it because they could. And we are alarmed."
Some former U.S. national security officials said they were puzzled at the balloon sighting, noting that China has other more discreet means to collect intelligence on U.S. targets, including hacking. Unlike a balloon that can easily be identified as Chinese, said John Hultquist, director of intelligence analysis at Mandiant, a cybersecurity firm, "cyber is pretty unique as a cheap and deniable capability." Christopher Wray, director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, has likened China's collection of U.S. business intelligence to "almost an existential crisis."
Doubt is widespread among policy analysts that China lost control of its balloon as the Foreign Ministry appeared to claim.
Credit: By James T. Areddy, Doug Cameron and Aruna Viswanatha
