The Obama Administration released two reports last week on subjects that will shape the national-security agenda of the Trump Administration. The one about Russian hacking launched a thousand headlines. The other, about Chinese efforts to dominate the global semiconductor industry, deserves more attention.
Semiconductors are essential to everything from home appliances to cars, satellites and fighter aircraft. The U.S. has led the industry since its start in the 1950s, with firms like Intel, Qualcomm and Apple today accounting for nearly 50% of global sales, worth about $165 billion a year, and employing some 359,000 Americans (four times more than the steel industry). Semiconductors are the fourth-most valuable U.S. export behind airplanes, petroleum products and cars.
China hopes to change this through state subsidies and predatory trade practices. The White House report, drafted by industry and policy experts, warns that "Chinese policies are distorting markets in ways that undermine innovation, subtract from U.S. market share, and put U.S. national security at risk."
In 2014 the Chinese government launched an unprecedented $150 billion program to subsidize domestic semiconductor production and acquire advanced technologies overseas. Beijing also increasingly forces Chinese firms to use domestic suppliers while forcing foreign firms to transfer technology in exchange for market access. This indirect theft of intellectual property is complemented by direct pilfering via abuse of joint ventures, state-backed cyberhacking and commercial espionage.
No Chinese semiconductor firm is in the global top 20 today, but Beijing aspires to world-class status in all major segments of the industry by 2030. By 2025 it wants to produce 70% of the chips used in its economy, up from 9% today. Along the way it wants to erode the commercially and militarily significant technological advantage long held by companies in the U.S., Japan, Taiwan, South Korea and Germany.
The recent attempt by Chinese investors to buy German firm Aixtron, which isn't mentioned in the White House report, raises particular red flags. Two state-backed Chinese firms, Fujian Grand Chip and San'an Optoelectronics, may have colluded to put Aixtron into distress by canceling a large order at the last minute. Then Fujian Grand Chip swooped in for a takeover last year. German and U.S. regulators blocked the deal, citing Aixtron's U.S. subsidiary and the sensitive military applications of its technologies.
There's also the pending bid by Canyon Bridge, a California-based fund backed by China's State Council, for Oregon-based Lattice Semiconductor, which makes field-programmable gate arrays, an especially sophisticated integrated circuit. Two Chinese nationals were indicted for trying to smuggle similar Lattice chips in 2012, and in 2004 Lattice paid a $560,000 civil fine for illegally exporting to China. The pending takeover, warned 22 U.S. lawmakers in a recent letter, "could disrupt the military supply chain and possibly lead to a reliance on foreign-sourced technologies for many critical Defense Department programs."
The White House report recommends greater scrutiny of such deals, especially if Beijing begins "undermining cutting-edge, defense-critical U.S.-based companies by flooding markets" with subsidized competition. But the report rightly warns that the focus of U.S. investment restrictions should remain "on national security, rather than narrow economic objectives," because shielding U.S. firms from legitimate foreign competition would undermine market principles and hurt domestic innovation and competitiveness.
China sought to invest $18 billion directly in the U.S. last year, up nearly 100 times from a decade ago, so the need for responsible investment regulation is obvious. But keeping the U.S. edge in semiconductors will require more, as the White House report emphasizes, including better cultivation of scientific talent in U.S. schools and via high-skilled visas such as the H-1B. It also recommends areas of focus for federal research grants and, amazingly for this White House, calls for cutting corporate taxes and easing federal permitting rules for new facilities.
The report ought to show Beijing that its mercantilist behavior has alienated its trade partners even before Donald Trump takes office. The Obama Administration approved at least 13 Chinese semiconductor acquisitions in the U.S. in the past two years, but U.S. officials have grown increasingly concerned that China is preying on sensitive U.S. technologies for microchips, artificial intelligence, gene editing and more. Addressing this economic and national-security threat without abandoning market discipline will be a major challenge of the Trump era.
