As head of the Consumer Technology Association for three decades, Gary Shapiro says he has watched the medical community use new technology to make advances in everything from diet science to disease detection.
Here, adapted from Mr. Shapiro's forthcoming book "Ninja Future: Secrets to Success in the New World of Innovation," is how artificial intelligence, sensors and even digital assistants like Amazon's Alexa could help keep costs down and improve care.
Sensors Will Help Doctors
How do you respond when a doctor asks you to describe your symptoms? Probably with a lot of subjective, anecdotal self-analysis. But there's a gap between what's happening to your body and how you interpret it. The key to bridging this gap lies in wearable devices containing sensors, including micro-electrical-mechanical systems, or MEMS. These tiny sensors activate in response to outside stimulus to detect changes in location, air pressure, temperature, light, sound -- even smell. Consider a medical consultation powered by these sensors. Without asking a single question, your doctor could chart your physical activity and check your hydration, sodium and oxygen levels without using a needle.
When AI Is a Lifesaver
With help from MEMS, individual patients generate millions of data points every day, but doctors and hospitals aren't able to view and understand this enormous volume of information. AI can quickly sift through vast amounts data to enhance caregiving -- and even save lives. AI is a game-changer in health care because of its uncanny ability to identify patterns. That skill -- searching for signs of abnormalities -- is at the core of what pathologists, oncologists and radiologists do every day. Optellum, a startup based in the U.K., has created an AI diagnostics system that claims to detect lung cancer in patients earlier than doctors can. And a team at Stanford University built a database of 130,000 skin disease images and created an algorithm to diagnose skin cancer.
Internet of Things Will Benefit Seniors
Rick Phelps, founder of the online Alzheimer's and dementia support group Memory People, was diagnosed with early-onset Alzheimer's in 2010. He had this to say about Amazon's Alexa: "It has afforded me something that I have lost. Memory. I can ask Alexa anything and I get the answer instantly." In addition to acting as a cognitive crutch, AI-powered smart home technology can monitor for falls and provide daily reminders for people with less severe memory loss. The Israeli startup Intuition Robotics has created ElliQ, a robot for seniors that can send reminders about appointments, message family and friends, respond to voice commands and turn on music.

Credit: By Gary Shapiro
