What were the biggest artificial-intelligence stories this year? We posed that question to a handful of AI experts and business executives and chose from their responses the following four events whose effects could shape future AI development and usage.
AI M&A hits record. It has been a record year for artificial intelligence mergers and acquisitions.
There have been about 130 AI mergers and acquisitions this year around the globe with the value of the deals exceeding $28 billion, according to a Dealogic analysis. Last year, there were 120 global M&A deals valued at $5 billion.
Brandon Purcell, a vice president and principal analyst at technology research company Forrester Research Inc., said the accelerated pace of AI M&A will likely continue as big tech companies look for AI technologies that complement their existing offerings.
But he also cautioned that mergers could limit technology options and increase costs.
"As the market continues to consolidate, and there are fewer players, there are fewer deals to be had out there. So their price tag on some of these technologies and investments is necessarily going to go up," he said.
A big deal. One of the biggest deals announced this year was Microsoft Corp.'s agreement to purchase artificial intelligence company Nuance Communications Inc. for $16 billion. The deal is expected to close in early 2022.
Hey, big AI spender. Retail this year will overtake banking as the top spender on artificial intelligence, according to market researcher International Data Corp. The global retail sector is expected to spend $11.8 billion on AI this year, up from $9.36 billion in 2020, according to the most recent IDC forecast. Spending in the sector is expected to grow at a compound annual rate of 25.5% between now and 2025.
Banks, which spent $9.43 billion on AI last year, are expected to spend $11.7 billion on the technology this year, according to IDC.
Rising e-commerce activity sparked by the pandemic is helping fuel retailer spending, said Ritu Jyoti, group vice president, artificial intelligence and automation research, with IDC's software market research and advisory practice.
Case study. Home Depot Inc. is in the early stages of rolling out a machine-learning system to spot products that need to be restocked on store shelves. The system uses computer vision that can analyze camera images to track the stock on the shelves of individual stores.
"As we continue to analyze more data points across our business, AI is helping us more quickly identify trends and patterns so we can better serve our customers," said Fahim Siddiqui, the company's senior vice president of information technology.
EU proposes regulation to limit AI use. The European Union's executive arm in April proposed a bill to curb the use of artificial intelligence for applications like hiring and policing. It is one of the broadest efforts yet by a Western government to regulate AI.
The legislation would increase regulatory supervision and standards for the development and use of AI in designated high-risk areas, such as college admissions and loan applications; limit the use of facial recognition by police; and ban certain uses of AI.
It is unclear when and if the regulation will become law. In the EU, such laws must be approved by both the European Council, representing the bloc's 27 national governments, and the directly elected European Parliament. Both the European Council and European Parliament are expected to work on responses to the legislation over the course of the next year.
AI experts torn on possible outcomes. The legislation "can be a critical component in building the sort of trust that is a net positive for everyone," said Christian Troncoso, senior director of policy at trade group BSA | The Software Alliance. Other experts say the European proposal will run up costs and smother innovation. Thomas Donnelly, chief information officer of software firm BetterCloud Inc., worries about the impact on smaller software companies. Their pace of development may slow as they work to ensure new products meet the EU's requirements. And they may not develop certain AI applications because of wariness over possible legal fees and penalties.
Inventive AI. South Africa in July granted a patent to an invention that listed an AI system as the inventor. The system came up with an idea for a beverage container based on fractal geometry. It was the first time a government awarded a patent for an invention made by AI.
AI systems are people too? Stephen Thaler, founder and chief executive of Imagination Engines Inc. of St. Charles, Mo., created the system. He, a professor and a group of attorneys filed applications in more than a dozen jurisdictions, including patent offices in the U.S. and the European Union.
The application was granted in South Africa, but the patents were turned down by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and the European Patent Office. Most patent laws, including those in the U.S., only recognize human beings, or "natural persons," as inventors.
Credit: By John McCormick
