WASHINGTON -- The leader of the powerful Senate Commerce Committee urged the Federal Trade Commission to investigate allegations that Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. has misled businesses about its efforts to protect their brands from hate speech and has overstated the reach of advertising on its platforms.
In a letter to FTC Chairwoman Lina Khan, Sen. Maria Cantwell (D., Wash.), who chairs the Commerce Committee, said the agency should examine how the company's actions might have affected advertisers and the public.
The FTC confirmed that it had received Ms. Cantwell's letter but declined to comment. Facebook has denied that it intentionally has misled businesses and advertisers.
Ms. Cantwell said the allegations are even more important given Facebook's large share of the digital advertising space. The company reportedly controlled 74% of the social-media market in July 2020 and now controls 24% of all of U.S. digital-advertising spending, she said.
The senator said one of the company's primary metrics "could significantly misrepresent the effectiveness of Facebook's algorithms" in taking down hate speech. Her letter cites whistleblower documents showing that Facebook processes "miss more than 90% of hate speech content" despite the company's claims about its algorithms' success.
Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg has said he expected the company would use artificial intelligence to detect "the vast majority of problematic content" by the end of 2019, and the company has said that as of earlier this year nearly 98% of the hate speech it takes down was discovered by AI before it was reported by users.
Another set of issues relates to alleged problems with Facebook's potential reach metric for gauging how many people might see an ad. Ms. Cantwell's letter repeats longstanding concerns that Facebook might have overstated potential reach.
Ms. Cantwell questioned the head of Meta unit Instagram, Adam Mosseri, about those matters at a Senate hearing Wednesday. "I'm not aware of any specific inaccuracies," Mr. Mosseri said.
Credit: By John D. McKinnon
