XPeng forecast a rise in second-quarter vehicle deliveries after its first-quarter net loss narrowed on higher sales and improved margins.
The Chinese electric-vehicle maker posted a quarterly net loss of 1.37 billion yuan, or about $189.4 million, compared with a 2.34 billion yuan loss a year earlier, it said Tuesday. Quarterly revenue jumped 62% to 6.55 billion yuan, beating an estimate of 6.22 billion yuan in a FactSet poll of analysts.
The company attributed the increase to higher deliveries, driven by its X9 model launch during the quarter. XPeng delivered 21,821 vehicles in the first quarter, meeting its prior guidance for 21,000 to 22,500 units. The EV maker cut prices for its models in March.
The top line was helped by a near-doubling in revenue from services, which it attributed to a recent tie-up with Volkswagen Group in the fields of autonomous driving and advanced in-car software systems.
XPeng forecast second-quarter deliveries to rise 25% to 38% to between 29,000 and 32,000 vehicles, and revenue to increase 48% to 64% to between 7.5 billion yuan and 8.3 billion yuan.
Gross margin was 12.9%, up sharply from 1.7% a year earlier and 6.2% in the fourth quarter. Bigger rivals Li Auto and BYD reported first-quarter gross margins of 20.6% and 21.9%, respectively.
Xpeng's improved gross margin was driven by a sharp rise in its services-and-others margin, thanks to revenue from research-and-development services related to its platform and software collaboration with Volkswagen Group.
Its vehicle margin rose to 5.5% from negative 2.5% a year earlier and 4.1% in the fourth quarter. The company attributed the increase to cost reduction and a better product mix of models.
XPeng, which has yet to turn a profit since its founding nearly a decade ago, is seeking to leverage its advances in auto-driving technology as it works to boost production in the world's most crowded EV market. The company launched its artificial-intelligence-powered in-car operating system on Monday.
The system can help drivers better identify road situations, assist with parking and provide interactive in-car assistance.
"Through our strategic partnership with the Volkswagen Group, XPeng is at the forefront of monetizing in-house developed smart technologies as a technology enabler," said Chairman and Chief Executive Xiaopeng He.
Generate image description

Credit: By Jiahui Huang
