Living things are the most intricate and marvelous things in the universe. The simplest organism has such dazzlingly complex architecture that one has never been observed coming into being without help from another life form. This is why life itself is perhaps the best expression of transcendent intention in the arrangement of this world.
But if that's true, isn't explaining life's natural origins through science the most effective way to debunk biblical religion? Arguing that God had to have been there at the beginning seemingly would get harder if life's very existence were to stop looking so miraculous. Yet lately the science appears to point in that direction.
As a physicist and Orthodox rabbi, I sit right in the middle of this dilemma. My colleagues and I have shown in our research that "dumb" collections of particles can spontaneously recapitulate impressive behaviors normally associated with life. Such particles simply require the right kind of patterned energy in their environment. In other words, there are a variety of behaviors that life displays -- making copies of itself, harvesting energy from its surroundings, predicting its future -- that can emerge in initially lifeless and inchoate matter.
It's reasonable to assume this perspective might chip away at my confidence that Scripture has anything accurate, let alone profound, to offer on the origin of life. To my delight and amazement, I have found the opposite to be true.
Near the beginning of Exodus, Moses is alone in the desert tending sheep when he encounters a shrub wreathed in fire. God reveals himself and provides three signs to bring to the Hebrews in Egypt. The first is a staff that turns into a serpent. The second is a "snowy" growth on Moses' skin. The last is a mixture of river water and dirt that turns into blood. Each of these can be read as a sensible comment about physics along the blurry border between life and nonlife.
The staff is a lifeless tool that transforms into the most stafflike of living creatures. This shows the perspective of a physical materialist, who sees all living things as assemblages of inanimate pieces. Such a shift in perspective is essential to cracking the physics of life's emergence, because life is really a motley collection of physical phenomena easiest to define and understand outside biology.
The snowy skin, meanwhile, is an anomaly in the boundary between the body of a living man and his inanimate surroundings. The reference to snowflakes invokes the idea of an ambiguous boundary that is impossible to define precisely. Delineating the difference between life and nonliving self-organized complexity -- whether snowflakes or the forking waterways in muddy river deltas -- can be difficult through the lens of physics.
The creation of blood from mixing dust with river water hits on the fundamental idea with remarkable precision. Dust particles can be combined into countless shapes. Flowing water may not be alive, but it provides patterned energy that favors some shapes over others.
Viewed in these terms, this passage from Exodus shows how Scripture can be held in awe yet still read in a way that it amplifies understanding of the natural world without demanding one bit of compromise on the science.
It is certainly intriguing to realize the Bible talks about the physics of lifelikeness, but what could it possibly be trying to teach by doing so? Here, the narrative provides the key. A prophet is asking how to convince a slave nation that the world's Creator has sent him to liberate them. The Lord's answer is the serpent, the snowy skin and the muddy Nile as blood. Part of the point, surely, is to evoke the physical ideas: The Creator's calling card comes in the form of the recipe for his most stunning creation.
Yet each of these coins has another side. The serpent teaches that sensing life comes from a conscious shift in perspective on how one views the same set of materials and events. The anomalous skin spurs the individual to look beyond himself and feel part of a broader continuum. And the bloody Nile invites a nation held captive in Egypt to lift its sights to the entire world -- and realize that a patterned, connected, living whole might be recognizable. Above all, the goal of the signs is to facilitate encounter. In one master stroke, God gives away the secret of his greatest trick. Then he teaches us how to go on seeking him nonetheless.
---
Mr. England is senior director in artificial intelligence at GlaxoSmithKline and principal research scientist at Georgia Tech. This column is adapted from "Every Life Is on Fire: How Thermodynamics Explains the Origins of Living Things," just out from Basic.

Credit: By Jeremy England
