CIGNA GROUP
CI -8.1%
Cigna and Humana are in talks to join forces in a stock-and-cash deal that could be struck by the end of the year, The Wall Street Journal reported Wednesday. The possible deal would create a healthcare powerhouse worth roughly $140 billion and give the firms scale to rival that of UnitedHealth Group and CVS Health. Cigna has a huge pharmacy-benefit business and strength in commercial insurance, while Humana has the second largest Medicare Advantage business after UnitedHealth. Cigna shares fell 8.1% Wednesday, while Humana lost about 5.5%.
GENERAL MOTORS
GM +9.4%
General Motors is shifting gears. The automaker on Wednesday announced plans for a $10 billion stock buyback for next year. The share repurchase is aimed to assuage investors about the health of its business amid setbacks in its electric-vehicle and driverless-car pursuits. GM will fund the buyback in part with capital previously earmarked for those areas. The company also said it would work to offset higher labor expenses, which will add $9.3 billion in costs over about four years. General Motors shares jumped 9.4% Wednesday.
SHOPIFY
SHOP +4.9%
The after-Thanksgiving shopping rush was a windfall for online vendors. E-commerce platform Shopify said its merchants recorded $4.1 billion in Black Friday sales, up 22% from a year earlier. Including Cyber Monday, its merchants reached a record of $9.3 billion in sales, a 24% increase from 2022. An Adobe report predicts Cyber Monday to be the biggest online shopping day of all time, forecasting more than $12 billion spent by consumers. Shopify shares climbed 4.9% Monday.
PFIZER
PFE -5.1%
Pfizer faces a setback in its weight-loss drug ambitions. The pharmaceutical giant said Friday that it will not move to a late-stage trial of the twice-daily weight loss pill danuglipron, after the medication showed too many side effects. The anti-obesity drug craze has bolstered rivals such as Ozempic-maker Novo Nordisk and Mounjaro-maker Eli Lilly this year, leaving behind early-pandemic winners as Covid vaccine demand falls. Pfizer said that it will focus its efforts on a once-daily formulation of the drug, that it said could play a role in obesity treatment. Pfizer shares lost 5.1% Friday.
SALESFORCE
CRM +9.4%
Salesforce on Wednesday posted strong earnings in its latest quarter, beating analyst expectations. This year, the company has focused on cutting costs and reducing staff to outweigh slowdowns in sales of its business software. Salesforce is competing with rivals like Microsoft in the artificial-intelligence arms race, and has launched several AI products and tools. Salesforce's latest results impressed investors, and the stock led both the Dow and the S&P 500 during November's final trading session. Salesforce shares soared 9.4% Thursday.
TESLA
TSLA -1.7%
Tesla's Cybertruck has finally arrived. Chief Executive Elon Musk on Thursday unveiled the electric pickup two years after its planned release. The entry-level model of the truck -- which has a unique angular design and stainless-steel exterior -- sells for roughly $61,000. It will also sell two other, higher-end versions with the most expensive -- the Cyberbeast -- starting at nearly $100,000. The delayed launch comes as Tesla faces increased EV competition. Tesla shares lost 1.7% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
