WASHINGTON -- A bipartisan Senate bill subsidizing domestic semiconductor production cleared its first procedural hurdle on Tuesday in a 64-34 vote, as Democrats and Republicans came together to address supply-chain woes that they said were increasingly becoming a national security concern.
The legislation would provide roughly $52 billion in subsidies to encourage chip companies to boost production in the U.S., seen by the White House and leaders of both parties as a critical national-security need. Lawmakers worked up until late Tuesday to negotiate other elements in the competitiveness package, dubbed USICA.
The vote paves the way for a larger package that would include additional funding for scientific research. Ahead of the vote, Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.) said he would use the result to gauge whether there was enough Republican support for the additional funding, which has been under negotiation for more than a year.
"This will be a test vote, and the outcome will decide whether the science portion of USICA is included," Mr. Schumer said, while adding he personally supports a larger proposal.
Tuesday's motion needed only 51 votes to pass, but Mr. Schumer said because it received more than 60 votes -- enough to comfortably overcome a Senate filibuster and advance, he would move forward with adding the science funding. That would back early-stage research using technology in water systems, technology and behavioral health, precision agriculture, and other sectors. It would also bolster technology education.
The Senate last year approved an expansive version of USICA that included significant increases in federal funds for scientific research. It focused on cutting-edge technology research in areas such as quantum computing and artificial intelligence. In all, it authorized around $190 billion in spending in addition to the semiconductor subsidies, according to a congressional analysis. Earlier this year the House passed its own version of the legislation, a $350 billion package.
But the two chambers failed to come to an agreement on the two bills, and semiconductor manufacturers began threatening to cancel proposed U.S. chip-making sites, increasing pressure on lawmakers to reach a deal. Lawmakers instead moved to a narrow bill that could have bipartisan support that resembled what the Senate passed last year.
"This is the land of USICA, where things change on a minute-to-minute, hour-to-hour basis," Sen. Todd Young (R., Ind.) said before the procedural votes Tuesday. He said he thought he was close to having enough Republican support to move the bill through the Senate.
Lawmakers are coalescing around the so-called guardrails portion of the bill, which would ban chip makers who receive incentives to build in the U.S. from then using that money to build in China or other adversarial countries.
Credit: By Natalie Andrews
