Big tech companies are facing the biggest expansion in potential technology regulation in a generation. And while the jury is out on whether all that sound and fury will signify anything, for the first time there are signs that the big-tech backlash could have a substantive impact.
New laws under consideration in Europe, Asia and the U.S. could put sharp limits on how big tech companies can treat smaller competitors and restrict their use of artificial intelligence like facial recognition. Some proposals could ban common practices such as companies giving their own products a boost in their own rankings.
At the same time, regulators globally are advancing dozens of investigations related to competition and privacy that could lead to more than just speeding tickets for tech giants. Under consideration, according to regulators and executives, are orders or settlements that could cut off trans-Atlantic data flows, kneecap some kinds of digital advertising, delay major product changes or force ongoing oversight of activities.
To be sure, regulation so far has had little effect on Silicon Valley's bottom line or valuations. The market value of five of the world's largest tech companies is $9.31 trillion, up close to fourfold from five years ago, nearly double the growth for the S&P 500 index in that time.
But that could be changing. The fresh wave of scrutiny has already made it more difficult for the companies to cash in on potential growth from acquisitions, says Mark Mahaney, head of internet research at Evercore Inc.'s research arm.
Tech companies are making other changes, too. Facebook announced in November that it would shut down its facial-recognition system in part because of potential regulations.
"There's definitely a sense of there being a new momentum" for regulation, says Sinead McSweeney, Twitter Inc.'s global vice president for public policy, noting that in recent weeks the company has had to implement new legislative requirements in at least six countries.
Alphabet Inc.'s Google, for instance, has agreed to work closely with the U.K.'s Competition and Markets Authority on its plan to remove cookies, which track online activity, from its Chrome browser. Now Google executives are looking at how to build new appeals processes for content removals on YouTube, and reworking how it handles user and partner information internally, says Kent Walker, senior vice president of global affairs.
While tech companies say they agree that their industry needs new regulation, they are pushing back against some specific proposals. Some tech executives, such as Twitter's Ms. McSweeney, say they worry requirements in proposed online-content rules could encourage companies to remove content they merely disagree with, chilling free speech.
For their part, advocates for more regulation worry that the big tech companies could emerge unscathed from the newest wave of regulation. Gabriel Weinberg, founder and chief executive of DuckDuckGo, maker of a privacy-centric search engine, says that three EU antitrust decisions against Google, and more than $9 billion in fines, have done little to pare the search leader's market position. (Google says that its compliance with the EU decisions has led to significant changes in its operations that have helped competitors.)
Now Mr. Weinberg is concerned that policy makers are placing more emphasis on passing laws than making sure regulators properly implement new requirements.
Policy makers say they can make it work. Cedric O, junior minister for digital affairs for France, says he's confident that the EU can pass effective laws. He also says he's going to the U.S. to lobby for trans-Atlantic rules to protect children who use social media, following articles in The Wall Street Journal's Facebook Files series that found that Instagram made some teenage girls feel worse about themselves.
"I think there's a European and probably international consensus that Big Tech has an impact on the economy and on democracy and should be regulated," he says.
---
Mr. Schechner is a Wall Street Journal reporter in Paris. Email sam.schechner@wsj.com.
Credit: By Sam Schechner
