Samsung Electronics Co. has been granted a one-year exemption from new U.S. restrictions on China's chip industry, according to people familiar with the matter, joining a list of semiconductor giants that have received dispensation.
The U.S. Department of Commerce granted Samsung authorization to continue receiving chip-making equipment and other items needed to maintain its memory-chip production in China, the people said.
The South Korean company operates chip facilities in two Chinese cities.
Samsung, the world's biggest memory-chip maker by revenue, hasn't said publicly if it has received a one-year exemption similar to those disclosed by rivals SK Hynix Inc. and Intel Corp. A Samsung spokesman declined to comment.
On Thursday, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. also said it obtained the exemption from U.S. rules, enabling the world's biggest contract chip maker to keep expanding its facilities in China's eastern city of Nanjing.
The Biden administration has been working to get allies on board with the new rules unveiled Friday.
The restrictions appeared to offer at least one concession to some of the allies, as the Commerce Department would review applications for certain exports to U.S. and U.S.-allied facilities operating in China on a case-by-case basis. Chinese-owned facilities, in contrast, would face a presumption of denial.
Exemptions for a variety of semiconductor and chip-equipment makers from the U.S. or allied countries are widely expected by industry officials.
Samsung dominates production of two major types of memory chips -- DRAM and NAND flash.
The South Korean tech giant operates a NAND flash memory-chip plant in Xi'an and a chip-packaging facility in Suzhou.
As of the second quarter of this year, Samsung accounted for 43.5% of global revenue for DRAM and roughly one-third of global revenue for NAND flash, according to TrendForce, a Taiwan-based tech-market researcher. It is the No. 1 player in both memory markets.
In announcing an 80% jump in third-quarter net income Thursday, TSMC Chief Executive C.C. Wei said the new regulations appeared targeted at only the very high-end applications such as artificial intelligence and supercomputers. "Therefore our initial assessment is that the impact to TSMC is limited and manageable," he said.
The majority of TSMC's revenue came from customers in North America, accounting for 72% of the third-quarter total, up from 64% in the second quarter. China accounted for 8%, down from 13%.
---
Yang Jie contributed to this article.
Credit: By Jiyoung Sohn and Asa Fitch
