SINGAPORE -- Elon Musk wrapped up a trip to China in less than 24 hours and came away with a crucial victory as he pushes to reignite Tesla's sagging growth.
After his flurry of meetings with top officials in Beijing, China's government signaled its blessing for Tesla to roll out its advanced driver-assistance service in the carmaker's second-biggest market. The Tesla chief executive is seeking to expand use of the controversial software feature globally as the company confronts the prospect of lower sales growth this year.
Chinese officials told Tesla that Beijing has tentatively approved the company's plan to launch its "Full Self-Driving," or FSD, software feature in the country, people familiar with the matter said Monday.
The U.S. electric-vehicle maker will deploy its autonomous driving services based on mapping and navigation functions provided by Chinese technology giant Baidu, the people said.
Tesla's stock jumped 15% to $194.05 Monday.
The partnership clears an important regulatory hurdle for Tesla to offer its driver-assistance system there. Working with a Chinese company helps ease regulators' concerns over any data-security risks, the people said. Bloomberg earlier reported the deal with Baidu, which in addition to its core search-engine business has expanded into autonomous driving and artificial intelligence.
Baidu declined to comment. Tesla didn't respond to a request for comment. Baidu's shares rose 2.4% in Hong Kong on Monday.
The approval follows a meeting on Sunday between Musk and top Chinese officials including Premier Li Qiang, who was previously the Communist Party chief in Shanghai when Tesla was setting up its production facilities there.
Musk is stepping up efforts for wider adoption of FSD after the world's most valuable automaker saw its first-quarter profit drop to its lowest level since 2021.
Being able to roll out FSD in China would help Tesla compete with major Chinese car manufacturers that have already provided higher-level driver-assistance features.
"This trip will be significant for Tesla and Musk further strengthening its EV footprint within the Chinese market at a pivotal time," analysts at Wedbush Securities said in a note to clients on Sunday, calling Musk's visit to China a "watershed moment."
Musk spent almost 24 hours in Beijing before departing early Monday afternoon, according to details of his plane on Chinese flight-tracking app Umetrip.
Tesla's sales in China of its vehicles made in the country slid last quarter by almost 4% from a year ago, while the rest of the EV market recorded 15% growth over the same period.
Tesla is open to licensing its autonomous-driving technology to other carmakers, Musk has said previously.
An approval would also allow Tesla to compete with homegrown autopilot technology suppliers including Huawei Technologies, Baidu and WeRide, a startup that counts Nvidia and XPeng as investors.
In the U.S., Tesla last week halved the subscription price of FSD in the U.S. to entice adoption.
On Friday, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration opened an investigation into Tesla's more basic driver-assist system, which the authority said is tied to avoidable crashes and fatalities. Tesla didn't respond to a request for comment on the probe.
Chinese officials haven't responded to Musk's request for approval to transfer data that Tesla's cars collect in China to the U.S. to train its driver-assistance features, people familiar with the matter said. Data from China, where Tesla has 1.7 million drivers, would help Tesla improve its algorithms.
It is a potentially thorny issue, given that Beijing regards protecting such data as a matter of national security. Tesla would have to go through China's stringent approval process for cross-border transfer of data, the people said.
---
Selina Cheng contributed to this article.
Credit: By Raffaele Huang
