PARIS -- France is empowering regulators to slap large fines on social-media companies that fail to remove postings deemed hateful, one of the most aggressive measures yet in a broad wave of rules aimed at forcing tech companies to more tightly police their services.
France's National Assembly passed a law Wednesday that threatens fines of up to 1.25 million euros ($1.36 million) against companies that fail to remove "manifestly illicit" hate-speech posts -- such as incitement to racial hatred or anti-Semitism -- within 24 hours of being notified.
The law also gives the country's audiovisual regulator the right to audit companies' systems for removing such content and to fine them up to 4% of their global annual revenue in case of serious and repeated violations. The measure takes effect on July 1.
Tech-company lobbyists and free-speech advocates have criticized the law, arguing that it would push large social-media platforms to remove a great number of controversial posts using automated tools, rather than risk incurring potentially astronomical fines. French opposition parties had delayed passage of the law, citing the risk of "pre-emptive censorship" by tech giants.
"Fighting the spread of hate on the internet is certainly necessary, but it must not happen at the expense of our freedom of expression," Constance Le Grip said before her party, Les Republicains, voted against the measure.
A signature effort of French President Emmanuel Macron, the government has promoted the law, first proposed last year, as part of a broad effort to reset the balance for how much responsibility tech companies should assume for illegal or harmful activity that happens on their platforms.
Laws in the U.S. and in Europe have since the 1990s shielded tech companies from much liability for what their users do on their platforms. But in the past couple of years, tech platforms have been blamed for doing too little to stop terrorist propaganda, electoral disinformation, cyberbullying and sex trafficking. Activists and policy makers have pushed to give companies a bigger financial incentive to police their services.
"We can no longer afford to rely on the goodwill of platforms and their voluntary promises," Cedric O, France's junior minister for digital affairs, said during parliamentary debate. "This is the first brick in a new paradigm of platform regulation."
The French law is one of several that have been passed or are under consideration on the topic. Later this year, the European Union's executive arm is expected to propose updating -- and perhaps abolishing -- liability protections from its old e-commerce directive. The U.K. is pursuing a related idea with legislation that would create a "duty of care" for tech companies to take measures to prevent illegal or potentially harmful content from being published on their platforms.
Companies like Facebook Inc., Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Twitter Inc. have responded to growing pressure with investments in content moderators and artificial-intelligence tools to comb their services for content that violates their own or national standards. But they have also emphasized the need to protect speech.
Facebook said that it would work closely with French regulators on implementation of the law. Twitter said it shares a "commitment to build a safer internet and tackle illegal online hate speech, while continuing to protect the Open Internet."

Credit: By Sam Schechner
