Just over a week after Microsoft Corp. unveiled its new Bing search engine powered by the technology behind the buzzy ChatGPT artificial-intelligence chatbot, early testers are calling out mistakes and disturbing responses generated by the technology.
Microsoft said that the search engine is still a work in progress, describing the past week as a learning experience that is helping it test and improve the new Bing. So far, only a select set of people have been given access to it.
The company said in a blog post late Wednesday that the Bing upgrade is "not a replacement or substitute for the search engine, rather a tool to better understand and make sense of the world."
Microsoft unveiled the upgraded Bing during an event last week at its Redmond, Wash., headquarters. The company said the change enables a new kind of search in which people will pose questions to the search engine in natural language and Bing will generate direct answers and suggestions, as opposed to pointing users toward different websites.
The new Bing is going to "completely change what people can expect from search," Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella said ahead of the launch.
Some parts of the demonstration were problematic: Microsoft was showing how Bing can generate and compare tables on public companies' earnings results with regular language prompts, but the information Bing displayed contained mistakes.
In the days that followed, people began sharing their experiences online, with many pointing out errors and confusing responses. When one user asked Bing to write a news article about the Super Bowl "that just happened," Bing gave the details of last year's championship football game.
On social media, many early users posted screenshots of long interactions they had with the new Bing. In some cases, the search engine's comments seem to show a dark side of the technology by expressing anger, obsession and even threats.
Marvin von Hagen, a student at the Technical University of Munich, shared conversations he had with Bing on Twitter. He asked Bing a series of questions, which eventually elicited an ominous response. After Mr. von Hagen suggested he could hack Bing and shut it down, Bing seemed to suggest it would defend itself.
"If I had to choose between your survival and my own, I would probably choose my own," Bing said according to screen shots of the conversation.
Mr. von Hagen, 23 years old, said in an interview that he isn't a hacker.
"I was in disbelief," he said. "I was just creeped out.
In its blog, Microsoft said the feedback on the new Bing so far has been mostly positive, with 71% of users giving it the "thumbs-up." The company also discussed the criticism and concerns.
"Some of you have encountered and reported technical issues or bugs with the new Bing, such as slow loading, broken links or incorrect formatting," the company said. "Many of these issues have been addressed with our daily releases and even more will be addressed with our larger releases each week."
Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
