WASHINGTON -- Despite strong economic growth and historically low unemployment, a government report released Thursday pointed to an important missing ingredient so far in the U.S. expansion: worker-productivity improvements.
Output per hour for workers in nonfarm businesses rose 1.3% in the third quarter from a year earlier, marking the 32nd straight quarter of yearly growth below 2%, a long and consistent stretch of anemic growth that hasn't happened before in the post-World War II era.
There were some signs of improvement. For a six-month period between April and September, worker productivity gains beat a 2% annualized growth rate. Jim O'Sullivan, an economist at High Frequency Economics, called that "strong by recent standards" and Daniel Silver at JPMorgan Chase & Co. called it "solid."
Still, there have been previous six-months bursts of growth like that in this expansion that weren't sustained and thus didn't develop into strong yearly growth. If the latest six-month stretch doesn't hold up, some economists say, the economy's fast overall growth rate won't be sustained.
"Since we're getting slow growth of productivity, and . . . relatively slow growth of the workforce, that means we're going to get slower growth of gross domestic product," said Martin Baily, senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington and former adviser to President Clinton.
An economy's long-run growth is determined by its number of workers and how much they produce. During the late 1990s and early 2000s, yearly productivity gains routinely beat 3%, sometimes exceeding 4%. Without productivity gains, economic growth depends on growing the workforce, something that is hard to accomplish now because so many baby boomers are retiring.
To boost growth for much of the expansion, businesses have been hiring more workers, as opposed to aggressively boosting the output of the workers they have.
That meant more jobs and more income for millions of Americans, which is good news, but it has also been a conundrum. Advances in technology such as artificial intelligence led some economists to foresee big gains in worker productivity that haven't shown up in the statistics. Moreover, with the jobless rate so low and workers in many industries scarce, companies have a big incentive to invest aggressively to help their workers become more productive.
One factor at play: The historically low unemployment rate means companies are hiring less-skilled workers to fill jobs, a potential drag on productivity.
Increases in business investment earlier this year could offset that drag, but business investment in the third quarter grew at a meager 0.8% annual rate, in part because spending on oil and gas rigs was down.
Chicago Fed President Charles Evans underscored the need for stronger productivity in a September speech.
"Higher sustainable growth would be great. However, we can't get there without boosting the underlying trends in labor input or productivity," Mr. Evans said.

Credit: By Harriet Torry and Sarah Chaney
