Higher-income consumers are stepping up purchases at supermarkets, Kroger executives said, shaking off higher prices and economic uncertainty.
Continued spending among middle- and higher-income customers is helping offset the effect of reduced spending by lower-income shoppers at the nation's biggest grocery-store operator by sales.
Higher-income customers tend to be more profitable because they make bigger purchases, Chief Executive Rodney McMullen said in an interview. Such shoppers are seeking out higher-end store brands and using personalized coupons, he said, and Kroger is streamlining its supply chain to improve products' availability and freshness.
"Fresh and produce are especially important to that customer," McMullen said.
Lower-income shoppers are making more changes to how they buy food, he said, including purchasing fewer items and cheaper products including smaller packages partly because of declines in food-stamp benefits.
Discounts have been hard to score at U.S. supermarkets since the Covid-19 pandemic, partly because of supply constraints. Cincinnati-based Kroger now is offering more discounts, executives said, as the supply chain improves and food brands fund more promotions.
Kroger is using algorithms and artificial intelligence to provide more targeted deals to shoppers, executives said. The owner of the Ralphs and Dillons chains is looking at other ways to harness AI, like providing more accurate substitutions for customers and improving search results when people order online.
Kroger said its identical sales, which exclude effects of store openings and closings, rose 3.5% in the quarter ended May 20, excluding fuel sales.
The company's quarterly profit increased to $962 million, or $1.32 a share, from $664 million, or 90 cents a share, last year. Adjusted earnings were $1.51 a share, above analyst forecasts for $1.46 a share, according to FactSet.
Kroger reaffirmed its sales and profit forecast for the year, the first time it didn't raise guidance since late 2019.
Shares of Kroger fell 2.7% on Thursday.
McMullen said Kroger's planned $20 billion deal to acquire competitor Albertsons remains on track to close in early 2024, and that integration planning is under way. The company is working with regulators while identifying buyers for stores it expects to divest for approval.
Grocery prices rose 5.8% in May from a year ago, according to the Labor Department. Prices of eggs, milk and some meats declined from the year before while cereal and other items stayed expensive.
Inflation is expected to moderate throughout the year. Some fresh foods are getting cheaper, while prices of packaged items are declining but staying at higher levels, Kroger executives said.
Sprouts Farmers Market and other food companies have said that unit volumes have declined in recent months because of inflation but that supermarket operators aren't yet aggressively competing to lower prices. Retailers have historically sold more products when inflation declined, Kroger executives said.
---
Dean Seal contributed to this article.
Credit: By Jaewon Kang
