SEOUL -- After an excruciating year, makers of memory chips have reason to breathe a sigh of relief: The industry's slide appears to have ended.
The latest positive sign came from Samsung Electronics Co., the world's largest memory-chip maker, which this week issued financial guidance that topped analysts' estimates. That followed a declaration from rival producer Micron Technology Co. in December that its business was passing through a "cyclical bottom."
A big accelerant is the rollout of 5G mobile networks. The global deployment of the next-generation technology should re-energize smartphone sales and juice corporate investments in artificial intelligence, computing and data storage -- all areas requiring significant memory capacity.
Prices for memory chips slumped for much of the past 15 months. Following a historic run of profits, the industry overproduced as the global economy weakened, leaving a glut of unsold inventory.
The market, however, began to turn in 2019's final quarter. Contract prices for NAND, a major type of memory chip, rose for the first time in more than a year and a half, according to market-research firm TrendForce. The other major memory chip, DRAM, is forecast to show contract-price increases for the first time in over a year in the current quarter.
"The surpluses in the [memory chip] stockpile are smaller than before. We're not seeing the excesses that were available three quarters ago," said Tobey Gonnerman, an executive at electronic components distributor Fusion Worldwide. He also said that chip transactions ticked up in the past two months.
Despite sagging chip-maker profits, investors bet on a turnaround in 2020. Last year, Samsung's shares rose 44%, Micron increased 64% and SK Hynix Inc. jumped 61%. Those three companies represent the lion's share of the world's memory production.
Companies and industry observers throughout last year forecast a market rebound but nudged the timeline back as the U.S.-China trade fight continued. Chip users, worried about potential tariffs and soft smartphone sales, held off on purchases.
Optimism about a demand rebound has strengthened, according to analysts.
In 2020, several major markets are set to expand their 5G networks. That is expected to boost smartphone sales, which have declined for two consecutive years as consumers held on to their devices longer without upgrading them, said Tarun Pathak, an associate director at Counterpoint Research.
Mr. Pathak forecasts 4% growth in smartphone shipments this year. "Memory capacity in smartphones is also increasing every year," he said.
Meanwhile, big internet companies such as Facebook Inc. and Amazon.com Inc. are looking to restore their memory-chip inventories after months of paring them down, said Mark Newman, an analyst at Bernstein Research, who follows the semiconductor market.
---
Liyan Qi contributed to this article.

Credit: By Eun-Young Jeong
