[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Broadcom has never been one for making fanciful forecasts. Which is why its latest one carries a lot of weight.
The chip maker's fiscal fourth-quarter results late Thursday barely edged out Wall Street's expectations. And its projection for semiconductor revenue in the quarter ending in January actually came in a bit below analysts' targets. But the company had an early Christmas surprise in store, in the form of a forecast that its three current big-tech customers will spend between $60 billion and $90 billion in the 2027 fiscal year on the types of artificial-intelligence components that Broadcom supplies.
Because Broadcom is the largest player in those specific markets, those comments effectively represented the company projecting a huge jump in the $12.2 billion in AI revenue it reported for its just-ended fiscal year. That paid off. Broadcom's stock rose only slightly following the results after Thursday's closing bell, but jumped sharply after Chief Executive Hock Tan mentioned the long-term "serviceable addressable market" on the company's earnings call. The shares were up 24% on Friday.
That also pushed Broadcom's market cap above $1 trillion for the first time. The company is only the second chip maker to reach that milestone after AI powerhouse Nvidia crossed it last year. Nvidia is currently valued around $3.3 trillion, second only to Apple.
Some analysts seemed a bit skeptical of Broadcom's forecast. Tech companies have a long history of pushing out questionable addressable-market numbers as a way to justify frothy valuations. But Tan made a sharp distinction during the call, noting he is describing just the expected spending on specific components from the three customers Broadcom currently has.
He did add that the company is working with two other big tech companies on designs for custom AI chips -- which is not in the current forecast. "We have line-of-sight to develop these prospects into revenue-generating customers before 2027," Tan said on the call.
Such a projection also means a majority of Broadcom's semiconductor revenue will come from AI, compared with about 40% now. But even at a $1 trillion market cap, Broadcom's stock is trading about 35 times projected earnings for the next four quarters compared with 46 times for Marvell, Broadcom's main competitor in helping big tech companies build customized AI chips.
"Broadcom remains one of the most compelling ways to play AI semis over the next 2-3 years," Morgan Stanley analyst Joseph Moore wrote in a note to clients Friday. A trillion dollars may not be as expensive as it sounds.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
