TOKYO -- Japanese technology investor SoftBank Group said it plans to buy back up to about $3.5 billion of its shares -- an encouraging sign for the Tokyo stock market, which recently suffered its worst day in decades.
SoftBank Group said Wednesday that it will buy back up to 6.8% of shares available, valued at up to 500 billion yen, equivalent to $3.46 billion, over the next 12 months.
The announcement is likely to help lift sentiment in the Japanese stock market after the Nikkei Stock Average on Monday suffered its biggest single-day percentage drop since 1987. Share buybacks can benefit investors by boosting a company's per-share earnings.
SoftBank's own share price has fallen by more than one-third from its peak in July.
Recently, activist hedge-fund manager Elliott Investment Management has pressured SoftBank to buy back $15 billion of stock, according to a person familiar with the matter. SoftBank Group Chief Financial Officer Yoshimitsu Goto said that the company's decision on the buyback was made on its own and wasn't influenced by any individual investor. "We need to demonstrate our readiness and protection as a company to investors and stakeholders" when the market gets volatile beyond theoretical values, Goto said.
The company on Wednesday also reported a surprise first-quarter loss after two consecutive quarters of profits.
It booked a net loss of 174.28 billion yen for the quarter ended June, narrowing from 477.62 billion yen a year earlier but missing a modest profit expected by analysts.
The company reported total investment gains of 559.7 billion yen, including those from the holding company and its Vision Funds investment vehicle.
Meanwhile, it posted a 443.9 billion yen loss related to foreign-exchange rates as a weak yen inflated its dollar-denominated liabilities.
Based on the dollar/yen rate and stock market prices as of Tuesday, SoftBank's net asset value stood at 24.9 trillion yen at the end of June, compared with 27.8 trillion yen as of the end of March.
"The market is on a downward trend, which is a good opportunity for us to invest," said Goto, who started his career as a banker in 1987.
The current situation looks similar to the dot-com bubble when investors weren't completely sure of the true value of companies, such as Amazon and Microsoft, which are leading the technology sector today, Goto said. The same can be said for the recent artificial-intelligence boom, he added.
Goto said SoftBank's financial health is solid with ample cash, but the company should take a "conservative" approach, given market volatility.
After years of playing a defensive strategy, Chief Executive Masayoshi Son has said the company would look for investment opportunities more actively in the field of AI.
But the outlook remains uncertain due to the recent global stock market turmoil, which has hit the technology sector especially hard.
Credit: By Megumi Fujikawa
