Facebook, Google Share Vision
Despite Facebook's new virtual-reality goggles, its investors may be more puzzled than ever about the company's vision for its own future. One clue comes from a rival that makes some nifty glasses of its own: Google.
Facebook has been on a shopping spree lately, spending $19 billion on messaging service WhatsApp and snapping up goggle maker Oculus VR for $2 billion. The two deals call to mind Facebook's surprise $1 billion purchase of photo-sharing platform Instagram two years ago. Chief Mark Zuckerberg has said the recent acquisitions fall under his goals of "connecting everyone" and "building the knowledge economy." In plainer language, the purchases are big bets on the future of social networking.
This high-stakes strategy of throwing stuff against a wall to see what sticks is redolent of Google. The technology industry, by its nature, must acknowledge that today's incumbent platforms won't necessarily be tomorrow's. Facebook and Google are using their highly profitable advertising businesses -- and, in Facebook's case, a very high stock valuation -- to invest in what might become the next big thing, even if that this is only tangentially related to their core businesses.
For every Oculus, WhatsApp and Instagram, Google has a Nest Labs, a Waze and a YouTube, for which it paid $3.2 billion, just over $1 billion and $1.65 billion, respectively. Both companies have invested in artificial intelligence and have projects devoted to expanding Internet services to underserved populations.
Both also are helmed by founder-CEOs with controlling stakes, giving them relatively free rein to do big deals without approval. By buying in, shareholders essentially sign up for the ride; an implicit expression of faith that these companies' visionary leaders can keep coming up with brilliant ideas.
Granted, there are some differences. Facebook has stuck to purchases that could all be considered loosely related to its core business. All are new platforms for social interaction. Instagram is another way to share photos with friends; WhatsApp is another way to send messages to them; and if virtual reality takes off, Oculus's product could offer another portal for interaction.
Google has embarked on many more so-called moonshots: projects mostly unrelated to search advertising. Among these are its acquisition of biotech company Calico, which focuses on combating aging; multiple robotics deals; and its investment in Google Glass and Fiber. Google X, the company's secretive laboratory, has researchers working on projects such as self-driving cars, balloon-powered Internet and airborne wind turbines.
But for both companies, most of these options on the future are still just that. Google got nearly 91% of its core business revenue from advertising in 2013, and that likely generated the vast majority of its profit, too.
Facebook's recent acquisitions come with virtually no revenue, let alone profits, so investors must return to what they know and can more easily predict: the prospects for the core business. And those look strong. Analysts forecast earnings per share to nearly double over the next two years, compared with a 41% increase at Google.
So Facebook's stock likely deserves some premium. Even so, 46 times the next 12 months' earnings looks rich compared with Google's 20.4 times. Both companies have built highly profitable, world-changing businesses and represent options on the future. It is difficult to see the edge that justifies Facebook's 120% premium -- which is bigger still if you adjust for Google's cash pile of $58.7 billion, roughly five times Facebook's.
The implication is that Google's investors are paying a reasonable multiple for its core business. By extension, they are paying relatively less for those options on the future than Facebook's shareholders are paying for their company's vision thing.
There is an added wrinkle: Google's cash position gives it plenty of firepower for more deals. Facebook has favored stock deals. And why wouldn't it, given the multiple awarded by the stock market? Investors with a nervous eye on Mr. Zuckerberg's predilection for bold moves should remember that they enable him by supplying the currency.
-- Miriam Gottfried
Air France
Can Take
Cue From
Lufthansa
Deutsche Lufthansa is showing its pilots union a lot of muscle. That is the kind of tough stuff Air France-KLM could use.
The German carrier is standing firm over proposed changes to retirement provisions for its heavily unionized pilots. The cost: a three-day strike that will ground 3,800 flights, affect almost half a million passengers through Friday and clip tens of millions of euros off profits.
But sticking to its guns could have merit: Lufthansa's ground and cabin crew agreed to terms after striking.
Lufthansa and Air France-KLM are both partway through restructuring plans aimed at making them more competitive against low-cost rivals. But labor looms larger as a problem for Air France-KLM: Staff accounted for 30% of its cost base in 2012 compared with 20% at Lufthansa, estimates Barclays. Assuming Air France gets the full benefits of its turnaround plan, employee productivity will still be between 10% and 15% below rival full-service airlines, estimates Barclays.
Air France-KLM really needs a wider restructuring of its European short-haul business. It could benefit from moving all short-haul traffic that doesn't feed its hubs to its low-cost carrier Transavia -- like Lufthansa is doing with Germanwings. But that looks unlikely to pass muster with the unions.
Instead, Transavia, which has just 11 jets in France, is left chasing leisure travelers on routes Air France typically doesn't fly, which means it competes more directly with low-cost operators. And cuts to capacity at the full-service airline out of Paris Orly and regional bases such as Toulouse, Marseille and Nice only go so far. Despite the changes, Air France-KLM could still log a 300 million euro ($414 million) loss in the short-haul business in 2015. Lufthansa's broke even last year.
Air France-KLM shares -- up 50% this year -- could keep defying gravity. Ongoing cuts to the airline's 5.3 billion euros in net debt should help, as would an expected return to profit this year after three years of losses.
Yet Air France-KLM and Lufthansa are both valued at about 3.6 times forecast 2014 earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization, according to FactSet. Lufthansa should have the greater thrust from here.
-- Renee Schultes
Bank Lending
Begins to Bloom
While much of the country spent the first three months of 2014 sheltering against snow and ice, banks began to fire up the lending furnaces.
That is welcome news for bank investors. Loan growth has been the missing ingredient for banks for some time. Without it, they have been left to try to bolster earnings through repeated rounds of cost cutting and reversals of loan-loss reserves, even as the Federal Reserve's superlow interest-rate policy has weighed heavily on margins.
While loan growth seen in the first quarter isn't yet strong enough to suggest banks are anywhere near out of the woods, it does provide some reason to hope the lending environment is improving. And it could bode well for banks' coming first-quarter results, especially as firms continue to grapple with lower mortgage-origination activity.
Not that any lending gains have been immediately apparent. In the first quarter through the third week of March, the latest date for which Federal Reserve data are available, overall bank loans grew from a year earlier at an average of 2.5%.
The pace is the same as seen in the final quarter of 2013. While this at least marked stabilization following a long period of declining rates of loan growth, it wasn't anything for bank investors to write home about.
But the average figure doesn't tell the whole story. For one, it reflects extremely low growth in January -- the lowest monthly growth since 2011. More important, it conceals a marked trend of rising growth. Better to look at the monthly averages. These rose from 2% in January to 2.5% in February to 3.4% through the third week in March.
And business lending has picked back up, reversing six quarters of decelerating growth.
This type of lending rose in 10 out of the year's first 12 weeks; with one week to go in the first quarter, such loans were 9.7% higher than a year before.
Business loans alone aren't enough to pull banks up out of revenue-growth doldrums. But the sudden turnaround in their growth rate signals that prospects for the economy may be better than weak first-quarter data has indicated.
-- John Carney
China's Pork Play Has Good Taste
When China's largest pork distributor acquired America's largest pork producer, it was a tasty match. Now the two are going to the public market to sanctify their union as the world's top pork firm.
WH Group, the company formerly named Shuanghui International Holdings that acquired Smithfield Foods last year, is set for an initial public offering of up to $6 billion in Hong Kong, The Wall Street Journal reported. Shuanghui borrowed heavily to buy Smithfield, and the IPO proceeds will help pay down debt. That should leave a financially solid firm ready to harvest the gains of the combined operations.
First WH Group will move the pork. Then it will move the pigs. The legacy Smithfield operations in the U.S. raise 16 million hogs a year, says BOC International, one of the IPO sponsors. Some of this can be exported to China, which consumes nearly six out of every 10 servings of pork world-wide, according to Euromonitor.
Despite lower labor costs in China, raising hogs is actually 15% cheaper in the U.S., according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. That is thanks to lower feed prices and more efficient industrialized farming.
Smithfield was successful in recent years in moving away from distributing unbranded pork chops and the like through butchers to developing branded end products such as packaged sausages. That formula will serve WH Group well in China, where consumers have become hypersensitive to food safety.
The longer-term synergy may come from China bringing over Smithfield's hog-producing efficiencies. Beijing has made food supply and safety a priority and sees large-scale industrialized agriculture as the key. A substantial proportion of Chinese pigs still is raised on small farms. The government has provided incentives to companies such as WH Group, whose hog capacity will be around 350,000 in 2015, to ramp up substantially and capture market share.
Smithfield's buyout price was about 13 times forward earnings, which makes the suggested 20 times multiple for the IPO seem rich. But combined with WH Group's higher margin distribution business, and the potential for the company to serve as a key player in China's modernized pork supply chain, it isn't unreasonable to think the value should inch toward Chinese milk giant Mengniu Dairy, which commands 26.3 times, or a branded-product distributor such as Hormel Foods, which trades at 20.7 times forward earnings.
The price of this pork play may seem high, but the flavor could be worth it.
-- Abheek Bhattacharya
