Researchers at the DeepMind Technologies artificial intelligence lab said Thursday they had predicted the structure of nearly all known proteins, a major advance in biology that will accelerate drug discovery and help address problems such as sustainability and food insecurity.
The lab, a London-based subsidiary of Google parent Alphabet Inc., developed an algorithm called AlphaFold that predicts the three-dimensional structure of proteins, molecules that are found in all living organisms and play essential roles in the functioning of cells. The project was initiated in 2016. Last July, DeepMind released an AlphaFold database with nearly 1 million predicted proteins, allowing researchers and labs around the world to make use of it for any purpose.
On Thursday, DeepMind said it had expanded the database to include 214 million predicted proteins, or nearly all of the proteins known to science. That includes all of the proteins in the human body, as well as proteins found in animals, plants, bacteria, and many other organisms.
Understanding the structure of a protein is vital for understanding its function, according to Demis Hassabis, co-founder and chief executive of DeepMind. Until now, that modeling required time-consuming and expensive experimental methodologies such as X-ray techniques.
"When we launched the database last July, it was recognized as a pretty big leap forward for biology, and I think it also was a great demonstration of how AI can be used to advance scientific discovery. You can look up a 3-D structure of a protein almost as easily as doing a keyword Google search," Dr. Hassabis said.
The effort to model proteins, under way for decades, has been accelerated greatly by AlphaFold, according to Ewan Birney, deputy director general of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory and director of EMBL's European Bioinformatics Institute, which collaborated on the project.
"This problem has been such a tough problem for so long," Dr. Birney said.
During the last year, scientists at the University of Oxford used AlphaFold to advance their research into vaccines to stop the spread of malaria, which kills hundreds of thousands of people a year worldwide, according to Matthew Higgins, a professor of molecular parasitology.
They used older methods to study a malaria protein called Pfs48/45. "We were never able to see in sufficient detail, despite many years of work, what this molecule looks like. We got a very fuzzy view of it," Dr. Higgins said.
The post-doctoral researcher working on the problem was able to take the structure of the protein predicted by AlphaFold and compare it with the fuzzy view of the molecule that derived from experimental methods. The two models fit together beautifully to create a sharp image of the molecule and how it works and how antibodies bind to it, according to Dr. Higgins.
AlphaFold, a machine learning algorithm, was trained on known models of proteins, and learned to predict proteins on its own.
DeepMind is known for a number of pioneering AI models including AlphaGo, which mastered the complex game of Go and in 2016 beat Lee Sedol, a top player.
Credit: By Steven Rosenbush
