Officials overseeing New York's transit system should consider thermal cameras to take riders' temperatures and artificial intelligence to assess mask-wearing to combat the spread of the novel coronavirus, a new report says.
The report, which was commissioned by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, offers a range of best practices gleaned from transit systems around the world. Countries such as Canada and Singapore have used thermal-scanner temperature checks during the pandemic and have denied entry to riders with a fever, the report says. Hong Kong has deployed robots to deep clean and decontaminate subway cars, according to the report.
The state-controlled MTA, the nation's largest transit system, ordered the report from a consulting firm in May as officials prepared for the economic reopening of the city and surrounding counties after months of lockdown. Ridership fell by more than 90% at the height of the outbreak.
Part of the report was released Monday. MTA Chairman Patrick Foye said in an interview that his agency is considering whether to apply some of the options outlined in the report to the city's subway and bus systems, as well as the agency's two commuter railroads. He said he recognized the need for safety measures as New York continues its phased reopening and hundreds of thousands of riders return to mass transit each week.
The report says that passengers can be temperature screened in kiosks or by workers wearing special helmets or glasses.
"We are going to continue to look at everything that is feasible," Mr. Foye said, noting that the city's 10,000 bus stops would be too vast for a temperature-checking regime.
The authority already has been an innovator during the pandemic, Mr. Foye said. The MTA is using ultraviolet light to disinfect trains and buses. It recently introduced an app that tells Long Island Rail Road riders crowding conditions in each railcar.
Missing from the report released Monday is an evaluation of the authority's responsiveness to the pandemic. That information is expected to be presented to MTA board members at their regular meeting Wednesday.
Some of the authority's 74,000 workers have criticized officials for refusing to allow employees to wear masks during the early weeks of the pandemic. The MTA has said it was following guidance at that time from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. So far, 132 workers, mainly from the division that runs the subway and buses, have died of coronavirus-related causes.
The authority was "ahead of the curve" in implementing pandemic procedures, Mr. Foye said. He added that he is confident the consultant, WSP USA, which has been paid up to $100,000 for the report, would deliver an impartial verdict.
The MTA is cleaning and disinfecting trains, buses and stations around the clock. The report emphasizes that the main risk of catching the virus is through inhaling particles from another person coughing, sneezing or talking. It also highlights how disparate health guidance can be regarding Covid-19.
The concept of social distancing can mean anything from a distance of 3 feet to 6 feet, depending upon the nation. While U.S. health authorities recommend that masks should be worn by everyone, some European and world health authorities say masks should be worn only by people who are unwell.
The MTA has given up maintaining social distancing on its systems, which carried about eight million people on an average weekday before the pandemic. Instead, it is relying on mask usage to prevent the spread of the virus.
Authorities in Paris are using artificial intelligence to scan CCTV footage from the Metro to identify people who aren't wearing masks, the report says. The data isn't used to punish people, but to gauge mask usage, the report says.
The MTA began exploring similar technology on its commuter railroads and the subway before the report was commissioned, Mr. Foye said.
"The technology is promising, and what they are doing in Paris we are also looking at," he added.

Credit: By Paul Berger
