Humana Inc. has deployed artificial-intelligence software trained to detect conversational cues to coach call-center agents and supervisors in real-time, when calls with customers are going awry.
The software, built with AI tools from Cogito Corp., can, for example, recognize increasing agitation by "listening" for markers such as a steady rise in the pitch of a customer's voice or instances of a customer and an agent talking over each other. The digital coach, called Cogito Dialog, will then send an electronic alert, such as "speaking quickly" or "frequent overlaps," to prompt the agent to change technique.
Empathy, said Geeta Wilson, director of consumer experience, is a competitive advantage.
"Usually when folks are interacting with us, it's about procedures and medications," she said. "A health-care company has to have empathy and compassion."
As AI advances spur the first generation of commercial applications, called chat bots, based around natural-language processing, researchers and technology companies are studying how such systems can better detect conversational cues. One goal is to develop a better rapport with users.
Increasingly affordable artificial intelligence tools are also making possible software to help with customer service beyond systems that respond to keywords, said David Nichols, a principal at Ernst & Young LLC.
At Humana, Ms. Wilson is trying to build systems that learn and can predict customer behavior.
"We want to know what the consumer is going to do before they do it, so it feels like we know them," she said.
To build digital coaches, Humana developers earlier this year fed data from 100,000 customer service calls into the AI system, to analyze for such markers as pauses, key words and interruptions, then associated them with the outcomes of the interactions. Now digital coaches, built with tools from machine-learning startup Cogito Corp., listen for stress in live conversations and send real-time suggestions to an agent to talk less, for example, or moderate his tone.
"Those alerts help agents determine how they should change the conversation to make sure the member feels like they're being heard." Ms. Wilson said.
Credit: By Kim S. Nash
