SoftBank Group Corp. has approached Didi Chuxing Technology Co. of China about investing roughly $6 billion to help the ride-hailing firm expand in self-driving-car technologies, two people familiar with the matter said.
The bulk of the investment would likely come from SoftBank's planned $100 billion Vision Fund, in hopes of unlocking new value in China's expanding ride-hailing market, one of the people said. The technology fund, originally slated for a launch in January, has been delayed as SoftBank considers different demands from investors such as Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund, Abu Dhabi's Mubadala Development Co., Apple Inc., Qualcomm Inc. and Oracle Corp., according to another person close to the fund.
Didi became China's ride-hailing champion after it merged with rival Uber Technologies Inc.'s China operations last year. SoftBank -- like Tencent Holdings Ltd., Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Baidu Inc. -- has been hunting for stakes in car-hailing apps. The Japanese group led a $750 million fundraising push last year in Singapore-based Grab, which is locked in a price war in Southeast Asia. Grab also counts Didi as an investor. SoftBank also led a $600 million financing round in Kuaidi Dache in 2015, which later merged with Didi.
Through the Vision Fund, SoftBank Chief Executive Masayoshi Son hopes to target multimillion-dollar investments in areas such as autonomous driving and artificial intelligence.
Since announcing the fund, SoftBank has invested in shared-office-space firm WeWork Cos. and satellite operator Intelsat SA, with plans to have the Vision Fund take stakes in the companies as well. It also plans to sell a stake in its U.K. semiconductor designer ARM Holdings PLC to the fund, people familiar with the matter have said.
Didi was valued at roughly $36 billion after the Uber China merger. As part of the deal, Uber also became the largest shareholder in Didi. Didi counts all three of China's largest technology companies -- Alibaba, Tencent and Baidu -- as shareholders.
A SoftBank investment could give Didi a boost when the company is facing hurdles in China. Several cities issued proposed industry regulations late last year that would restrict the types of vehicles that can be used and who can drive them. Meanwhile, the country's antitrust regulators opened an investigation on Didi's deal to acquire U.S.-based Uber's China unit.It isn't clear whether the investigation has concluded.
SoftBank's possible investment in Didi was reported earlier by Bloomberg.
Credit: By Kane Wu and Mayumi Negishi
