WASHINGTON -- The U.S. Army has proposed a 2020 budget plan that would eliminate or scale back some of its most enduring equipment programs to free up money for investing in the weapons and hardware of the future.
Two Army mainstays scheduled for cuts -- the Bradley fighting vehicle, dating to the 1980s, and the CH-47 Chinook helicopter, first introduced in 1962 -- are known to generations of service members.
But like dozens of other programs, they will give way to next-generation technology under the Army proposal. The budget would divert money from the Bradley, Chinook and other programs to develop new gear including combat vehicles that use artificial intelligence and a precision-strike missile to double the firepower of current artillery systems, officials said.
In all, more than 180 equipment and weapons platforms would be cut or scaled back in what top officials said marks the most consequential budget in more than 40 years. The plan is contained in an overall $182 billion budget for the Army, part of a Pentagon budget proposal for $718 billion in 2020 -- a $33 billion increase over 2019 spending.
"We are making the hard, painful choices to live within our means while making sure that our soldiers have what they need to fight and win," Army Secretary Mark Esper said in an interview.
Gone this year will be millions of dollars that otherwise would have been spent on the Bradley and Chinook, as well as the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle, or JLTV, made by Oshkosh Corp. Smaller cuts are proposed to other programs including mine-clearance vehicles, Humvee trailers, bulldozers and forklifts.
That money will go toward six modernization priorities: a new combat vehicle to replace the Bradley; helicopters known as Future Vertical Lift; long-range precision missiles; missile defense; communication networks; and what Army officials call soldier "lethality."
Chinook maker Boeing Co. has launched a lobbying campaign in an effort to maintain the current level of purchases, while BAE Systems PLC, which produces the Bradley, said it had been informed of the planned cuts as the Army changed its priorities.
Ryan McCarthy, undersecretary of the Army, acknowledged there will be a debate in Congress over the Army's budget. "We're moving a lot of money," he said, but added: "We hope that they give us the opportunity to explain the choices that we made."
---
Doug Cameron in Chicago contributed to this article.

Credit: By Gordon Lubold
