Oracle's shares rose in late trading Monday after it said its revenue rose in the latest quarter on strong demand for its cloud services that was in part powered by growing interest in generative artificial intelligence.
While Oracle is one of the second-tier players in the cloud market -- well behind Amazon.com's Amazon Web Services and Microsoft's Azure cloud service -- it said strong demand for its AI computing infrastructure drove customer interest.
Oracle has been trying to position itself with corporate customers as a more affordable alternative to the largest cloud companies. Investors have been looking for indications as to whether this tactic is succeeding.
The company noted Monday that demand for AI services has far exceeded the ability for Oracle data centers to supply them. The company said it was expanding data-center capacity rapidly and that its generative AI business will be in "hypergrowth" phase for the foreseeable future. Revenue from that segment was up 53%.
The company has been working with Microsoft to better capitalize on the AI opportunity.
In September, the rivals announced a partnership to give customers direct access to Oracle database services running on Oracle Cloud Infrastructure and deployed in Microsoft's Azure data centers.
Oracle's shares rose 9% in after-hours trading following the results.
In Oracle's February quarter, sales rose 7% to $13.28 billion, in line with analysts expectations. Net income climbed 27% to $2.4 billion.
Cloud services and license support revenue climbed 12% to $9.96 billion, in line with analysts' estimates according to FactSet. The company during the quarter announced its generative AI cloud platform was widely available and provided customers access to AI models from companies like Cohere, as well as Meta Platforms' Llama2.
Through Monday's close, Oracle shares had risen 36% over the previous 12 months. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index had climbed around 44% over the same period.
Credit: By Tom Dotan
