The unwinding of some of Wall Street's most popular trades intensified Monday, sending Japanese stocks to their worst day since the 1987 market crash and walloping U.S. technology shares.
U.S. stock indexes opened sharply lower, tracing declines in international markets, before recovering somewhat after a survey of purchasing managers showed the services sector expanded last month at a slightly higher rate than expected.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq led the way lower, falling 3.4%. Every industry segment in the S&P 500 declined, pushing the broad index down by 3%. All 30 stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average ended lower and the blue-chip index shed 1034 points.
The Russell 2000 index of small stocks, resurgent in recent weeks, lost 3.3%. Oil, precious metals and bitcoin fell. Wall Street's fear gauge, the CBOE Volatility Index, or VIX, jumped more than 50% during stock-trading hours to its highest level since 2020.
The rout began in Asia, where Japan's Nikkei 225 declined 12% amid a surging yen. It was the worst single-day percentage drop for the Nikkei since Oct. 20, 1987.
That was the Tuesday after Black Monday in the U.S., when the Dow industrials fell nearly 23%.
The selloff in Tokyo extended last week's rout that followed the Bank of Japan's decision to raise interest rates. That move pushed the yen higher relative to other currencies. Disappointing economic data in the U.S. stoked the selloff, unwinding a popular Wall Street bet known as the carry trade.
For years, investors around the world bought riskier assets, such as U.S. stocks, and funded the trades with the yen, thanks to ultralow interest rates in Japan. Until recently, many hedge funds and money managers expected rates to remain low and the yen weak.
Instead, the strengthening yen has squeezed the carry trade. Investors who borrowed yen to fund their bets have been forced to buy more of the currency by bankers insisting on additional collateral. That is pushing the yen even higher, prompting more margin calls.
The Japanese market rebounded sharply early Tuesday. At the midday break, the Nikkei was up 9.4%. Elsewhere in Asia, South Korea's Kospi was up 3.5%, Other big moves on Monday also were reversing themselves: The yen, which had strengthened sharply, has fallen back somewhat. The Japanese currency was trading at around 145 to the dollar. Japan's 10-year government bond yield had recovered to 0.87% from 0.75% Monday afternoon.
The losses Monday were an example of the popular trades that are coming unraveled as investors mull weakening U.S. economic data and tech shares' sky-high valuations while awaiting the Federal Reserve's next move on interest rates.
Investors have been expecting the central bank to cut rates at its September meeting. Now the debate centers on whether the Fed might take the rare steps of making a larger-than-usual half-percentage-point cut or even lowering borrowing costs between meetings.
In one sign that growth is continuing, Treasury yields recovered from sharp early declines following Monday's strong reading of the services sector.
The Institute for Supply Management's survey of service businesses rose to 51.4 in July from 48.8 in June, which was the lowest reading since the depths of the Covid-19 pandemic lockdown in 2020. Readings over 50 indicate expansion.
A similar ISM survey of manufacturing companies last week slipped deeper into contraction, prompting bonds to rally and a selloff in stocks. Monday's services reading suggests that the swath of the U.S. economy that employs the most people might not be in as bad shape as manufacturing.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note ended at 3.782%, down from its Friday settlement of 3.795% and well off the 2024 high of 4.706% in late April.
The two-year yield, which often moves with expectations for short-term rates set by the Fed, inched up to 3.88%.
While investors wait, they are dumping the technology stocks that propelled the market to new highs this year.
Each of the so-called Magnificent Seven technology stocks declined at least 2.5%. Nvidia, the must-own stock of the artificial-intelligence frenzy, lost 6.4%.
Investors have questioned whether those companies' share prices had outrun realistic forecasts for future profits. "The technology sector has come under particular duress in recent weeks amidst fear that companies are overspending on artificial intelligence infrastructure just as economic growth is beginning to slow," said John Belton, portfolio manager at Gabelli Funds.
Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway on Saturday disclosed that it had slashed its position in Apple during the second quarter, selling nearly half of its huge stake in the iPhone maker.
The regulatory disclosure sent a strong signal to the droves of investors who look to the Nebraska-based billionaire, known as the Oracle of Omaha, for signs of shifting market sentiment.
"It's something that people pay attention to due to his historic track record of going against the greed-and-fear rotations of the market," said Brian Burrell, portfolio manager at Thornburg Investment Management in Santa Fe, N.M. "When a contrarian starts to move and everyone is positioned the other way, that's a reason to re-examine their positioning."
---
Kosaku Narioka and Rebecca Feng contributed to this article.
Generate image description

Credit: By Ryan Dezember
