International Business Machines Corp. on Wednesday agreed to acquire the digital and data assets of Weather Co., owner of the Weather Channel.
Financial terms weren't immediately disclosed, and calls seeking further comment from IBM were not immediately returned. The Wall Street Journal reported Tuesday that the deal could be valued at more than $2 billion, citing a person familiar with the matter.
The deal doesn't include the traditional TV channel business but does include such digital businesses as the website and app, intellectual property, infrastructure and data.
IBM is particularly interested in Weather Co.'s forecasting group, WSI, which houses the technology and weather data that the Weather Co. collects, manipulates and licenses to companies ranging from airlines to utility companies to insurance providers.
Shares of IBM rose 1.3% to $139.69 in morning trading.
Weather Co. is owned by a consortium that includes private-equity firms Bain Capital LLC and Blackstone Group LP, and Comcast Corp.'s NBCUniversal. They bought the company in 2008 for roughly $3.5 billion. Weather Co. Chief Executive David Kenny is expected to join IBM after the deal closes, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Weather Co. had courted various types of potential buyers. More than a year ago, Google Inc. was offered the chance to bid on the Weather Channel's digital assets, but the company wasn't interested, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Weather Co. is best known for the Weather Channel and its friendly meteorologists like Jim Cantore, who people routinely turn to for information during hurricanes and blizzards. But prospects for the TV channel have dimmed in a tough media environment where consumers are cutting the pay-TV cord and slimming down cable packages. That has raised fears that smaller networks like Weather Channel will struggle to grow subscription fees.
People close to Weather Co. say that the company envisions a future for the TV channel tied to "over-the-top" streaming products. Earlier this year, the company struck a deal to be carried on Dish Network Corp.'s Sling TV streaming video service. A sale of Weather Channel is also on the table, one of the people said.
Weather Co. and IBM already have an alliance, struck earlier this year. The idea was to combine Weather Co.'s weather data and forecast information with IBM's cloud computing skills and analytics know-how, so the two could come up with new ways to package and sell weather data and business solutions to different industries. IBM's artificial intelligence service, Watson, is central to that arrangement.
IBM believes that it can enhance the Weather Channel's forecasts to build new products. Retailers, for example, could better manage their supply chain by knowing when sales might slump because of snowstorms.
Over the past year, IBM has worked hard to secure new data sources for its software, forging new relationships with Twitter Inc., Apple Inc., Johnson & Johnson, Medtronic Inc., and the Weather Channel's WSI division, which generates more than 10 billion weather forecasts a day.
In August, IBM said it would buy Merge Health care, a medical imaging company.
---
Ezequiel Minaya contributed to this article.
Credit: By Suzanne Vranica and Robert McMillan
