Videogame fans waited years for a new generation of living-room consoles. Now that the hardware has arrived, Microsoft Corp.'s hopes of keeping pace with the competition may turn on a piece of software.
The title is "Titanfall," a combat game for the Xbox One console that goes on sale in Europe Thursday. Microsoft has been promoting the game since last June, hoping to inject new ideas into a familiar genre while providing a strong reason to buy its new hardware.
"Titanfall" is already generating considerable buzz, with retailers planning midnight launch events at 6,000 stores world-wide. But Microsoft, whose new console appears to be lagging behind sales of Sony Corp.'s new PlayStation 4, is taking no chances.
The company will provide a free copy of the title to customers who buy the Xbox One, a move that amounts to an early price cut for a device that arrived in November.
"'Titanfall' is an incredibly important game and it's coming at an important time," says Yusuf Mehdi, head of marketing and strategy for Microsoft's Xbox group.
The game was developed by Respawn Entertainment and published by Electronic Arts Inc. exclusively for Xbox One, Xbox 360 and personal computers that run Microsoft Windows. Its creators hope to attract consumers by providing a combination of artistic and technical innovations.
As in other videogames that are sometimes called "first-person shooter" titles, the game's world is seen by the players through the eyes of their characters, with a gun ever present in their hands.
They fight their way through an urban battleground, moving by foot or using jetpacks to jump from wall to wall. Alternatively, characters may pilot robot-like machines called Titans, building-sized combatants that can be programmed to fight autonomously. The game is designed to always be played with multiple people over the Internet. Most existing games offer both single-player and multiple-player options.
"Titanfall" exploits gamers' Internet connections to advanced computers in data centers to help accelerate the action while generating vivid images, a combination of chores that can tax the power of individual game consoles.
In this case, Microsoft servers power functions like the artificial intelligence of the game's computer-controlled characters, freeing up the videogame console to focus on creating more detailed animations, says Vince Zampella, Respawn's chief executive.
Some people who have played test versions of "Titanfall" are enthused. Omar Elshamy, a 19-year-old college student who is studying graphic design in Gilbert, Ariz., says that he likes the way soldiers can fight on the ground or jump into the mechanized Titans. The game is "going to revolutionize shooters," he says, while spurring hardware sales. "It's going to be a system seller."
Microsoft can use some excitement. Although both the Xbox One and the new PlayStation 4 sold well after their respective introductions in November, Sony appears to have taken the lead.
In January, Microsoft said it had sold more than three million Xbox One units to customers by the end of 2013; it hasn't issued more recent numbers. Sony said it sold more than 4.2 million units in 2013, and in March it put the cumulative figure at more than six million units. Market researchers NPD Group said the PlayStation 4 led hardware sales in the U.S. in January but didn't provide figures.
Popular game titles have long sparked console sales. The game series "Halo," which made its debut in 2001, helped establish Microsoft's first Xbox videogame console and has since generated billions of dollars in sales.
Colin Sebastian, an analyst at Robert W. Baird, says "Titanfall" also has the potential to become a major franchise if it meets fans' quality expectations. But he hasn't published any sales forecasts. "I think it's too early to say," he says.
Some early signs from consumers are favorable. Industry research firm Fizziology says "Titanfall" has been mentioned on social-media sites nearly as often as the console world's most popular shooting-game franchise "Call of Duty" before its most recent release last year.
"Titanfall" has also been the most preordered videogame in the U.S. for more than a month, according to industry tracking site VGChartz.
Respawn's Mr. Zampella, one of the original creators of "Call of Duty," credits Microsoft with supporting the four-year-old company since it was announced, offering development hardware and information about the Xbox's future road map. The Sherman Oaks, Calif., company now has about 90 employees.
Optimists about the game's appeal include Greg Blair, a 31-year old cable salesman in Appleton, Wis., who has played an early version and likes both its game play and underlying technology.
He wondered aloud whether "Titanfall" could come to define the Xbox One in the way "Super Mario Bros." did Nintendo Co. and "Halo" did the original Xbox. "It has the potential," he says. "It's a start."
Credit: By Ian Sherr
