NVIDI
Baidu to Team Up
On Self-Driving Cars
Chip maker Nvidia Corp. and Chinese internet giant Baidu Inc. said Thursday that they are forming a partnership to develop a self-driving, artificially intelligent car.
Speaking at the annual Baidu World conference, Nvidia co-founder and Chief Executive Jen-Hsun Huang announced that his Santa Clara, Calif.-based company will work with Baidu to build a self-driving car platform whose algorithm-based operating system will include cloud-based, high-definition maps and the ability to perceive and react to different road environments.
"No company in the world today has demonstrated the ability to integrate this system and deploy it at scale for millions of cars to drive by themselves," Mr. Huang said. "We are going to bring together our technical capabilities and expertise in AI" to make this happen.
The partnership comes after Baidu received approval earlier this week from regulators to test its self-driving cars in California, where Tesla Motors Inc., Ford Motor Co. and Google parent Alphabet Inc., among others, are testing their autonomous-driving cars on the road.
Mr. Huang said Nvidia started collaborating on artificial intelligence with Baidu in 2012 when the two companies worked to develop a large-scale graphics processing unit which made it possible for machine intelligence to train at a larger scale.
-- Alyssa Abkowitz
---
MAZDA MOTOR
Auto Maker to Recall
2.3 Million Vehicles
Mazda Motor Corp. is recalling 2.3 million cars world-wide over rear door and engine problems, Japan's transport ministry said Thursday. The recalls include the Mazda 3 car as well as the popular CX-3 and CX-5 crossover SUVs, according to Mazda.
Of the recalls, 117,030 are related to issues with the chips controlling the diesel engines on models sold in Japan and manufactured between 2014 and 2016, which could in rare cases cause the engine to cease running. The company said no accidents were caused by the defect.
The rest of the recalls are related to problems with the paint job on the hydraulic arm that holds up the rear door, which could allow it to rust and fail. The problem affects vehicles built between 2007 and 2015.
-- Chieko Tsuneoka
