TOKYO -- Japan's benchmark stock average on Thursday broke the intraday record set more than 34 years ago, a milestone in the country's recovery from a popped bubble that left the economy in the doldrums for decades.
In intraday trading Thursday morning, the Nikkei Stock Average of 225 shares reached 39029.00, higher than the record close of 38915.87 on Dec. 29, 1989, and higher than the previous intraday high of 38957.44, set on the same day in 1989.
That was the last trading day of a decade that saw one of history's great stock and real-estate bubbles.
The milestone was powered by foreign investors who are encouraged by Japan's corporate-governance changes and are piling into the country as China's lure fades.
The Nikkei has rallied since November on optimism that Japan has broken out of its longstanding problem of flat or falling prices, as well as anticipation that the country's tech industry will benefit from global demand in the artificial-intelligence era. Pessimism about China has driven investors to redirect money to Japan, analysts said.
Japan's wages and profits are improving, and companies are using their assets more efficiently, said Jonathan Garner, a longtime Asia strategist at Morgan Stanley. "That's working in a virtuous cycle upwards as you exit deflation," he said. "Whereas for China, the exact opposite is happening."
Garner said the reversal of fortunes for Japan and China "is causing some very large reallocations within portfolios right now."
Foreign investors were net buyers of Japanese stocks for seven consecutive weeks through Feb. 17, buying a total of about $25.4 billion more than they sold, according to Ministry of Finance data.
News that U.S. chip maker Nvidia's sales more than tripled in the latest quarter helped the Nikkei make gains Thursday.
Tokyo Electron, which makes semiconductor-manufacturing equipment, was up more than 5% in Thursday's trading and is up 44% this year. Tech investor SoftBank Group was also up more than 5% Thursday and has gained 40% this year thanks to its subsidiary Arm, a chip-design firm seen as likely to benefit from AI demand.
The 34-year interval is one of the longest in the history of global stock markets. The Dow Jones Industrial Average took 25 years to recover its peak reached in 1929 before the stock-market crash that year.
Credit: By Peter Landers and Megumi Fujikawa
