For amputees like John Redfield, shopping for a new pair of shoes used to be a major hassle. Walking up or down an incline was as awkward as wearing ski boots. And going shoeless required performing a constant balancing act.
To achieve comfort in each instance would require a trip to the prosthetist's office, where adjustments would be made with a wrench -- an impractical option.
But now, the 50-year-old sales professional in Connecticut can adjust the heel height of his prosthesis -- an artificial foot and ankle device on his right leg -- simply by pressing a button on his smartphone. In some cases, the prosthesis will correct itself automatically.
"It just makes my day-to-day life easier," said Mr. Redfield, who became an amputee at age 29 as a result of a motorcycle accident and is one of the product's test patients. "My gait is much more natural now."
The prosthesis from Oklahoma City start-up Orthocare Innovations LLC is among a growing number of medical devices that aim to help people deal with health conditions in ways that previously required the aid of a medical professional.
Another start-up, Boston-based Rest Devices Inc., is testing a T-shirt with wireless sensors that measure respiration in sleep-apnea patients. Users can wear it at home instead of a hospital or sleep lab to gather information that physicians need to select treatment options.
Such devices could benefit patients who have a tendency to ignore or delay care because of the costs and hassles that come with having to make frequent or overnight visits to health facilities. But the products could give patients a false sense of security about their ability to manage their health on their own.
"That's a danger when you hand somebody a medical device that looks professional and therefore they think they're just fine using that as a substitute," said Jason Hwang, a physician in Mountain View, Calif., and co-author of "The Innovator's Prescription: A Disruptive Solution for Health Care."
The concept of medical devices that patients can use themselves isn't new, given products like home-pregnancy tests. But Dr. Hwang said the category is accelerating because consumers are accustomed to using the Internet to gather information.
The cost of sensor technology, a common component of medical devices, has also fallen "exponentially" in recent years, according to Vivek Wadhwa, director of research at Duke University's Center for Entrepreneurship and Research Commercialization.
Even so, there are plenty of financial hurdles to bringing a new health product to market. Start-ups have to gain the trust of doctors who prescribe these items and depending on the product, secure Federal Drug Administration approval.
Meanwhile, medical-device makers may also need to convince Medicare and private health insurers to help cover the cost for patients.
"We have an approval and reimbursement system that is expensive, risk-averse and basically hostile to start-ups," said William A. Sahlman, a professor at Harvard Business School, and an investor in Rest Devices.
Founded by three Massachusetts Institute of Technology graduates, two-year-old Rest Devices is currently working toward applying for FDA approval for its washable, respiration-tracking T-shirt. The sensors embedded in the fabric measure the user's breathing, and a small data logger with a USB port -- which must be attached to the shirt because it's not waterproof -- records the output from the sensors.
Orthocare, a 30-employee company founded in 2007, has raised $12 million to embed wireless technology in its prosthesis devices. Its CEO and co-founder, Doug McCormack, plus its director of software engineering are both amputees.
A number of other start-ups are working on products aimed at minimizing patients' dependency on medical professionals, such as Scanadu Inc., a Moffett Field, Calif., maker of a handheld device not yet on the market that interacts with smartphones to identify conditions such as the flu and strep throat.
Consumers can expect more products like these.
Qualcomm Inc., the San Diego-based chip maker, launched a $10 million contest in January to develop a workable "tricorder" -- the handheld diagnostic device used on the science-fiction TV show Star Trek. It aims to bring together advances in artificial intelligence, wireless sensing, imaging diagnostics, lab-on-a-chip, and molecular biology. Some 200 teams have so far pre-registered.
---
Angus Loten contributed to this article.
Subscribe to WSJ:
Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
