During a 2016 experiment at Google in Mountain View, Calif., researchers gave a robot the task of lifting a pink stapler. The colorful items it had seen previously were soft baby clothes, so the machine figured that the stapler also "had to be soft," said Sergey Levine, the scientist who led the work. But the pinching strategy it had used previously didn't work in this case. The robot was foiled by the unexpected scenario.
In a factory, a robot's movements are precisely choreographed. Engineers must reprogram the machine for any change to its routine. As automated systems become more commonplace in businesses and homes and on our roads, researchers are trying to make them more adaptive and responsive. To function well outside controlled settings, robots must be able to approximate such human capacities as social intelligence and hand-eye coordination. But how to distill them into code?
"It turns out those things are really hard," said Cynthia Breazeal, a roboticist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Media Lab. Researchers are experimenting with artificial intelligence to see how much they can upgrade robot capacities, said Dr. Breazeal, who is also the founder of the social-robotics startup Jibo Inc.
Even today's state-of-the-art AI has serious practical limits. In a recent paper, for example, researchers at MIT described how their AI software misidentified a 3-D printed turtle as a rifle after the team subtly altered the coloring and lighting for the reptile. The experiment showed the ease of fooling AI and raised safety concerns over its use in real-world applications such as self-driving cars and facial-recognition software.
Current systems also aren't great at applying what they have learned to new situations. A recent paper by the AI startup Vicarious showed that a proficient Atari-playing AI lost its prowess when researchers moved around familiar features of the game. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency -- the U.S. Department of Defense's R&D arm -- recently launched a planned $65-million, four-year program dubbed Lifelong Learning Machines to develop AI systems that can handle new challenges without additional training, according to program manager Hava Seigelmann. When conditions change, she said, "We need something that works right away."
Firms including Alphabet's Google, Autodesk, OpenAI, plus a cadre of startups and academics, are testing techniques that they think could help AI systems and AI-powered robots become more flexible. Google's DeepMind subsidiary used a technique known as reinforcement learning to build software that has repeatedly beat the best human players in Go. While learning the classic Chinese game, the machine got positive feedback for making moves that increased the area it walled off from its competitor. Its quest for a higher score spurred the AI to develop territory-taking tactics until it mastered the game.
The problem is that "the real world doesn't have a score," said Brown University roboticist Stefanie Tellex. Engineers need to code into AI programs so-called "reward functions" -- mathematical ways of telling a machine it has acted correctly. Beyond the finite scenario of a game, amid the complexity of real-life interactions, it's difficult to determine what results to reinforce. How, and how often, should engineers reward machines to guide them to perform a certain task? "The reward signal is so important to making these algorithms work," Dr. Tellex added.
A paper published this summer by researchers at OpenAI described a reinforcement learning-based algorithm that helps robots to complete simple tasks, such as stacking blocks or pushing objects across a table. The system, dubbed Hindsight Experience Replay (HER), records and "relives" robot experiences multiple times in a virtual world. It allows a machine to turn blunders into learning opportunities, according to Marcin Andrychowicz, one of the scientists who developed it.
If a robot aims to pick up a screwdriver but instead latches onto a hammer, the program doesn't count that as a failure, he says. Instead, it analyzes the experience to teach itself how to pick up hammers -- in the same way that humans learn from mistakes. "Without HER, the robot would just learn that what it did is not a good way of picking up screwdrivers and would ignore the hammer completely," he said. By leveraging all of a machine's previous experiences, even mistakes, HER is intended to reduce a major challenge of reinforcement learning: the time and data it takes to train a system.
For teaching physical actions, researchers rely on simulators and virtual reality. One reason is safety: During training in a simulator at OpenAI, a robot started knocking blocks forcefully across the room as it was learning how to place them in a certain location. The "sensible thing" to do is to pick up the object and take it there, said Lerrel Pinto, a robot trainer who interned at OpenAI this summer. "Another solution is to hit the block hard enough that it flies and reaches that point," he said. But "in the real world, we do not really want . . . that."
In simulations, researchers can also change environmental properties such as color, lighting, texture and friction, so that robot AIs can face a wider range of situations. The more varied the environments a program encounters, the better it can generalize from its past experience. That, in turn, should help it work well in a machine meant to interact with the physical world. When the OpenAI researchers challenged a machine to slide a puck placed on a bag of potato chips -- a condition it hadn't experienced during previous training -- it succeeded because it could generalize from other variations.
If a robot needs thousands of examples to learn, "it's not clear that's particularly useful," said Ingmar Posner, the deputy director of the Oxford Robotics Institute in the U.K. "You want that machine to pick up pretty quickly what it's meant to do."
Researchers are trying to get systems to understand relationships between tasks that require similar skills. For instance, learning to pick up a block might require the same skills as picking up a box or a book. Experience with all of these objects might then help a robots to link together enough tasks to clean up a room.
Figuring out the "recipe" for more complex actions, like making coffee or playing the piano, is still an active area of research, Dr. Posner said. "Finding out what those relationship are," he added, "that's a pretty important next step."

Credit: By Daniela Hernandez
