Videogame companies say the kind of technology behind the viral chatbot ChatGPT is set to radically speed up game development, reduce costs and help players interact with characters in new ways.
Generative artificial-intelligence tools have gained prominence in recent months for their ability to create essays, images and even music in response to simple text prompts. Game studios are already using the technology for all sorts of tasks, from helping craft virtual scenes and scripts to designing weapons and characters.
"There is probably no game that we're not thinking about some use cases for generative AI," said Marija Radulovic-Nastic, chief technology officer of creative and development at Electronic Arts Inc., the company behind hit franchises such as "Madden NFL" and "The Sims."
EA is using the technology to make quick digital sketches for visualizing ideas for game levels, challenges and other features. These designs could take weeks to draw up by hand before and now can be produced in hours.
Roblox Corp. is building its own generative AI tools for developers who make games and other experiences for its platform. The tools can quickly create new kinds of materials and movements on screen.
With simple text prompts, a developer could try to change a car's paint job to look like bubbles and make it fly. No coding is necessary.
"If you have this incredible idea in your head, you can make it a reality," said Roblox's technology chief, Dan Sturman. "You can use generative AI to create the materials you want."
China's NetEase Inc. is testing a tool that can diversify the dialogues of the many extras in games, also known as nonplayable characters.
Normally, players would need to select from a menu of pre-written responses to communicate with these NPCs. Or they might get a limited number of scripted responses that would repeat every time they encountered them.
In NetEase's yet-to-be-released mobile version of its multiplayer computer game "Justice Online," the company plans to make those conversations with NPCs more free-flowing, guided by users' imaginations.
Because the mobile game is based on a Chinese martial-arts novel, the AI used to create the NPCs' responses was trained on Chinese-language history books, poems and songs, a NetEase spokesman said. The feature, which is a collaboration between the company's Fuxi AI Lab and its ThunderFire game studio, is still in its early stages, he said.
Generative AI is also helping developers build soundscapes for games by streamlining the process of writing chatter for characters in the background, such as reactions to an explosion.
Ubisoft Entertainment SA recently unveiled Ghostwriter, an AI tool that creates first drafts for this chatter, something the company calls one of the most laborious tasks for videogame writers.
Writing crowd chatter and NPC dialogue requires "time and creative effort from scriptwriters that could be spent on other core plot items," the company said in a March blog post.
Electric Noir Studios used ChatGPT and the audio tool Murf to create text messages and voice mails that serve as clues for its mobile game "Dead Man's Phone." And it used Midjourney to create photo-realistic images of characters in a courtroom for its legal thriller game "You Be the Judge!"
The London studio couldn't have afforded to hire actors, costume designers and others to make the game, said Nihal Tharoor, chief executive and co-founder.
"It is allowing us to build out high-quality content much quicker and much cheaper," he said.
Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
