Google unveiled measures meant to help marketers track where advertisements appear across YouTube, in the wake of the controversy over the company's placement of ads alongside videos with objectionable content.
The tech giant, a unit of Alphabet Inc., told marketers and advertisers on Monday that it plans to allow third-party measurement companies to monitor where ads appear on YouTube and to report back to marketers on the "brand safety" of its videos.
Google already offers similar functionality allowing marketers to track whether their ads were "viewable" or not, meaning whether they actually appeared on users' screens.
According to executives at ad agencies, Google also has promised to offer video-level reporting across YouTube by the third quarter of this year.
That feature would give advertisers a full list of specific videos against which their ads appeared and how many times their ads were displayed on each, perhaps making marketers more comfortable with advertising on the service.
A Google spokeswoman said the company hasn't announced the timing for video-level reporting. Marketers and advertising agencies had been pushing Google for more transparency even before the recent uproar over controversial ad placements.
Other changes Google sent to advertisers relate to policies it announced last month, including faster reviews of problematic ad placements and the use of artificial intelligence technology to help detect objectionable content.
The company said it would have new default settings that set a higher bar for the videos that qualify for running ads, and said it would expand its guidelines to block ads from more videos. For instance, previously Google prohibited ads on YouTube videos advocating violence against people based on race, religion, gender or similar categories. But now it plans to ban ads on any videos that are demeaning or incendiary toward such groups.
Google Chief Business Officer Philipp Schindler said in interviews with several news outlets that the company can't guarantee ads will never appear alongside objectionable content, in part because of the sheer number of YouTube videos and websites on which Google places ads. The company told tech website Recode that videos advertisers have flagged for inappropriate content account for less than one thousandth of a percent of advertisers' total views.
The Google spokeswoman said the company is now using smart software to automatically detect inappropriate content and is capturing five times more objectionable videos than it did previously.
Observers said reliance on such software is rife with challenges, in part because computers often struggle to understand the context and nuance required to determine whether a video violates YouTube's ad policies.
Indeed, YouTube hasn't employed such software to screen videos to see whether they should be pulled down from the site. Instead, it generally required a human reviewer to weigh in on any such moves.
Credit: By Jack Marshall and Jack Nicas
