The artificial-intelligence mania that fueled the stock market to records this year took a breather, pushing all three indexes lower.
The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite led losses among the three major indexes, down 0.5%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 0.1%, or 23 points, and the benchmark S&P 500 declined 0.2%.
Surging share prices of the Magnificent Seven stocks -- Apple, Microsoft, Alphabet, Amazon.com, Nvidia, Tesla and Meta Platforms -- pushed indexes higher last year. Gains for some of those stocks have accelerated this year due to investor interest in artificial intelligence and its potential applications. Earlier this month, chip maker Nvidia's market capitalization briefly topped $2 trillion.
Shares of Nvidia declined 1.3%. Alphabet, Google's parent company, fell 1.8% and Apple edged down 0.7%.
The pause in the rally came as investors awaited fresh data for an inflation gauge due Thursday. Recent figures for the consumer-price index came in higher than expected by economists, causing some traders to wonder if the Federal Reserve will have to hold rates higher for longer.
"Coming into this year, a lot of people thought the Fed would be cutting pretty quickly and often," said Chris Zaccarelli, chief investment office at Independent Advisor Alliance. "You got one data point, which made people start worrying about inflation again."
Zaccarelli said he is waiting to see if Thursday's personal-consumption expenditures price index -- the Fed's preferred inflation gauge -- also confirms inflation edging higher.
Fresh data showed that the growth rate of the U.S. economy in the fourth quarter was downgraded slightly to a 3.2% annual pace, but the economy is still expanding at a rapid clip and showing few signs of slowing down.
Bitcoin continued its comeback. The cryptocurrency briefly topped $64,000, close to its record, before edging back to $60,312.44, its highest level since Nov. 17, 2021. A new crop of bitcoin exchange-traded funds are adding to the rally.
Some users of crypto exchange Coinbase Global reported seeing zero balances in their accounts and having trouble buying and selling cryptocurrencies. A spokeswoman said the company was investigating the issue and that user assets were safe. Shares nevertheless added 0.8%. Crypto companies' shares often rise or fall alongside strong moves in bitcoin.
In bond markets, the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note ticked down to 4.273% from 4.314% Tuesday. Yields fall when prices rise.
Overseas, the Stoxx Euro 600 fell 0.35%. At midday Thursday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 0.65%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 0.3% and the Shanghai Composite was up 1.3%. S&P 500 futures were down slightly.
Credit: By Caitlin Ostroff
