BEIJING -- Foxconn Technology Group is making a new push into semiconductors, teaming up with a local government in China's Pearl River Delta to build a chip fabrication plant, people familiar with the matter said Friday.
The city of Zhuhai announced on its website Friday that Foxconn would work with it in the field of chip and semiconductor equipment design, but gave no further details. In an emailed statement, Foxconn confirmed it has entered into a local partnership, though it added that it doesn't have plans to build a semiconductor plant in Zhuhai "at this time."
Foxconn said it is developing plans within the partnership, which includes "other stakeholders" in the city. "We will be prepared to announce these plans when they have been finalized in the coming months," the Taiwan-based company said.
The initiative comes at a time when China is spending billions of dollars to nurture its own semiconductor industry and reduce its reliance on foreign technology, an effort that has grown more urgent as its attempts to acquire U.S. chip companies have met opposition from the U.S. over national-security concerns.
Foxconn, formally known as Hon Hai Precision Industry Co., is the world's biggest contract manufacturer, best known for assembling Apple Inc.'s iPhones. Other products it assembles -- many in China -- include Dell desktop computers and Nintendo game consoles. With an ambition to build up its own brand, Foxconn bought Japan's Sharp Corp. in 2016.
Foxconn already has some semiconductor-related operations, including a Sharp plant in Fukuyama, Japan, that designs and produces analog integrated circuits.
The company has been planning an expansion of its semiconductor business and last year made a bid to acquire Toshiba Corp.'s memory-chip unit. That was ultimately purchased by a consortium led by U.S. private-equity firm Bain Capital.
The new initiative would stretch Foxconn's capability, said Sean Yang, a vice president at Shanghai-based CINNO Research.
"Foxconn currently lacks talents within the company to operate in the semiconductor field and may need to find a partner," Mr. Yang said.
He also said that while Foxconn's rich experience in manufacturing would help the company move into the chip business, it should carefully choose the type of projects to make sure it doesn't stray too far from its business areas.
The move underscores the ambition of Foxconn Chairman Terry Gou to transform the company from a contract-manufacturing giant to a manufacturer of its own products such as components and electronics, as well as providing manufacturing-related services.
The project would help Foxconn meet growing demand for integrated circuits that would be used for industrial internet purposes -- a term often used to describe internet-connected, smart manufacturing -- as well as for artificial intelligence and next-generation wireless and broadcasting technologies, the Zhuhai government said.
China's Pearl River Delta is a technology and manufacturing hub near Hong Kong. Foxconn has a big facility in Shenzhen, a major city in the region. Other companies based in the area include gaming and social-media giant Tencent Holdings Ltd. and smartphone maker Huawei Technologies Co.
"It is hoped that Foxconn can seize the new opportunities with Zhuhai's development [and] promote more projects to settle there," the city said.
-- Yang Jie and Yoko Kubota
