Your Global View columnist is trudging to the voting booth this year with no spring in his step. Overseas, as the Pax Americana fades, the dire, potentially catastrophic consequences for human civilization fill me with foreboding. Neither candidate, to my mind, has demonstrated the mix of diplomatic skill and strategic vision that the geopolitical situation demands. I hope to be pleasantly surprised, but so far the signs are not good.
Our country's division between a feckless and decadent establishment and a ragged, intellectually shaky populist insurgency doesn't point to an easy way forward. And while we have had bitterly fought elections in the past, the grace that led Richard Nixon to concede in 1960 and Al Gore to give way 40 years later seems in perilously short supply. In my gloomiest hours I fear we are past choosing between the lesser of evils and are trying instead to discern which is the more survivable of two looming catastrophes.
But when I look back at almost 250 years of American independence, I feel better. We've had pretty rotten political leadership for much of our history. Neither Tippecanoe nor Tyler left much in the way of enduring policy accomplishments. The tombs of Franklin Pierce and Chester Arthur aren't disturbed by throngs of pilgrims come to venerate their inspirational historical legacies. We've often been the bad kid in civics class. When Tammany Hall handed out Christmas turkeys to loyal supporters and votes were openly bought and sold at courthouses across the land, the world did not look to American democracy as a model of wise or rational governance. In no other country on earth could something called the Know Nothing Party become a significant political force.
And as I wrote in my book "Special Providence" almost 25 years ago, foreign and American observers alike have almost always thought of American foreign policy with a mixture of amusement, frustration and contempt. Think of Thomas Jefferson's foolish embargo policy that bankrupted a host of American businesses and farmers without gaining anything from Britain or France. Neither Kamala Harris nor Donald Trump has proposed anything quite that stupid this time around. Yet.
Political polish and diplomatic finesse have never been our strong suits. The savvy statesmen and supercilious aristocrats of the great European empires laughed at our uncouth presidents and their bumbling diplomats. Fascist and communist dictators united to disparage America's messy, ungoverned society and its enduring commitment to what they assured us were the outmoded ideas of political and economic freedom.
The secret to American success has never been the excellence of our technocrats, the honesty and transparency of our political system, or the sleek efficiency of our governing machine. It is the vigor and drive of a turbulent, nearly ungovernable society that pushes us ahead.
The disruptive innovations and sometimes eccentric political ideas of titans of business and finance from the age of Cornelius "The Commodore" Vanderbilt to that of Elon Musk have done much more for American success than any Big Policy Ideas hammered out in Harvard Yard. It's the restless energy of people from all walks of life figuring out the quickest and easiest way to get what they want, not Five Year Plans cooked up in think tanks, that makes this country a nursery of innovation and a global driver of change. Waves of immigrants seeking better lives do much more for our country than waves of policy intellectuals seeking better jobs.
When disruptive technologies like fracking and artificial intelligence pop up, our European friends want to strangle them at birth lest they grow up to be sinners. Our Chinese competitors want to harness them immediately to the service of the Communist Party. Here, those new technologies get a chance to show what they can do. That's partly because we are natural optimists who think change often works out for the best, and partly because our lax and messy system of governance isn't very good at industrial policy of any kind.
Blue America and Red America are deeply divided, but they both remain deeply American. Blue California gave the Information Revolution to the world, and Blue San Francisco has welcomed robo-taxis onto its poop-strewn streets. Red Texas changed the world with the fracking revolution and is currently leading humanity's journey to Mars. Transformational financial innovation pours out of Blue Manhattan, while Red Florida integrates immigrants from all over the world into a new version of the American dream.
Elections matter, but the spirit of a country matters more. Our nation's leadership class may be weak, but the United States of America, warts and all, remains a beacon of hope in a world that needs all the light it can get.
Credit: By Walter Russell Mead
