She's smart, a master of high-end design software. She's kind, ready to help at any time of day or night.
She's the new AVA -- an acronym for automated virtual assistant -- a next-generation digital assistant created by Autodesk Inc. to help its customers with its software. She's scheduled to replace the company's current text-only chatbot that goes by the same name in mid-May.
Autodesk hopes AVA's animated face, New Zealand-accented voice and touch of emotional savvy will engage customers at a deeper level than current conversational software can. "If a customer tells [the virtual-human version of] AVA, 'I'm having trouble,' I want her to frown a bit and say, 'I'm sorry, let me see if I can help,' " says Rachael Rekart, who manages Autodesk's digital support channels.
Chatbots lately have become ubiquitous in the form of automated helpers on messaging services and social networks, voices issuing from smart speakers, and text-input boxes on business websites. But for all their high-tech underpinning, current chatbots can be maddeningly unhelpful and unengaging. They tend to trip over all but simple statements and requests, and they're lost if conversation strays outside their areas of expertise.
So bot makers are experimenting with various strategies they hope will make automated conversations more satisfying.
Eva, from the United Services Automobile Association, understands enough about USAA's banking and insurance products and its customers to present likely options that will steer conversations in a productive direction. Harman International Industries' car-dashboard assistant tries to predict drivers' needs before they ask, suggesting a place to stop for coffee, for instance. And Autodesk's new AVA not only looks and sounds fairly human, but also will be able to detect and react to users' emotional state, according to her developers.
"We're going to spend more of our time interacting with automated systems like robots and self-driving cars," says Greg Cross, co-founder of Soul Machines Ltd., the New Zealand company that developed AVA's face, voice and emotional IQ. "Our view is that these machines are more helpful if they can engage with us and respond to us."
AVA, whose ability to understand language is provided by Watson Assistant technology from International Business Machines Corp., looks almost realistic enough to pass as human, though her voice doesn't quite synchronize with her animated mouth. She delivers news that your software subscription can include more products at no additional cost with a hint of a smile, word that you'll need to buy a new license with a slightly pained look, and instructions such as "Now, let's try again" with a schoolmarm's stern demeanor.
The history of chatbots is rife with inept digital helpers, but that began to change with the 2014 debut of Alexa, resident in Amazon.com Inc.'s Echo speaker. Alexa set a new standard in voice recognition with her ability to distinguish commands spoken across rooms and amid noise.
Like virtually all current bots, though, Alexa has limitations around grasping what words mean. Her "skills" -- custom programs that give her knowledge of a particular domain -- cluster around consumer transactions such as playing music or buying tickets, where a limited number of simple requests generally will suffice.
Programs designed to relieve the load on customer-service desks face a steeper challenge. Callers don't necessarily know what the bot can and can't do or what commands it recognizes. So these systems generally need to have deeper knowledge within their area of expertise. Indeed, customer-service bots may be first to deliver something approaching real conversation, according to some people in the field.
"You'll have richer dialogues with enterprise bots than the thing in your house because there's a wider range of questions within a narrow scope," says Tom Hebner, leader of the cognitive innovation group at Nuance Communications Inc., which specializes in voice-interaction technology.
Take Eva, a voice-and-text bot built by Nuance for USAA. It helps USAA's membership perform simple tasks like changing the PIN on a credit or debit card on the web or through an app. But it also can see around some of the corners such interactions entail. For instance, it can look into accounts to find out whether customers have more than one card and, if so, prompt them to tell it which one they need help with.
Launched in 2012 and continually updated, Eva handles around 70% of questions it receives without passing them along to a human agent, says Chris Cox, the company's chief digital officer. When the bot escalates a call to a human agent, it's able to send it to the right department roughly 90% of the time, he says.
Of course, Eva knows about USAA's services. Ask it about buying a car, and it comes up short. That narrow focus is by design. Current language-understanding technology can't yet cope with the full range of things people might ask for. Coaxing a computer to converse meaningfully as context builds and shifts is extraordinarily difficult, says Nuance's Mr. Hebner. "It's harder than image recognition, speech recognition, self-driving cars -- much harder than all these amazing things." So the usual solution is to confine the possibilities for interaction to narrow, tightly defined cases.
Some of the latest bots can shortcut conversational complexity by anticipating what users will ask for next and beating them to the punch by offering suggestions, potentially reducing many complicated requests to a simple "yes" or "no."
Harman is taking a proactive approach with its automobile dashboard. In Harman's tricked-out Maserati GranCabrio demo car, Watson Assistant maintains driver profiles, noting frequent destinations such as Starbucks, says Stephen Surhigh, head of cloud services at Harman. After a long stretch on the road, he says, it might say something like, "It's time to take a break. There's a Starbucks ahead at Exit 98." If the right moment for a coffee break has passed and the driver says, "How about lunch," Watson will suggest a nearby restaurant that matches the driver's profile or ask what kind of food the driver has in mind, Mr. Surhigh says.
If bots are to remain confined to simple conversations for now, they might be better helpers if they know how users feel, so they can head off confusion or frustration and recognize when automated assistance isn't sufficient and it's time to call in a human agent. That's why Autodesk is outfitting AVA with rudimentary emotional intelligence.
"Emotional IQ will be the limiting factor on AI," says Autodesk's Ms. Rekart. "People want to feel understood, and these things will fall short until we figure out how to give them empathy."
When the new AVA goes live later this month, she'll smile, frown and adjust her tone based on clues to the user's emotional state, if all goes well. She's designed to process emotional cues from users' tone of voice and facial expressions. (She'll tell users that if they turn their camera on she'll be able to see them.)
At first, she'll respond purely to positive and negative signals. Later she may be programmed to differentiate, say, frustration from sadness, Ms. Rekart says. After that, she might be given arms so she can express herself through hand gestures and the like, according to Soul Machine's Mr. Cross.
Autodesk aims to take it step by step, gauging AVA's impact on customer satisfaction before making her more elaborate, Ms. Rekart says.
"We're just sticking our toe in the water," Ms. Rekart says. "We have a long way to go."
---
Mr. Greenwald is a Wall Street Journal reporter in San Francisco. Email him at ted.greenwald@ wsj.com.

Credit: By Ted Greenwald
