"I know the Bronx like the back of my hand," says Jerelyn Rodriguez. Born to immigrant parents from the Dominican Republic, Ms. Rodriguez was raised in the South Bronx by her mother, a schoolteacher who enrolled her in a KIPP charter school, a pioneering college-preparatory program for disadvantaged students.
Now, from a headquarters in the South Bronx neighborhood of Hunts Point, three miles from where she grew up, Ms. Rodriguez is working to educate others. In 2014, she co-founded and became CEO of the Knowledge House, a nonprofit that provides training in technological skills -- including coding, Web design and basic digital fluency -- and an introduction to tech entrepreneurship to young people aged 16 to 24.
Students are trained in software development and can learn programming and markup languages including HTML, Python and JavaScript. The group targets local high-school students and unemployed or out-of-school young adults who otherwise wouldn't have easy access to IT training. Students are admitted through an application and interview process. Partners such as the boutique engineering consultancy Hackerati offer seminars, classes and career mentoring.
Jamaine Roseborough, 18, now a first-year computer-science major at the Borough of Manhattan Community College, learned Python this spring at the Knowledge House as a high-school student. From March to June, "I'd go there every day after school," he says. "I fell in love with coding." He now works as the lead intern for Duro UAS, an underwater "eco-drone" business with offices in the South Bronx, managing its data-visualization team, and hopes to have a career in artificial intelligence.
More than 500 students from low-income households have taken part in workshops and classes at the Knowledge House. Its core program includes 150 hours of instruction, 75 of them devoted to coding. About a quarter of the core program participants are female. Students receive a certificate of completion, and a third of the trainees, like Mr. Roseborough, have landed internships or freelance assignments after completing the program.
"It was important for us to be headquartered in Hunts Point," says Ms. Rodriguez. A 2015 report by the Citizens' Committee for Children, an advocacy group, called the neighborhood New York City's "highest risk community" for children, with the highest poverty rate and the highest number of adults without a high-school diploma. Coding boot camps and other tech outreach efforts have been held in Manhattan and Brooklyn, but, Ms. Rodriguez says, "none of them were reaching the Bronx. Someone from the community really had to be the one to catalyze it."
Ms. Rodriguez, 27, earned a B.A. from Columbia University in 2011. In 2013, she worked on the campaign of Reshma Saujani, the founder of Girls Who Code, who was running for the post of New York City public advocate. Ms. Saujani lost the election, but in the course of the campaign, Ms. Rodriguez met Joe Carrano, a former director of the Bronx Business Incubator, who co-founded the Knowledge House with her.
Their efforts now include launching the Bronx Digital Pipeline, a borough-wide initiative that the Knowledge House is spearheading with support from JobsFirstNYC, an employment agency. With Bronx-based partners including Lehman College, two community colleges and other nonprofits, the pipeline aims to match 1,500 unemployed and out-of-school young adults with entry-level IT jobs over the next decade. "It is a start," Ms. Rodriguez says.
Credit: By Hannah Bloch
