A recent graduate told me about a college professor who has begun assigning two versions of every essay -- one created by ChatGPT and a second one that is the student's own work. Accepting that students are tempted to use the new technology, this strategy neutralizes it to some degree, he felt. Students learn how to work with artificial intelligence and learn how to differentiate themselves from it through reflection, critical thinking, intellectual honesty and creativity.
Whether you agree with this approach or not, the one thing that's clear is that artificial intelligence has the potential to disrupt everyday life, posing ethical dilemmas that we -- as individuals and as a society -- need to resolve.
As part of a series of articles looking at ethical questions raised by AI, we wanted to know what WSJ readers think about the emerging applications of artificial intelligence to academic pursuits. Specifically, we asked:
Would it be ethical for a chatbot to write a Ph.D. thesis, as long as the student looks over and makes refinements to the work? What percent of rewriting would be the minimum to make this acceptable?
Here are some of their responses.
Within limits
Yes, but AI assistance must be acknowledged and the dissertation must be rigorously defended with no AI help.
-- Peter Boynton, McLean, Va.
Defeats the purpose
Decidedly not. Ph.D. dissertations primarily demonstrate: 1) their author's mastery of the subject and 2) valuable original research contribution and capability. We cannot see an argument that makes this an acceptable use of generative AI.
-- Jenna and Evan Kramer, Washington, D.C.
An insulting question
I find it incredibly insulting that this question is even up for debate. Of course it isn't ethical to have a chatbot write a Ph.D. thesis, even if a student "looks it over" and makes a few revisions.
Thousands of people over the course of centuries have poured their hearts and souls into producing an original piece of scholarship that would mean something to them personally and to the wider academic community. Independent critical thinking is one of the most meaningful aspects of being human, of possessing individual dignity. How could we think for even a second about replacing that with a chatbot, supposing that such a bot is capable of anything similar in the first place?
I'm not an AI-skeptic who believes there are no applications for it in academic research and teaching, but having it literally compose an entire thesis goes beyond the pale by any reasonable metric.
Anyone who has a chatbot write a work of scholarship for them should absolutely be disciplined to the same extent that other plagiarists are punished.
-- Robert Powers, Dungannon, Va.
AI makes things too easy
I would like to say up front that I did not ask ChatGPT or any other AI to write this answer for me.
To your question, my answer would be "no," at least as things currently stand. Academia (of which I am a part) isn't ready to relinquish the toil, tears and terror associated with the Ph.D. process. The task of writing "the really long paper" involves certain hoops through which the candidate has to jump, and using AI would make things too easy.
One possible pathway to incorporating AI-generated content into the Ph.D. process would be to have the candidate gather the materials, do the research, create the literature review, and have those verified by the thesis chair, and then dump it all into the AI tool to create a polished finished product. And remember, no matter how fluent it is, AI can't defend your thesis for you.
-- Bridget Powell, Champaign, Ill.
Expand readership
It's perfectly fine for ChatGPT to help a student write their Ph.D. thesis, at least in part. To provide an initial outline, get the first ideas on paper, and to smooth out otherwise clunky academic constructions are just the beginnings of where AI can be useful, especially for nonnative-English speakers whose defenses must be written in English. Perhaps with these tools, more people than just the advisory committee will want to read dissertations.
-- Brandon Giella, Fort Worth, Texas
AI devalues the degree
I have a Ph.D. Hard won. So NO. In my university, a program was used to detect plagiarism if you copied more than five words in a row. No chatbotting should be allowed.
It's bad enough when students cut and paste from the internet. Plus it completely devalues my years of hard work and my degree.
-- Susan Alexander, Luxembourg
Who controls AI?
Allowing AI to "assist" by aggregating data and previously explored concepts on a topic is an advanced form of a Google search engine. Writing and presenting your paper will take on greater weight.
I am concerned that this process opens itself to stratification and manipulation. Someone or small groups of someones will manipulate the AI toward certain theories or concepts. Politics, power and AI. . .
-- Robert Dingess, Wayne County, N.C.
Feedback, yes. Writing, no.
No, this is not ethical and my university specifically prohibits such writing. Feedback on one's own writing (by a colleague or chatbot) is fine as long as that feedback is publicly acknowledged and specified clearly.
-- Nicola Pohl, Bloomington, Ind.
AI is a tool
It is acceptable for humans using tools to achieve results. Is it acceptable to use a calculator in a math exam? Yes! Therefore AI would be an acceptable tool for a Ph.D. thesis as well.
-- Martin Schatz, Holly, Mich.
A reluctant yes
As a college professor I face a double dilemma with ChatGPT. I need the students to know the material I am teaching, but also need to know that they are prepared for a future with ChatGPT and other AI. I reluctantly want them to use it, as they will anyway, but also want to know when it is not their work, but an AI's.
Let's get real: ChatGPT searches the web and grabs concepts not of its own devising but other people's. It is, in itself, a huge plagiarizer. When students use ChatGPT or other AIs in my classes, I require them to provide proper credit to their source, including an artificial intelligence source.
-- David P. Bugay, Irvine, Calif.
Is learning the goal?
I am a teacher. Here are the questions I have for students: Is learning the goal? Is becoming a certain type of person the goal? Is the betterment of society and humans the goal? Is the glory of God the goal? Then absolutely not. In education, you are the product, not the thesis, so yes, the process matters. So you can't have a machine do it for you.
-- Brad Grizenko, Wake Forest, N.C.
To our detriment
No, it definitely wouldn't be ethical for a student to use an AI to write a Ph.D. thesis, a master's thesis or any other intellectually challenging educational paper. These "think" projects are designed to challenge and develop the writer's thought process of question-generation, data collection, analysis and logical thinking, not "How can I ask the AI to solve my homework problem?"
The end result of this would be a nation of intellectually crippled (and possibly emotionally stunted) citizens asking their smartphones how to do everything, including who to vote for in the next election.
-- John Parziale, Ocala, Fla.
Where's the value?
If the AI revolution is teaching us anything, it is about what we really value and what the core meaning is behind something. Is a thesis worth something because it is well written or because it contains original ideas and research?
Ph.D.s are bestowed on individuals who add that original value to society. If the research was conducted by a student but added to a thesis via an AI then this would still warrant a Ph.D. If no original research was done outside of AI prompting, then this doesn't warrant one.
But that also doesn't mean idea organization via AI isn't of value to society. Our highest-paid business leaders direct and organize groups to produce value as well. We don't, however, give them Ph.D.s.
-- Jeff Schloemer, Menlo Park, Calif.
Not for a thesis but. . .
It would be unethical to use a chatbot to write a Ph.D. thesis. The work must be the product of the candidate's intellect. Full disclosure: I am using Grammarly to check my answers to WSJ's questions.
-- William Mackey, West Hartford, Conn.
Rewards to the incompetent
This is unethical. AI is an equalizer in that it allows someone who isn't smart enough to get into a university to get in, to pass the exam, to write the paper, submit the thesis. But eventually that entirely incapable person has to do the job.
I think AI is being used for all the wrong reasons. It's like taking your photo and retouching it until you're perfect, like the supermodels in the magazines. But then eventually someone will see you in person and say, "Who are you?"
-- Deena Semeniuk, Phoenix
The real problem
If your thesis is so banal as to be AI-generative you probably need a new adviser.
-- James Murphy, Alameda, Calif.
---
Demetria Gallegos is an editor for The Wall Street Journal in New York. Email her at demetria.gallegos@wsj.com.
Credit: By Demetria Gallegos
