Diller Anticipates
More Regulation
The dominance of the biggest U.S. technology companies is reaching a point when the government will need to regulate their expanse, media mogul Barry Diller said Tuesday.
"Inevitably it has to face regulation," said Mr. Diller in an interview at The Wall Street Journal's WSJ D. Live technology conference. "This is a different situation than the standard fear that down the street in a garage somewhere is your competitor . . . The dominant companies do not have fundamental competition."
Mr. Diller, chairman of IAC/InterActive Corp., didn't specify which companies he thinks will face greater regulation, but his comments come at a time of widening concern about the influence of tech giants including Facebook Inc., Amazon.com Inc. and Google parent Alphabet Inc.
Mr. Diller said that "everyone and their mother" is trying video on the web. But in Mr. Diller's view, only two companies are succeeding unequivocally: Netflix Inc. and Amazon.
-- Eric Schwartzel
Alibaba's Tsai Gives
Views on China's Role
Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. Executive Vice Chairman Joseph Tsai pushed back on perceptions that the Chinese government has access to all Chinese corporations' data, as Beijing pushes for a stake in some of China's tech giants. "I would disagree with the premise that the central government has access to all this corporate data. That's just not true," he said. "If they want data from you, just like in the U.S., they have to have a reason."
He added that just like other governments, Beijing will ask for access to data when it comes to security and terrorism, which he called "understandable."
The Chinese government is pushing for a stake in some of China's tech giants, including social-media powers Tencent Holdings Ltd. and Weibo Corp., as well as Youku Tudou, a YouTube-like video site owned by Alibaba.
-- Jack Nicas
Facebook Pitches In
On Intel's New Chip
Intel Corp. on Tuesday said it is working with Facebook Inc. and other firms on a coming chip specially designed for artificial intelligence, as the semiconductor company moves to capitalize on a fast-growing market and aims a direct shot at rival Nvidia Corp.
Intel's new chip will be among the first of a new breed of processors designed from the ground up to accelerate the popular AI technique known as deep learning, which enables computers to recognize objects in photos, words in spoken statements, and other features that otherwise would require human judgment.
Called the Nervana Neural Network Processor, the chip is the fruit of Intel's acquisition last year of startup Nervana Systems. Intel expects to ship the initial version on a limited basis later this year and make it widely available next year through Intel Nervana Cloud, a cloud-computing service, and as an appliance that customers can install in their own data centers.
-- Ted Greenwald and Jack Nicas
GM to Make Systems
For Autonomous Cars
General Motors Co. plans to make the bulk of the systems that go into an autonomous car, a shift from its previous strategy that thrusts it into direct competition with tech giants.
GM wants to have a hand in the creation of the software, electrical architecture, sensors and large-scale manufacturing of the next wave of vehicles, President Dan Ammann said Tuesday. "The approach that we are taking to that is to control a lot of that system ourselves because it allows us to move more quickly," Mr. Ammann said.
At first, GM seemed eager to team up. In early 2016, for example, GM announced a $500 million investment in Lyft Inc., where Mr. Ammann sits on the board of directors, and a partnership with the ride-sharing company to develop self-driving vehicles.
-- Georgia Wells
