Advertising company Havas has acquired 51% of marketing agency Uncommon in an all-cash deal that values the London-based company at more than GBP 100 million, or around $129 million, the companies said.
Uncommon founders Natalie Graeme, Lucy Jameson and Nils Leonard will retain ownership of the remaining 49% of the business and operate the company independently of Havas, which is owned by Paris-based holding company Vivendi.
Uncommon will open an outpost in New York in the coming months as a result of the deal, the companies said.
Havas made the deal for Uncommon, one of the largest independent agencies in the industry, partly as a counter to marketers' growing interest in generative artificial intelligence, said Yannick Bollore, chairman and chief executive of Havas.
AI's ability to develop new creative ideas has made it important for agencies to offer clients top-shelf creative talent that can outperform the machines, Bollore said.
"Brands will be able very easily -- without any advertising agency -- [to create] an average creative campaign," Bollore said. "The agencies that will be thriving in the future will be the ones with the best planners and the best creative executives."
Graeme, Jameson and Leonard founded Uncommon in 2017 after leaving WPP agency Grey London a year earlier. The trio describe Uncommon as a creative studio spanning advertising strategy, customer experience and production.
Uncommon employs 160 full-time staff. The deal won't result in any layoffs, according to the agency, and Uncommon will be hiring to open its New York location.
Leonard said that becoming part of Havas will help the business pursue larger assignments.
"We built Uncommon to be on the receiving end of the most important and influential briefs of our time. . .There's a point at which your size and your ability to do that don't allow you to come through on that promise," said Leonard. "We needed partners that believe in that."
Most large advertising companies have in recent years moved away from acquiring creative agencies to concentrate on data, technology and influencer marketing businesses.
Interpublic Group last October acquired commerce technology firm RafterOne and earlier in 2022 took a stake in virtual event production company the Famous Group. And Publicis Groupe in the past six months has acquired commerce firm Corra, digital business transformation company Practia and marketing technology business Yieldify.
Havas, meanwhile, has been trying to expand its portfolio of digital and creative capabilities over the past few years, said Jay Pattisall, principal analyst at Forrester.
"This could be illustrating a renewed appreciation for brand, and for some of the upper-funnel types of communications that are just so important to driving the performance at the bottom of the funnel," Pattisall said.
Credit: By Katie Deighton
