Boeing Co. is establishing a venture-capital arm as part of a broader push to capture technology that includes innovations that could be used beyond its core aerospace and defense sectors.
The company announced the new Boeing HorizonX unit Wednesday alongside its first two minority investments and a pledge to deploy tens of millions of dollars a year world-wide in pursuit of technology that might be deployed in the next five to 15 years.
Boeing is following a path taken by rivals including Airbus SE and Lockheed Martin Corp. as well as other big manufacturers such as General Motors Co., all of which have reorganized their innovation efforts under a single umbrella with the ability to make minority investments.
Steve Nordlund, who will lead the new unit, acknowledged Boeing was responding to moves in the marketplace but said it wasn't playing catch-up, with the establishment of HorizonX coming as it prepares to launch another stand-alone operation tasked with securing a bigger share of aftermarket and services.
"The big difference is we're moving this entire effort to the enterprise level," said Mr. Nordlund, formerly vice president of strategy at Boeing's defense unit. He will report to Greg Smith, chief financial officer and strategy chief.
Boeing's efforts to boost productivity of its jetliner production have included borrowing techniques from the auto industry. One of the two initial investments is in Upskill Inc., a Washington firm that makes software for wearable devices that use augmented reality to perform tasks more efficiently. It also is taking a minority stake in Zunum Aero, a Kirkland, Wash., company developing electric aircraft-propulsion systems. JetBlue Airways Corp., an Airbus jet operator that set up its own VC arm, also is taking a stake. Mr. Nordlund said Boeing's pipeline included a mix of stand-alone deals and those with strategic partners.
Similar to peers, Boeing is targeting areas such as artificial intelligence, machine learning and additive manufacturing, but Mr. Nordlund said there were capabilities within Boeing such as preventing tampering with hardware that could be married to external technology and sold outside the aerospace industry.
Credit: By Doug Cameron
