While startups across most sectors face a difficult fundraising environment, cybersecurity startups are showing signs of life, thanks in part to their sector's ties to artificial intelligence.
Venture investment into cybersecurity startups globally increased 69% in the first quarter from the prior quarter, according to analytics provider Crunchbase. The first quarter's $2.7 billion haul was close to how much the sector brought in during the same quarter of 2023.
Venture capitalists attribute the rise to increased merger-and-acquisition activity and initial public offerings, which allow investors to cash out investments. Cyber's overlap with AI, the startup investing world's darling over the past 18 months, is also helping buoy the industry, they say.
"In the most recent period, AI is a driving force," said Ken Elefant, a partner at Sorenson Capital, adding that cyber startups' use of AI goes back years but has ramped up recently as cybersecurity companies develop security for AI systems and use AI to supercharge their own products.
Last month, Sorenson participated in the final close of a roughly $8 million seed funding round for cyber startup VulnCheck, which uses AI to help large companies and government agencies autonomously triage and fight cyber threats.
"What savvy investors understand is that in cyber, AI makes cyber," said Mike Janke, co-founder and investment board member of cyber-focused venture firm and startup incubator DataTribe. That is helping lift cyber out of 2023, which was a difficult fundraising year, he said.
The cyber sector has performed better relative to the overall startup market, according to a first-quarter DataTribe report combining internal data with figures from analytics provider PitchBook Data. For instance, the number of seed-stage cyber deals in the first quarter increased from the prior quarter, while the number of seed-stage deals overall fell over the same period.
A thawing exit market in cyber also is helping to pull the sector along, Janke said.
Cybersecurity software firm Rubrik recently filed paperwork for an initial public offering. The Palo Alto, Calif.-based company is backed by investors including Microsoft and Lightspeed Venture Partners. Last week, Evolution Equity Partners said it finished raising a $1.1 billion fund to back cybersecurity companies through growth investments.
Not all investors think AI is behind cyber's rebound. Jay Leek, managing partner at cybersecurity-focused SYN Ventures, said his firm usually makes between seven and 10 new investments each year. Last year it made four.
"There was a lot of sideline sitting," Leek said of last year's cyber market.
That hasn't been the case recently. SYN has made three new investments this year and recently signed a term sheet for a fourth.
Additionally, earlier this year, SYN held the final close of a $100 million seed-focused fund that will complement its Series A-focused flagship fund, Leek said. Up to roughly a dozen deals will be done with the seed fund annually.
While all of SYN's portfolio companies use AI in some way, Leek attributes the rebound in cyber market activity not to AI excitement but to an increase in the number of quality companies ready for investment this year. Entrepreneurs who exited companies in the hot 2021 market formed new companies and are increasingly eager for funding, Leek said.
Generate image description

Credit: By Marc Vartabedian
