Craving a bundle of cable channels whose only commonality is that, sometimes, they might host a sporting event you want to watch?
That's what Disney, Fox and Warner Brothers Discovery are getting together to offer, a bundle of channels that occasionally feature sports. Call it a dog's breakfast of a cable bundle, including the all-sports channel ESPN, plus your local Fox and ABC affiliates, which sometimes show a ballgame or racing event when they aren't showing local news, soaps or "The Simpsons." Included too: the cable mainstays TBS and TNT with their holiday "Star Wars" marathons and "Big Bang Theory" reruns, though each also occasionally shows a baseball, basketball or Nascar event.
In other words, a bunch of victims of cable's decline trying to get paid for their expensive sports contracts. A gimmicky cable replacement app, it won't solve the real problem of sports fans: how to get the contests they want. It won't solve the problem faced by the sports leagues: how to package their content for optimal fan viewing and revenue.
Maybe one day our personal AI negotiating agents will solve these problems. In the meantime, if the new app's September launch even comes off, its half-life will be measured in years at most for reasons I will get to. And first it will have to survive the lawyers and regulators because of the way it plays fast and loose with the underlying distribution and content deals its promoters signed in the cable era.
But the app is also an option that some consumers may find useful, at least for a while. For its key organizer, Disney, the announcement is being taken as a sign that Disney's stock may be done repricing itself for the death of cable. Punished shareholders can perhaps begin to hope for growth again.
The same week saw reviewers finding fault with the clunkiness and questionable usability of Apple's new Vision Pro headset -- in fact, everything but its sound and picture quality.
The week also saw the cognoscenti savoring a new insight from Mark Zuckerberg. As foreshadowed in a column last year, Mr. Zuckerberg now sees the metaverse primarily as a venue for interacting not with real people but with artificial intelligence.
The future is coming into view, and it will be a melding of entertainment, artificial intelligence and e-commerce, which brings us to the first reason the new app has a minimal life expectancy. With its divided parentage and broadcast orientation, it will be hard-pressed to support sports betting, which all now see as a test case of interactive home entertainment.
Even family-friendly Disney has made its peace with sports wagering as a way to get young consumers who are already addicted to social media and videogames to pay attention to three-hour sports contests and their associated commercials. Disney just took a $1.5 billion stake in Epic Games, of "Fortnite" fame. Next time CEO Bob Iger strikes a deal for a Taylor Swift concert film, expect it to be offered in interactive form, so subscribers can wander virtually backstage and get beat up by Ms. Swift's bodyguards.
Not only is the new sports app poorly suited for interactivity, however, it's also doomed because its underlying sports rights will immediately begin expiring, starting this year with the NBA. The new "sports" app will offer less and less sports unless its backers are ready to outbid Apple, Amazon, YouTube and -- gulp -- Disney's own forthcoming and franchise-redefining ESPN app. In turn, its customers will find that what they're increasingly paying for is "Simpsons" reruns.
Last week's media sensation was hard to justify. At best, the new app is a stopgap to corral some of the sports fans fleeing cable. Then again, the real strategy may lie elsewhere. Sports was once the glue that held together the cable package. Now sports is prized streaming content because it can't be binged. You have to wait for the game; baseball season ends, but football season begins, etc.
Expect the new app quickly to be bundled with Disney's marquee streaming property, Disney+. Expect it to be bundled with Warner's Max (formerly HBO). The mission: reduce deadly "churn," or customers constantly signing up for and dropping the subscription services that old Hollywood is betting its future on.
Survival is the name of the game vs. industry leader Netflix. If their expiring sports rights can help stabilize their streaming revenues and subscriber acquisition costs for the next couple of years, that might be justification enough for the dog's breakfast app.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
