Facebook parent Meta Platforms unveiled to employees a stand-alone app it plans to launch through Instagram to compete with Twitter, according to people familiar with the matter.
The app was demonstrated during an all-hands meeting Thursday with Meta workers by Chief Product Officer Chris Cox, who called it Meta's response to Twitter, the people said.
Cox told employees that Meta has heard from creators and public figures who want "a sanely run" platform. The company is in talks to have people such as Oprah Winfrey and the Dalai Lama commit to using the app, Cox said, adding that Meta hopes to launch it "as soon as we can." The app is internally code-named Project 92, a person familiar with the software said.
Meta Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg spoke at the meeting, sharing his thoughts on Apple's newly unveiled $3,500 Vision Pro headset with employees.
Zuckerberg said the good news is that Apple didn't present any "magical solutions . . . to any of the constraints on laws and physics that our teams haven't already explored and thought of," according to people familiar with the meeting.
Zuckerberg's comments come a week after Meta announced the Quest 3, the latest edition of the company's computing headset.
The device is expected to go on sale this fall and start at $499.
Zuckerberg pointed out that Apple went with higher-resolution displays for its headset, resulting in a device that costs seven times as much as Meta's coming Quest 3 headset.
Zuckerberg noted that the Vision Pro uses an external battery pack, adding that every demo that Apple showed was of a person sitting on a couch, rather than being active, the people familiar with the meeting said.
"Their announcement really showcases the difference in the values and the vision that our companies bring to this in a way that I think is really important," Zuckerberg said, according to the people. "We innovate to make sure that our products are as accessible and affordable to everyone as possible."
The Verge, a tech-news site, earlier reported on the coming app and Zuckerberg's comments.
Additionally, Zuckerberg made a number of announcements regarding Meta's efforts with generative AI, according to the company.
Credit: By Salvador Rodriguez, Jeff Horwitz and Berber Jin
