Credible: The Power of Expert Leaders
By Amanda Goodall
(PublicAffairs, 255 pages, $30)
When computer-animation researchers Ed Catmull and Alvy Ray Smith were starting Pixar as a graphics computer company in 1986, they sought advice from a former colleague, Jim Clark, about how to run a business. Mr. Clark, founder of high-flying Silicon Graphics, told them: "Oh, it's pretty easy. You'll figure it out in about a year." What mattered, rather, was that they were smart and knew computer graphics cold.
That, more or less, is the thesis of Amanda Goodall's thought-provoking "Credible: The Power of Expert Leaders." Ms. Goodall, a business-school professor at the University of London, contends that the leaders who create and sustain greatness in an organization are those, like Messrs. Catmull and Smith, with a background as recognized experts in the organization's business. Hospitals, for instance, are best run by respected doctors, and technical companies are best run by engineers. While such leader-experts were once the rule, Ms. Goodall says, "the pendulum has swung way too far down the generalist managerial path."
Ms. Goodall offers support for the superiority of leader-experts partly by pointing to studies of the hospital industry, both her own and those of other researchers. Among the findings: Physician-led hospitals achieve higher quality rankings than those led by non-physician chief executives and perform no worse financially; nonetheless, she reports, only around one in 25 hospitals in the U.S. is led by a physician.
Ms. Goodall also canvasses research on the management of sports teams, which lend themselves to objective assessments of success or failure. From the NBA to soccer to Formula 1, she finds, success is mostly associated with leader-experts. In Formula 1, in particular, "the most successful team principals [head managers] are almost always expert leaders" -- that is, former drivers or mechanics. They're the ones, it seems, with a close understanding of the factors that win and lose races. Much the same level of discernment, she suggests, may be expected of leader-experts in other organizations.
To be sure, counter-examples to Ms. Goodall's thesis abound. Jeff Bezos was a Wall Street investment banker with no prior experience in the retail or technology industries when he started Amazon. Elon Musk had no experience in the auto industry before joining Tesla and leading it to prominence (it now has the highest market cap, by far, of any auto company). Reed Hastings was a former software entrepreneur and executive with no entertainment-industry experience when he co-founded Netflix. Sam Altman has done pretty well as chief executive of ChatGPT maker OpenAI, even though his work experience was in venture capital and general management, not AI research. Ms. Goodall calls Apple's Steve Jobs "first and foremost, a techy expert," but that's a more accurate description of his co-founder, Steve Wozniak.
There are other objections. If CEOs should be experts in the company's products or services, what does that mean for the head of a conglomerate? Or of any company involved in wide-ranging areas? And, of course, experts are human, too, bringing their own biases to their jobs. The early days of the internet and the iPhone, for example, saw plenty of expert skeptics. Robert Metcalfe, co-inventor of Ethernet and co-founder of networking company 3Com, wrote an article in 1995 predicting that the internet would soon collapse. (Mr. Metcalfe later good-naturedly ate his words on stage -- putting his article in a blender and consuming the results with a spoon.) The biases of experts are surely why pathbreaking startups like Amazon, Netflix and Tesla came from industry outsiders.
Ms. Goodall doesn't grapple with these sorts of objections. And on the whole her evidence is only suggestive, not conclusive. Yet there's something appealing about the intuition that organizations should mostly be led by accomplished experts rather than clever generalists. For one thing, expert leaders can attract and inspire the best talent. Strong people typically want to work with other strong people -- and, as Ms. Goodall found in 2017 research, having a technically competent boss with deep "core business knowledge" is an important factor in employees' job satisfaction. "The truth is," she writes, "that we want a boss who is a better version of ourselves -- one who can do what we do but to a higher standard."
For another thing, despite cases like Amazon, an expert leader can often better recognize the value of a breakthrough idea. At Britain's Bletchley Park decryption center during World War II, for instance, it took a Cambridge mathematician who had taught Alan Turing, and who knew Turing's theoretical work on computing machines, to recognize the value of a maverick engineer's proposal for a digital electronic computer.
Finally, expert leaders at their best bring with them a sense of responsibility to their professions. Ms. Goodall usefully highlights this virtue. Professionals like doctors and engineers are steeped in standards of practice and codes of ethics. Having such a person at the top sends a signal throughout the organization that he or she understands the values and priorities of the people on the team. A critical turning point in the leadup to the 1986 Challenger space-shuttle disaster came when, in a discussion of whether a launch would be safe, one executive for contractor Morton Thiokol told another to "take off your engineering hat and put on your management hat."
As Ms. Goodall concedes, not all experts can make the leap to leadership, or want to. But in a world where expertise counts, those who do are in an especially strong position to create value for their organizations.
---
Mr. Price is the author, most recently, of "Geniuses at War: Bletchley Park, Colossus, and the Dawn of the Digital Age."
Credit: By David A. Price
