International Business Machines Corp.'s earnings declined in the second quarter against the backdrop of a pandemic that has roiled many of its corporate customers.
IBM had been searching for growth under new Chief Executive Arvind Krishna after several years of mostly declining revenue under his predecessor, Ginni Rometty. Cloud computing and artificial intelligence have become focal points in recent years for the 109-year-old company, which became a corporate mainstay with its mainframe computers and information-technology services.
IBM officials and industry analysts have said some companies have been skittish about technology purchases with the economic uncertainty caused by the coronavirus. The pandemic prompted IBM in April to withdraw its full-year guidance. The company also laid off thousands of employees in the past two months, spurred by the pandemic and a broader reorientation of its business.
IBM said Monday its second-quarter revenue fell by 5.4%, albeit a smaller decline than Wall Street analysts were forecasting, to $18.12 billion. Earnings per share fell to $1.52 from $2.81 a year earlier. IBM increased its gross margins and beat analysts' expectations for earnings on an adjusted basis.
Despite the rocky performance, IBM said its cloud-computing revenue was $6.3 billion during the second quarter, up 30% from a year earlier.
IBM's shares rose 4.5% in after-hours trading. The company's share price has fallen 5.7% this year, compared with a slight gain in the S&P 500.
IBM is one of the first big U.S. tech companies to report results for the second quarter. Chip maker Intel Corp. reports later this week, while Amazon.com Inc., Apple Inc., Google parent Alphabet Inc. and Facebook Inc. report quarterly financial results next week.
The U.S. technology sector has shown resilience in the coronavirus era as more people work from home and use computer hardware, software and internet services, but they haven't been immune to such negative effects as a drop-off in advertising and lower demand for smartphones.
IBM, for its part, sees a long-term opportunity amid the crisis as clients accelerate their digital transformations, Mr. Krishna said during a call with analysts.
At the same time, some parts of the company are taking a short-term hit, including software businesses that rely on big transactions to grow.
"We're feeling the impact of austerity measures that businesses have put in place to preserve cash and capital," Mr. Krishna said.
Still, Chief Financial Officer James Kavanaugh said the company was in a stable position given its wide global footprint and a customer base that includes many resilient companies in critical industries.
In recent months, IBM bolstered its cloud-computing business despite the pandemic by signing deals with auto maker Daimler AG and Indian telecom Bharti Airtel Ltd. Mr. Krishna said that there were growing opportunities for large and transformational projects, but that they also "take time to shape and therefore to close."
IBM wants to be a leading cloud-computing player, but it is behind the competition, led by Amazon and Microsoft Corp.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
