TOKYO -- At a mobile phone store here, a white plastic robot on wheels sidles over to a visitor and tries to strike up a conversation. In a childlike voice, it proclaims that rain is on the way, oil prices are falling and the subway is on time. When the customer fails to respond promptly, the robot advises him to study his Japanese.
Robots long ago proliferated in Japan's pop culture and on its factory floors, but the plucky humanoid Pepper represents the most aggressive bid in years to move them into the home.
Japanese telecommunications giant SoftBank Corp. hopes to sell thousands of Peppers to consumers, starting this summer, predicting that eventually robots will be a mass-market technology along the lines of the PC or the smartphone.
This month, SoftBank joined forces on robotics with International Business Machines Corp. to jointly develop IBM's Watson artificial intelligence technology for the Japanese market, including robots. A SoftBank spokesman said Pepper was one of a number of platforms on which Watson could appear.
It is unclear whether consumers will spend close to $2,000 to buy Pepper, and recently SoftBank delayed the sale from February to some time in June to August, highlighting difficulties in commercialization. Most of the robots launched for consumers so far have been vacuum cleaners or toys that failed to catch on beyond a niche market of enthusiasts.
Standing about 4 feet tall on a wheeled, plinth-like base rather than legs, Pepper is only vaguely human in form. While some humanoid robots can walk on two legs, Pepper rolls on wheels. Its arms gesticulate in mechanical fashion and lack the dexterity to help with the dishes or the vacuuming.
Pepper can keep up a basic conversation, though when it doesn't understand an answer to one of its questions it sometimes changes the subject abruptly.
SoftBank sees broader uses for humanoids, saying they could provide company to Japan's growing ranks of elderly people, assist schoolchildren with homework or help customers find products in retail stores. Outside developers are working on applications that will deliver cloud-based digital entertainment and other services via the robots.
So far, Japan has had more luck with industrial robots. The New York hedge fund investor Daniel Loeb this month disclosed an investment in Fanuc Corp. of Japan, whose sales of industrial robots used in the making of Apple Inc.'s iPhones and other smartphones have soared.
Research firm Freedonia Group predicts the overall robotics market will grow to $22.7 billion in 2019 from $14 billion last year. Industrial robots account for more than two-thirds of the current total, though sales of robots used in services, such as companions for the elderly in nursing homes or helpers in hotels, are expected to grow more rapidly.
Other Japanese companies, from conglomerate Toshiba Corp. to startup Robo Garage, are also developing robots that resemble humans. Google Inc. in 2013 acquired Schaft Inc., another Japanese startup whose humanoid robot wowed the field in a competition sponsored by the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Google has since then turned its back on military funding for Schaft
The Japanese government is encouraging the private sector to invest in robotics. Prime Minister Shinzo Abe sees robot workers as a solution to Japan's demographic challenges, including an aging population and a shrinking workforce. Mr. Abe last year called for a "new industrial revolution," setting a goal of doubling the presence of robots in industry and increasing twentyfold their use in service industries, by 2020.
In late January, a government-commissioned panel published recommendations on how to reach those goals, including a regulatory overhaul and nearly $1 billion in public and private investment.
SoftBank, which owns Sprint Corp. in the U.S., plans to connect Pepper to its mobile network, which has more than 37 million subscribers in Japan. It was developed by a subsidiary in France called Aldebaran and is being built in China by Taiwanese contract manufacturer Hon Hai Precision Industry Co., which assembles iPhones.
"If any culture on earth is ready for early adoption of more robotics, it is probably Japan," says Maryanna Saenko, an analyst at Lux Research.
But she also questioned how many consumers would be interested in a robot that can't do practical things like household chores. "Even with big advances in the technology and the platform, it is hard to identify needs for humanoids like these," she said.
SoftBank has not disclosed specific sales forecasts and says it will lose money at the start because the 198,000 yen price ($1,665 equivalent U.S. dollars) is below the cost of parts and manufacturing. But the company hopes to recoup that with fees to connect the robots to its network. Kaname Hayashi, director of the product management office at SoftBank Robotics, said Pepper would be the most widely sold humanoid robot to date.
That bar is low because few humanoids have been made available to the public. Aldebaran says it has sold about 5,000 Nao robots, which are smaller than Pepper, since 2006.
Humanoids are a small minority of the robot population. The International Federation of Robotics says sales of domestic robots rose 28% in 2013, to about 4 million, worth $1.7 billion. This included 1.2 million robots for "entertainment and leisure" use. The rest are robots that do household chores, such as vacuum cleaning.
"Robots are widely used in factories, but we need to bring them into offices, homes and hospitals," says Hitoshi Okuda, an executive in charge of new business development at Toshiba.
Toshiba's Aiko Chihira is an extremely lifelike, female-model android, complete with real human hair and silicone flesh. It can communicate in basic sign language, moving its arms smoothly and nearly silently. Toshiba hopes to sell robots like it for entertainment, education and other purposes.
Other humanoids, such as Honda Motor Co.'s Asimo -- which engaged in a soccer kickaround with President Barack Obama when he visited Japan in 2014 -- have mostly been used for demonstration purposes rather than commercial use.
Pepper is not the first robot to be sold widely to the public. Sony Corp. introduced a toy robot dog called Aibo in 1999 and sold about 150,000 of them before ending the program in 2006. But Aibo lacked Pepper's Internet connectivity and more sophisticated artificial intelligence.
The founder of the startup Robo Garage, Tomotaka Takahashi sells a robot called Robi as a kit with subscriptions to a magazine about robotics. Customers get new parts every week; after 70 issues and 140,000 yen, they can assemble the robot.
Credit: By Eric Pfanner
