Thrive Capital raised $5 billion for its largest-ever pair of venture-capital funds, a sign of how the AI boom is encouraging some startup investors to go big again after a period of retrenchment.
On Sunday, Thrive told its investors that it had received commitments for the full amount, which marks its biggest-ever fundraising and is among the largest completed this year by a venture firm. The New York-based firm last raised $3 billion two years ago.
Thrive, founded 15 years ago by Josh Kushner, has gained greater prominence in Silicon Valley startup circles thanks to its close relationship with OpenAI, the ChatGPT maker helmed by CEO Sam Altman that kicked off the AI boom. Thrive first backed OpenAI in April 2023 and has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in the startup. Thrive also has invested in other AI startups recently, including Scale AI, and non-AI firms such as the movie studio A24.
The firm's new fundraising haul is a bet on the future of the venture-capital industry, which is still reeling from the tech crash of two years ago. At the time, interest-rate increases dried up the funding that had propelled a long bull run in startup valuations, which caused many startups to scale back or close shop.
Few companies in the past two years have managed the kind of successful exits that deliver returns to venture investors, because of a sluggish IPO market and antitrust scrutiny that has dampened acquisitions. Some venture firms scaled back the size of their funds after struggling to garner interest from investors.
Venture capitalists lately have been focusing their attention on AI, a technology that they overwhelmingly say will produce a transformation at least as important as the internet. The excitement fueled an investment frenzy, with AI startups often getting funding before they had a business plan or formal name. Earlier this year, top venture firms including Andreessen Horowitz and Benchmark rebranded some of their funds to signal a renewed focus on the technology.
So far, the costs required to train generative AI models have vastly exceeded the revenue coming from the technology. Once-leading AI startups, including Inflection and Adept, also have resorted to bailouts from big tech firms after struggling to find a market for their products.
Thrive made AI a focus of its fundraising pitch. The firm touted its close relationship with OpenAI to investors and said the company helped it win a recent investment into the robotics startup Physical Intelligence.
Credit: By Berber Jin
