ECHOSTAR
SATS +8.9%
After years of will-they, won't-they, two satellite-TV rivals are nearing a deal. DirecTV is in advanced talks to acquire EchoStar-owned Dish, The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday. DirecTV is owned by telecom giant AT&T and private-equity firm TPG. A potential deal -- which includes Dish's streaming brand, Sling TV -- would create one of the country's largest pay-TV distributors. The companies have flirted with a merger multiple times. Both companies have been shedding customers as viewers opt for streaming services instead of pricier traditional television channels. A tie-up would give DirecTV's owners a way to dramatically cut costs and give EchoStar a vital lifeline ahead of looming debt payments. EchoStar shares gained 8.9% Friday.
SOUTHWEST AIRLINES
LUV +5.4%
Southwest next year will start selling assigned seats and add rows of premium seating with extra legroom. Southwest also unveiled a $2.5 billion share-buyback program, cost-cutting plans, and a new board member as it tries to convince shareholders that it can turn itself around. Elliott Investment Management, which owns about 10% of Southwest's shares, said it will continue to press for new leadership. Southwest shares advanced 5.4% Thursday.
MICRON TECHNOLOGY
MU +15%
The memory-chip maker late Wednesday reported better-than-expected results thanks to robust artificial-intelligence demand. Micron also gave guidance that topped expectations. The company expects its momentum to continue in the current quarter, saying both revenue and adjusted earnings are likely to beat analyst views. Worries about PC and smartphone demand had weighed on Micron's stock. Micron shares surged 15% Thursday, helping buoy the broader tech sector.
COSTCO WHOLESALE
COST -1.8%
Costco's share price got a markdown on Friday, thanks to its mixed quarterly results. The retailer late Thursday posted better-than-expected earnings and revenue that missed Wall Street estimates. The results come a few months after Costco said it was raising its membership prices for the first time since 2017. The stock has been on a tear for much of this year. Through Thursday's close, the stock was up roughly 37% for 2024, and 63% over the past 12 months. Costco shares ended 1.8% lower Friday.
VISA
V -5.5%
The Justice Department sued Visa on Tuesday for antitrust violations, alleging that the card-network giant illegally monopolized the market for consumers' debit-card payments worth trillions of dollars. The government said Visa blocked competitors by using higher fees to punish merchants if they routed some transactions to another card network. Visa also paid companies including Apple to limit their innovation and sought to undermine startups, the complaint said. Visa shares fell 5.5% Tuesday.
SUPER MICRO COMPUTER
SMCI -12%
Super Micro Computer is facing a federal probe following a report by an activist short-selling firm. The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday that the Justice Department is looking into the server maker, whose specialized servers use the chips Nvidia designs for generative AI. In August, short seller Hindenburg Research published its report about Super Micro and said it had placed bets against its stock. Super Micro Computer shares lost 12% Thursday.
Generate image description

Generate image description

Credit: By Francesca Fontana
