In Asia, many smartphone users use messaging apps to watch videos, make calls, hail rides and play games. And U.S. giants WhatsApp and Snapchat are getting more competition from challengers from Asia. To get a glimpse of what the future may hold for messaging apps, Wall Street Journal senior editor Yun-Hee Kim spoke with Kavin Bharti Mittal, founder and chief executive of India's Hike Messenger, and Ji-Hoon Rim, CEO of South Korea's Kakao Corp.
Here are edited excerpts of the discussion.
MS. KIM: What is the next-generation messaging app going to look like?
MR. RIM: Artificial intelligence. I personally think that the next messenger is going be the virtual personal assistant.
MR. MITTAL: Yeah, absolutely. I'm a big believer that we're at a stage in the evolution of technology where humans are still forced to adapt to the way technology works. And I think AI's going to change that.
It's going to spin it backward, where technology can finally adapt itself to how human beings live their lives.
We're only using AI in small amounts of the application today in Hike.
Based on the time of the day, based on your location, based on the weather, we can change the recommendation of stickers [images people can send to other users] that you see in your palette. It's a very small example of what's possible with big data and AI inside messaging apps going forward.
MS. KIM: How does Kakao plan to use artificial intelligence in its KakaoTalk messaging platform?
MR. RIM: It's going to be natural-language processing and understanding. In the mobile service right now, we're already connected to the biggest franchise deliveries like Pizza Hut, Burger King. All those things you can actually order on mobile right now, and get delivered.
If that's connected with AI and a conversational [user interface], rather than typing or touching the phone, you can just say, "Please order the same pizza that I did last week." Or "I want to go to Hong Kong Disneyland. Please call me a taxi."
I'm pretty confident that we could show how the future is going to be. Because Korea is relatively small. We can showcase how it really works.
MS. KIM: There are many other messaging apps globally that are offering quite similar services. The market is quite competitive. In terms of users, both Hike and Kakao trail WhatsApp, which has more than a billion monthly active users. So how do you take on a giant like that? Do you have ambitions to even attempt to compete with WhatsApp?
MR. MITTAL: In any realm of industry, you try to sort of compete as little as possible. You go around the competition.
We focus on the youth. In India, about half a billion people are under the age of 24.
So we focus on our user base and deliver what is important to them. In India, given that you have so much diversity, it allows for people like us to exist, because we can solve very local problems at scale.
MS. KIM: But in India, WhatsApp actually has double the amount of users as Hike. What are they doing right? And what do you guys need to do to catch up?
MR. MITTAL: We don't look at Hike as catching up at all. We've made it very clear that for us to win, WhatsApp doesn't have to lose.
As a matter of fact, people use WhatsApp and Hike very, very differently together on their phones.
Hike is used with seven, eight, 10 close friends. Whereas WhatsApp is used with your parents, your driver, your colleagues, your plumber.
The more pervasive Facebook and WhatsApp are, the more the need for Hike. Because in a market like India, there is a very large divide between the older, conservative population and the younger youth who are much more liberal. As a result of which, people need a space to be themselves. And Hike is that application.
MS. KIM: Kakao hasn't really gained much traction overseas. What went wrong?
MR. RIM: I don't want to say it was wrong. Actually, it was a path that we chose. We realized that it's going to be very tough for us to compete as a messenger globally, because they were big companies.
We chose a path where we'll do platform business in Korea, since we're a dominant player, and we'll do content business globally. Content here means offering music, gaming, entertainment and comics.
MS. KIM: Do you have plans to take Hike outside of India?
MR. MITTAL: Not yet. We feel that the market is very big. There is enough and more for us to work on in India.
Do we foresee ourselves going outside the country? Well, we'd hope so.
There are many countries out there like Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Africa as well, that have a very similar characteristic to India. Where data's tricky, where smartphones are cheap.
Maybe in the next 12 to 18 months, we'll consider one of these markets.
MS. KIM: You've raised more than $250 million from investors. What are you using the funding toward? Is it improving your features or expanding perhaps outside of your home market?
MR. MITTAL: Definitely improving the product. We're big believers that as consumers get used to technology, consumer needs grow. So you can't stay stagnant in the technology space. You have to keep evolving and improving your product 24/7.
We've been working on a lot of stuff that we've launched in the last six months. Hike, by the end of 2017, will look very different.
Because we have the funding, and more important, we have a lot of access to people like Tencent [a Chinese company that created the messaging app WeChat and backs Hike].
There are a lot of insights we've got around what WeChat's doing with the platform, or what they're doing with messaging, what they're doing with photos, what they're doing with videos, what they're doing with calling, payments and a bunch of other stuff. We've definitely used that to improve our own set of tactics and strategy in India.
MS. KIM: In light of the terrorist attacks in Europe and the U.S., there has been a lot of debate about whether messaging companies like yourselves should give away data of their users to government agencies. I wanted to hear your thoughts on that issue.
MR. MITTAL: One thing that we do well with Hike is we actually don't store any messages. We just don't do it. We don't plan to change that over time. But I think it's not wrong for the governments to ask for data if the situation is right.
I can only speak for India. The internet is so new in India that the government's also trying to figure out what the rules are in the online world. What does it mean to have security and privacy online in the virtual world?
Because now people spend four hours of their day on average on the internet. In a country like India, one day you'll have a billion people accessing the internet through their smartphones. So time will tell.
MR. RIM: Privacy of data is very important. And Kakao puts in every effort to keep it up.
Credit: By Yun-Hee Kim
