[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The irony of an AI iPhone is that it could help one company that Apple is least interested in helping.
Investors are enthusiastic about such a device after Apple's earnings, which showed a weakness in iPhone revenue, but that was expected. CEO Tim Cook used the occasion to tout Apple's interest in generative artificial intelligence, which has analysts convinced an AI iPhone is on the horizon. Apple stock rose 6% on Friday, its best single-day gain in 18 months. It fell slightly on Monday.
Qualcomm, the maker of modem chips in the iPhone, saw its stock jump nearly 10% on Thursday after its results, where chip sales were helped by AI Android phones such as Samsung's latest Galaxy family that went on sale in January. It rose 1.2% on Monday.
Such on-device AI offers benefits such as faster speed in processing AI tasks as well as greater privacy -- as less data has to go to the cloud. Samsung's Galaxy S24 phones offer functions such as real-time translating and image-based search. Unit sales of the S24s during their first three weeks were up 8% from the previous Galaxy family's sales last year during the same window, according to Counterpoint Research.
The launch of an AI iPhone would likely further juice the market for on-device AI, given Apple's marketing prowess. And that would be a major benefit for Qualcomm, which has dominated the market for modem chips -- known as basebands -- that handle the task of connecting a device to a carrier network. Its Snapdragon central processor is the main computing chip for a variety of Androids, including the latest from Samsung. And it has a growing business in the radio-frequency chips that work with basebands to filter interference and boost signals.
For phones processing demanding AI algorithms, the ability of such components to work closely together while conserving power becomes paramount. That plays to Qualcomm's advantages -- particularly among the wireless components that it has an expertise in. If AI is in a phone and "you want the battery life to be the same, where are you going to get the power budget from? Modem, RF and screen," said TD Cowen's Matt Ramsay.
That could even help extend the life of Qualcomm's business with Apple, which has long been working to get Qualcomm's chips out of its devices. Apple's failure to develop its own modem led to the two extending their deal last year. In a note to clients, UBS analyst Tim Arcuri said "as time goes on without an Apple modem, Qualcomm's leverage grows arguably stronger as AI requires much tighter modem/RF integration to keep battery life manageable."
Helping sell a few more smartphones by making them even smarter could go a long way.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
