HANGZHOU, China -- Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. says it will nearly triple spending on research and development to more than $15 billion over the next three years, as the Chinese e-commerce company seeks to keep pace with Western rivals such as Alphabet Inc. and Amazon.com Inc.
Alibaba started as an online marketplace but has since moved into cloud computing and artificial-intelligence initiatives. In the previous three years, its spending on R&D was about $6 billion -- a fraction of what major U.S. technology companies spend.
As part of the spending initiative, Alibaba Chief Technology Officer Jeff Zhang will lead a new research unit called the DAMO Academy -- an acronym for discovery, adventure, momentum and outlook -- that will establish R&D labs world-wide, including one in cooperation with the University of California, Berkeley.
The academy will fund research into areas such as data analytics, quantum computing and machine learning.
"For any major internet company to remain competitive in the future, they will have to invest in these technologies," said Mark Natkin, managing director at Beijing-based consultancy Marbridge Consulting.
Alibaba's investment comes as the competition to attract the best talent ramps up.
Facebook Inc., Amazon.com and Google parent Alphabet are increasing spending and racing to find and retain researchers in search of the next big breakthrough. According to corporate filings, Alphabet spent $13.9 billion on R&D in 2016, or about 16% of its revenue. Amazon spent $16 billion in the same period.
In contrast, Alibaba spent 17.1 billion yuan ($2.6 billion) on R&D in its financial year that ended in March, or about 11% of its 158.3 billion yuan in annual revenue.
Alibaba said it plans to hire 100 researchers for its new academy, which will open in seven locations, including two in the U.S.: San Mateo, Calif., and Bellevue, Wash.
In a speech in the company's headquarters city of Hangzhou, Alibaba Chairman Jack Ma paid tribute to the tech competitors that he is trying to outdo. "We'll learn from the work of IBM, Microsoft and Dell -- but we'll walk our own path."
---
Chuin-Wei Yap contributed to this article.

Credit: By Liza Lin
