[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Tesla shares had a stellar 2023, in large part because they had such a dismal end to 2022. By the same logic, this year could be tough for the world's most-traded stock.
Tesla delivered roughly 485,000 electric vehicles last quarter -- a bit better than expected, but worse than its Chinese rival BYD, which sold about 526,000. It is the first time the EV pioneer has been outsold on a quarterly basis. With BYD offering cheaper vehicles in a larger home market, it won't be the last.
The increasing cost of Tesla's rapid growth is a problem. Last year's increase in deliveries of 495,000, or 38% -- which compares with the company's target of 50% production growth over a multiyear period -- came after price cuts of about 16%, according to brokerage Bernstein.
Some variable costs fell, cushioning the blow, but Tesla still had to sacrifice profitability. Its closely watched gross automotive margin excluding regulatory credits is expected to come in at 17.1% for the fourth quarter, according to a FactSet consensus, and even this seems ambitious after 16.3% in the three months through September. It will report the actual number on Jan. 24. Two years ago, Tesla was reporting margins approaching 30%.
Even some analysts who are bullish on Tesla stock think expectations for 2024 are too high. Deutsche Bank analyst Emmanuel Rosner, for example, has warned that this year's results could be disappointing while rating Tesla a "buy," based on the transformative potential of a mass-market product, dubbed the Model 2, that the company is expected to launch in 2025.
This is a reminder that Tesla's stock is unusually dependent on distant and somewhat vague growth prospects rather than the profit outlook. Last year, its share price more than doubled even as the consensus earnings-per-share estimate for 2023 fell 45%.
The reasons for last year's gains weren't totally clear, but they likely had to do with details about the lower-cost manufacturing platform that will build the Model 2 on the one hand and hopes that artificial intelligence might accelerate the automation of driving on the other.
Tesla's stock is starting the year in a much more expensive place: On Jan. 3, 2023, Tesla's shares hit a low of $108 -- about 20 times forward earnings -- after it reported lower-than-expected fourth-quarter deliveries. They closed Wednesday at $238, 63 times today's lower, but still optimistic, earnings forecasts for the next 12 months.
Who knows what the hyperactive CEO Elon Musk will come up with next to galvanize fresh interest in Tesla's shares. One thing we do know is that the bar for his hype is much higher in 2024 than it was in 2023.
Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
