A late-August rally lost some sizzle on Thursday, sapping major stock indexes of momentum as they enter a month that is traditionally their weakest of the year.
Investors still have confidence in the U.S. economy, as well as the potential for artificial intelligence to boost productivity gains, but stock markets fell for much of August before turning upward.
The S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite snapped five-month winning streaks, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average posted its first monthly loss since May.
August's declines were broad, though shallow. They spanned big banks, carmakers and tech giants.
Energy stocks were the only slice of the S&P 500 to post monthly gains.
Despite a similarly broad rebound over the previous four trading sessions, major indexes were mixed Thursday.
The Dow industrials opened in the green but gave up those gains in the afternoon en route to a 0.5% decline of about 168 points.
The S&P 500 slipped 0.2% lower, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite climbed 0.1%.
Investors saw the tepid August as a pause for markets after months of summer travel, Taylor Swift concerts and "Barbenheimer" box-office bonanzas suggested that U.S. consumers haven't cracked beneath the higher interest rates aimed at curbing inflation.
"It's been a YOLO summer" for consumers, said Rusty Vanneman, chief investment officer at Orion, using the acronym for "you only live once."
Americans in July spent more in areas such as housing, restaurants and insurance, the Commerce Department said Thursday.
That helped nudge the personal-consumption expenditures price index, the Federal Reserve's preferred inflation gauge, higher.
Positive economic data has pushed many investors to believe that the Federal Reserve will keep interest rates higher for longer to tame inflation, buoying yields on longer-term government debt.
While the benchmark 10-year Treasury yield edged downward to 4.090% on Thursday, it remained 0.134 percentage point higher than at the start of August.
Yields on 2-year Treasurys, a rough proxy for investors' near-term inflation expectations, were down 0.017 percentage point in August.
That uptick has enticed investors away from stocks.
To avoid associated volatility, Vanneman has advised clients to diversify portfolios with assets such as non-U. S. bonds, shares in natural-resource-producing companies and commodities.
"All else equal, [a higher interest rate] does put pressure on the stock market," Vanneman said.
Benchmark U.S. crude eked out a 2.2% gain in August, to $83.63 a barrel, as Saudi and Russian production cuts forced companies to draw down their stockpiles.
Natural-gas futures for October delivery rose 5.1% during the month.
Investors on Friday will parse a jobs report that will offer clues on whether the Fed's rate increases are cooling hiring and wage growth to central bankers' liking. Economists polled by The Wall Street Journal expect employers added 170,000 workers in August, down from July's 187,000, with unemployment steady at 3.5%.
Clayton Allison, a portfolio manager at Prime Capital Investment Advisors, said he has increasingly advised clients to eye small- and midcap stocks that could capitalize on a robust U.S. economy and limit any fallout should the outlook darken.
"The consumer has been so resilient over the last three or six months," he said. "A lot of people probably didn't expect that with interest rates going up."
Allison is among the investors who have begun to broaden their focus away from the big technology companies that have gobbled up much of this year's AI-related gains and pushed up stock valuations.
Even so, those firms propped up broader indexes on Thursday.
Enterprise-software giant Salesforce was the Dow's best performer, rising 3% after posting better-than-expected earnings.
Amazon.com climbed 2.2%, while Apple earned a fifth consecutive daily gain.
Chip manufacturer Nvidia edged 0.2% higher, finishing August up 5.6%.
"It's been a very top-heavy rally," Allison said.
---
Eric Wallerstein contributed to this article.
Credit: By David Uberti
