[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Say this much for Google and its gadgets: The internet giant is clearly willing to put its money where its mouth is.
The company owned by Alphabet Inc. showed off its latest series of devices on Tuesday. These include a new version of its Pixel smartphone as well as a hybrid tablet and a new smart speaker with a video display. All serve well as showcases for the company's advancements in artificial intelligence that include its popular, voice-activated Google Assistant.
All are priced aggressively, at least relative to the most popular devices in their relative segments. The Pixel 3 starts at $799 -- a $200 discount from the starting price of Apple Inc.'s iPhone XS that features similar specs. The hybrid device known as the Pixel Slate starts at $599, or $300 less than the starting price of Microsoft's newest Surface Pro 6 hybrid tablet. The Home Hub is Google's first entry into video-based smart speakers and is priced about 35% below Amazon.com's redesigned Echo Show.
Google seems tired of being a bit player in hardware. The previous two versions of Google's Pixel smartphone garnered largely rave reviews but barely made a dent in the market. The company has sold a total of 6.8 million Pixel phones since the first models launched in late 2016, according to IDC. That is barely one-tenth of 1% of the 3.6 billion smartphones sold globally during that time.
Meanwhile, aggressive pricing against Amazon's Echo lineup already has helped the company in the burgeoning smart-speaker category. Google's Home line of devices garnered nearly one-quarter of the U.S. market for smart speakers by the end of the second quarter, according to Consumer Intelligence Research Partners.
But a bigger piece of the device market would still be a tiny slice of Google's pie. Analysts expect the company's hardware revenue to jump to $5.2 billion this year from $3.3 billion last year, according to consensus estimates from Visible Alpha. That still would be less than 5% of the $116 billion in advertising revenue Google is expected to generate in that time.
Google clearly wants its devices to do better. Shareholders needn't fret too much about its odds of success.

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
