[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The rise of generative artificial intelligence, like that used in ChatGPT, has pushed any stock vaguely related to AI up this year. The coming initial public offering of British chip designer Arm will put this market frenzy -- and its parent SoftBank's AI ambitions -- to the test.
Riding the AI wave, Arm, which filed to go public on the Nasdaq exchange next month, could be the largest new listing this year. The total value of IPOs in the U.S. has amounted to $13 billion in 2023 so far, according to Dealogic. The market for new listings has only started to show signs of recovery quite recently, after a lackluster 2022.
The boom in AI stocks could help Arm's IPO. Chip stocks rebounded strongly this year: The PHLX Semiconductor index surged 41%. Nvidia, the leader in AI chips, led the rally. Its share price more than tripled.
Arm's chip architecture goes into almost every smartphone due to its low power consumption. It charges license and royalty fees for devices that use its designs and technology. And the hope is that model will one day extend to many other markets, like for the central-server processors used in AI. There are some concrete signs those hopes might be realized, too: Nvidia's Grace server chips are based on Arm's architecture. The two planned to merge in 2020, but the deal collapsed due to regulators.
The pricing for Arm's IPO isn't out yet, but SoftBank dropped hints. The company just bought back a 25% stake in Arm from the SoftBank-managed Vision Fund for $16.1 billion. That implies a valuation of about $64 billion for Arm. SoftBank warned this price won't reflect the IPO price for Arm as it is based on prior contractual agreements.
Around two-thirds of the almost $100 billion in committed capital for the Vision Fund came from outside investors like the sovereign-wealth funds of Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi. The transaction could transfer some profits to the fund, which returned to a small profit last quarter after five consecutive quarters of losses. The Vision Fund bought the stake for $8 billion from SoftBank in 2017.
At $64 billion, Arm would be trading at a lofty valuation: equal to 24 times revenue or 122 times earnings, using financial data for the fiscal year ending in March -- more expensive than most chip peers. Nvidia trades at even higher multiples, but its net income is expected to more than triple year over year in this fiscal year ending in January, according to S&P Global Market Intelligence. That makes Nvidia's forward price-to-earnings ratio just 48 times.
And Arm will likely keep suffering from the sluggish smartphone market. Its net profit for the three months ended in June more than halved from a year earlier.
The question is: Will buyers pay up for Arm's AI prospects? Much depends on whether investors believe Arm will experience the same explosive growth as Nvidia. That is no sure thing. The AI frenzy seems to have cooled lately: The Nasdaq Composite is down 6% in August.
SoftBank, which bought Arm for $32 billion in 2016, has a lot riding on the deal. Its stock gained 18% this year, partly because of hopes of higher valuations for an Arm IPO.
The AI frenzy lifted the chip sector this year. The Arm IPO is shaping up as a stress test for all the rosy assumptions baked into that rally.
Credit: By Jacky Wong
