What China wouldn't give to be America for a day.
President Xi Jinping faces a series of probably intractable problems ahead of March's "two sessions" -- the annual set-piece meetings of the Chinese state's and Communist Party's highest decision-making bodies. His regime is under growing pressure to manage the consequences of a continuing property-market rout. Along with this comes enormous fiscal strain on the many local governments that went into heavy debt in the name of property investment.
Chinese consumer confidence, rocked by that real-estate meltdown, has yet to recover fully from the consequences of draconian pandemic lockdowns. Economic relations with the U.S. and Europe are becoming more tense, raising the question of whether China can export its way out of its malaise. Foreign investors are growing warier.
To date, all Mr. Xi has to offer is gimmicks such as "new productive forces," a catch phrase introduced last year. This seems to mean placing an emphasis on high-tech innovation as opposed to China's traditional brute-force mobilization of labor and raw resources to mass-produce cheap T-shirts, toys or -- more recently -- solar panels and windmills.
Yet Beijing could only look in envy as American artificial-intelligence darling Nvidia last week briefly surged past a $2 trillion market capitalization.
To fully appreciate this turn of events, recall that one of the sillier intellectual tics of the 2000s was the notion that China's authoritarian regime had figured out how to Solve Big Problems and Deliver Economic Growth in a way that democracies -- especially American democracy -- couldn't. The concept found its fullest expression in a New York Times columnist's wistful imaginings in the early years of Barack Obama's first presidential term about what might have happened if the U.S. could "be China for a day."
The "China for a day" meme conflated two distinct concepts. The Communist Party's capacity to mobilize vast resources in support of its political or economic goals operates independently of whether a given goal is the right one. That's why more democratic paralysis -- the proper word actually is "reflection" -- would have benefited China. A more sclerotic system might have avoided the public-works overbuilding boom now in danger of bankrupting local governments. It likewise would have been able to avoid the human and demographic disaster of the one-child policy.
All of which explains how Nvidia's recent boom taunts China several times over. Economically, the surge of AI stocks (Nvidia is far from alone) demonstrates Western capitalism's unrivaled capacity for pouring resources into decentralized innovation, and also the economic payoff. Investors rushed into AI shares after a bumper earnings report from Nvidia provided concrete evidence of an AI-born productivity revolution. It's the American recipe: Whisk together private-sector innovation and risk-taking capital, bake it in the marketplace, and hope the profits of success deliver scrumptious returns to shareholders.
Beijing's attempts to re-create this souffle keep coming out flat. Mr. Xi is pursuing a top-down innovation drive in AI, as in other areas, with some success. But any inventiveness will to some extent be limited by the imaginations of the politicians and bureaucrats funding and managing it. This precludes them from boosting returns to shareholders and other savers the old-fashioned way -- by stimulating productivity growth and corporate profitability. So instead they occasionally try to pump up the Chinese stock market with fiscal or regulatory gimmicks.
Which points to the bigger mistake lurking in "China for a day" fantasies:
Mr. Xi and President Biden face similar political-economic problems. In China and the U.S., rising global interest rates and domestic policy missteps have generated substantial economic headwinds. In China, it's the collapsing property bubble. In America it's the inflationary consequences of bonkers fiscal and monetary policies and a Democratic bias toward overregulation.
The difference is that Mr. Biden at least can hope he gets lucky. Even in the "China for a day" heyday, what ultimately saved the Obama economy wasn't any successful steamrolling of opposition to his policy agenda on healthcare or green subsidies. It was a shale-gas fracking boom that arrived largely unbidden by his administration. If Mr. Biden ekes out re-election in November despite voters' chronic discontent with his economy, it will be in part because the AI explosion that coincided with his first term is creating just enough productivity and economic growth to push him over the political line.
Dumb luck in the market isn't a possibility in China's command economy. Instead, Mr. Xi must generate rising prosperity through his own savvy economic management, which is bad news for China. An AI growth boom and Chinese rebound might both be low-probability events, but it's still always smarter to bet that a politician will be lucky than that he'll be wise.
Credit: By Joseph C. Sternberg
