A Chinese-made app that lets users morph themselves almost seamlessly into scenes from iconic movies and TV shows using a single selfie is the latest viral sensation to fan fears about data privacy and identity theft.
Zao, which shot to the top of China's list of most-downloaded free apps after it launched Friday, repurposes a user's image to dramatic effect.
It uses deepfake technology, which harnesses artificial intelligence to produce doctored photos, videos and audio recordings that can be strikingly realistic. U.S. lawmakers and technology companies are wrestling with how to detect and prevent deepfakes, especially in advance of next year's U.S. presidential election.
Users on Zao can upload a photo of themselves and stitch their faces onto actors in films, TV shows and videogames. Clips from Zao featuring ordinary people replacing Hugh Jackman in "The Wolverine," Leonardo DiCaprio in "Titanic" and Kit Harington in "Game of Thrones" have flooded Chinese social media.
The app is now at the center of a debate about personal data privacy in China that erupted after users discovered playing with Zao required signing away "irrevocable, permanent, transferable" rights over their content.
On Wednesday, China's Ministry of Industry and Information Technology announced an inquiry into Zao's "non-standard user agreement, data leakage risks and other network data safety issues." The ministry said it was requiring the company to fix any policies that violated laws and regulations.
People flocked online to gripe about the app's far-reaching user agreement, and Chinese social-media platform WeChat, from Tencent Holdings Ltd., blocked links to content generated by Zao.
"Changing faces will get you happiness in a short period of time," one user wrote on Weibo, a popular microblogging site. "But it will throw your privacy to the crematorium." Another said, "I'm scared, and hurried to delete it."
Zao is available for download only through Apple Inc.'s mainland China iOS store. The company behind Zao, Changsha Shenduronghe Network Technology Co., is owned by two executives from Chinese dating-app giant Momo Inc., according to commercial registration data.
On Tuesday, Zao issued a public apology and said it tweaked its user policy and won't store people's images. It said people aren't in danger of identity theft because the app's face-transplant technology can't be used to trick security systems that rely on facial recognition.
"As a startup, we did not think about the core concerns of people," the company said on Weibo. "We attach great importance to the protection of personal information and data security."
The backlash against Zao is especially striking in China, where consumers tend to be more relaxed about data privacy compared with people in the U.S. or elsewhere in the West, said Ben Cavender, managing director of China Market Research Group. But that attitude, he said, doesn't stretch to identity fraud.
"Consumers here are not so concerned that the government can see their data," Mr. Cavender said. "But when you start talking about the ability to manipulate pictures of them or things they have said, that becomes very scary."
The uproar about Zao is part of deepening concern around the world among consumers, lawmakers and tech companies about the threats posed by deepfakes, especially as the technology becomes increasingly difficult to detect.
In June, a video popped up on Instagram depicting Facebook Inc. Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg giving a talk on data that he never gave. A month later, a face-aging app called FaceApp, which was launched a few years ago, went viral in the U.S. Many users then realized it was owned by a Russian company. In a letter posted on Twitter, Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.) called for an investigation into FaceApp, saying the app "could pose national security and privacy risks."
The House Intelligence Committee held a hearing this summer focused on countering the threat of deepfakes ahead of the 2020 presidential elections.
---
Lekai Liu contributed to this article.

Credit: By Shan Li
