Artificial intelligence is already better than humans at many tasks, such as recognizing patterns, analyzing vast amounts of data and formulating predictive algorithms.
And tech evangelists believe that's only the beginning. Increasingly, they say, we'll turn a great many jobs over to AI, because machines will become a lot more trustworthy than humans.
But skeptics say we aren't anywhere close to that yet, and may never be. For one thing, even tech promoters aren't always sure how the AI-based results are being reached, as the machines don't always explain their recommendations. Not to mention that the machines sometimes even hallucinate, or make up answers.
Which poses a dilemma, one of more than a dozen we are exploring with the help of WSJ readers. We put the following question to them:
Unlike human thinking, machine learning is a "black box" that can't fully illustrate its rationale. Even if machine learning is right more often than humans, should we trust it more than professionals, such as doctors, who can justify their decision?
Here's some of what we heard in response.
Imagine if your doctor made stuff up
We can't trust AI yet because it's known to hallucinate. Would you trust a doctor or lawyer who is known to hallucinate?
-- Patrick McDarrah, New York
Human fallibility
AI can already read X-rays and MRIs better than a human doctor. I have, in fact, very little trust in human doctors. You know that joke, what do you call a doctor who was last in his class? A doctor.
Once we solve the issue of hallucination, you'll always get consistent quality from an AI, while only 10% of humans of any profession are excellent at what they do. Do you trust your luck to run into a doctor who's in that 10%?
-- Dragana Munitic, Solin, Croatia
Trust must be earned
If a doctor, even one with a strong record, couldn't explain how he or she came to their diagnosis then I wouldn't be inclined to trust them. Neither would I trust an algorithm with a consequential decision that it can't explain.
-- Clint Eubanks, Houston
Basic math
No, I would not trust the black-box AI. Just like high school math, you need to be able to "show your work" to understand the conclusion.
-- Clay Parcels, Belleville, Ill.
Keep humans at the helm
First, who said that machine learning is right more often? Second, a human with years of training and experience will pretty much always be better able to select between options than the AI. Let the AI present options, but the human should make the decision!
-- Jim Sky, Bellevue, Neb.
The personal touch
I do not think we should trust AI more than professionals. AI cannot duplicate uniquely human experience combined with that human's personal wisdom. AI is also less trustworthy than humans who we become familiar with, who have previously been hired by our parents, families, referrals, etc.
-- Dawn Taggblom, DeLand, Fla.
AIs never get tired
I'm a pragmatist. If it works, use it. I've seen many doctors make bad calls for lack of attention, inability to assimilate all the facts, fighting a lack of sleep, etc. The current versions of AIs may not be able to illustrate their rationale fully, but this is being built into AI as we discuss this.
The advantage AI has over the vast majority of doctors is the breadth of knowledge that it can draw upon. Doctors today are often specialized; if they deal with something outside their specialty, they pass on the patient or risk making ill-informed calls. And some may have a political or religious agenda that influences their professional judgment.
I'll take unbiased medical advice from an AI with a statistical track record of being correct over an ill-informed opinion from a flawed human any day. It may even be a good way to train doctors in the future by explaining why the AI found something they missed, or monitor their performance and see who needs to have their credentials reviewed.
-- Mark Aubuchon, Houston
AI wins
Of course we should. Just as we trust our kitchen mixer to do a better job stirring the ingredients for our morning juices. There are things that machines do better than humans because machines are built to repeat activities.
-- Michael Esser, Los Angeles
At least you can teach an AI
If those professionals routinely provided valid justification that would be one thing. But they don't in many, many cases. At least AI could be programmed to be dispassionate and to ask questions instead of assuming.
For instance, many women who are overweight get all of their health concerns dismissed as being in their head or simply because they're fat. It is rare for a doctor to look at obesity as a symptom of an illness, rather than a cause. AI has biases because of the data set. It's easier to correct a data set than an arrogant professional.
-- Carrie Warren, Grays Harbor, Wash.
All of the above
Some of the free consumer-facing AI is currently generating results based on two-year-old data. In addition, the free services don't necessarily aggregate your prior interactions -- so the AI tool is starting from scratch each time. While paid consumer-facing AI services might resolve these shortcomings, it is still difficult for AI to provide historical perspective -- something that is critical in my industry. So, I prefer a hybrid approach, where an expert human utilizes AI to come up with a trustworthy solution.
-- Sam Garcia, Laguna Beach, Calif.
AI is a sociopath
I have almost been killed by doctors twice. I have also been dead "on the table" twice and been saved by a doctor. I have also had my future quality of life saved by a righteous physician. The problem with AI in such situations is regardless of how it is employed it has no soul, no conscience and no honor. AI is definitionally sociopathic. It doesn't care about the outcome of what it does.
-- Peter Goulet, Lee's Summit, Mo.
Treat them the same
Machine learning models, despite their "black box" nature, are not inherently more or less trustworthy than human decisions. Trust in both should be built on evaluating inputs and outcomes over time rather than solely on the ability to logically justify a decision.
We trust scientific theories because of their proven reliability in unbiased settings and close friends based on consistent behavior demonstrating fidelity. It's incumbent on us to apply the same trust criteria to both human and machine-based decisions, rooting out biases in their inputs and consistently testing their effectiveness in generating desired outcomes.
-- Tim Marlowe, Whitefish, Mont.
Right over reason
You tell me: If you had a grave medical condition, would you rather have a human doctor who can explain their reasoning get it right 70% of the time, or a machine which merely renders a judgment without explanation but gets it right 95% of the time?
-- Will Dwinnell, Philadelphia
---
Demetria Gallegos is an editor for The Wall Street Journal in New York. Email her at demetria.gallegos@wsj.com.
Credit: By Demetria Gallegos
