The pandemic shutdown has amplified a simple truth for working parents: We can't do it all.
When child-care centers and schools closed, we suddenly became teacher, tech support, head chef and constant dishwasher-loader, on top of being an employee, if we were fortunate enough to still have a job. The added tasks pushed all the other small but time-consuming to-do's -- cancel that old credit card, call the airline for a ticket refund, etc. -- farther down a bottomless to-do list.
I've long thought that, just like businesses that use software to manage their operations, we need systems for managing our families. I found not one but two women who are mothers and are hard at work developing this very thing, pushed harder by the pandemic that has stressed so many households.
Although they're coming at it from different directions, both are taking a project-management approach, all the more fitting as the lines between work and home are blurring.
Blessing Adesiyan is working on a way for parents to outsource the million little things that eat up their time through her web-based service, Villo. Imagine, a real personal assistant to cut through all your family-related red tape. Meanwhile, Avni Patel Thompson is developing Modern Village, a single app for organizing all a family's to-do's and schedules.
Ms. Adesiyan, a chemical engineer and mother of three in Houston, also has a side gig: Mother Honestly, an online platform and podcast for working moms. Back in January, Ms. Adesiyan and her Instagram followers had a discussion about a CEO who posted an ad for a nanny, with a lot of atypical requirements, like being able to ski, drive in foreign countries and cook organic meals. The chat pushed Ms. Adesiyan to act on an idea she'd been considering for some time: Since we can't clone ourselves, she figured, the next best thing would be to offload the tasks that keep us from focusing on our jobs and family.
"We need to reduce the mental load of the daily tasks we perform because it is not sustainable," she said. "We had this in the works before the pandemic, but the pandemic made it clear we needed to work faster."
Using her own funds and profits from Mother Honestly, she began testing the idea, hiring people to work for families as remote household managers. They are full- or part-time employees, not short-term gig workers, and each takes on three to six families with the goal of developing long-term relationships.
Families will have to spend more time with their manager in the beginning to bring them up to speed on their needs; eventually they should get to a point where the manager can anticipate certain tasks. The manager keeps track of all the to-do's through a website dashboard. Eventually, Ms. Adesiyan plans to move the dashboard to an app, with a chat function.
The idea is to have a one-hour call with your household manager each week to go over what they need to do in the week ahead. They might be in charge of anything from scheduling doctor's appointments to interviewing babysitters to putting together a meal plan and ordering groceries. That weekly call, she said, can save hours later. "I spoke to one mom who said she spent nine hours researching summer camps. Another spent two weeks looking for the right child care," Ms. Adesiyan said.
Families can choose to have their manager help from 10 hours to 60 hours a month at a cost of roughly $35 to $40 an hour. Ms. Adesiyan wants to persuade companies to subsidize the cost as an employee benefit: If employees didn't have to spend so much time thinking about household-related tasks, they'd be more productive at work, she reasons.
Ms. Adesiyan is currently testing the site with 15 families and three household managers, all of whom are work-at-home moms. She plans to launch the service publicly on July 1.
Clearly, a venture like this demands relationships built on trust and mutual respect. Managers would have to undergo a criminal-background check and take a personality test before being paired with a family, and they would be required to sign nondisclosure agreements. "Discretion is part of our core values, and we will do everything in our power to make sure our [managers] embody our values," Ms. Adesiyan said.
Villo isn't currently planning to store sensitive client data such as credit-card or bank-account information on its site and will leave it to clients to decide how much personal information to share with their household managers.
To scale the business, Ms. Adesiyan said the company will employ artificial intelligence to handle certain tasks. If, for example, there are 100 families in Los Angeles interested in soccer camps for their children, AI can learn to search for those camps.
Modern Village, Ms. Patel Thompson's software, was designed to manage the logistics of school drop-offs, after-school activities and more. The mother of two from Vancouver, in Canada, raised $1 million in pre-seed funding from investors including startup accelerator Y Combinator. She began testing the app in January -- but then the coronavirus pandemic shut down life as we knew it. "It quickly turned into managing Zoom links and keeping track of who's cooking and who's doing child care," she said.
Families already have been using workplace communication and management tools like Slack and Asana to split and track household duties, but juggling multiple apps is hard. With Modern Village, any member of a household -- including grandparents, babysitters or even other families who are sharing child-care responsibilities in a quarantine "pod" -- can access all facets of a family's daily doings in one place. School or camp Zoom links, calendar items, grocery lists and emails all can be housed in the app.
"All of this coordination takes place in one person's brain, typically the mom's," said Ms. Patel Thompson. "I'm not trying to reinvent the calendar or shopping list -- those are inputs. I'm building a central point of coordination where everyone can access this information." Ms. Patel Thompson has founded other tech companies, including the now-defunct child-care matching service Poppy.
She's testing the Modern Village app now with 40 families, and says she is slowly adding new families from a wait list of 800. She plans to launch Modern Village in August, just as children are heading back to some form of school. She is still working out pricing details but said there will likely be a monthly subscription.
"I'm trying to solve a problem I acutely feel," said Ms. Patel Thompson. "Families are as complex as small enterprises."

Credit: By Julie Jargon
