The big question in "Blade Runner 2049" continues to be the one posed by Ridley Scott's 1982 sci-fi masterpiece. Who is human, made of flesh and blood, and who is a replicant, built in a factory but able to pass for human in most respects? For those who've cherished the original all these years, the larger question has been whether the new film itself would be a kind of replicant, a soulless simulacrum of a visionary work of art that dared to combine a film-noir plot with startling images of a bleak urban future. The very good and surprising news is that Denis Villeneuve's sequel is anything but soulless, let alone exploitative, though it's longer than it should be and short on clarity; the storytelling swings between mysteriously allusive and opaque. Daring in its own right, this broodingly sumptuous saga explores the primacy of feelings, the nature of memories and the essence of being human, framed as the difference between being manufactured or born.
The action takes place 30 years after the original -- which was set only two years from now -- in a California so ravaged by environmental degradation as to make Antonioni's "Red Desert" look lush. But the cinematographer was the incomparable Roger Deakins, so no matter where the camera turns it discovers commanding shapes and seductive colors. (The production was designed by Dennis Gassner.) In Los Angeles, LAPD headquarters is a huge, cloud-shrouded anvil. Inside the towering headquarters of Wallace Corp., which manufactures an advanced line of replicants, bronze backlighting contrasts with dark browns and blacks in a chiaroscuro reminiscent of Edward Hopper's "Nighthawks." Down south near San Diego, gray-faced children toil in a slave-labor camp that Dickens could not have imagined in his most perfervid dreams. (The screenplay was written by Hampton Fancher, who co-wrote Mr. Scott's film, and Michael Green. Benjamin Wallfisch and Hans Zimmer composed the synthesizer-based music, with its frequent overtones of the original Vangelis score.)
Rick Deckard, the sardonic blade runner -- read replicant hunter -- played by Harrison Ford in the earlier film, hasn't been seen for three decades, though you may already have inferred from the current marketing campaign that he turns up again in Mr. Villeneuve's version. The hero of this tale, an LAPD cop and blade runner named K (as in Kafka's "The Castle"?) is played by Ryan Gosling. A master practitioner of intense inwardness, Mr. Gosling seems to believe, quite correctly, that we can't take our eyes off him, whether his remote and taciturn character is engaged in mortal combat with a nonmortal quarry, or almost lost, as is often the case, in rueful reverie.
At the outset K goes off on a routine assignment -- find and retire an old-model replicant, meaning put an abrupt end to the android's ostensible life. But the assignment leads to a singular quest in which K, seeking his own Rosebud, investigates a secret that, in the words of his tough-as-nails superior, Lt. Joshi (Robin Wright), "breaks the world."
Exactly how and why the breakage occurs won't be discussed here; the film is unusually vulnerable to spoilers, even though it surrenders its secrets in near-inscrutable fits and starts. I'll say only that the source of Joshi's concern is at least as momentous as she thinks it is; that the overall bleakness is relieved by a theme in the complex narrative that could be called the redemptive rise of the machines, or artificial intelligence in search of genuine experience; and that K, who thinks he knows where he's going in the investigation, has several other thinks coming, just as we do, before crucial truths are revealed during a climactic encounter with Deckard.
Mr. Villeneuve's direction enlivens "Blade Runner 2049" with verve and heart that couldn't have been predicted from the cool intelligence of his previous feature, "Arrival." Two women in the large cast give spectacular performances: Ana de Armas as Joi, the scintillating love of K's life, and Sylvia Hoeks as Luv, an implacably unlovable assistant to, and enforcer for, the evil magnate Niander Wallace. (Niander is played with ethereal gusto by Jared Leto, who stays -- just barely -- on the right side of fatuousness.)
Harrison Ford, for his part, is nothing less than a revelation. Many of his recent roles, dominated by unmodulated anger, have obscured the memory of his easy charm as Han Solo and Indiana Jones. Here, as the blade runner Deckard in the home stretch of a turbulent life, he is astonishing in his ferocity and poignant in his passion, an old man still possessed by a vision of lost love. And Mr. Ford can be charming once again, a man with a faithful dog that may or may not be a canine replicant. "Is it real?" K asks. "I don't know," Deckard replies. "Ask him."

Credit: By Joe Morgenstern

Location: Red Desert; California; Los Angeles California; United States--US
