The Dow Jones Industrial Average clung to pre-Christmas Day gains in the first session after the holiday, while a recent bond-market selloff deepened.
The blue-chip index swung between small gains and losses before finishing with a gain of less than 0.1%, just enough to extend a resilient tone from earlier in the week. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite both slipped less than 0.1%.
"What we see is continued interest in buying the dips," said Matt Peron, head of global solutions in Janus Henderson's $53.5 billion multiasset group.
Investors picked up shares of companies that had sold off in recent months, like Dollar Tree, which relies on lower-income consumers that have been hit hard by inflation.
The calm in the equity market clashed with stubbornly rising bond yields as debt investors expressed concerns about rising inflation and government deficits.
With just a few trading sessions left in 2024, equities are on pace for robust annual gains.
As of Thursday afternoon, the Dow industrials were up roughly 15% this year and the S&P 500 had gained 27%. The Nasdaq Composite, the index most buoyed by exuberance about the promise of artificial intelligence, was up 33%.
That is despite the Federal Reserve cutting rates less than investors had expected going into this year, as bringing inflation all the way back down to its 2% target has proven challenging.
The benchmark 10-year Treasury yield initially continued its weekslong climb, hitting multimonth highs above 4.63%, before reversing course and settling at 4.577%, according to Tradeweb. It closed Tuesday at 4.584%. Bond yields rise as prices fall.
"The bond market is concerned about inflation and the growing deficit and is sending a message to the incoming administration to be thoughtful about its policies," said Mark Malek, chief investment officer at broker dealer Siebert. "There's some bond vigilantism coming into effect that could impact some sectors of the stock market."
Yields had peaked above 4.7% in April, then pulled back more than a percentage point to hit a trough in September, before starting to rebound in tandem with inflation expectations.
Globally, stocks were mixed. Japan's Nikkei 225 index added 1.1%, as the car companies Nissan Motor, Mitsubishi Motors and Toyota Motor all gained 6% or more. That took the gauge's year-to-date advance to more than 18%.
In China, the benchmark Shanghai Composite eked out a 0.1% gain, while the Kospi in South Korea slipped 0.4%. Numerous international stock markets were closed, including those in London, Frankfurt, Hong Kong and Paris.
By Matt Wirz and Quentin Webb
