Everywhere you turn in the U.S. these days, there is worried talk of China's rise and the fading of American pre-eminence on the world stage. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo sees China as "the greatest challenge that the United States will face in the medium to long term." The U.S. intelligence community is also uneasy, citing China's growing technological prowess as a prime concern in its 2019 "Worldwide Threat Assessment." Just this month, six former senior U.S. military commanders released a statement expressing their alarm over the possibility that "a Chinese-developed" next-generation 5G wireless network may be "widely adopted among our allies and partners."
How has the U.S. responded? Mostly with defensive measures like instituting tariffs and complaining about China's "predatory" trade practices. But the challenge can't be answered just by demanding that China plays fair. The U.S. needs to meet strength with strength, and the best way to do that is to renew a longstanding American advantage: innovation. To compete and win in the century ahead, the U.S. urgently needs to fix the mismatch between its declared national technology priorities and the deployment of our research funding.
The U.S. intelligence community's recent threat-assessment report identifies a number of research areas that will determine military and economic superiority in the coming decades, from artificial intelligence and gene editing to synthetic biology, 5G wireless systems and quantum computing. It warns that America's "lead in science and technology fields has been significantly eroded."
As we see it, this decline stems from two related trends: steadily declining U.S. budgets for basic scientific research and a lopsided emphasis on the life sciences to the detriment of emerging technologies. According to the National Science Foundation, the U.S. government spent $66.5 billion in basic and applied science and technology research in 2017. This might sound like a lot, but it is a tiny part of the $4.7 trillion federal budget -- about 1.7% of all federal spending and a measly 0.3% of U.S. GDP.
More important, we invest far less now than during the golden age of American technological leadership. In 1956, U.S. investment in scientific research represented some 1.1% of the federal budget and a mere 0.2% of GDP. Then came the Soviet launch of Sputnik in October 1957, which sparked U.S. fears of losing the Cold War. Investment in science surged, peaking in 1965, when 3.6% of the federal budget was devoted to basic and applied scientific research. But as the Cold War ebbed and then ended, funding went into a long decline -- and we're seeing the consequences today.
Worse, the available funds have been distributed in a very lopsided way. Though a range of federal departments and agencies conduct and fund scientific research, from NASA to the departments of Agriculture, Energy and Defense, some 46% of all federal civilian science money goes to just one agency: the National Institutes of Health. That is why the intelligence community can say that the U.S. remains dominant in biomedical science.
But the current federal investment in all other critical scientific areas is minuscule. The Energy Department invests more than $18 billion a year in research and development -- almost a third of U.S. spending on non-biomedical science. About half of that, however, is devoted to nuclear security and energy -- obviously crucial issues but not on the roster of cutting-edge fields for producing the thriving economy of the future.
Much of the federally funded research in the areas highlighted by the U.S. intelligence community -- computing, artificial intelligence, physics and more -- passes through the National Science Foundation, which has been forced to get by on a shoestring. In 2017, the foundation's total research funding was a mere $5.6 billion, some 0.1% of the federal budget and less than 20% of the budget of the National Institutes of Health. Worse, this amount has been declining for years as a fraction of the federal budget.
It is hard to maintain leadership in any field with five decades of shrinking budgets. Science is no different -- especially when your competition is devoting hundreds of billions, year after year, to beating you.
China opened more than 1,800 new universities from 2001 to 2014, according to the Diplomat magazine, and produced nearly five million science, technology, engineering and medicine graduates -- nearly 10 times the equivalent American figure. (The U.S. graduates around 1.8 million students a year in all subjects from its roughly 2,600 four-year colleges and universities.) Moreover, after years of rapid growth, China's research and development spending reached some $410 billion in 2016 -- more than that of Japan, Germany and South Korea combined.
Such state investment has helped Chinese firms to take the lead in many tech-focused fields. China is already the world's largest electric-vehicle market and the dominant player in drones. (One Shenzhen-based company alone has a 74% share of the world-wide drone market, reports Skylogic Research.) Huawei and ZTE's advances in 5G network technology are also the result of massive government support.
The U.S. is being outmatched. Private U.S. investment in scientific research has increased but not nearly enough. Little corporate spending goes to the kind of basic research that leads to transformative discoveries. U.S. companies spend about $24 billion a year in basic research -- about a third of the annual federal investment -- but more than 10 times that, some $316 billion, in development. That isn't enough to keep the U.S. ahead of China.
The solution? America needs to do what it does best: compete. The U.S. has the world's best research universities, a great scientific talent pipeline and a strong culture of innovation. Now Washington needs to invest more -- much more -- in both basic and applied scientific research. Ideally, the federal government would restore funding to the 1965 levels. At a minimum, it should commit to doubling non-biomedical research funding in the key areas identified by the U.S. intelligence community. Doing so would require about $12 billion a year over three years, amounting to just 0.25% of the federal budget.
The U.S. responded to the launch of Sputnik by beating the Soviets to the moon. In 1965 and 1966 alone, NASA received more than 4% of the federal budget. We need a similar period of reinvestment and renewal today in our basic and applied scientific research and education -- to compete with China and meet the threats of the future. On scientific research, Washington should put its money where its mouth is.
---
Dr. Emanuel is vice provost for global initiatives at the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Gadsden is executive director of Penn China Initiatives. Dr. Moore is director of the Penn Global China Program.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: The U.S. Must Outperform China in Science" -- WSJ April 27, 2019)

Credit: By Ezekiel Emanuel, Amy Gadsden and Scott Moore
