[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Creating professional-level images is harder than it looks. Creating trouble for the maker of Photoshop turns out to be a lot easier.
Adobe's rapid embrace of generative artificial intelligence made it one of the hottest stocks among large-cap software firms last year, even outperforming AI leader Microsoft. But that image has taken a hit of late. The company's last earnings report in December included a forecast that investors found disappointing for lack of perceived AI contributions to the company's growth prospects. And OpenAI's announcement last month of a new text-to-video creation tool called Sora caused further worry. Adobe's shares have tumbled a little over 10% since that announcement -- the S&P 500 Software & Services Group has lost less than 2% in that time.
Its comedown has a familiar ring: Adobe's stock spent the first few months of last year in the doghouse, partly on worries about the competitive threat of an earlier generation of AI image-creation tools such as Dall-E. But Adobe's unveiling of its own AI tool called Firefly in March of that year quickly touched up that picture. Adobe's stock price shot up 77% in 2023.
The roller-coaster performance of Adobe's stock over the past year is a good indication of how investors are trying to grapple with the potentially disruptive effects of generative AI -- sometimes well before those effects are even proven. Free public tools like Dall-E allowed users to create realistic images of outlandish concepts. They also were prone to errors and had few, if any, controls preventing the use of copyrighted work.
Such tools, therefore, have limited appeal for the professional content creators that make up the bulk of Adobe's customer base. In a report last March addressing the rise of services like Dall-E and Stable Diffusion, Wolfe Research analyst Alex Zukin noted that "current AI models are far away from pixel perfect content generation or being able to do so in ethical and legally compliant frameworks, so that creators can be properly compensated for work."
Sora has yet to become publicly available. OpenAI conceded in its announcement that "the current model has weaknesses," where it may be prone to errors like inaccurately "simulating the physics of a complex scene." In a note to clients on Monday, UBS analyst Karl Keirstead wrote: "While impressed with OpenAI Sora, there were no hints from our designer checks that Sora is likely to replace traditional video creation or impact Adobe's core Premiere Pro video editing application."
In his own report last month, Kash Rangan of Goldman Sachs noted that simply creating an image or video doesn't cover the need for "asset editing, processing, storing and publishing to a large, professional end-market" that Adobe's platform provides. "Natural-language-processing interfaces lower the content creation barriers, thereby increasing the overall demand for high quality, enterprise grade offerings," he wrote.
Adobe's more near-term risk as it relates to AI is that tools such as Firefly may be slower to generate significant revenue than most investors are expecting. The company's projection of only 10% revenue growth for its current fiscal year was nearly identical to what the company delivered last year and thus fell flat with investors who were looking for a greater AI uplift.
Adobe's president of digital media, David Wadhwani, said during December's earnings call that recent pricing changes for the company's products -- including its AI tools -- will be "more visible" in the company's numbers during the back half of the year and beyond. Adobe also tends to be conservative with its projections and has ended up beating the midpoint of its initial annual revenue forecast in seven of the past 10 years, according to FactSet data.
That still could leave the question of AI's contributions unclear in the company's first-quarter report, due next week. But the stock's weakness over the past few months offers a better setup, with Adobe shares now trading at a discount to Microsoft on a multiple of forward earnings.
And a major user conference taking place later this month also could help Adobe push its new AI message further to its customer base, many of whom can't afford to take chances on free public tools that spit out unreliable results.
Sometimes you really do get what you pay for.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
