Nancy Grace Roman is the mother of the Hubble Space Telescope. Or so she heard at an astronomy meeting soon after the telescope's launch in 1990.
"I was rather startled," she says.
As NASA's chief of astronomy, Dr. Roman organized the meetings of astronomers and engineers in the mid-1960s that started the long process of getting the school-bus-sized telescope into orbit, but she had retired from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration a decade before the launch.
The title has been "a little embarrassing," she says, but "I'm proud of the Hubble."
While scientists contend for Nobel prizes, patents and grants, there's another honor to be had: the title of "father" or "mother" of a new field, tool or technique. As scientific specialties proliferate with new advances, so too, it seems, has the naming of their progenitors. In articles and at awards ceremonies, various scientists are named the father or mother of everything from deep learning to positive psychology to selenium biochemistry.
The honorifics are generally bestowed by proud institutions or other admirers or the press, and not generally by the scientists themselves. The titles often inspire mixed feelings not unlike the emotions of actual parents. Some spar over recognition, while some are mildly uncomfortable and others chafe against it.
"What really happens is that you either get no recognition or you get more than you deserve," says Carver Mead, an emeritus professor of engineering and applied science at the California Institute of Technology. "There's nothing in between."
He is variously referred to as the "father of neuromorphic computing," building machines that mimic brains, and "father of very-large-scale-integration design," a dramatic shift to make computer chips more complex by an approach he pioneered.
Aaron Beck, university professor emeritus of psychiatry at the University of Pennsylvania, is proud to be recognized as the "originator" of cognitive behavioral therapy, an alternative to psychotherapy based on his theory that people with conditions such as depression have correctable distortions in their thinking. But when he's called the "father," he says, it "makes me squirm a little bit."
Establishing parentage of an idea isn't a science.
Geoffrey Hinton isn't sure how he started getting called the "godfather of deep learning," a technique that allows computers to learn patterns from large data sets with minimal programming. "I think it was a joke," says Dr. Hinton, an engineering fellow at Alphabet Inc.'s Google, who has been working on deep learning since the early 1980s.
Jurgen Schmidhuber, scientific director of the Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence in Switzerland, is another figure whose name gets bandied about as a "father" of AI. He considers Alexey Grigorevich Ivakhnenko the "father of deep learning" for work published in 1965.
Dr. Schmidhuber has written no fewer than seven letters to the journals Nature and Science disputing articles about scientific "firsts" from the telephone to powered flight to digital computing. He calls the narrative that lionizes Dr. Hinton "misleading" and wrote a lengthy critique on his own website when Dr. Hinton and a few colleagues authored a paper on deep learning in 2015 that didn't mention Ivakhnenko.
Ivakhnenko was the first to understand an algorithm essential to deep learning, says Dr. Hinton, but his own work with a few colleagues was the first to show the algorithm could do something interesting for AI. One of those colleagues, psychologist David Rumelhart, "is much more the father of deep learning than me," Dr. Hinton says.
"The whole father thing is difficult," Dr. Schmidhuber says in an interview. "There are so many fathers of important ideas."
Computer engineer Radia Perlman tells people about to introduce her before a speech that it's probably better not to call her the "Mother of the Internet," an honorific that caught on after its use in a magazine article.
Her development of the spanning tree algorithm and other work allowed the internet to scale up. But calling her the whole internet's mother "is not really accurate," she says. "I worry that people think it's me that is trying to promulgate that claim."
In 1975, geochemist Wally Broecker at Columbia University published a paper in the journal Science titled "Climatic change: Are we on the brink of a pronounced global warming?" That early use of the phrase got him recognition as the "father of global warming."
In 2017, he published another paper trying to ditch the title. Not because he has changed his mind about human-caused climate change. He just wants to be remembered for other things. One subtitle in his new paper: "I am not the father!"
If any single person must be named the "father of global warming," Dr. Broecker thinks the late Charles David Keeling, who recorded rising concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere from the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii, is the man. "I don't want it to go on my tombstone," Dr. Broecker says of the title.
---
Daniela Hernandez contributed to this article
Credit: By Ellie Kincaid
