Video-hosting company Vimeo has named Charlie Ungashick as its chief marketing officer as it positions itself as a reliable platform for professionals and corporations.
Ungashick, who has held the role of interim chief marketing officer since the beginning of the year, previously was CMO at tech companies including human-resources software provider Workhuman and software-testing company Applause.
Vimeo has gone through several rounds of soul-searching in its 20-year history, during which it morphed from a YouTube-like site for hosting funny clips into a high-definition content host, a would-be Netflix competitor and a tool for online content creation.
"Vimeo is like your cool cousin who went to L.A. and is thriving, making movies or something, but you hadn't heard from her in a while," Ungashick said. "One of the biggest challenges still exists a little bit today: 'Who is Vimeo?'"
Vimeo's leadership is now steering away from consumer video, an arena with high clout but even higher competition, and toward the less sexy but potentially lucrative world of hosting videos for video professionals, businesses and other organizations.
Its thesis is that more organizations will create more videos -- for employee training or company updates, for example -- as artificial intelligence makes it faster and cheaper to do so. Vimeo itself offers AI-powered tools such as language translation that can clone the original speaker's voice and a recap-video generator.
Vimeo sales increased 2% year-over-year in its most recent quarter, driven primarily by a 55% growth in its enterprise business, the company said in August.
Ungashick said he plans to measure his marketing team's performance more by revenue results than the current metrics emphasizing campaign results such as click-through rates. He is also preparing a marketing push in international markets such as Brazil and Japan, where Vimeo has been growing organically, and reassessing how Vimeo spends its advertising budget now that it has officially entered its private video era.
"I found a heavy reliance on paid media to promote new features, but those features themselves were not necessarily what users were looking for," Ungashick said. "And we were promoting things, but not in a way that could really tell the market a whole new story around some of our innovations."
Credit: By Katie Deighton
