In this day and age, when we can track our food being delivered, monitor our front door from anywhere in the world, and ask artificial intelligence just about anything, must we spend so much time sitting at red lights?
There is hope. Google, for example, is rapidly expanding a one-year-old product, called Green Light, that will create "green waves" -- that is, one green light after another -- in 14 cities where the system is already deployed, says Juliet Rothenberg, product lead of Climate AI, part of Google Research.
And research from the University of Michigan suggests these kinds of systems could actually save traffic agencies money, making it a no-brainer to adopt them.
The secret sauce is that none of these solutions requires new hardware. Instead, they use data gathered directly from new, internet-connected vehicles or from navigation apps on their drivers' phones to help municipalities adjust the timing of their traffic lights, making them more responsive to real-world traffic patterns.
"Instead of installing cameras at an intersection, if we know the trajectory of the vehicle, then the vehicle itself becomes the traffic sensor," says Henry Liu, who leads the research team at the University of Michigan.
If this approach could be rolled out nationwide, its proponents say it could make a significant dent in the amount of time we all spend idling at the country's 300,000-plus traffic signals. Data from the cities where Google's Green Light is already in operation -- including Abu Dhabi, Hamburg, Seattle and Kolkata -- suggest the system yields a 30% reduction in stop-and-go traffic at intersections.
A 2021 study by traffic-analytics company Inrix found that on short trips, Americans spend an average of 10% of their travel time stopped at lights. Reducing that time could help the climate and save our lungs, since research indicates that pollution at intersections is 29 times higher than on open roads, on account of all that idling.
Google uses its own data, gathered from users of Google Maps, to optimize traffic-light timing. Separately, researchers at the University of Michigan used telemetry data from connected General Motors vehicles to help the Detroit suburb of Birmingham, Mich., evaluate the timing of 34 traffic signals in 2022. The resulting changes the city made to the timing of those signals weren't huge, but they had a big effect on traffic flow during rush hour and other important times, says Danielle Deneau, director of traffic safety for Oakland county.
One benefit of this system is that it cuts out the need for the expensive and time-consuming studies normally required to change the timing of a traffic signal, says Liu. Such studies involve counting the number of cars at a given intersection throughout a day, and usually cost around $5,000 every time they are conducted.
The cost of such studies is one reason the timing of traffic signals at most intersections is only updated once every five years -- and there are some intersections where timing hasn't been updated in decades, he adds.
At least half the traffic signals we encounter in our daily lives function much as they did 30 or more years ago. They are "fixed time" signals, as opposed to the newer dynamic kind, which use either cameras or sensors under the road surface to detect how many cars are present and adjust their timing accordingly.
Today's fixed traffic signals generally have one pattern for peak times, such as rush hour on weekdays, and another for off-peak, like late at night or on the weekends, says Deneau.
In a perfect world, every traffic signal would be dynamic, and connected to a central control system so that an entire city or county could be optimized from moment to moment, in much the way that traffic on the internet is constantly optimized to make our connections as fast as possible.
But that's unrealistic, because dynamic, connected traffic signals can cost tens of thousands of dollars. A complete modernization of an entire intersection can run upward of $250,000, says Deneau. And then there are the additional maintenance costs that come with running these more complicated systems, which can add $5,000 a year to their operation, she adds.
At those prices, cash-strapped regional agencies are limited to using what they already have: old-school, fixed traffic signals. But they can update the timing on those old lights more frequently to improve overall traffic flow.
When cities sign up for Green Light, they get a dashboard that gives them recommendations for updating the timing of specific intersections. Importantly, Google's AI-powered system evaluates how traffic patterns change after signal timing is updated, to allow cities to measure the real-world results of their changes.
In Seattle, Green Light data convinced transportation planners to update the timing of lights at five intersections, beginning in June 2022, says a spokesman for the city's transportation department. After subsequent analysis, planners kept those updates at four of the intersections. The city is continuing to use the system alongside traditional methods, and planners believe it has the potential to save money in the future, he adds.
Google's Green Light currently has a waiting list, but the project is rapidly expanding to new cities, which Google will announce later this year, says Rothenberg. But Liu says any tech startup or transit agency could do what his team did, since they made their methodology available to the public, and anyone is free to use it. All that's required is getting the right kind of real-time data from auto manufacturers or navigation-app makers.
"All the mathematics was there before," says Liu. "The beauty of our approach is that the previous models were too complicated, and we simplified them."
Credit: By Christopher Mims
