Oodles of risk. Bold bets on artificial intelligence. Round-the-clock activity. The options market is booming like never before.
About 44 million options contracts have changed hands on an average day in 2023, on track for an annual record based on Options Clearing Corp. data going back to 1973 and more than double the figure from five years ago.
Activity in contracts expiring the same day -- among the market's riskiest -- has helped turbocharge a mania that began in 2020 during the depths of the Covid-19 pandemic. Volume has soared, hitting fresh highs in each of the following three years.
The explosion in activity suggests many traders are hungry to take big risks in markets, eager for fatter payouts than they think traditional buy-and-hold investments will offer.
The flourishing trades also show how the lines between trading and gambling have further blurred. Some of the most popular trades this year resembled scratch-off lottery tickets. In exchange for a small upfront fee, a trader gets the chance at doubling or quadrupling returns -- but is often left with a hole in his or her portfolio.
Rookie and pro traders alike have looked for opportunities to profit from the market's gyrations, from ups and downs in regional bank shares during the Silicon Valley Bank crisis to Nvidia's ascent in the artificial-intelligence boom.
The share of trading in contracts that expire in five or fewer days touched a record 59% in October and has remained elevated, according to figures from SpotGamma. Many traders are increasingly holding positions for hours, or even minutes, to rapidly juice their returns. The one-day trades, known by the hashtag GBP 0dte, have gone viral, with tens of thousands of mentions swirling online.
Others have piled into exchange-traded and mutual funds that track options, sending assets to a record $64 billion, according to Morningstar Direct, a nearly 50% jump from last year.
Options give traders the right to buy or sell stocks at a specific price, by a stated date. Although some exercise their rights to do so, the contracts are often used as tools by those looking to magnify their bets. The price of an option contract tied to Tesla, for example, is highly sensitive to where the shares go and how volatile they are, making it a tempting way to play the big stock swings.
The contracts can rapidly mushroom in value if a bet proves correct, an adrenaline-inducing rush that has hooked many traders. For example, call options tied to Robinhood's stock jumping to $11.50 changed hands for about $2 on Dec. 1. The brokerage's shares soared in subsequent days, sending the value of the contracts to about $20 Thursday, according to Cboe Global Markets data. That return far exceeds the 23% jump in the stock over the same period.
Tom Sosnoff, co-founder of the retail brokerage Tastytrade, said people are looking to get the most bang for their buck. In the Robinhood example, each contract gave the trader the right to buy 100 shares of stock, offering a relatively cheaper way to play the moves in the shares.
Sosnoff expects a zeal for betting on sports to lead to even more interest. He tours the country hosting live trading events for individuals and said he plans to lead more events than ever next year to match the interest.
"Everybody's betting on everything," Sosnoff said.
The mania around one-day options at first reflected the uncertainty that many investors felt about the economy. Trading sessions featuring new economic data or the Federal Reserve's rate decisions sparked astonishing one-day moves in markets -- and created prime conditions for traders who dip into one-day options.
Four of the five top trading days for one-day S&P 500 options through November featured economic data such as the monthly inflation or jobs report. That unease about the economy, and the stock market, morphed into a fear of missing out on market gains as the year wore on.
Broader activity in calls -- which give investors the right to buy shares -- surged to one of the highest-ever levels in November when the S&P 500 logged its best one-month return since July 2022. Many traders have embraced bullish wagers on gold, Treasurys and stocks.
And the AI craze fueled interest in Nvidia options, sending volumes up about 60% from last year and making it one of the most popular trades. Tesla remains the favorite play among options traders who dished out more than half a trillion dollars on contracts tied to the stock this year.
Credit: By Gunjan Banerji
