Millions of American workers last spring thought the silver lining of quarantine would at least be exchanging the bustle of the office for the relative peace and quiet of home. Then yard work season began.
Software engineer Joris de Gruyter of suburban Seattle made a list of top sayings he hears on video meetings. For every "Sorry, I was muted," there's a "Let me close the windows so you don't hear that leaf blower."
There has been a spike in the number of people at home during prime lawn-care hours, with about 34% of American employees working remotely full time in October, up from 2.5% before the pandemic, according to Nicholas Bloom, a Stanford University economist who studies remote work.
Demand for landscape work climbed, too, as people remade backyards instead of taking vacations, according to landscape industry officials.
Many workers are frazzled by the sounds of the suburbs -- Weedwackers, renovation work, barking dogs and doorbells.
Leaf blowers, typically powered by small gasoline engines, draw a disproportionate share of complaints. These include gripes on Twitter ("Enough Already!") and official noise complaints, like in Huntington, N.Y., which has logged at least 75 online leaf blower complaints since March 1, up from 29 a year earlier.
Flutist and composer Nathalie Joachim said the leaf blowers in her leafy Chicago neighborhood remind her of roosters on her family farm in Haiti, whose cries tend to build on one another. "It's a chorus," she said. "Like, 'My neighbor's blowing their lawn, I better go blow my lawn.'"
Rob Lawrence said he has an aggressive homeowners' association in his suburban Los Angeles county neighborhood. "It's almost as if a leaf appears, they will be on scene," he said. The executive director of the California Ambulance Association shared a three-hour video of leaf-blower noise on social media so friends could have "the same Zoom experience as I do."
The township of Montclair, N.J., passed a nonbinding resolution in May urging a halt to leaf blower use during the Covid-19 crisis. Mayor Sean Spiller said the town is exploring more substantial restrictions, such as allowing only quieter, less-polluting electric equipment. A local resident group, Quiet Montclair, is urging gas-blower reforms and steps like mulching clippings and leaves into the lawn.
If you made a list of people wanting to get rid of gas-powered backpack blowers using simple two-stroke engines, landscapers would be first in line, said Bob Mann, who directs state and local government relations for the National Association of Landscape Professionals. "No one's closer to the noise than the landscape contractor who has the thing strapped on their back," he said. Electric blowers have greatly improved and the industry will get there, he said, but it is expensive to sink money into new equipment.
Going electric doesn't solve everything. Matt Gourley, who produces and appears on the "Conan O'Brien Needs a Friend" podcast, has an electric leaf blower that his landscaper uses to tend to his suburban Los Angeles property, where he has been working during the pandemic. He said he tries to schedule yard work around recording times, but the podcast schedule sometimes shifts.
The sound of the leaf blower could be heard as Mr. Gourley started speaking near the top of a recent show, which features Mr. O'Brien and his assistant Sona Movsesian recording from a studio in Hollywood.
"It's like an old man with asthma," Mr. O'Brien said on the podcast. "You're in Pasadena, where apparently all they do is blow leaves around from one side of the city to the other. It's insane."
Zoom Video Communications, which has 300 million daily participants logging into meetings, up from 10 million before the pandemic, sees the challenge. At last week's Zoomtopia user conference, Chief Product Officer Oded Gal announced artificial-intelligence improvements that "filter out background noise so you can still Zoom while your gardener is mowing the lawn."
The buzzing of any lawn equipment can wreck a video call, but leaf blowers emit a low-frequency sound that has a long wavelength that passes easily through walls and closed windows.
The way the sound modulates as the engines are gunned is another irritant, said Catherine Palmer, director of audiology for the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center's integrated health system. While steady droning sounds may fade into the background, humans are wired to notice sudden changes in noise, she said.
This may be useful for evading threats in the wild, but it makes tuning out suburban sounds difficult, she said.
Ms. Joachim, the flutist, said that at one point she and a fellow composer fantasized about fighting back by blasting repeated dissonant major ninth chords on synthesizers over a PA system on their front lawns.
Over time, she said, she has come to appreciate the work-from-home symphony, from the neighbor's cat upstairs to the leaf blowers.
"Winter is going to feel awfully quiet," she said. "But who knows? Maybe there'll be an uptick in snowblowers."

Credit: By Valerie Bauerlein and Jon Kamp
