The Biden administration will take its first step toward defining its arms control agenda with Moscow when senior U.S. and Russian officials meet Wednesday for strategic stability talks in Geneva.
The talks, agreed to by President Biden and Russian President Vladimir Putin at their summit meeting last month, will be led by U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Wendy Sherman and Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov.
They come amid a growing recognition that arms control challenges extend well beyond the long-range nuclear weapons that are constrained by the New START treaty, which the U.S. and Russia have agreed to extend until 2026.
"We are really looking at arms control that addresses all Russian nuclear weapons," a senior State Department official said. "We plan to be frank and direct with the Russians as we seek to clarify what the U.S. sees as threats to the current security environment and into the future."
Mr. Ryabkov said Russia had its own idea on a prospective agenda, which it has shared with the U.S.
"We are just at the very beginning of what I hope would be a sustainable process," Mr. Ryabkov wrote in an email to The Wall Street Journal. "At this point in time we in Moscow don't have any sense if we would be able to succeed."
The talks will involve exchanges on the definition of strategic stability, potential threats, foreign-policy priorities and the future of arms control. In addition to nuclear issues, likely subjects include space, hypersonic missile technology, the military implications of artificial intelligence and cyber policy.
The talks are likely to lead eventually to the formation of specialized working groups, current and former officials say, and are a step toward setting up formal talks on possible follow-on agreements to New START. The U.S. team will include officials from the National Security Council, the Pentagon and the Energy Department, in addition to the State Department.
The two sides come to the discussions with somewhat different concerns. The array of threats for the U.S. includes Russia's substantial arsenal of short-range nuclear weapons and new Russian systems under development, including a nuclear-tipped torpedo, which could be used to attack American ports and submarine bases.
Russia, for its part, has long expressed concerns about U.S. missile defenses and the capabilities of its conventional precision-weapons.
Following American complaints that Russia had violated the 1987 Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty by deploying a prohibited ground-launched cruise missile, both sides withdrew from the accord in 2019.
Since then, Russia has proposed a moratorium on the deployment of intermediate-range missiles in Europe. The Trump administration rebuffed that proposal and now the two sides need to decide what, if any, limits should be set on intermediate-range missiles based on land.
China, whose small nuclear arsenal is growing substantially, isn't a party to Wednesday's stability talks, and the Biden administration has yet to outline plans on drawing Beijing into an arms control negotiation.
Credit: By Michael R. Gordon
