SHANGHAI -- A Chinese startup that sells facial-recognition systems to police forces secured venture-capital funding that values it at more than $1.5 billion, underscoring the sector's emergence as one of technology's hottest areas of interest.
Beijing-based SenseTime Co., which provides surveillance systems using facial recognition to Chinese law-enforcement agencies, said Tuesday it raised $410 million in new funding from investors, lifting it to so-called unicorn status with a value of more than $1 billion.
Using artificial intelligence, facial-recognition systems from SenseTime and others identify people in a crowd by matching their features against those on file in image databases. The software breaks down a person's face into a series of measurements and uses them to create a template that can be compared with others.
Adoption has been especially swift in China, aided by a large network of surveillance cameras, a national photo-identification index and relatively few privacy concerns.
Customers include law-enforcement agencies that use the technology to identify and detain criminal suspects. It is also being used by local governments to discourage behaviors like jaywalking. In a park near Shanghai, for example, it is being used to identify race participants who take shortcuts on a running track.
But commercial uses are growing as the technology emerges as an alternative way to identify people who gain access to workplaces, board airplanes, make ATM withdrawals and check into hotels.
American tech companies are active in the sector as well. Facebook Inc. is considered a pioneer in the field and last year Apple Inc. bought Emotient, a startup whose technology assesses emotions based on facial expressions. Los Angeles-based FaceFirst Inc. provides facial-recognition systems for U.S. and international airports and military bases.
SenseTime, which also provides facial and image recognition to the finance and mobile-internet sectors, was founded in 2014 and has 500 employees. Local Chinese governments are among its biggest clients.
The company will use the funding raised to retain and hire talent and pay for research into other technologies that rely on artificial intelligence, including self-driving cars and medical diagnostics, said Chief Executive Xu Li.
SenseTime investors include Chinese private-equity fund CDH Investments and Sailing Capital, a VC fund linked to the Shanghai government.
"We are already seeing the early signs of how artificial intelligence is changing traditional industry," CDH Investments Chairman Wu Shangzhi said. "The time has come for AI to have a big impact."
In total, AI-focused tech startups in China raised $500 million in the first six months of the year, preliminary data from Dow Jones VentureSource showed, compared with $700 million for all of last year. No separate data were available for facial recognition startups.
Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. Chairman Jack Ma and Foxconn Technology Co. are investors in these kinds of startups. Yunfeng Capital, a venture fund founded by Mr. Ma, is an investor in Shanghai-based Yitu Technology. Foxconn has a stake in Beijing-based Megvii Technology Inc.
Providing smart surveillance systems for national security gave startups a huge leg up when they began, said Cool Zhang, IDC China's director for artificial intelligence.
China's annual public-security budget is huge, making it an easy sector for companies to generate revenue, he said.
Privacy advocates worry that the technology could be used by governments to conduct random surveillance without cause.
"This is a force multiplier that takes the identification of people in public to a completely different level," said Clare Garvie, a researcher for the Center on Privacy & Technology at Georgetown University Law Center.
Analysts say investment in the sector is expected to continuing growing -- especially in China, where the government has made a big push to advance AI technologies.
---
Josh Chin in Beijing contributed to this article.

Credit: By Liza Lin
