A conservative YouTuber known as "Mr Reagan" said he was nervous when he posted a video this summer mimicking a Kamala Harris ad. He used AI to clone her voice and generate a self-mocking imitation.
"Joe taught me rule No. 1: Carefully hide your total incompetence," the fake Harris says in the video.
The YouTuber, whose real name is Christopher Kohls, was worried the voice didn't sound enough like Harris. So he was surprised when Democratic California Gov. Gavin Newsom flagged his video on X as a prime example of a deepfake made illegal under a new state law.
California is at the forefront of legislative efforts to protect political candidates and voters from AI trickery. The state's new deepfake statute -- which Newsom signed into law in September -- allows anyone who views "materially deceptive" AI-generated election-related content to bring potentially costly lawsuits against those posting it online.
Kohls is now suing to try to get the law struck down as a violation of the First Amendment. A federal California judge granted him a preliminary injunction blocking the state from enforcing most of the law.
His lawsuit underscores the growing tensions between free-speech rights and legislative crackdowns on AI-fueled political deepfakes proliferating on social media.
The rapid advance of generative artificial intelligence has made it easy to fabricate the face and voice of real people in videos or audio clips. A host of simple-to-use apps and websites let users generate digital clones of politicians and celebrities in seconds.
Some have used the technology for laughs, but deepfakes can be no joking matter. A Louisiana political consultant is facing felony charges that he arranged robocalls to New Hampshire voters in January with a fake recording of President Biden urging them to skip voting in the primary.
The incident fueled a new wave of political deepfake laws. Nineteen states now have laws regulating AI deepfakes in elections, according to Public Citizen, a consumer-advocacy group. Most measures require disclaimers or restrict the content.
California's law "definitely goes further than other state laws," said Ilana Beller, a Public Citizen organizer who has tracked the legislation. She said she is unaware of any other law allowing any recipient of a political deepfake to take legal action.
In defense of the law, California's attorney general's office pointed to examples of deepfakes undermining elections outside the U.S., in countries such as Slovakia and Bangladesh. It also cited reports of a Donald Trump fan posting a fake image of Trump surrounded by Black supporters.
Kohls said he wrote and designed the Harris video in a couple of days, declining to identify the software he used to simulate her voice.
"It didn't even cross my mind that anyone would interpret what Kamala Harris is saying in the video as actually being her," said Kohls, a 44-year-old former Los Angeles resident currently based on the Indonesian resort island of Bali.
His fake Harris ad went viral in late July after Elon Musk touted it on X, the tech mogul's social-media platform. It racked up more than 100 million views. Newsom was less amused. "Manipulating a voice in an 'ad' like this one should be illegal," Newsom wrote on X, two days later. "I'll be signing a bill in a matter of weeks to make sure it is."
The governor has said the free-speech concerns are overblown. "Parody is still alive and well in California," he told reporters in September. Newsom said the measure targets deepfakes that undermine democracy and the integrity of the election system.
A Harris campaign spokesman didn't respond to a request for comment.
U.S. District Judge John Mendez, a President George W. Bush appointee, acknowledged that legislators have a legitimate interest in election integrity, but said California's approach was well over the constitutional line.
"While a well-founded fear of a digitally manipulated media landscape may be justified, this fear does not give legislators unbridled license to bulldoze over the longstanding tradition of critique, parody, and satire protected by the First Amendment," Mendez wrote. Newsom's office said it continued to believe the law would be upheld by the courts.
Ted Frank, a lawyer with the Hamilton Lincoln Law Institute who represented Kohls, said, "We hope California accepts this straightforward application of longstanding First Amendment precedent and will negotiate a permanent injunction." The group is also bringing a similar challenge to restrictions in Minnesota, again on behalf of Kohls.
Credit: By Jacob Gershman
