[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Buying growth is rarely a cheap concept, especially for small tech companies that lack the pocketbooks of their much larger peers.
Yelp knows this well. Founded 19 years ago as a pioneer in the field of online reviews for local businesses, Yelp established an internet advertising business now generating more than $1.2 billion a year in revenue. That is a tenfold increase from when the company went public in 2012.
Even that was a hard-won business for Yelp. Selling ads to local restaurants, plumbers and day spas required an army of young sales reps who mostly lacked the experience necessary to chase bigger deals at bigger employers. Yelp spent an average of 55% of its annual revenue on sales and marketing costs for the years 2011 through 2020. The self-service nature of much of Google's search ad franchise allowed the internet titan to amass a more lucrative business at a much lower rate of relative spend.
Yelp has long considered Alphabet's Google its nemesis. But competing against Google for two decades taught Yelp the value of scaling an online ad business in a more cost-effective way. The company built up a self-serve advertising arm that has increased its revenue by around 25% year over year for the past four quarters. And that segment, along with multilocation advertising geared toward larger businesses, now accounts for more than half of Yelp's total advertising revenue.
Yelp is getting better at coming up with new products and services that help its appeal among advertisers. The result, according to Colin Sebastian of Robert W. Baird, has been "a transformation from a sales-driven organization to a more engineering-driven company." That makes for a more efficient business model: Yelp's sales and marketing costs accounted for 42% of revenue for the 12-month period ended in September, and analysts project that number to fall further to 40% next year, according to FactSet estimates.
Yelp's stock surged 77% this year, its biggest annual gain in a decade. Goldman Sachs upgraded the shares to a "buy" rating in July, with analyst Eric Sheridan estimating that Yelp's net earnings per salesperson jumped from 37% of ad revenue in 2014 to 54% last year. That upgrade sent Yelp's shares 10% higher in a single day. Cory Carpenter of JPMorgan upgraded the stock to a "neutral" rating in October, writing in a note to clients that "Yelp has navigated the challenging ad market better than most of its peers."
Further gains will depend on how well Yelp can keep boosting ad sales efficiently while also improving its product and staying on top of important technology shifts such as generative AI. Yelp is also one of the few internet companies of its generation still run by its founder, which Baird analyst Sebastian credits with helping the company in its most recent transformation. CEO Jeremy Stoppelman still has a few more stars to reach for.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
