Artificial-intelligence researchers in Norway are testing AI models designed to cut costs and improve efficiency in raising salmon, one of the country's major exports.
The models are designed to optimize feeding, keep the fish clean and healthy, and help companies make better decisions regarding farm operations. The AI is being developed in the Norwegian Open AI Lab, which is run by Norwegian telecommunications carrier Telenor ASA and other companies. Telenor provides some other technology services, such as testing of 5G mobile connectivity, to salmon farms.
Exports of salmon in 2019 totaled 107.3 billion Norwegian krone, equivalent to $11.3 billion, the Norwegian Seafood Council said in January. The trade group, which represents fisheries and fish farm industries, said last month the value of Norwegian fish exports increased about 1% between January and August.
But fish farms are under pressure to improve environmental standards and cut waste.
Multinational tech companies have started providing AI tools to Norway's fish farms.
Alphabet Inc.'s Tidal initiative, for example, said in March it is teaming up with seafood company Mowi ASA to use AI to analyze and monitor fish and environmental conditions. Microsoft Corp., Swiss engineering firm ABB Ltd. and fish farm operator Norway Royal Salmon ASA said in January they piloted an AI solution to remotely track fish populations. International Business Machines Corp. created a machine-learning tool that predicts outbreaks of sea lice, which are parasites that threaten farmed fish.
Using AI in fish farms can be a challenge. Some systems rely on getting a sizable number of accurate images of the fish to train AI models. However, the fish swim at different speeds and can face cameras from different angles, said Kjell Carlsson, a principal analyst at Forrester Research. But advances in imaging technology and lower-cost computing are helping companies use AI to address fish health and management problems, he said.
The AI initiatives developed in the Norwegian Open AI Lab are based on neural networks, a subset of machine learning that learns based on large sets of training data, and a type of AI known as tiny machine learning, which is machine learning designed to run inside small, low-powered computing devices.
One neural network application is designed to help farmworkers understand salmon feeding behavior. The application takes data from underwater cameras. Typically, schools of salmon swim together and break apart when food is thrown into the farm. The technology can analyze the camera images to determine when that behavior changes, signaling the fish are no longer hungry, said Bjorn Taale Sandberg, head of Telenor Research.
In lab tests, the feeding technology correctly identified behavior 80% of the time, he said.
Around 40% of the cost of operating fish farms comes from feed, which can cause environmental problems if too much is given and the uneaten amounts fall to the bottom of farms, Mr. Sandberg said.
Salmon in farms are cleaned to avoid lice, a big health problem for farmed fish. But a fish that is cleaned too often can become stressed, which can lead to other problems, Mr. Sandberg said. Some farms use cleaning chemicals that can cause environmental problems if overused, he added.
Researchers used a tool based on a neural network to analyze thousands of hours of video feeds from a salmon farm in northern Norway. The technology accurately identified 96% of salmon in lab tests, Mr. Sandberg said. The approach would be a cheaper alternative to other methods of identifying individual farmed salmon, such as physically tagging or tattooing them, he added.
In a production environment, the images for the two applications would need to be stored on large computers used to run neural networks.
But Telenor also is developing very small computers that could remain on site at a fish farm and eventually make decisions based on what cameras detect.

Credit: By Catherine Stupp
