We have too many regulations. The Code of Federal Regulations is almost 200,000 pages long. In 2017 President Trump signed Executive Order 13771, which held that "for every one new regulation, at least two prior regulations be identified for elimination." It didn't work. Can anyone cut through the red tape mummifying America?
Another "Ghostbusters" movie is in theaters, but what we need are regulation busters. I spoke with Salen Churi and Brooke Fallon from Trust Ventures, a $500 million Texas-based venture-capital firm. It's almost as if they are wearing plasma proton packs.
The two originally worked together to legalize street vending in Chicago. Mr. Churi explained the problem: "Restaurants got together with the city to prevent competition. We got this food-cart license passed. It didn't scale though," as it was Chicago specific, but it was the start of a plan.
Trust Ventures came together, Mr. Churi said, because no one thinks " 'I hate innovation,' except perhaps for incumbents. We have crises in the most human of industries -- energy, healthcare, housing. Everyone thought I was nuts. They're like, 'Why would you invest in companies with regulatory problems?'" Good question.
Most venture capitalists invest and help startups with new strategies and hiring a team. Mr. Churi describes what he does as "trench warfare," fighting with regulators and incumbents deal by deal. He notes that "we have built houses the same way for 1,000 years -- with sticks and bricks." A startup, ICON, hoped to create homes for the homeless in Texas using a giant 3-D printing machine that deposits layers of concrete. It can "print" a 500-square-foot home in 24 hours. For $4,000. Game changing.
Then came the regulators. Mr. Churi says that for homes, international fire safety codes say, " 'You've got to put the wooden joists like this.' But there are no wooden joists. The whole thing is inherently fireproof -- it's concrete." As for regulators, "they're like, 'You've got to put the wooden joists like that. See it says it right here on the page.'" They grappled with fire-code permitting bodies. "New language got passed. It took two years."
Mr. Churi explains that "when you get a great new technology that's fundamentally different, regulators just want to shove you in the old box, right? Our challenge is to say, 'Well, actually, this needs a new box.' Otherwise, it's going to sit on the shelf."
Eye exams are a great example of an old box. The American Optometric Association is powerful, and many states banned online vision tests. "Regulators don't care about all those single mothers who have to pay three times as much or that people in Central Illinois have to drive three hours," Mr. Churi says.
The pandemic loosened telehealth rules, providing an opening to test your eyes with your own smartphone. As lockdowns ended, Trust Ventures worked with the startup Visibly in several states to legalize online eye exams permanently. They got help from their investors network -- some of their limited partners "are great American families," Mr. Churi says. Visibly's Food and Drug Administration-approved online eye tests, now in 36 states, cost as little as $35 instead of three times as much at LensCrafters or box-store-located optometrists.
Going forward, Mr. Churi tells me the firm is focusing on energy and artificial intelligence. Trust Ventures is working to provide a new design for safe, clean nuclear energy to sit right next to power-hungry AI data centers. This means more trench warfare with slow-as-molasses regulators. Another investment, Antora, stores energy by using renewables to heat up a chunk of carbon to 3,600 degrees Fahrenheit. This thermal battery can sit next to a factory and generate electricity or steam at night or when the wind stops blowing. Cool -- or, rather, hot -- stuff.
Ms. Fallon explains that the problem with energy innovation is a "web of jurisdictions." This includes "local utilities, the City Council, the county-level Public Utility Commission, the state-level Public Utility Commission" and other entities that rarely talk to each other.
With AI, there weren't a lot of regulations until the hoopla around ChatGPT and generative AI produced a Biden administration innovation-killing executive order. Then Sen. Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.) got an itch to regulate and, sniffing lobbyist dollars, began to hold AI hearings. The model for Trust Ventures and others with AI is prophylactic: Get ahead of regulators and fears of job losses and help craft sensible regulations. Mr. Churi's hope is to "be a change agent to help the law catch up to where technology already is." If not, AI will get put in an old box. It's too important to leave to politicians.
Who you gonna call? Reg-busters! Startups aren't big enough to undertake this themselves, and law firms don't have the right incentive structure to help. VC-backed Uber and Airbnb broke ground taking on regulations. Maybe it really does take venture capitalists, providing the scissors to cut progress-smothering red tape, to get the job done.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
