Publicis Groupe said first-quarter revenue continued to grow and beat expectations, helped by new business wins and what it called a clear rebound in the technology sector.
The Paris-based advertising group said Thursday that organic net revenue grew 5.3% in the first three months of the year compared with the same period of 2023. Analysts expected Publicis to report organic net revenue growth of 4.55% for the quarter, according to consensus estimates provided by Visible Alpha.
Publicis' update kicks off the first-quarter reporting season for the advertising industry. The world's largest ad group by market capitalization has been growing faster than its peers in recent quarters, a trend analysts attribute to investments in tech and data capabilities that are translating into strong customer retention and momentum in new business.
U.S. rival Omnicom Group is due to give a first-quarter update next week, with Interpublic Group of Cos. and London-based WPP due to report later this month.
A slowdown in marketing spending by tech companies led to a divide in the fortunes of ad-agency holding companies toward the end of last year, with those more exposed to the sector taking a hit and other less reliant on it, like Publicis, feeling little pain.
However, Publicis said it saw a recovery in the tech sector in the first quarter, with growth in the double-digit percentage range.
"Publicis had a very strong start to 2024, sustaining growth momentum despite ongoing macroeconomic tensions," Chairman and Chief Executive Arthur Sadoun said.
Sadoun said the company's performance was driven by tailwinds from new business wins, growing demand for data-led marketing services boosted by artificial intelligence and a rebound in the tech sector.
The owner of agencies such as Saatchi & Saatchi, Leo Burnett and Zenith reiterated its guidance for 2024, with organic net revenue growth expected to range between 4% and 5% and an operating margin of 18%.
For the second quarter, the company expects solid organic growth within the full-year range, it said.
Net revenue for the first quarter amounted to 3.23 billion euros, the equivalent of $3.47 billion, up 4.9% on a reported basis, Publicis said.
Credit: By Adria Calatayud
