Cisco Systems closed its $28 billion all-cash acquisition of cybersecurity and analytics company Splunk on Monday.
The deal, the largest in Cisco's history, was completed months earlier than projected and reflects the extraordinary effort many companies are undertaking as they remake their businesses around data and artificial intelligence.
Cisco Chief Executive Chuck Robbins and former Splunk CEO Gary Steele -- now an executive vice president at Cisco -- said AI will be deeply woven into the combined companies, and they saw no hint that the wave of business-AI adoption was going to slow.
The combined company will use AI to help customers draw correlations among intelligence coming from different vendor platforms, so that they can take a more predictive approach to cybersecurity. While that predictive capability has been developing for some time, the company also plans to launch more capabilities that make use of generative AI to simplify their software and make the tools easier for people without technical training to operate.
Splunk's dashboard allows users to search, monitor and analyze machine-generated data. It takes training to use it, and generative AI helps flatten the learning curve, according to Steele.
"Splunk has its own proprietary language, the way in which you issue commands, and you have to be reasonably technical to do that," he said. "With the AI assistance that we've launched, you can use English language to automatically generate that proprietary language."
Splunk's AI will benefit from Cisco's massive amounts of data, not to mention its global presence and sales and marketing channels, Steele said.
Generative AI will have other applications across Cisco's business, such as simplifying the complex task of setting a configuration screen for a company's security policy, according to Robbins.
"It's very technical," he said. "We're going to enable our customers to just use English language to describe what security capabilities they would like . . . and then we will translate that into a policy that they would review."
The software would function as an assistant, simplifying and speeding up the deployment of security policy and other resources without replacing human operators, according to Robbins.
When the deal was announced last September, the companies said they expected it to close by the end of September 2024. The process was completed in roughly half a year.
Last week, the European Union gave the acquisition unconditional antitrust approval, after regulators found the deal wouldn't pose barriers to competition.
Credit: By Steven Rosenbush
