TOKYO -- Panasonic Corp. is joining with a Tokyo-based venture to help its driver-assistance computers learn on the job, part of efforts in Japan to join the "deep learning" vogue that has swept Silicon Valley.
People familiar with the deal said Preferred Networks Inc. would provide software to beef up Panasonic's offerings in advanced driver assistance systems. The Osaka-based electronics giant hopes such systems and other auto-safety businesses will bring in some $3.8 billion a year in revenue by the fiscal year starting in 2018.
"Deep learning" is a kind of self-study program for machines. Instead of being programmed solely with fixed rules, computers would learn by themselves how to achieve a task -- such as avoiding obstacles, in the case of cars. Eventually, all car computers could be connected to a single "brain."
Panasonic hopes to leverage the venture's deep-learning expertise in other products and services, including consumer electronics and surveillance cameras, the people familiar with the deal said.
Google Inc. acquired U.K. artificial intelligence startup DeepMind last year for $400 million, while big Silicon Valley names, including Facebook Inc.'s Mark Zuckerberg and Tesla Motors Inc.'s Elon Musk, put $40 million into another deep-learning venture.
Though little known outside the field, Preferred Networks has emerged as one of Japan's leading competitors in machine learning, drawing investment from Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp., Japan's largest telecommunications company.
Preferred Networks employs 25 people, all engineers except one finance person. They are mostly graduates of elite universities who made the rare choice in Japan of working at a startup. The venture's technology can identify people in video footage and sort them into categories such as gender, type of clothing and movements on a real-time basis without human supervision. It can also predict what people in videos will do next.
Once a top name in global consumer goods, Panasonic has been betting more recently on car-related industries for growth. It is a major supplier to Toyota Motor Corp. and makes the batteries that power Tesla vehicles.
Other Internet companies are joining the machine-learning bandwagon. Mobile-gaming company DeNA Co. said last month it would work with robotics technology venture ZMP Inc. to realize a driverless taxi in Tokyo by 2020.
"A time of great change has arrived in the auto industry, and I believe the IT sector can play a big role," said Hiroshi Nakajima, head of DeNA's automotive business. "Deep learning could help us achieve in a year what would otherwise take a decade."
Panasonic's rival, Sony Corp., is also trying to build its auto business, backed by strength in sensors that are used in Apple Inc.'s smartphones. Sony teamed up earlier this year with ZMP and has its own team working on deep-learning technology, people familiar with the matter say.
In addition to Panasonic, Preferred Networks is set to announce a deal with industrial-robot maker Fanuc Corp.
Credit: By Takashi Mochizuki
