[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Investors may soon begin to forget -- or at least block out -- the trauma of a very bad year for memory-chip stocks.
Samsung Electronics and SK Hynix both last week reported horrendous results for the quarter ended in June. But the two Korean chip makers also offered investors a glimmer of hope that the worst is over.
Samsung's revenue for the June quarter fell 22% year over year while operating profit plunged 95%. Hynix's sales nearly halved from a year earlier and its losses widened from the previous quarter. The ghosts of the pandemic-era electronics boom are still haunting chip manufacturers, mainly in the form of enormous inventories lurking all along the supply chain. According to Morgan Stanley, total chip inventory in the global supply chain -- including at manufacturers, distributors and customers -- stood at 258 days in the first quarter, or 76 days above the historic median.
But there are signs that the inventory situation in memory chips is finally starting to improve. Samsung said its inventory peaked in May. Hynix's inventory days fell last quarter compared with the previous one.
Partly that is thanks to aggressive production cuts by manufacturers, especially Samsung, which was reluctant to do so at the beginning of the price crash. Goldman Sachs estimates that Samsung has cut its production of both DRAM, used in processing, and NAND, used in storage, by about 20% to 25%. The bank expects Samsung to cut NAND output by a further 5% to 10%. This has started to support prices, especially for DRAM.
Demand from artificial-intelligence applications also is becoming a real bright spot. Hynix's average selling price for DRAM actually increased last quarter thanks to a better mix of premium products used by AI servers. Those include high-bandwidth memory chips, which offer faster data transmission. The company is the leader in that segment. It was the first to mass produce the latest generation of these chips. Hynix expects its AI server memory revenue to more than double from a year earlier.
Share prices may have already priced in much of that rosier outlook, however. Samsung's share price has gained 26% this year while Hynix's has surged 59% -- reflecting the latter's higher exposure to the rapidly growing AI demand.
The boom times of 2021 and early 2022 are distant memories at this point for most chip sector investors. Good times aren't around the corner yet, but with inventories finally being chipped away -- and AI boosting margins at the high end -- the worst of this down cycle may finally be in the rearview.
Credit: By Jacky Wong
