The Samsung conglomerate said it will invest more than $22 billion over the next three years to target such areas as artificial intelligence and auto-technology components, as it seeks out growth drivers beyond phones and memory chips.
The bulk of the spending will be earmarked for Samsung Electronics Co., the conglomerate's crown jewel. The company is the world's No. 1 maker of smartphones, semiconductors and televisions and last year put more toward capital expenditures than any other publicly traded company.
Samsung said it would invest heavily in four key areas through 2020. Auto tech, artificial intelligence and new fifth-generation, or 5G, cellular technology -- all of which that fall under Samsung's umbrella -- will draw funding, as will its nascent drug companies specializing in contract manufacturing and biosimilar medications.
Samsung, South Korea's largest business empire, spans 62 affiliates as diverse as life insurance and theme parks. It didn't provide a specific breakdown of the new investments, but the spending represents its broadest investment in new business pursuits since 2010.
When combined with previously announced investments, the company will spend 180 trillion won, or about $161 billion, over the three-year period, a total that includes commitments for semiconductors and displays. Roughly $100 billion will go to capital expenditures, according to S&P Global Market Intelligence estimates.
Lee Jae-yong, Samsung's de facto leader, has made innovation a priority across the conglomerate, according to people familiar with the matter. In October, Samsung Electronics Chairman Kwon Oh-hyun said the firm was facing an "unprecedented crisis" and was "hard-pressed to find new growth areas right now." The company replaced all three of its CEOs in March.
Samsung lacked bold moves last year, as the conglomerate dealt with a leadership vacuum after Mr. Lee was jailed during a high-profile corruption probe. He was released on a suspended sentence in February and has appealed his case to the Supreme Court.
On Monday Mr. Lee made his first public appearance in South Korea since leaving jail, meeting with the country's finance minister at a Samsung semiconductor facility in Pyeongtaek, about 40 miles south of Seoul. During the visit, Finance Minister Kim Dong-yeon called Samsung's role in helping reshape the economy important.
The country's left-learning president, Moon Jae-in, has made job creation a priority, especially for the underemployed youth, saying the situation could become a national disaster if unaddressed. The conglomerate's investments will directly create 40,000 jobs over the next three years, Samsung said.
The South Korean firm's focus on auto tech has accelerated after it announced in late 2016 an $8 billion deal to buy Harman International Industries Inc., the company's largest-ever acquisition. It also launched a $300 million auto-tech investment fund last year.
Samsung has also been building up its AI capabilities aggressively, opening new research centers in Cambridge, U.K., Toronto and Moscow in May. The company plans to build an internal team of at least 1,000 AI-dedicated engineers and researchers by 2020, with new hires and worker reassignments. By that year, Samsung wants to put AI features and internet connectivity into all of its products.

Credit: By Timothy W. Martin
