Fears of slowing growth are rattling financial markets around the world, spurring investors to unwind many of 2024's most popular trades.
A volatile week in markets turned uglier on Friday after a weaker-than-expected July payrolls report showed job growth slowing and unemployment rising to the highest level since 2021.
Stocks and bond yields dove, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average losing more than 600 points. Oil prices slid, as traders bet slowing growth would erode demand for crude.
The stock declines extended a fall that began a day earlier, after data showed weakness in manufacturing and construction. But the reversal of some of the year's most-popular trades was already under way, with investors shifting positions ahead of potential interest-rate cuts from the Federal Reserve, analysts said.
Now, just days after the Fed held short-term rates steady at its July policy meeting, many on Wall Street are worried that the central bank has waited too long to begin cutting rates and that the economy might suffer. By Friday, traders were pricing in overwhelming odds that the Fed will cut rates by half a percentage point in September. Few had made that wager on Wednesday after Chairman Jerome Powell said that officials needed to see more data.
Friday's jobs report was "the first clear sign of employment slowing across virtually every metric," said Rick Rieder, BlackRock's chief investment officer of global fixed income. "The Fed-funds rate is clearly too restrictive relative to inflation that is trending in the low-2s with slack building in the labor force."
The market swings are the latest in a bruising series for what were recently some of Wall Street's favorite bets.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury, which falls when bond prices rise, just posted its largest one-week decline -- retreating below 4%, to 3.795%, according to Tradeweb -- since the pandemic market panic of 2020. Japan's Nikkei 225 slumped 5.8% Friday and is down almost 15% from a record in June, while the yen has surged against the dollar.
And the Magnificent Seven tech titans that have powered most of this year's stock gains have had a rough few weeks, shedding more than $1 trillion of market value combined.
Second-quarter earnings reports have so far disappointed investors, who had high expectations, particularly for companies that are investing a lot in artificial intelligence. Microsoft and Alphabet, two heavy AI spenders, both sold off after reporting results.
Meanwhile, chief executives are sounding the alarm that the economy could be worse than backward-looking data indicate.
McDonald's CEO Chris Kempczinski said recently that a slowdown in visits from lower-income consumers has deepened this year.
Amazon.com shares dropped 8.8% Friday after the company projected weaker-than-expected revenue growth.
And a particularly bad earnings report -- including struggles in the AI and data-center business -- sent Intel shares plunging 26%, their worst day since at least 1985.
"There's now a drumbeat of skepticism about the benefits of AI and whether it will actually deliver profits and productivity at the level that's been promoted," said Yung-Yu Ma, chief investment officer for BMO Wealth Management in the U.S.
"It's not surprising that the ebb of enthusiasm is going to take place at the same time we've seen some economic weakness and concern that the Fed is behind the curve," he said.
Analysts also said that hedge funds that went all-in on some of this year's most popular trades -- such as buying big tech stocks or betting on declines in the Japanese yen -- are now exacerbating market moves.
When a hedge fund has a highly concentrated position that starts to fall, it often needs to start selling assets and cutting risk elsewhere in the portfolio to satisfy its risk models. When a lot of funds have been buying the same things, that process can pressure a variety of investments, including some seemingly remote from the original bet.
Macro investors reversing a popular trade in which they borrow yen and swap them for dollars to take advantage of the discrepancy between the two countries' interest rates might have exacerbated a recent climb in the yen, some analysts said. Japan's central bank raised interest rates last week, further contributing to the currency's climb.
"The pricing and the acuteness of the market action I think is really indicative of the fact that hedge funds have been caught offside," said Bob Elliott, CEO of asset manager Unlimited.
The surge in volatility follows a prolonged period of market calm.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index entered correction territory on Friday, or a 10% drop from its recent high, but remains up 12% for the year. The S&P 500 is also up 12% in 2024. A pullback from highs driven by exuberant investors can be healthy.
Generate image description

Credit: By Jack Pitcher
