Waste Management remains committed to expanding its renewable-energy business as it prepares for what Chief Executive Jim Fish sees as a big surge in demand for energy over the next decade.
"Demand for energy is far outstripping the supply, and we're part of the supply side of that," Fish said on Thursday, adding that he expects transportation to fuel an uptick in energy demand similar to that driven by artificial-intelligence data centers.
The waste-and-recycling company, which goes by WM, has $3 billion in planned investments in its sustainable businesses between 2022 and 2026. Fish said $1.6 billion of that is going toward building 20 plants capturing natural gas at its landfills to fuel power generation and its natural-gas-vehicle fleet. The remaining $1.4 billion is earmarked for revamping the company's recycling plants to make them more efficient and productive, as well as building new recycling plants, he said.
"You might not think of us as an energy company, but it's a very important product of our business and a focus area for us," Fish said. "We haven't really decided what our long, long-term strategy is in renewable energy, because we're just building out those 20, but we certainly see energy as a real opportunity and as part of our strategy."
WM owns 260 landfills, of which at least 100 could make economic sense to couple with renewable-energy plants, Fish said. "So we may decide to continue to build that out."
While the plants are fairly expensive to build, the payback is three years, which benefits shareholders, Fish said.
Renewable energy is one of WM'S priorities going into 2025, Fish said, along with the integration of medical-waste company Stericycle, which WM bought this year. That was WM's biggest acquisition to date, with an enterprise value of $7.2 billion.
"I really look at Stericycle as being that kind of fourth vertical or fourth line of business -- after trash, recycling and renewable energy," Fish said. "It's a pretty natural fit."
Credit: By Sabela Ojea
