U.S. auto safety regulators are investigating Tesla Inc.'s advanced driver-assistance system known as Autopilot after a series of crashes at emergency scenes.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration probe made public Monday is the latest sign that U.S. authorities are beginning to scrutinize driver-assistance technologies more closely after largely giving companies free rein.
NHTSA said it had identified 11 crashes since early 2018 in which a Tesla vehicle that had been using Autopilot struck one or more vehicles involved in an emergency-response situation.
Four of the crashes NHTSA is probing happened this year and most took place after dark, the agency said. In one such crash in March, the driver of a Tesla Model Y had Autopilot engaged before plowing into a police vehicle that had stopped along a Lansing, Mich., area highway to investigate a separate crash, Michigan State Police said. The police vehicle had its emergency lights on, police said.
NHTSA is studying the Autopilot system in some 765,000 Tesla vehicles from the 2014 through 2021 model years. Autopilot is available on vehicles made in late 2014 and later, according to Tesla's website. Such investigations can but don't always lead to recalls.
Advanced driver-assistance systems aren't tightly regulated in the U.S. NHTSA recently began requiring companies to regularly report crashes involving such features to the agency.
Tesla, whose shares were down more than 4% Monday, didn't respond to a request to comment. The electric-vehicle company has long said that driving with Autopilot engaged is safer than doing so without it.
Autopilot is designed to help drivers with tasks such as steering and keeping a safe distance from other vehicles on the road. Tesla instructs drivers using the system to pay attention to the road and to keep their hands on the wheel.
However, the system has drawn scrutiny for how some drivers misuse the technology, overriding safety functions to operate the vehicle without their hands on the wheel, for example. Some critics also said the term Autopilot risks giving drivers an inflated sense of the system's capabilities.
NHTSA said its probe would examine how the car maker monitors driver engagement and how vehicles identify roadway obstacles. The agency has opened more than two dozen investigations into crashes thought to be related to Tesla's advanced driver-assistance system.
Sean Kane, president of auto safety advocacy organization Safety Research & Strategies Inc., welcomed NHTSA's Autopilot probe but said that the agency should have set stricter rules to begin with.
"It's an after-the-fact fix when it could have been dealt with on the front end and prevented," he said.
Tesla uses examples of traffic scenarios to train its driver-assistance technology and help determine the appropriate course of action.
Autopilot has evolved over time and has long relied on a combination of cameras, radar and other sensors. However, several months ago, the company did away with radar in Model 3 sedans and Model Y compact sport-utility vehicles made for the North American market.
Duke University engineering professor Mary "Missy" Cummings said that cameras and radar can both have trouble recognizing parked police cruisers or other equipment such as traffic cones. Radar can struggle to distinguish between stationary objects, while cameras will help a vehicle identify obstacles only if the system has been trained to recognize that specific scenario, she said.
Emergency vehicles don't always behave in consistent ways -- sometimes pulling over and partially blocking a lane -- and that can make it challenging for driver-assistance systems to react appropriately.
"This is why emergency situations are so problematic," Dr. Cummings said. "The visual presentation is never the same."
Andrej Karpathy, senior director of artificial intelligence at Tesla, recently spoke about some of those challenges while discussing the company's technology at an industry conference. "The problem with radar is like, once in a while, at random, it will give you a dumb measurement, and you will not know when that is," he said in June.
NHTSA's action adds to the heightened regulatory scrutiny Tesla has faced in recent months.
Earlier this year, two U.S. senators -- Democrats Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut and Edward Markey of Massachusetts -- urged NHTSA to develop recommendations for improving advanced driver-assistance systems such as Tesla's Autopilot. Their comments followed a fatal crash in Texas, though another federal safety agency that investigates crashes, the National Transportation Safety Board, has since raised doubts that Autopilot was involved.
Sens. Blumenthal and Markey called on NHTSA to conduct its investigation quickly, thoroughly and in a transparent manner.
The probe "should inform the agency's recommendations on fixes the company must implement to improve the safety of its automated driving and driver assistance technology and prevent future crashes," the senators said in a joint statement Monday.
Tesla recently recalled more than 285,000 vehicles in China to address a cruise control-related safety issue.
China's State Administration for Market Regulation said Tesla's cruise-control system could be activated accidentally, potentially causing sudden acceleration. Most of the vehicles affected by the recall were made at Tesla's factory in Shanghai, and the software fix could be completed remotely. Tesla apologized to car owners in connection with the recall and said it would continue to improve safety in line with national requirements.
In the U.S., Tesla agreed early this year to recall about 135,000 Model S and Model X vehicles over touch-screen failures. Tesla said at the time that it disagreed that the issue constituted a defect in the vehicles but that it was going ahead with a recall in the interest of customer experience.
Credit: By Rebecca Elliott
