Apple Inc. said Wednesday that it plans to invest $1 billion in SoftBank Group Corp.'s new fund to help finance technologies the U.S. company could use in the future.
"We believe their new fund will speed the development of technologies which may be strategically important to Apple," said an Apple spokeswoman, Kristin Huguet. Ms. Huguet added that Apple has worked with the Japanese telecommunications company for many years.
The SoftBank Vision Fund, announced in October, aims to raise $100 billion. It is set to be launched formally in the coming weeks. In addition to Apple and SoftBank, which is investing $25 billion, Saudi Arabia's government is investing $45 billion. Others who have discussed investing include the sovereign-wealth fund of Abu Dhabi, the Qatar Investment Authority and chip maker Qualcomm Inc.
Apple's participation in the fund reflects a shift in its investment strategy. Last year, Apple invested $1 billion in Didi Chuxing Technology Co., China's homegrown ride-sharing competitor to Uber Technologies Inc.
During a call with analysts in July, Apple Chief Executive Tim Cook called the Didi investment unusual because the company typically acquires companies and technologies rather than investing in them. He said the company would do more investments but that it wasn't "something that you'll see a whole string of from us."
SoftBank Chief Executive Masayoshi Son is creating the fund to help put his company and investors at the forefront of emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence and the Internet of Things, in which everyday objects such as thermostats, watches and cars are connected online.
While competitors such as Alphabet Inc. and Amazon.com Inc. have launched connected devices, Apple has largely stayed out of that arena. Its focus instead has been on the Apple Watch, a wearable device with some health-monitoring capabilities.
Joining SoftBank's investment fund could help Apple as it looks to integrate new technologies into its devices or ensure its smartphones are compatible with connected products such as thermostats.
"Apple doesn't want to sell a lot of the end nodes in the Internet of Things, but it does need to defend its core, smartphone business," said Roger Kay, market analyst with Endpoint Technologies Associates.
Mr. Kay said the investment also is about alliances. He said Apple has generally operated independently but is increasingly looking to establish alliances with other companies, particularly in Asia.
Apple and SoftBank have business ties stretching back nearly a decade. In 2008, the companies struck a deal to make SoftBank the exclusive iPhone seller in Japan. The partnership drove record sales, helping make SoftBank Japan's third-largest cellular carrier by 2011.
Mr. Son is close to Terry Gou, the head of Taiwan's Foxconn Technology Group, which manufactures most iPhones. During a December meeting with U.S. President-elect Donald Trump, Mr. Son was photographed carrying a paper with Foxconn's logo. Foxconn, known formally as Hon Hai Precision Industry Co., said after the meeting that it was in talks to expand its operations in the U.S.
Apple has roughly $237.6 billion in cash on hand, according to its annual report. More than 90% of that money, $216 billion, is held abroad because Apple would have to pay additional tax to bring it to the U.S.
---
Liz Hoffman contributed to this article.
Credit: By Tripp Mickle
