An international tech blockade threatens to deprive Russia of sophisticated semiconductors needed to power advanced weaponry and cutting-edge technologies like 5G, artificial intelligence and robotics, experts say.
In late February, the U.S. imposed a ban on selling high-tech products including semiconductors and telecommunications systems used by the defense, aerospace and maritime industries to Russia and its ally Belarus, days after Russia invaded Ukraine. The ban also extended to certain foreign items produced with U.S. equipment, software or blueprints.
South Korea and Taiwan, which dominate in high-end chips, and Japan, strong in chip-making materials and tools, have also banned exports of the items that the U.S. has put on its export-control list. Their moves cut off Russia's access to many top-end chips, and materials and components needed to re-create production of such items locally.
For Russia, the impact from the coordinated sanctions will be significant, said Tom Rafferty, Asia regional director at the Economist Intelligence Unit. "The big export bans are going to be on semiconductors and high-end semiconductors in particular, for which Korea and Taiwan almost monopolize production. So there won't be supply of that anywhere that Russia can lean on."
While the sanctions would appear to limit Russia's access to chip supplies, the actual impact couldn't fully be determined. Russia's Ministry of Industry and Trade and the Ministry of Economic Development didn't respond to requests for comment.
Russia continues to largely rely on foreign technology to design chips and has limited chip-production capabilities of its own. In 2020, Russia imported roughly $440 million worth of semiconductor devices, including components like diodes and transistors, and around $1.25 billion worth of electronic integrated circuits, or "chips," built by incorporating various components, according to the United Nations Comtrade database.
While the majority of these imports come from Asian countries that aren't imposing sanctions, Russia would still be left in the dark on high-end chips or homegrown chips. Taiwan produces most of the world's cutting-edge semiconductors, with the rest produced in South Korea, data from Washington, D.C.-based trade group Semiconductor Industry Association showed. South Korea also dominates in memory chips, while Japan is a stronghold of semiconductor materials and manufacturing tools, both crucial for chip building.
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., the world's biggest contract chip maker, said it is committed to complying with the new export-control rules. South Korea's Samsung Electronics Co., a leading memory-chip maker and an electronics producer, said this month it has suspended shipment of all its products to Russia because of geopolitical developments and is monitoring the situation to determine its next steps.
Russia's chip-building technology lags behind that of industry leader TSMC by more than 15 years, said Western semiconductor-industry executives who have studied the state of Russia's industry. The country's leading chip maker, Mikron Group, has said it is the only local company capable of mass producing semiconductors with 65-nanometer circuitries -- a technology introduced to the industry for mass production around 2006. Mikron didn't respond to a request for comment.
Some of the leading Russian-designed chips are assembled by TSMC. Russia could lose access to some of these chips, though it couldn't be determined whether these chips would be hit by sanctions.
The latest Baikal microprocessors, widely used in many Russia-made computers and servers, are built by TSMC, according to Baikal Electronics JSC, a Russian company that designs the chips. Certain latest Elbrus microprocessors, designed by the Moscow Center of SPARC Technologies, were slated to be manufactured by TSMC, documents from the Russian company showed.
TSMC declined to comment beyond its statement on the sanctions. Baikal and MCST didn't respond to requests for comments.
Generate image description

Credit: By Yang Jie in Tokyo and Jiyoung Sohn in Seoul
