For many families during the pandemic, the massive gaming platform Roblox has been a fun outlet to keep children busy and connected with friends. Its popularity among cooped-up kids helped fuel a successful public debut for the company, which relies on its users to create games and other content.
Yet this platform of 32.6 million daily users -- more than half of whom are under 13 -- has some dark corners. In some games, players' blocky avatars simulate sex, engage in raunchy talk and "date" other avatars. While much of this isn't new, Roblox's explosive growth has drawn fresh attention to what's happening at the fringes -- and what responsibility the company has to protect its young audience.
Roblox is now working on developing content ratings for games and on ways to make parental controls easier to find and use, said Remy Malan, vice president of trust and safety for Roblox and its chief privacy officer.
Even when children say they're under 13 when creating accounts, age-inappropriate games can show up on their "recommended for you" lists.
Within the hard-to-find controls, parents can restrict the games kids can play in Roblox to those deemed appropriate by the company. But of the tens of millions of multiplayer games within Roblox, only around 1,000 are on that curated list.
Bryan Buffinton, a dad in Tampa, Fla., had done his research before he allowed his 8-year-old son to play Roblox. He read the company's guide for parents and knew how to restrict the games his son could access. So he was shocked one day last year when his son came to him with his iPad and said, "I think something's wrong."
The boy had entered a Roblox role-playing game where, instead of the typical blocky visuals, there was an actual photo. It was a woman wearing a thong. And she had multiple scratch marks on her bottom.
After confirming that the account restrictions were still in place, Mr. Buffinton said he started perusing the game. He saw the word "sex" scrawled three times across the top of the screen and a cartoonish depiction of sodomy in the sky. He could hear music with racist lyrics playing.
He said he tried to alert Roblox through the company's website and on social media but never heard back. He decided to call it quits on Roblox altogether. "I can't trust the platform," he said.
Roblox said it plans to investigate his claims.
"Roblox was designed for kids and teens, and we have a responsibility to make sure our players can learn, create and play safely," Mr. Malan said.
The new Roblox content-rating system, Mr. Malan said, will provide a more nuanced look at what kids might encounter in a specific game, giving parents more control over what they feel is and isn't OK for their kids. There's no way to really know what a particular game entails until you play it. Mr. Malan said he couldn't provide a specific time frame for the content-rating rollout.
Roblox employs a team of more than 2,300 people to monitor games for safety, using a combination of artificial intelligence and human moderators. "We work relentlessly to create a safe and civil community and have no tolerance for content or behavior that violates our rules," Mr. Malan said.
Some parents I spoke to have seen role-playing that involved rampant talk of sex and avatars bumping up against each other.
I've seen it myself, and it made me wonder how much exploration is safe for young kids. Is this the 21st-century equivalent of "playing doctor"?
The difference here, online safety experts say, is that kids might not know with whom they're engaging in such role-playing; it could be another curious 10-year-old or it could be a teen or an adult.
"It's considered normal curiosity if they're similar ages. But when the age disparity is more than two years, it's questionable," said Kristen Jenson, founder and chief executive officer of Protect Young Minds, a company that seeks to educate parents about the dangers of pornography and child exploitation.
Elizabeth Milovidov, a digital parenting coach, said that when she conducts online safety workshops, she urges parents not to freak out when they learn their children have explored sexual content or engaged in sexual role-playing online.
"I tell parents to take the tech out of the equation and to think about how they would handle this if they caught their child and a friend playing doctor," she said.
Still, she agrees with Ms. Jenson that the difference with online role-playing is that the child doesn't necessarily know who's on the other end.
Dr. Milovidov, who lives in Paris and once consulted with Roblox on a French parents' guide, said she advises parents to have ongoing discussions with their children. "You can speak to them in an age-appropriate manner and ask if they've ever seen something that makes them feel icky or uncomfortable," she said. "You can also watch their behavior after they play -- do they seem secretive or upset?"
---
The Key Parental
Controls in Roblox
For now, there's nothing in Roblox that screams "parental controls." Here's how to set up a child's account so they can play as safely as possible. Keep in mind that nothing is foolproof: Kids can easily create alternate accounts because no email address is required.
-- Enter your child's correct birth date. It's best to set up an account for your child and discuss the controls you're establishing and your reasons for doing so. By indicating a child's real age, certain language in the chat section will be filtered out.
-- Restrict inappropriate games. Click the gear icon at the top right of the main Roblox webpage, or tap the three dots in the app. Choose Settings, then Security and scroll to Account Restrictions. Toggling that bar to green limits play to games that Roblox deems appropriate for kids under 13. It also locks contacts so other players can't send messages to your child. Other communications controls can be found in the Privacy setting.
-- Set up a PIN. In the Security settings, parents can create a four-digit PIN required to change any settings. This can prevent kids from disabling the other controls.
Credit: By Julie Jargon
