The world is undertaking two great technological transitions -- toward greener energy production and toward more AI-enhanced decision-making. The two are intimately linked.
Machine learning has long helped to analyze and improve engineering, such as finding more-efficient battery designs, as well as orchestrating and improving energy delivery. Now cutting-edge AI is poised to take that collaboration a step further.
AI can analyze data, find patterns in it and then concoct solutions to problems faster than any human researcher could. But it isn't a straight path to sustainability. Ever more-complex AI models consume ever more energy to run, for instance -- eliminating some of the climate-friendly gains AI produces.
We asked an array of experts to help illustrate this complex interplay -- drawing on leading thinkers from tech firms, energy companies, nonprofits and universities. Here is a sample of what they had to say.
Getting us the juice we need
Keeping the lights on has always been a delicate balancing act. Power companies must ensure that at any given time, electricity demand is precisely matched to electricity produced. Now that job is getting much more complicated as we move away from large, centralized power plants toward a diverse network of less predictable energy sources such as wind turbines and solar panels.
Artificial intelligence is critical to navigating this shift. It can monitor and respond to real-time changes in electricity supply, demand and grid conditions to ensure that power flows optimally. It can also avert potential problems, such as wildfires sparked by equipment failure: AI can scrutinize real-time heat, wind and drought conditions, and help utilities manage equipment shut-offs and redirect power in overloaded lines.
AI will bring big changes on the consumer side, as well. For example, future home energy-management systems will get real-time information about grid conditions and use that data to generate less pollution -- running appliances and charging electric vehicles at the times when solar and wind resources are abundant and fossil-fuel generation is low. These systems can also schedule when electricity produced by solar panels is consumed directly by a household, stored in a battery or sold back to the grid.
-- Kelly Sanders, associate professor of civil and environmental engineering, University of Southern California
Finding climate patterns
The climate crisis requires a pace of innovation as fast as the Apollo program, in every sector of the economy. Even though AI isn't a panacea, it will be crucial in deepening our understanding of the information we need to make advances.
For example, over the decades we have gathered huge amount of data on a range of climate issues -- things as disparate as the effect of aircraft contrails (the clouds that come out of the back of planes) on the upper atmosphere, marine fuel's impact on the ocean and the downsides of clean energy sources such as biofuel.
However, this knowledge is often spread across highly specialized journals, with data in incompatible formats. AI tools can synthesize and find correlations in that disparate information faster than human researchers. Meanwhile, AI can help climate technologies improve processes we already have in place, such as finding the optimal ways to improve crop yields.
-- Karthik Balakrishnan, president, Actual
Building a better battery
The challenges faced by the battery industry have a direct impact on our daily lives. How can we design batteries that don't catch fire? How can we eliminate the use of scarce metals, like cobalt and lithium, in batteries without compromising their performance? How can we ensure that batteries operate effectively in extreme temperatures?
By harnessing the power of AI, researchers and manufacturers are propelling battery innovation, overcoming technical challenges and paving the way for a sustainable and electrified future.
Consider how AI might work in an R&D lab. Every day, the lab runs a gamut of tests to find the optimal combination of materials to make the best battery. The results of those tests are used to train the AI, which spots hidden patterns in the results that would otherwise be nearly impossible to detect. So, the AI gets smarter each day and eventually can run on autopilot, devising its own tests based on what it learns daily.
All of which means an organization can sort through countless design options rapidly -- instead of waiting for human researchers to visualize raw data, interpret the results, build mental models and design the next set of experiments.
-- Kaixiang Lin and Jason Koeller, co-founders, Chemix.ai
Making change less painful
AI has the potential to accelerate innovation in climate technology. But it might have an even bigger impact in getting people to adopt that technology -- by eliminating the frictions and nuisances associated with going green.
Most people are happy to take the climate-friendly option, as long as it doesn't inconvenience them. AI has the potential to make those options completely painless: For instance, AI can optimize your household appliance load in communication with the grid without you noticing. If technology gets to that point, it could become the default for mainstream consumers.
We must remember, though, that AI could disrupt people's lives, shattering the fragile political and social equilibrium that is nudging us toward climate progress. AI is likely to create labor-market upheaval and generally foster a sense that the world is changing rapidly. These tensions have the potential to divide society and make it more difficult to solve grand challenges like the climate.
-- James Sallee, associate professor, Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of California, Berkeley
Crafting better policy
AI could substantially improve energy and climate policy-making by finding patterns in vast data sets and speeding evaluation of complex challenges.
Consider a big-city mayor who commits to reduce the city's chronic traffic problems and thereby ease pollution. AI tools can help the mayor's staff identify solutions based on the experience of similar cities around the world, evaluate options using data on local traffic patterns and make adjustments as a plan is implemented based on real-time data.
More broadly, AI helps people with little expertise on energy and climate issues learn more about a topic and helps experts deliver advice far faster.
AI is no silver bullet. Human judgment is a vital check on AI output. Careful monitoring for error and bias is essential. However, well-managed AI has the potential to significantly improve energy policy-making around the world.
-- David Sandalow, inaugural fellow at the Center on Global Energy Policy, Columbia University
Making buildings smarter and greener
AI can take the hard work out of making our buildings more energy efficient, saving us from wandering around flicking off lights in the office or finding the leakiest windows. Heating, cooling and lighting systems enabled with AI can gather information on how our offices, tower blocks, schools and hospitals are operating and make improvements in real time. For instance, AI can optimize heating and lighting for any given time of day, making decisions based on how many people are in the room and what the weather is likely to do over the coming hours -- so we cut down on wasted energy while ensuring our rooms remain comfortable.
AI-enabled tech can also watch out for performance problems and find solutions -- such as monitoring the behavior of heat pumps, and detecting any faults that might hinder performance or lead to breakdowns. With AI-enabled tech throughout our buildings -- including, eventually, in our individual homes -- those structures can become more climate-smart and drive positive environmental change.
-- Toby Morgan, senior manager for built environment, Climate Group
Getting the most out of raw materials
AI has the potential to alleviate two interrelated challenges for clean energy -- supply bottlenecks for critical minerals, and advances in materials science that could drive development of better, more efficient clean technologies.
AI is helping geologists identify promising new mineral deposits, scanning for patterns in aerial and seismic survey data with unprecedented speed and precision. Several firms are even exploring ways to harvest metals-rich rocks from the seafloor using AI and robotic vehicles.
In the lab, machine learning is helping researchers find future materials for battery packs and solar cells, narrowing down the vast range of possibilities and identifying the most promising chemical compounds for more-detailed study. Researchers are already leveraging AI for advanced battery research and for the development of next-generation solar panels.
-- Seaver Wang, co-director, Climate and Energy Program, The Breakthrough Institute
AI's climate dilemma
For all its promise, AI poses a challenging paradox in the fight against climate change.
The technology has done a tremendous amount to make our power grids more efficient and has the potential to do even more. At the same time, cutting-edge AI -- such as large language models behind ChatGPT and Google Bard -- uses an extraordinary amount of fossil fuel to run its data centers. In my work, I found that the data processing involved in the latest generations of large language models produces thousands of times more carbon than previous generations.
Recent advances in AI may be exciting, but we need to factor in the technology's environmental footprint before we start deploying it more broadly. This will require more transparency and accountability from AI providers, as well as better legislation and efficiency standards. Without these, we can't make informed choices regarding AI training and deployment.
-- Sasha Luccioni, climate lead, Hugging Face
Credit: By Sean Captain

ERIC Subject: Physical Environment; Researchers; Management Systems; Innovation; Fuels; Artificial Intelligence; Data Processing; Heat; Buildings; Energy
