Google and Microsoft have vowed to slash emissions by the end of the decade, but new disclosures show their numbers are moving in the wrong direction.
Google's overall emissions increased by 13.5% from 2022 to 2023, according to its annual sustainability report released last Tuesday. They are up by nearly half since 2019. A recent disclosure from Microsoft told a similar story. Its total emissions were up by 29% between 2020 and 2023.
Meanwhile, Google has pledged a 50% cut against a 2019 baseline, and Microsoft has said it will be carbon-negative by 2030.
"In spite of the progress we're making, we face significant challenges that we're actively working through," wrote Google Chief Sustainability Officer Kate Brandt and Senior Vice President Benedict Gomes in a letter accompanying the report.
The AI boom is substantially responsible for the lack of progress. Large language models like ChatGPT are powered by energy-intensive data centers, and AI is projected to increase electricity demands from data centers by 50% by 2027, according to researcher Alex de Vries.
Data center construction and grid infrastructure upgrades push up energy consumption, too.
Tech companies have insisted that while AI may be driving ramped-up electricity demand at present, it also will be responsible for massive energy savings elsewhere. Google, for example, has worked on an AI-powered tool that would help airplanes avoid generating contrails, which account for 57% of aviation's global-warming impact, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
It isn't yet clear if efficiency gains will cancel out energy use. And even if they do, the biggest impact will likely be felt in other sectors, like air travel and construction. That leaves tech companies with ever-growing emissions problems on their carbon balance sheets.
To address the issue, they are getting creative. Amazon Web Services is pursuing a deal to buy energy directly from a nuclear power plant on the East Coast. Microsoft has eyed small-scale nuclear, too, and unlike many of its peers, it is an enthusiastic purchaser of carbon offsets.
Google's sustainability report was accompanied by an announcement that it had partnered with BlackRock to build a one-gigawatt pipeline of solar capacity in Taiwan. The company also touted its data center efficiency metrics, saying Google-owned data centers are 1.8 times more energy efficient than average.
Credit: By H. Claire Brown
