Instacart is cutting about 250 employees, or roughly 7% of staff, as it focuses on profitability amid heated competition in the grocery-delivery business and rising food costs.
The layoffs are aimed at cutting back on certain projects, while focusing on those that generate bigger returns.
"This will allow us to reshape the company and flatten the organization so we can focus on our most promising initiatives," Chief Executive Fidji Simo said in an investor letter.
Instacart said three executives, including its chief technology officer and chief operating officer, will leave the company for personal reasons.
Following the news, the company's shares were down 3% in after-hours trading.
Instacart is the latest tech company to cut staff this year. Last week, DocuSign said it would cut about 6% of its workforce, and Snapchat parent Snap said it was slicing 10% of its staff. Okta, Zoom, Google and Amazon have also recently moved to cut jobs.
The tech industry has continued its belt-tightening even after cutting tens of thousands of workers since 2022. The industry, which grew with little restraint until a few years ago, has emerged from a recent downturn with a new focus on profitability. Meanwhile, excitement about the potential opportunity of artificial intelligence has nudged some companies to increase automation and shift resources from other efforts.
Instacart commands the U.S. grocery-delivery market, but competition is mounting from rivals, including DoorDash and Uber Technologies' Uber Eats. All three apps saw their sales skyrocket during the pandemic. While sales have remained elevated -- showing that consumer habits have shifted toward convenience and delivery -- growth has sharply cooled from pandemic peaks.
Delivery is a capital-intensive and logistically challenging undertaking. Instacart and its rivals expanded into more-lucrative businesses, such as advertising, to bolster profits. Uber, which also has a more mature ride-sharing business, marked its first full year of profit in 2023. DoorDash, which leads the restaurant-delivery business, has also been trimming its losses.
Instacart, formally called Maplebear, went public in September. As of Monday's close, its shares have fallen 19% since their first day of trading. Over the same period, Uber shares have climbed 49%, DoorDash shares have risen 46% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index is up 16%.
Instacart announced Tuesday's layoffs alongside its fourth-quarter results. The company posted a profit of $135 million for the three months through Dec. 31, down 71% from the same quarter a year earlier when it gained from a tax allowance.
The value of transactions on its app grew by 7% to $7.89 billion, slightly better than the estimates of analysts polled by FactSet. The value of transactions indicates consumer demand, while revenue refers to Instacart's cut from it.
The company's revenue grew by 6% to $803 million, in line with Wall Street's forecast. About 70% of that revenue was earned by charging a cut on transactions, while the rest came from other avenues, including advertising.
For the current quarter that ends in March, Instacart projected the value of transactions on its app to be between $8 billion and $8.2 billion.
Credit: By Preetika Rana
