When the company behind Snapchat hatched plans to earn money from its popular messaging app, it told advertisers their ads would only appear beside content curated by people.
Now, Snap Inc. is in a tricky spot. To boost revenue, the 6-year-old company will ultimately need more of the tailored packages of pictures and videos, called Stories, that advertisers prize. Expanding its offering using only editors could be a slow and costly effort, but letting computers do the work would eliminate the human touch that has helped Snapchat stand out.
Ads accounted for nearly all of Snap's $149.6 million in revenue in the latest quarter, which surged from a year earlier but declined sequentially for the first time.
The Venice, Calif.-based company gets ad revenue from several areas, including publisher content and sponsorships. While Stories is a smaller share -- it could amount to more than one-quarter of ad revenue this year, Barclays PLC estimates -- it is the lever Snap has the greatest control over.
Snap created Stories four years ago to take advantage of the steady stream of pictures and videos people send in private, disappearing messages called Snaps. By allowing users to stitch Snaps together into a narrative arc that could be shared publicly for 24 hours, Stories showed how Snapchat could be more than just a messaging app.
More important, it gave Snap a place to showcase ads. Unlike Facebook Inc. and Twitter Inc., Snapchat doesn't have a content feed optimized by algorithms. And it doesn't show traditional ads with most of the three billion Snaps.
Facebook, by comparison, pulled in $7.86 billion in ad revenue in the first quarter, driven by ads placed in the news feeds of its 1.28 billion daily users. Twitter had $474 million in ad revenue and 328 million monthly users in the first quarter.
With its stock falling more than 25% since the company's first earnings report and briefly touching its IPO price of $17 on Thursday, Snap is under pressure from investors to prove its new form of advertising will grow. "Snap might be able to scale with human editors, but it will be labor intensive and won't make much money," said Pedro Domingos, a professor of computer science and engineering at the University of Washington who wrote a book on machine learning.
In the first quarter, Snap editors created more than 450 Stories, called Our Stories, chief strategist Imran Khan said on an earnings call. While Snapchat's 166 million daily users also can create Stories that carry ads, those don't have the ability to go viral.
Snap says it is committed to human curation, and the company is testing new software to help editors more quickly and efficiently craft Stories, former employees say.
Still, Snap has hired people with machine-learning expertise, a person familiar with the matter said. And since 2014 Snap has filed for patents related to automated content curation, according to research firm CB Insights.
Last year, Snap tested tools that help create Stories using algorithms. The company isn't planning on including ads in algorithm-created content, said a spokeswoman.
During the first phase of testing, algorithms flagged when users in New York created a burst of Snaps after a statue of Donald Trump appeared in August. Editors then culled the content into a Story, according to a person who saw the tool in action. A later version of the tool did the work of pulling Snaps together for editors to evaluate.

Credit: By Georgia Wells
