Speech Recognition
Gets Conversational
Smartphones are good at understanding what users say to them, but they can't handle conversations. The shift from one speaking voice to another confuses virtually all speech-recognition software.
Researchers at International Business Machines Corp. say they have succeeded in building an algorithm that doesn't get tripped up so easily. The new software accurately recognizes conversations spoken by two alternating voices, said Michael Picheny, the leader of IBM's speech team.
The researchers tested the software, which like many IBM artificial-intelligence efforts will carry the Watson brand name, on a database of telephone conversations between strangers and found an 8% error rate, 36% better than the best previous results on the same test, Mr. Picheny said.
That's not as accurate as a person, but it's close.
"Humans on this particular set of data only get 4% of the words wrong," he said. "A few years ago the number was closer to 20%" for the best software available.
Even Facebook Inc., one of IBM's rivals in the artificial-intelligence race, is impressed. The results represent a "significant advance," said Yann LeCun, Facebook's director of artificial intelligence research.
The success of the IBM team stems from fusing a variety of so-called deep-learning computing techniques. It used deep neural networks to spot speech patterns; convolutional neural networks, also called ConvNets, to sort out variations in pitch; and recurrent neural networks to remember past sounds.
Many researchers lately have been combining these techniques. In the past year, Baidu Inc., Google Inc. and Microsoft Corp. have published papers on these techniques.
"People at IBM and elsewhere have used ConvNets and neural language models before, but this is the first system that really puts it all together and beats a long-held record on a widely accepted benchmark," said Mr. LeCun, one of the inventors of the ConvNet technique.
The new software will be added to a programming service, known as an application programming interface, or API, released in February, that lets programmers use Watson for speech recognition, Mr. Picheny said. It could be used, for instance, to help customer-support staff with callers' whose speech is difficult to understand.
The artificial-intelligence techniques involved have been around since the 1980s, but they have become hot areas of applied research and development only in the past five years.
Google has spent hundreds of millions of dollars acquiring companies with neural networking expertise. Apple Inc., Baidu, Facebook, IBM and Microsoft also have been snapping up deep-learning experts in an effort to build systems that recognize speech, photographs and videos with near-human accuracy.
-- Robert McMillan
Splunk's Loss Widens
Despite Solid Revenue
Big-data software company Splunk Inc. on Thursday reported another period of strong revenue growth, though higher expenses led to a wider loss for its fiscal first quarter.
For the second time in as many quarters, the company increased its revenue guidance for the year.
Splunk said it had a strong quarter and that its 9,500 customers now include 80 of the Fortune 100. "We welcomed a record number of new customers to Splunk Cloud," the company said.
For the year ending in January 2016, the company now expects revenue of $610 million to $614 million, compared with a previous view of $600 million.
In the current quarter, it expects $138 million to $140 million. Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expected second-quarter revenue of $136 million.
While Splunk's revenue and customer base have been growing rapidly, the company has yet to post a profit.
Earlier this month, Splunk hired Snehal Antani as chief technology officer. He replaced Todd Papaioannou, who left the company in November.
For the quarter ended April 30, Splunk reported a loss of $71.2 million, or 57 cents a share, compared with a year-earlier loss of $50.8 million, or 43 cents a share.
Excluding stock-based compensation and other items, the company reported a loss of one cent a share. Analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters expected a loss of three cents a share.
Revenue jumped 46% to $125.7 million. The San Francisco company had projected revenue of $116 million to $118 million.
-- Josh Beckerman
Apple Buys Metaio,
German Reality Firm
Apple Inc. has acquired German augmented-reality firm Metaio.
Apple confirmed the acquisition with its standard response when it buys a company. "Apple buys smaller technology companies from time to time and we generally do not discuss our purpose or plans," said an Apple spokesman.
Metaio has worked on a technology that allows people wearing Google Glass-like eyewear to make any real-world surface into a virtual touch screen. It also created software to let developers create tablet apps that flash repair instructions across the screen when the tablet's camera is pointed at machines such as car engines or a printer.
The acquisition comes a few months after Piper Jaffray senior research analyst Gene Munster said Apple has a small team exploring augmented reality technology. He said that Apple could help develop AR products that appeal more to consumers than products like Google Glass.
Apple news site 9to5mac reported earlier this week that Apple is working on adding augmented- reality features to its Maps application. The feature would allow a user to point an iPhone camera down a street and it would overlay information about restaurants, cafes and other local businesses in that vicinity.
The acquisition was earlier reported by 9to5mac.
-- Daisuke Wakabayashi
