The value of trade between two nations is rarely equal. Whether due to a surfeit of natural resources, low labor costs, a culture of inventiveness or all three, one country inevitably enjoys an advantage over another in the production of certain goods.
Yet as David Ricardo noted 200 years ago in his classic 1817 treatise on comparative advantage, even when trade is unequal both countries benefit from trade.
Ricardo's model was based on the idea that inefficient producers in the two countries would perish. The resulting increase in productivity would create higher real wages in a win-win for both sides.
But if Ricardo were alive today, the state of U.S.-China trade would confound him. By erecting an array of nontariff barriers, each as pernicious as tariffs, China has secured the larger share of the benefits from trade, protected inefficient companies and moved the relationship closer to a zero-sum game.
By no means have all American companies been losers. U.S. automobile manufacturers, pharmaceutical firms and consumer-goods producers are among the beneficiaries of China's economic growth. Shanghai today has more Starbucks than any city in the world. Buicks dominate the streets. Logos for American companies and brands abound.
But the list of hurdles that inhibit or imperil American companies' success in China is woefully long. It includes equity caps on ownership stakes, Byzantine regulations, inconsistent enforcement of laws, forced transfer of intellectual property and cheap government-backed bank loans to inefficient state enterprises.
In 2001 China was admitted to the World Trade Organization, an act meant to benefit both China and other countries. It was globalization writ large. But China has often thumbed its nose at WTO rulings designed to ensure fairness of trade, or dragged its feet thereafter.
In 2012, for example, the WTO determined that China unfairly withheld licenses from American credit-card companies and should end those restrictions. It wasn't until May of this year, however, that the Trump administration secured an "early harvest" trade agreement with China, including the right for American companies to issue yuan credit cards. It was a hollow victory that arrived far too late. Shielded from competition for five years after the WTO ruling, China's mobile-based payment services have superseded Western credit services.
Soon the citizens of Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles and Philadelphia will commute to work on railcars manufactured by majority state-owned Chinese companies. These companies benefit from openly published government subsidies amounting to several hundred million dollars. Lessons should be learned.
This week a delegation from the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai visits Washington. We bring a simple message: As the Trump administration mulls the future, two things are paramount. First, it must negotiate a level playing field for American business in China for the years ahead. Second, it must focus on the key industries of the future.
Until now, many U.S. companies have relied on their technological smarts to stay ahead of competitors, innovating in expectation of a market for their goods. But in China, government barriers provide local firms with ever-greater competitive advantages, even as those firms improve their know-how.
Take cloud computing. Amazon and Google are the industry's vanguard, but in China they cannot majority-own server farms. Foreign tech companies have had to enter into local partnerships to retain access to the local market, even if it risks technology transfer.
And what of artificial intelligence? While Chinese law lags AI's rapid development, successful AI relies heavily on data collection, an area where the Chinese government fiercely regulates foreign investment. The sense that Chinese technology firms are stealing a march on their foreign competitors is inescapable.
American bioseed producers are restricted to minority-owned joint ventures with Chinese companies. Medical-device manufacturers must wait up to five years for their most advanced products to receive approval. Industrial policies such as "Made in China 2025" result in preferential access to capital for local firms. In the information and communications technology sector, there is alarm among U.S. companies that China's goal is nothing less than nativizing this entire sector by 2025.
In the industries of tomorrow, whether it's AI, autonomous vehicles, biotechnology or high-end manufacturing, China is deploying industrial policy to nurture national champions. It uses the excuse of security to protect its companies from overseas competition, and pressures foreign firms to share technology to speed indigenous innovation.
China is tilting U.S.-China trade in its favor. In violation of international trade law, it is using state resources to alter comparative advantage. Ricardo surely would object.
---
Mr. Gibbs is chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai.

Credit: By Ker Gibbs
