Most mornings, the first two words out of my mouth are "Hey, Google." Before I greet my wife or my dog, I turn toward the Google Home Hub on my nightstand and ask about the weather.
The Home Hub is a vessel for Google Assistant, the virtual helper Google wants to make the center of your computing life. Amazon's Alexa and Apple's Siri aim for the same lofty status, as do Samsung's Bixby and Microsoft's Cortana.
Virtual assistants can do lots of things, and learn new tricks all the time. But what are they actually best at?
To find out, I've been trying to do as much as possible with the help of Alexa, Siri and Google Assistant. (Bixby and Cortana didn't make the cut.) They turned out to be more useful than I expected but ran into too many frustrations.
There are a few things that virtually everyone uses their assistant for. Playing music, according to study after study. Checking the weather comes in second. After that? Setting timers and alarms.
In addition to the basics, I've found four categories of tasks that Alexa, Siri and Google Assistant tend to handle well.
-- Looking things up. Generally speaking, if you want to know whether a digital assistant is up to a task, figure out if there is a single correct answer. Facts and trivia are a good starting point. Who won the Bruins game? How many tablespoons in a cup?
Who does it best? Google Assistant. While Siri often gives up and shows search results and Alexa just fails, Google nearly always has the answer.
-- Controlling your devices. All three help you control smart-home gadgets like lights and locks, as long as you buy compatible products. But I'm more fond of asking Siri or Google Assistant to turn on my phone's flashlight, enable Do Not Disturb, or start Personal Hotspot.
Who does it best? Siri. Since Apple released iOS 12, Apple's helper has gained more access to the inner workings of its host phone than the others. I can say, "Hey, Siri, show me Netflix notification settings" and it'll jump to the right place.
-- Ordering the usual. Assistant-guided shopping isn't normally a good experience -- too much explaining needed. There is one terrific exception: If you order the same thing over and over, your assistant has it covered. I tell Google Assistant to order my regular from Starbucks, or have Alexa re-up my dog food, and it can place the order in seconds.
Who does it best? Alexa. What Google is to question-answering, Amazon is to shopping. Make sure you enable the Starbucks Reorder skill: The first time I asked Alexa to order a drink, it added "venti ice coffee with skim milk" to my Amazon cart.
-- Getting stuff done. You might feel weird walking down the street saying, "Hey Joe comma what's the plan for tonight question mark" into your phone, but there is no faster way to send a message or start a call than to dictate it. I use Siri and Google Assistant all the time to add things to my calendar or to-do list.
Who does it best? Siri. For calls and texts, whatever comes with your phone will work best, but Siri integrates with other productivity apps -- TickTick for tasks, Evernote for notes and more.
I was struck by how many tasks seemed beyond the assistants' scope. The murkier things get, the worse your assistant becomes. It can find the nearest Mexican restaurant, but not necessarily the best one. You can enable extra tools to help -- Alexa has a handy "Restaurant Finder" and the Siri Shortcuts app can help stitch apps together.
Meanwhile, voice-recognition software is excellent but not perfect. When I told all three assistants to remind me to pick up churros at Trader Joe's, only Google heard me right. Siri thought I said "chairs" and Alexa decided I was picking up "Charles."
All that said, you should lean on your assistant for more than timers and music. Take all those small, repetitive things you do all day and try delegating. Sometimes you'll end up picking up Charles at Trader Joe's. But most of the time you might be impressed at what your assistant can do. Just don't ask too much.
Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, has a commercial agreement to supply news through Apple services.

Credit: By David Pierce
