Every year on the website Edge, scientists and other thinkers reply to one question. This year it's "What do you consider the most interesting recent news" in science? The answers are fascinating. We're used to thinking of news as the events that happen in a city or country within a few weeks or months. But scientists expand our thinking to the unimaginably large and the infinitesimally small.
Despite this extraordinary range, the answers of the Edge contributors have an underlying theme. The biggest news of all is that a handful of large-brained primates on an insignificant planet have created machines that let them understand the world, at every scale, and let them change it too, for good or ill.
Here is just a bit of the scientific news. The Large Hadron Collider -- the giant particle accelerator in Geneva -- is finally fully functional. So far the new evidence from the LHC has mostly just confirmed the standard model of physics, which helps explain everything from the birth of time to the end of the world. But at the tiny scale of the basic particles it is supposed to investigate, the Large Hadron Collider has detected a small blip -- something really new may just be out there.
Our old familiar solar system, though, has turned out to be full of surprises. Unmanned spacecraft have discovered that the planets surrounding us are more puzzling, peculiar and dynamic than we would ever have thought. Mars once had water. Pluto, which was supposed to be an inert lump, like the moon, turns out to be a dynamic planet full of glaciers of nitrogen.
On our own planet, the big, disturbing news is that the effects of carbon on climate change are ever more evident and immediate. The ice sheets are melting, sea levels are rising, and last year was almost certainly the warmest on record. Our human response is achingly slow in contrast.
When it comes to all the living things that inhabit that planet, the big news is the new Crispr gene-editing technology. The technique means that we can begin to rewrite the basic genetic code of all living beings -- from mosquitoes to men.
The news about our particular human bodies and their ills is especially interesting. The idea that tiny invisible organisms make us sick was one of the great triumphs of the scientific expansion of scale. But new machines that detect the genetic signature of bacteria have shown that those invisible germs -- the "microbiome" -- aren't really the enemy. In fact, they're essential to keeping us well, and the great lifesaving advance of antibiotics comes with a cost.
The much more mysterious action of our immune system is really the key to human health, and that system appears to play a key role in everything from allergies to obesity to cancer.
If new technology is helping us to understand and mend the human body, it is also expanding the scope of the human mind. We've seen lots of media coverage about artificial intelligence over the past year, but the basic algorithms are not really new. The news is the sheer amount of data and computational power that is available.
Still, even if those advances are just about increases in data and computing power, they could profoundly change how we interact with the world. In my own contribution to answering the Edge question, I talked about the fact that toddlers are starting to interact with computers and that the next generation will learn about computers in a radically new way.
From the Large Hadron Collider to the Mars Rover, from Crispr to the toddler's iPad, the news is that technologies let us master the universe and ourselves and reshape the planet. What we still don't know is whether, ultimately, these developments are good news or bad.
Credit: By Alison Gopnik
