SUPER MICRO COMPUTER
SMCI +31%
Super Micro Computer is on a road to recovery, recharging its shares. The specialized server maker on Monday submitted a plan to stay listed on the Nasdaq after it missed deadlines for providing financial reports to investors. Super Micro also named a new auditor after its previous accounting firm, Ernst & Young, resigned last month, citing concerns about the company's financial reporting. The struggling company started this year as one of the hottest names in artificial intelligence, but a scathing report from short-selling firm Hindenburg Research and a probe by the Justice Department has weighed heavily on its shares. Super Micro shares surged 31% Tuesday, building on Monday's 16% rally.
NVIDIA
NVDA +0.5%
Nvidia has been riding high on its AI hype, but investors weren't wowed by its latest earnings. The chip maker on Wednesday reported another quarter of surging sales and profits, but the stock's after-hours declines signaled that the results didn't meet traders' lofty expectations. The company said it expects its next-generation AI chips, known as Blackwell, to ship in the current quarter and be in short supply during into its next fiscal year. Nvidia shares edged 0.5% higher Thursday.
GAP
GAP +13%
The apparel retailer on Thursday raised its sales outlook for the year. The company now expects full-year sales to grow between 1.5% and 2%. Gap also posted a rise in profit and sales in the fiscal third quarter and said that its fiscal fourth quarter is off to a strong start. The company has been working to turn itself around under Chief Executive Richard Dickson, who took charge last year. Dickinson is known for reviving Barbie during his long tenure at Mattel. Gap shares jumped 13% Friday.
TARGET
TGT -21%
The retailer posted disappointing quarterly results and cut its full-year forecasts for sales and profit as consumers head into the critical holiday season. Earlier this year, Target had raised its profit estimates and said sales were looking up. Rival Walmart said Tuesday it had a great start to the season, with its U.S. comparable sales rising 5.3% in the latest quarter, beating expectations. Target said its comparable sales grew just 0.3% in the quarter. Target shares plummeted 21% Wednesday.
WARNER BROS. DISCOVERY
WBD +2.7%
Warner Bros. Discovery and the National Basketball Association are ending their legal battle over TV rights. While Warner Bros. is losing long-held rights to regular and postseason games for its TNT network after this season, the settlement will give it rights to a significant amount of NBA content domestically and abroad, the Journal reported. Warner Bros. in July filed a breach of contract lawsuit against the NBA. Warner Bros. shares rose 2.7% Monday.
ALPHABET
GOOG -4.6%
The Justice Department on Wednesday said that Google should be forced to spin off its popular internet browser as part of a court-ordered fix to its alleged monopolization of the online search market. The department also proposed preventing Google from giving preferential access to its search engine on Android devices and forbidding Google from paying to be the default search engine on any browser. Alphabet shares lost 4.6% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
