Proposed U.S. controls about sharing technology with China threaten the development of self-driving vehicles, an area where U.S. and Chinese businesses have grown to rely on each other in recent years.
Whether nominally American or Chinese, many companies developing autonomous driving systems or other next-generation vehicle tech function as Sino-U.S. hybrids with research-and-development bases of equal importance in California and in China. Employing the best available American and Chinese engineers, they typically raise funds in both countries.
This distributed approach has been considered a strength but is now a vulnerability as Washington prepares to slap export controls on a range of critical emerging technologies, including the artificial intelligence that underpins autonomous driving.
"Our company would be split in half," said David Liu, the founder and chief executive of Plus.ai, the U.S. self-driving software developer that recently teamed up with Chinese truck maker FAW Group Corp. With bases in San Francisco and in the Chinese cities of Beijing and Suzhou, it would be hard for Plus.ai to function in its present form, should exporting U.S.-developed A.I. technology to China be proscribed, Mr. Liu said.
The U.S.'s proposed controls are "a cloud hanging over every technology company," said Mr. Liu, a Stanford University graduate who was born in China and is now a U.S. citizen, with many of the company's Chinese and American peers in Silicon Valley similarly vulnerable. Despite the uncertainty, he said, Plus.ai plans to continue developing and selling in both countries.
Exports to blacklisted entities such as Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei Technologies Co. are already tightly monitored, but the new controls, mandated by 2018 Export Control Reform Act, will be much more sweeping, covering whole technology categories. Late last year the Commerce Department, as mandated by the act, published a list of emerging technologies, including A.I., biotech and microprocessors, that potentially merit controls. Implementing legislation is expected to follow next year.
"Autonomous driving technology is likely to be roped up in these controls," said Dan Wang, a Hong Kong-based technology analyst at Gavekal Dragonomics. "The U.S. government has long taken an expansive view of national security."
Technology controls may prove costly: U.S. companies could lose up to $56 billion over five years if tech exports are closed off, according to the Washington-based think tank Information Technology and Innovation Foundation.
However, the threat of controls could prove a useful bargaining chip in Washington's confrontation with Beijing, said Michael Dunne, chief executive of ZoZo Go, an automotive consulting firm. While Chinese tech firms have long been free to operate in the U.S., their American counterparts enjoy none of the same freedoms in China.

Credit: By Trefor Moss
