WASHINGTON -- The House voted on Wednesday to approve a nearly $900 billion annual defense-policy bill that includes a controversial provision that would block some transgender medical care for minors covered by the military's healthcare program.
The package, which sets national defense standards and priorities for the 2025 fiscal year, notably calls for a 14.5% pay raise for junior enlisted service members, dwarfing the 4.5% pay raise included for all other members of the armed forces. The package passed 281-140.
The 1,800-page National Defense Authorization Act would increase the national-security budget to $895 billion, about a 1% increase from last year's total, less than inflation. It authorizes $25 billion less in funding for the Pentagon than the approach favored by Sens. Roger Wicker (R., Miss.), who in January will take over as the chair of the Senate Armed Services Committee, and Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.), who will take charge of the Defense panel of the Appropriations Committee next year.
House Speaker Mike Johnson (R., La.) on Tuesday said the bill "ensures our military has the resources and the capabilities needed to remain the most powerful fighting force on the planet." The final number keeps projected spending in line with a debt-ceiling agreement struck in 2023.
But Wicker said the lack of a meaningful increase in defense spending "is a tremendous loss for our national defense."
The NDAA authorizes appropriations but doesn't provide budget authority, making it a guide to what military spending is ultimately passed separately by Congress. It is set to be the 64th consecutive NDAA successfully passed through Congress -- a rarity in what has increasingly become a divided and chaotic legislature.
The bill is now expected to be fast-tracked in the Senate, where the chamber will likely pass it before Congress leaves at the end of next week. From there, it would go to President Biden's desk, where he is expected to sign it.
The compromise bill, which the House and Senate Armed Services committees released over the weekend, includes a provision from Johnson that blocks minor children of military members from receiving treatment for gender dysphoria through military health insurer Tricare.
The bill text says that "medical interventions . . . that could result in sterilization" can't be provided to minors.
The gender provision injected new drama into the vote, which typically passes with majorities of each party.
Rep. Adam Smith (D., Wash.), the lead Democrat on the House Armed Services Committee, said on Tuesday that he planned to vote against the package, saying that Johnson's addition "may force thousands of service members to make the choice of continuing their military service or leaving to ensure their child can get the healthcare they need."
Some Republicans also signaled annoyance at the provision. "This stuff does not belong in our bill," said House Armed Services Committee Chair Mike Rogers (R., Ala.), noting that President-elect Donald Trump is already expected to end transgender care for service members and dependents once he takes office on Jan. 20.
The Pentagon hasn't publicly released statistics on how many minor children of service members receive gender-affirming care via Tricare or how much it has paid to support them.
Smith estimated that up to 7,000 children could be affected by the provision.
The provision is tied to a broader push by Republicans to push back on transgender rights. While on the campaign trail, Trump repeatedly suggested that allowing transgender service members had weakened the force and vowed to "make the military great again."
Pete Hegseth, his defense chief nominee, has argued the military has come to value diversity and "wokeness" over lethality and readiness.
Another bill amendment would restrict the Pentagon from creating additional positions related to diversity, equity and inclusion -- another issue that conservatives have decried. But the bill doesn't include any provisions restricting military members' access to abortion, a controversial issue in last year's NDAA negotiations.
Both the House and Senate committees advanced their respective versions of the bill this summer, and leaders have negotiated a compromise bill in the months since.
The NDAA pledges to fully fund programs providing financial assistance for child-care programs and increase the pay of child-care staff, and extend a pilot program that connects military spouses with employment opportunities.
It also establishes a program to prevent and manage mental-health conditions arising at or around the time of giving birth, and does away with copays for some contraceptives bought at retail pharmacies and through the mail. It also reauthorizes tele-health eligibility for service members living abroad.
The bill expands the U.S. military presence in the Indo-Pacific, a region where China and other foreign adversaries have recently ramped up spending and infrastructure development. It authorizes $2 billion -- a large chunk of the $17.5 billion authorized for military construction projects overall -- for the Pacific Deterrence Initiative.
It also authorizes the construction of one nuclear-powered submarine and three guided-missile-destroyer warships as part of a $33.5 billion authorization for expanded shipbuilding, and 92 fighter aircraft. It would also free up some money by authorizing the divestment from outdated systems and machinery, including some aging ships and aircraft.
It excludes an amendment that would have limited some investment into China, an effort that has been spearheaded by Sens. John Cornyn (R., Texas) and Bob Casey (D., Pa.). "It's high time that the United States becomes serious about limiting the flow of U.S. dollars into the arsenal of our biggest strategic adversary," Cornyn said, citing issues including quantum computing and artificial intelligence.
---
Lindsay Wise and Nancy Youssef contributed to this article.
Credit: By Xavier Martinez
