Chief executives entered the decade waiting for the next shoe to drop. The 2008 financial crisis drove entire industries to the brink, and CEOs spent the initial years of economic recovery conserving capital, slow-walking hiring plans and keeping a close eye on fragile global markets.
Life in the corner office has undergone substantial change since then. Revenue, profits and company valuations have steadily increased over 10 years, according to the most recent analysis of S&P 500 companies. CEOs, meanwhile, enjoy longer tenures, on average, and are seeing pay packages increase annually, according to compensation-data firm Equilar Inc. and the Conference Board.
With growth has come a new set of headaches.
The dash toward globalization has been complicated by a wave of nationalism, and this trend is helping spark trade wars and a broad reboot of immigration policies. CEOs, meanwhile, are increasingly expected to take stands on issues ranging from civil rights to climate change. Artificial intelligence, big data and cybersecurity have gone from buzzwords to legitimate challenges facing the modern business leader, according to an analysis of PricewaterhouseCoopers's annual survey of CEOs.
"The game has picked up its pace a bit, and the consequences of screwing up have gotten worse," says Noel Tichy, a professor at the University of Michigan's Ross School of Business. Mr. Tichy says the basic job of a leader hasn't changed much since he ran General Electric Co.'s Crotonville, N.Y., leadership-training center in the 1980s, but today's top dog faces "more complexity, more technology change and competitors that are faster, stronger and bigger."
In recent weeks, I've checked in with several CEOs to better understand how life has changed atop the corporate ladder.
CEOs as social warriors
Indra Nooyi, the longtime leader of PepsiCo Inc., says CEOs have a "bully pulpit" now more than ever. As political leaders are increasingly seen as overly partisan and willing to take divisive stands, she says, shareholders, employees, customers and suppliers are expecting top executives to use their position to help unite people behind social issues that -- at times -- may offend some customers, employees or other constituents.
"There is a leadership vacuum today that CEOs are expected to step into and fill," says Ms Nooyi. "It's because others are failing at the job."
In 2019, the annual Trust Barometer from communications firm Edelman showed a sharp rebound in the public's confidence in businesses from the beginning of the decade, with respondents ranking corporations as more trustworthy than the government, media and nongovernmental organizations. Three-quarters of those surveyed, however, say CEOs need to show leadership by supporting equal pay, standing against discrimination, caring about the environment and confronting sexual harassment.
Dick's Sporting Goods Inc. offers a case study on how using the bully pulpit can go. Ed Stack, the CEO and son of the company's founder, in 2018 ended all sales of assault-style weapons in response to mass shootings at schools, costing the company an estimated $250 million in total lost revenue. In a book published recently, Mr. Stack said he "took a stand that earned both applause and condemnation." Other retailers, including Walmart Inc., followed suit, and Dick's has said it has seen a positive response from customers as a result of its decision.
The chief employment officer
As the act of hiring has gone from feast to famine in recent years, CEOs are realizing they need to do more to attract and reward the workers needed to keep the business afloat. In survey after survey, employees -- especially highly skilled younger ones -- say they need to feel proud of where they work and see room for growth.
"The old CEO tendency would be to say, 'I'm just going to pay them more,'" says Mat Ishbia, CEO of United Shore Mortgage, the No. 1 wholesale mortgage lender in terms of loan production volume.
But Mr. Ishbia realizes his employees want a life outside work. Leaders of the Michigan-based company enforce workweek hours, known internally as a "Firm 40." And he retooled how managers give feedback, installing a process called Your Time, where employees can expect regular and candid feedback and offer it in return.
Eva Karlsson, CEO of Sweden's Houdini Sportswear, says changing demands are evident in job interviews. "Employees aren't motivated as much by money. They may be in the job interview and ask, 'How are you doing with biodiversity?' If they don't get the answers they want, they don't take the job."
Think strategically in the long term . . .
The hottest debate in corporate America asks whether a public company exists for the enrichment of shareholders or in service of a broader constituency, including employees and customers. This summer, 181 CEOs in the Business Roundtable association chose the latter, signing a statement that committed their companies to serve the interests of all stakeholders.
The document is a proxy for a larger movement away from short-term thinking, which is most clearly seen in quarterly earnings reports that aim to please Wall Street.
. . . But act nimbly in the short term
While much has changed for CEOs, one thing has remained constant over a decade: the need to be nimble in an age of uncertainty and risk. Whether it is the policies of the Trump administration, threat of new regulation or geopolitical turmoil, wrestling with the unknown is as tough as it has always been. And CEOs have to be ready to turn quickly.
Ms. Karlsson is just beginning Houdini's expansion into the U.S., having recently notched a partnership with outdoor retailing giant REI. Revenue is growing rapidly. But forget about creating a long-term blueprint. "There is such rapid transformation everywhere," she says. "A few years ago, you could actually plan five years ahead and stick to that plan. Now you just have to set a framework with a clear goal."
Houdini is in an industry where new technology is constantly emerging, including improved fibers that make clothing lighter or easier to recycle.
Clean intentions
It wasn't long ago that environmentalists wondered when climate change would go from a fringe issue to a core business concern. That time has clearly come, and executives can no longer evade the issue.
On a recent conference call to update media on his company's climate goals, Cummins Inc. CEO Tom Linebarger said sustainability is now among the top business priorities for most companies doing business in the U.S. The Columbus, Ind., company is long known for making fossil-fuel-burning engines, but it is committed to significantly reducing the amount of greenhouse gases Cummins products emit.
---
Mr. Stoll writes The Wall Street Journal's On Business column. He can be reached at john.stoll@wsj.com.

Credit: By John D. Stoll
