The Biden administration's plan to restrict private-equity and venture-capital investment in China has left firms and their lawyers struggling with the implications for the huge Chinese operations that many have built over the past several decades.
The Wednesday executive order suggests a kind of "sanctions-lite" approach to investments in China, lawyers say. It would prevent private funds from investing in some high-technology areas and require them to disclose information about commitments involving sensitive industries in China.
The Treasury Department can issue the final rule after a 45-day comment period. The agency's proposal asked for feedback on many aspects of the rule, and private-equity and venture firms are likely to have a lot to say.
Private-equity lobbying group the American Investment Council disputes the administration's view that buyout fund investment in China represents a threat. The group said last month that private equity "sharpens the United States' competitive edge in emerging technologies" and that, in any case, the U.S. accounts for only a tiny fraction of private-equity investment in China.
On Thursday, a spokeswoman for the group said it was reviewing the proposal and would work with the Treasury Department on the rules.
The final proposal's shape remains to be seen. But the sketchiness of Wednesday's proposal means private-equity firms face many unknowns about what will come next.
The proposal applies to private-equity investment in just three high-tech sectors: artificial intelligence, quantum computing and semiconductors.
Firms should be aware that the scope proposed now can broaden over time.
Wednesday's order leaves firms with a lot to ponder concerning what to do with legacy investments in sensitive Chinese businesses. One basic question: Will Chinese investment arms or affiliates of U.S. private-equity firms be treated under the rule as U.S. or Chinese entities?
Like much else in the proposal, the answer remains unclear.
But some firms might choose to restructure the legal relationship between their U.S. headquarters and their Chinese operations to avoid this risk, said Brendan Hanifin, a partner at law firm Ropes & Gray who works on international investment risks.
However, he thinks it is unlikely that the proposal spooks firms into selling off their Chinese investments altogether.
Credit: By Chris Cumming
