Sentient artificial intelligence may take hundreds of years to develop, but AI is already beginning to transform nearly every industry, says Andrew Ng, a pioneer in the field whose resume includes work as chief scientist of Chinese internet company Baidu, co-founder of Google's deep-learning research team and co-founder of online-education company Coursera.
In April 2017, the 42-year-old left Baidu to launch two AI startups: an online education platform called deeplearning.ai and Landing AI, which aims to bring AI to companies in manufacturing, agriculture and other industries. He recently spoke with The Future of Everything about how to create an equitable society in the age of automation and why -- this time -- the technology is here to stay. This interview has been condensed and edited.
WSJ: A Conditional Basic Income Could Combat Job Loss
A: Of the things that worry me about AI, job displacement is really high up. We need to make sure that wealth we create [through AI] is distributed in a fair and equitable way. Ethics to me isn't about making sure your robot doesn't turn evil. It's about really thinking through, what is the society we're building? And making sure that it's a fair and transparent and equitable one. I feel that government should play a role as well in conditional basic income. For someone that's unemployed I really support the government giving them a safety net with the expectation that they'll do something to contribute back so they can gain the skills they need to re-enter the workforce.
WSJ: AI Winter Is Not Coming . . .
A: I don't think we're in for another AI winter [a period of decreased AI funding and interest]. In the earlier AI winters there was not that much economic value created through AI. It was relatively small groups of researchers whose work was overhyped. But if you look at it today, the fundamentals do support the rise of AI. Companies are bringing in very large amounts of revenues with AI. There's a clear road map for AI to create massive amounts of value.
WSJ: . . . But Our Timelines Are Too Rosy
A: I would actually welcome a correction in public opinion about what AI can and cannot do. This has happened to me multiple times, where I would listen to a CEO on stage make an announcement about what their company is doing with AI, and then 20 minutes later I'd talk to one of their engineers, and they'd say, "No, we're not doing that, and we have no idea how to do it." I think it still takes judgment to know what is and what isn't possible with AI, and when the C-suite does not yet have that judgment it's possible for companies to make promises very publicly that are just not feasible.

Credit: By Sara Castellanos
