A Silicon Valley startup is bringing high-tech solutions to one of America's lowest-tech childhood staples: riding the bus to school.
Zum operates a private school bus fleet, contracting with school districts to handle their bus routes. Its pitch to school districts is that artificial-intelligence-infused software can help cut the costs of ferrying children to and from campuses. Zum said it serves more than 4,000 U.S. schools in cities including San Francisco, Los Angeles, Chicago and Boston.
The Redwood City, Calif.-based company raised a $140 million Series E funding round at a $1.3 billion valuation to continue developing its AI-driven technology platform. The round was led by Singapore sovereign-wealth fund GIC. Additional investors in the round include Sequoia Capital and SoftBank Vision Fund 2.
GIC said it was attracted to how Zum was modernizing school transportation, making it safer and more sustainable. Zum said it feeds unused energy from the batteries on its electric buses back to the energy grid. Zum declined to say how many electric buses it has, but said it owns more than 2,000 total buses in its fleet, which include internal combustion and electric-powered buses.
Zum's funding round is a growth deal, a financing stage in which companies typically focus on scaling the business, expanding operations and increasing market share. Zum's financing comes as many startups in the growth stage struggle to raise capital, partly because the market for initial public offerings has been essentially at a standstill.
Last year, U.S. startups raised $36.1 billion in the venture growth stage, a 33% drop from what was raised in 2022, according to analytics firm PitchBook Data.
Zum Founder and Chief Executive Ritu Narayan said this reality factored into its fundraising, which kicked off in June of last year and closed in December.
"There is more desire from the investors to focus on the fundamentals toward not just the growth rate but also the profitability and sustainability of the business in the long run," Narayan said. "Our preparation was before fundraising, on making sure we had a strong business and we went out with strong metrics into the [fundraising] environment."
Narayan said Zum's business has a predictable and stable revenue model. Its largest contract is for $400 million with Los Angeles Unified School District, she said.
Zum says it can operate district bus routes more efficiently, in part by using artificial intelligence software to optimize routes. That allows it to reduce the number of buses used to serve the routes. For instance, the San Francisco school district was using 236 buses. Zum cut it to 193 buses, Narayan said.
Credit: By Marc Vartabedian
