Retailer Zulily Develops
Own In-House Software
Zulily Inc. turned to developing software in-house after commercial software couldn't keep pace with the growth of its online business. The retailer, which offers so-called flash sales where items are available for limited times only, counts on its website technology to track and customize the shopping experience.
"It's nearly impossible for a [off the shelf] solution to keep up with our pace," said Zulily CIO Luke Friang.
Zulily is one of a growing number of companies that recognize that developing software in-house could play a role differentiating them in the market and being competitive. Software development is where "innovation is captured and codified," said Jeffrey Hammond, a Forrester Research Inc. analyst. Other companies pursuing this strategy include General Motors Co., where CIO Randy Mott has directed the creation of several innovation centers and Tesla Motors Inc., which built its own e-commerce and back-end management software.
For Zulily, staying competitive meant building a system that could support the rapid pace of limited-time sales that typically last three days.
The company coded proprietary machine-learning algorithms capable of tracking consumers throughout the site, using behavioral data, such as how long consumers linger on a particular page and buying history, to display relevant sales events. Building its system frees Zulily to tune the software to better meet changing consumer preferences. "We feel that this is a differentiator for competitive advantage" versus Amazon.com Inc. and other online rivals, said Mr. Friang.
-- Clint Boulton
Many SAP Customers
Can't Make Case for HANA
SAP SE is betting its future on cloud computing and its in-memory HANA platform, but many customers still can't find the business case to validate the purchase, according to a survey from the Americas' SAP Users' Group.
It's a reminder that while there is lots of talk about the possibilities of Big Data, the technological transition -- especially for large companies -- won't happen overnight.
Of 377 respondents asked whether they had purchased a HANA product, just 40% said they had, while 55% hadn't and 5% didn't know. Three quarters of the customers who hadn't purchased a HANA product said they couldn't identify a business case that justifies the cost.
HANA is SAP's flagship product, a database that allows customers to store information in live memory rather than on disc-based storage devices, and to analyze it without having to perform time-consuming intermediate operations.
The results underscore the challenge companies face as they figure out what role, if any, HANA and other new technologies will play in their IT strategies. CIOs are developing or refining those strategies at a time when IT spending power is fanning out across business units, and technology assets aren't solely a back-office responsibility.
Making a business case for big upgrades and finding the right solution "is not a linear equation anymore," said Geoff Scott, CEO of the Americas SAP user group that conducted the survey.
The results also suggest that the shift to cloud and in-memory computing will be a gradual one for most customers, which could hamper growth prospects for companies like SAP and competitor Oracle Corp.
Steve Lucas, president of SAP Platform Solutions, said that the company has programs in place to address customer needs. "SAP has always been customer-centric in our approach to formulating our product and customer adoption strategies, and the SAP HANA product and solution line is no different."
-- Steven Norton
