Databricks is acquiring Tabular, a data-management startup that helps companies use a variety of open-source data formats, as the company looks to win artificial-intelligence customers by making it easier for them to use their own data with AI.
Databricks declined to specify how much it paid for Tabular, but said the price was between $1 billion and $2 billion. The sale is expected to close before July 31, and most of Tabular's team of about 40 will join Databricks, it said.
The deal comes as Databricks and other cloud data companies like Snowflake are on spending sprees for the same AI clients -- enterprises looking to spend big on using AI for business processes and building their own AI capabilities. Both Databricks and Snowflake provide a platform for storing, organizing and analyzing data across multiple cloud providers.
The AI boom has pushed chip giant Nvidia to meteoric heights, but it isn't clear that all technology players with a role in helping companies use AI will benefit from the hype. For Databricks and Snowflake, that means waging battle over one of the most valuable assets in the AI race: business data.
Data is a critical part of enabling generative AI because vast quantities of it are needed to train AI models like OpenAI's GPT-4 and Anthropic's Claude. For businesses, their private data is needed to customize those AI models to perform data analysis, summarization and other tasks with it. Without it, AI models are limited to what they have learned from their initial training on public data online, up to a certain point in time.
"What we want to do is create custom AI on all of your data. That's what we call data intelligence," Ali Ghodsi, chief executive and co-founder of Databricks, said in an interview. "For that, we need all the data. The more data the better."
The quest to capture more business data rests on making it easier for customers to use multiple data formats in the cloud at once, without driving up costs, Ghodsi said. That is where Tabular comes in.
Founded in 2021 by Netflix veterans Ryan Blue, Dan Weeks and Jason Reid, Tabular makes a cloud-storage technology that is built on Iceberg, an open-source table format for storing large amounts of data in data lakes, which allow companies to store all of their PDFs, spreadsheets and other information for processing later. Blue and Weeks were the creators of Iceberg in 2017.
Blue, Weeks and Reid will join the Databricks core data- platforms team to work on projects like Delta Lake UniForm, an offering announced last year that helps data engineers use multiple open-source table formats at once, including Iceberg, Delta Lake and Apache Hudi, the three most popular, Ghodsi said. They also will continue contributing to the Iceberg open-source technology, Databricks said. It didn't disclose the number of customers Tabular has.
Bringing Tabular into the Databricks fold is a boost for AI, because accessing more of their information allows companies to make their AI models that much better, said David Menninger, an analyst at Ventana Research, a unit of Information Services Group. With multiple open formats, companies can also more freely run and analyze their data where they prefer. Plus, they can more easily use retrieval-augmented generation, or RAG, a method of customizing AI models with business data, said Ramke Ramakrishnan, an analyst at market-research and consulting firm Gartner who focuses on data management.
The combination of Databricks and Tabular won't solve all of enterprises' data-sharing challenges. Ghodsi said Databricks intends to work with the open-source entities that manage Iceberg and Delta Lake to make the technologies more compatible -- or in other words, help end the "format wars."
But the formats may never converge, Ramakrishnan said, making it more likely that other vendors like Microsoft continue releasing their own tools to help enterprises use multiple formats at the same time.
On Monday, Databricks rival Snowflake unveiled Polaris Catalog, its own solution for making Iceberg-the format it has primarily supported -- easier for clients to use and manage with its data platform. Snowflake plans to make the product open-source, and is intended to prevent lock-in inside the Snowflake ecosystem, said James Malone, its head of data storage and streaming. The company began its business with a closed, proprietary table format.
Databricks, on the other hand, has over 12,000 customers using Delta Lake, and is aiming to expand its customer base to Iceberg clients, too, Ghodsi said.
Credit: By Belle Lin
