Beijing is increasingly tapping private Chinese firms to acquire foreign technology for its military, according to officials and a new report, in a strategy that is prompting calls in Washington to retool U.S. national security policy.
Chinese President Xi Jinping is pressing these companies to bid for defense contracts as part of a "military-civil fusion" drive to upgrade an arms industry long dominated by a handful of inefficient state-run contractors and research institutes.
The initiative, highlighted in a new report by nonprofit C4ADS, is alarming U.S. officials, who fear it is a central plank in Beijing's attempt to build a world-class military capable of challenging the U.S. in Asia and beyond. C4ADS does data-driven analysis on security issues and is known for its work detailing how North Korea evades sanctions.
"China's obfuscation and elimination of barriers between the defense and civilian sectors has troubling implications for foreign as well as domestic Chinese firms," a senior U.S. administration official said.
China's strategy is creating new risks that foreign companies and researchers inadvertently help the People's Liberation Army acquire the technology and expertise it needs to enhance its already rapidly expanding capabilities, according to the C4ADS report. The group said it presented its findings to stakeholders including U.S. and allied government agencies and legislators, defense contractors, financial institutions and Silicon Valley startups.
Beijing has made similar attempts in the past, but what makes its renewed push different and more troubling for the U.S. is that the country's industrial and capital base is much stronger today, and its involvement in business and research abroad far greater, C4ADS said. There also is much more scope now for using advanced civilian technology such as drones and artificial intelligence in modern military equipment.
Mr. Xi's vision for a more efficient defense industry is based largely on the American model. But there are significant differences between the Chinese strategy and the U.S. approach, Christopher Ashley Ford, U.S. assistant secretary of state for international security and non-proliferation, said.
Unlike U.S. defense contractors, Chinese firms don't have the option to spurn government overtures, he said. Companies there participating in the military buildup also engage in rampant intellectual property theft, which the U.S. doesn't encourage firms to do, Mr. Ford said.
"We don't think we should be sending private companies around to take advantage of their commercial relationships as thieves in the night," he said.
Chinese state media have called U.S. allegations of intellectual-property theft a "political tool." In 2018, Mr. Xi called military-civil fusion "a necessary choice for achieving the party's goal of a strong military for the new era."
The Pentagon declined to comment. China's Defense Ministry and Ministry of Industry and Information Technology didn't respond to requests to comment.
In one example of military-civil fusion detailed in the C4ADS report for the first time, privately held Beijing Highlander Digital Technology used a series of deals across Europe and Canada to build up China's military, including by contributing technology to the country's first aircraft carrier.
The company touts its role in China's defense industry on its Chinese-language website and in company filings, including a claim in its 2017 annual report that its products are featured on "all models" of Chinese warships, according to C4ADS.
Highlander didn't respond to a request for comment.
Crafting an effective response to China's military-civil fusion policy is taking on increasing urgency in Washington as the U.S. and China confront each other in not just a trade war, but a broader struggle for technological dominance, military supremacy in Asia and geopolitical influence world-wide.

Credit: By Kate O'Keeffe in Washington and Jeremy Page in Beijing
