Technology and real-estate shares lifted the S&P 500 to its best daily performance since June despite surveys of purchasing managers that flashed warnings of economic slowdown on both sides of the Atlantic.
The S&P 500 rose 1.1%. Energy shares were the only segment of the broader index that ended the day down, drifting lower along with prices for oil and gas futures.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average added 0.5%. The Nasdaq Composite, which is loaded with tech stocks, gained 1.6% and is up 31% this year thanks to investor excitement over artificial intelligence and chip makers powering the latest computing boom.
Shares of retailers and consumer-focused firms that reported quarterly results Wednesday were widely divergent. Footlocker shares dropped 28%, while Abercrombie & Fitch popped 24%. Williams-Sonoma added 13% and Kohl's, Advance Auto Parts and Bath & Body Works each climbed at least 3% on their own results.
Stationary-bike maker Peloton Interactive, a lockdown darling, shed 23% to close at a low after warning investors to expect more losses.
Toll Brothers' results walloped Wall Street's expectations and showed that home building remains a point of strength in the economy, despite the climb in mortgage rates. The Mortgage Bankers Association said the rate on 30-year fixed homes climbed to 7.3%, the highest in more than 20 years.
Nvidia, the first semiconductor firm to achieve a trillion-dollar stock-market value, gained 3.2% Wednesday before reporting its highly anticipated second-quarter earnings. Nvidia, the top performer this year in the S&P 500, topped analysts expectations, with record sales of $13.51 billion in its second fiscal quarter, more than twice the amount a year ago. Shares jumped more than 8% in after hours trading.
Nvidia and other big tech firms have propelled 2023's surprising rally in stocks, defying higher interest rates. The rates have threatened corporate earnings and boosted the returns on cash and government bonds to the highest levels relative to inflation in more than a decade.
Robert Minter, director of ETF Investment Strategy at asset manager Abrdn, said investors are moving money into sure things, like cash and short-term U.S. debt, but are hesitant to be completely sidelined should stocks keep climbing.
"What we're hearing from people is they're taking a little off the table and putting it into cash, but they understand the danger of putting too much of their assets in cash," he said.
Ben Kirby, co-head of investments at Thornburg Investment Management, said he is recommending clients buy longer-term bonds to lock in today's attractive yields and accumulate dividend-paying stocks, which have lagged behind the market this year and are a relative bargain compared with tech stocks.
The 10-year Treasury yield declined to 4.197%, down for the second straight day after hitting 4.339% on Monday, which was the highest closing level since 2007. Yields also declined on 30-year bonds and one-year bills. Yields fall when prices rise.
Investors bid up government bonds after a purchasing managers' survey showed U.S. business activity rising at a weaker pace than expected. European bonds also rallied after PMI surveys showed business activity there contracting more than expected.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 0.4%. Early Thursday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.4%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 1.2% and South Korea's Kospi was up 1%. S&P 500 futures rose 0.7%.
Credit: By Ryan Dezember
