LAS VEGAS -- Oooh, an adorable robot puppy! Two hours until he plays dead -- for real.
A cordless hair dryer! Hope you have short hair; it only lasts 14 minutes.
A foldable electric scooter! When you forget the midweek charge, remember that hitchhiking can be dangerous.
Some people saw the future at the annual CES tech trade show. I saw more batteries we will have to charge.
The biggest complaint people have about their smartphone? Battery life.
For some it's even worse: a battery that slows down their phone.
You can blame our increased use of these gadgets, or you can blame the lithium-ion batteries themselves. But neither reality will change soon.
The rechargeable batteries -- found in everything from your telephone to your Tesla -- don't charge all that fast, hold less power as they age and, yes, can catch fire.
While batteries seem to be evolving at a slower clip than other technologies, I'm encouraged by products and concepts I saw on display last week that address some of our biggest power problems.
Real Wireless Charging
If you want to use your phone while it charges, you are tethered to a wall like a dog on a leash. And it is even worse if you are using a wireless charging mat. What if, though, charging worked more like Wi-Fi? What if your phone received power while you were sitting on the couch scrolling through Instagram?
A handful of companies are working on it. While the underlying technology is different, the premise is similar. A transmitter placed somewhere in your house wirelessly sends power to receivers embedded in everything from smartphones to thermostats.
I got a look at Ossia Inc.'s Cota wireless power technology in Las Vegas last week. In one demo, a giant transmitter installed in a wall lighted up a lightbulb about 6 feet away. That same transmitter also powered special AA batteries, which powered a little LED light. Ossia says its technology can reach up to 30 feet right now, depending on transmitter size and the environment.
This premise is the absolute dream -- if it doesn't fry our brains. A competing technology, Energous Corp.'s WattUp, was certified by the Federal Communications Commission in December for charging up to 3 feet. Both Ossia and Energous say that their technology has been tested for safety.
The biggest obstacle right now seems to be getting the gadget makers to buy in to the technology -- the concern being that it simply isn't ready for prime time or that there isn't yet an agreed-upon standard. Both companies say they are in talks with top electronics makers.
Energous Chief Executive Stephen Rizzone said he expects to see consumer products with WattUp technology that can charge within its 3-feet- range before year-end. One potential product: a computer monitor with the transmitter built into the screen frame that can charge a mouse and keyboard.
My take? I've been incredibly excited about the whole idea . . . for at least four years. (I saw a wireless-power demo at CES 2015.) It is going to be years before this technology is in our most-used gadgets. Apple, for instance, only just caught up with mat-based charging.
Energy-Conscious Devices
Batteries may not be getting better, but our devices are getting smarter about using every little drop of power.
Huawei Technologies' Mate 10 Pro smartphone, making its U.S. debut next month, has an artificial-intelligence mobile chipset and a mega 4,000 milliamp-hour battery. (By comparison, Samsung's Galaxy S8 has a 3,000-mAH battery, while the iPhone X has a 2,716-mAh battery.) The Huawei phone's Kirin 970 AI chip is said to learn your usage behaviors and then optimize power allocation. For instance, it knows when the phone needs to provide your precise location (turn-by-turn directions) or a general location (weather) to save power. I haven't tested the Mate 10 Pro, but other reviewers say the phone really does have superb battery life.
Lenovo's Miix 630 tablet-laptop claims 20 hours of continuous battery life, and thanks its processor for the improved efficiency. Instead of a full-powered Intel Core processor, the Windows 10 hybrid device runs on a Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 processor, the same one inside many popular Android phones. Microsoft and Qualcomm have been working together to optimize Windows for lower-powered processors -- specifically for the added benefit of prolonged battery life.
My take? I believe improved processors that manage power better, along with more intelligent software, will provide the greatest leap in battery life in the coming years. So much of our gadgets' power is still used when we don't need it.
Better Backup Batteries
In the here and now, when that battery hits the dire 3% range, you're still going to need a backup battery. Good news: Smaller power bricks and cases are getting bigger batteries.
Yes, one of the most exciting things I saw at CES was a protective laptop sleeve with a built-in battery. The $200 Incase Connected Power Sleeve, made by Incase Designs Corp., can fully recharge a MacBook Pro with its big 14,000-mAH battery. It has a USB-C port and cord and a regular USB port so you can charge laptop and phone at the same time.
If you don't have a MacBook Pro, or just don't want your battery buried in a case, there is the $300 Saber by Romeo Power Technology. The company, which also makes electric-car battery packs, crammed a battery capable of charging a laptop twice into a water-resistant, shockproof device the shape and size of a water bottle. It has an AC outlet for plugging laptops in without special wires, and you can monitor its battery life from your phone, via Bluetooth.
My take? Innovation in external battery packs may sound like the equivalent of making straws bendy, but until we reach that dreamy future when our AI-powered phones constantly pull wireless power from the walls, they are the best we've got.

Credit: By Joanna Stern
