The U.K. is strengthening its takeover defenses, joining a wave of protectionism that is sweeping Europe as countries try to shield companies deemed vulnerable to unwanted approaches by foreign acquirers in the wake of pandemic lockdowns.
The British moves to strengthen the government's power to block foreign takeovers are focused on companies involved in combating public-health threats such as Covid-19, or developing technology key to guarding national security.
The proposals follow similar actions by other European countries including Germany, Italy and Spain as the pandemic-induced fallout raises alarm bells across Europe that slumping share prices of strategically important companies could leave them exposed to foreign takeovers.
The European Union has also signaled its own clampdown, announcing plans last week to tighten its defenses against subsidized foreign companies, as part of its effort to assert "strategic autonomy" from China and the U.S., while defending its economic interests.
Britain's proposed new powers would enable the government to block a foreign takeover of any domestic business directly involved in responding to a pandemic such as developing a vaccine or manufacturing personal protective equipment.
Governments are under pressure to find a coronavirus vaccine both to protect the health of their populations and to avoid a second shutdown. Britain's new rules are meant to help it achieve that goal by guarding against a foreign interloper gaining ownership of a promising vaccine for its own population at the expense of people in the U.K.
That pressure was underscored by the German government this month investing 300 million euros ($336.7 million) to take a 23% stake in CureVac AG, a homegrown biopharmaceutical company that is working on a coronavirus vaccine.
In addition, the U.K. government is lowering the threshold to review deals for businesses across a broader set of sectors. Currently, that minimum test applies to potential foreign takeovers of domestic companies developing technologies such as computing hardware, and products for military applications. That group will now include artificial intelligence, cryptographic authentication technology and advanced materials.

Credit: By Ben Dummett
