Chinese internet stocks jumped, after results from Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Baidu Inc. came in ahead of the market's downbeat expectations.
The rally, which extended a period of extraordinary volatility for the sector, began in the U.S., where American depositary receipts in both companies leapt by more than 10% Thursday. That helped fuel a 7.6% advance in the broader Nasdaq Golden Dragon China Index.
The gains continued Friday in Hong Kong, where the two online behemoths are also listed. The 30-stock Hang Seng Tech Index rose 3.8%, while the broader Hang Seng Index rose 2.9%.
On Thursday, Alibaba reported a higher-than-expected 9% increase in revenue for the quarter that ended in March to the equivalent of about $32.2 billion, thanks in large part to growth in its main e-commerce business. Meanwhile, Baidu reported quarterly revenue that was slightly above last year's level. Those sales, which also narrowly beat the market consensus, were supported by strong demand for the Chinese search giant's cloud and artificial-intelligence products.
Alibaba's results "were better than feared compared with expectations that had become increasingly negative in recent weeks," Sanford C. Bernstein analyst Robin Zhu and colleagues wrote in a note to clients. Sentiment toward Chinese tech stocks is shifting, and the latest results were merely triggers for the rally, said Jack Siu, Credit Suisse's chief investment officer for Greater China. Beijing has sent a clear signal that the regulatory campaign aimed at tech giants and internet platforms is due for a pause, he said.
Last week, Chinese politicians stated support for a stronger digital economy at a meeting with selected tech executives. In April, China's Politburo -- the ruling Communist Party's top policy-making body -- also vowed to roll out policies to support the economy and to wrap up its push to rectify issues at internet-platform companies.
Chinese tech stocks have endured incredibly high volatility, said Frank Benzimra, head of Asia equity strategy at Societe Generale. He said an increasingly supportive stance from Chinese officials was being offset by the country's stringent Covid-19 restrictions, which are weighing on growth and consumer sentiment.
Credit: By Rebecca Feng
