SAN FRANCISCO -- Microsoft Corp. on Thursday announced that BMW AG was a customer of its cloud-computing business, a show of strength in the hotly contested business of supplying computing power on demand through the Internet.
The relationship is particularly noteworthy because the German car maker has been a marquee customer of Amazon Web Services, the Amazon.com Inc. division that pioneered the business and has been its most successful provider. On Thursday, Thom Brenner, BMW Group vice president of digital life, stepped on stage at Microsoft's Build developer conference here to launch BMW Connected, a mobile app that does much of its work on Microsoft's Azure cloud platform.
The app, which runs on Apple Inc.'s iPhone and iPad, uses Microsoft's database and machine learning services to keep tabs on traffic conditions, update travel times, inform friends and family of a driver's likely arrival time, and more.
"Azure provides the tool set to build this architecture and allowed us to scale it to our needs," Mr. Brenner said.
An Amazon spokeswoman said BMW remains an AWS customer. "Nothing has changed there, and we expect that relationship to continue to deepen over time," the spokeswoman said via email.
The BMW Connected app links to Microsoft's Outlook calendar software to help determine where a driver is going and uses Azure's data analytics resources to suggest the quickest route. It offers walking directions from a parking spot to the final destination.
It remotely controls some car functions via BMW's ConnectedDrive service, letting drivers lock doors, flash lights, sound the horn and, with BMW's hybrid models, see how much charge remains in the battery. Cloud computing is a fast-growing market and a crucial one for Microsoft.
The portion in which Microsoft competes with Amazon will total $14.5 billion in sales this year, up from $11.0 billion in 2015, according to industry analyst International Data Corp. By 2019, IDC expects the market to hit $27.8 billion.
Microsoft isn't the first cloud provider to attract an Amazon Web Services customer.
In February, Alphabet Inc.'s Google Cloud Platform, seen by most analysts as the No. 3 supplier of raw computing power over the Internet behind Amazon Web Services and Microsoft's Azure service, landed Spotify AB.
Like BMW, the music streaming service has been using Amazon's cloud service, and is among the case studies that the company uses to tout its technology.
Credit: By Jay Greene
