The U.S. will speed up Australia's acquisition of nuclear-powered submarines by arranging for Canberra's first few subs to be built in the U.S., according to people familiar with the still-confidential plan.
The arrangement is part of a multifaceted plan to be announced Monday in San Diego at a meeting attended by President Biden, Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese and British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak.
The plan to sell up to five U.S. Virginia-class submarines to Australia is intended as a stopgap to provide the country with nuclear-powered subs by the mid-2030s.
Submarine production would later shift to Britain and Australia, which would produce a sub with a new design that would incorporate American technology, the people said.
Other facets of the plan call for the U.S. to step up its port visits to Australia in coming years and to establish the capability to rotate American attack subs through Perth by 2027.
All three countries would invest heavily in upgrading the defense industrial base, and Australia might even make a contribution to expanding U.S. capacity to construct submarines.
The White House and the Australian Embassy in Washington declined to comment on the plan.
The alliance is called AUKUS, an acronym for Australia, the U.K. and the U.S. In addition to collaborating on nuclear-submarine technology, the countries intend to cooperate on artificial intelligence, autonomous systems, hypersonic missiles and undersea technologies, among other areas, the people said. But the submarine will be the centerpiece of the Monday meeting.
U.S. officials argue that the AUKUS deal will result in more capable Australia and British submarines and, thus, help preserve the Western lead over China in undersea military technology.
They add that it will also strengthen the alliance among the three countries at a time when the Pentagon is undertaking a major defense transformation to deal with China's growing military might.
Credit: By Michael R. Gordon and Nancy A. Youssef
