APPLE
AAPL -4.8%
A stock-market meltdown took a bite out of Apple and other Magnificent Seven stocks. This year's most popular trades continued to unwind on Monday, as investors dumped the technology stocks that have propelled the market to new highs. Traders have questioned whether their share prices had outrun realistic forecasts for future profits. Nvidia, the big winner of the artificial-intelligence frenzy, lost 6.4%. Apple took an extra hit, after Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway revealed in an Aug. 3 filing that it sold nearly half of its huge stake in the iPhone maker last quarter. Apple shares lost 4.8% Monday.
ELI LILLY
LLY +9.5%
Eli Lilly is gaining ground in the weight-loss-drug race. The pharmaceutical giant reported better-than-expected earnings and hiked its annual-revenue guidance by $3 billion. Lilly has become one of the most valuable U.S.-listed companies due to the popularity of its diabetes drug Mounjaro and weight-loss injection Zepbound. Its results contrasted with those of Danish rival Novo Nordisk, which said sales of Wegovy, its weight-loss medication, came in short of expectations. Eli Lilly shares rallied 9.5% Thursday.
PARAMOUNT GLOBAL
PARA +0.9%
Two giants in the collapsing cable-television industry are reassessing their businesses. MTV owner Paramount Global on Thursday wrote down the value of its cable-TV networks by nearly $6 billion. A day earlier, rival Warner Bros. Discovery revised the worth of its own cable business lower by $9.1 billion. The reassessments come as cable-TV networks grapple with cord-cutting, declining ratings and a weak advertising market. Paramount shares added 0.9% Friday, paring earlier gains.
AIRBNB
ABNB -13%
Airbnb faces slowing demand in the U.S. The short-term rental company posted a bigger-than-expected decline in quarterly earnings, and its revenue forecast for its third quarter missed Wall Street's expectations. The company's demand warning comes amid recession fears and a recent slowdown in U.S. hiring. Investors are watching for signs of weakening spending, especially among American consumers. Airbnb shares tumbled 13% Wednesday.
KELLANOVA
K +16%
The maker of M&Ms and Snickers might have an appetite for more snacks. The Wall Street Journal and others reported that privately held candy giant Mars is in advanced talks to buy Kellanova, which was spun off from Kellogg in 2023. A possible tie-up could rank among the biggest transactions so far this year. Including a typical premium, a deal could value Kellanova at around $30 billion. Kellanova's brands include Pringles, Pop-Tarts, and Eggo waffles. Kellanova shares surged 16% Monday.
WALT DISNEY
DIS -4.5%
Disney's streaming and studio businesses are picking up the slack for its theme parks. The entertainment behemoth posted its first-ever profit in its streaming unit, which includes Disney+, ESPN+ and Hulu. Disney also benefited from a strong movie lineup, thanks to the box-office performance of "Inside Out 2." Meanwhile, the company reported weaker-than-expected results in its Experiences unit, which includes Disney's six theme-park resorts. Disney shares fell 4.5% Wednesday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
