It's worth remembering that the term 'feel-good' grew out of the drug culture. First it was feel-good doctors dispensing amphetamines, then feel-good films dispensing formulaic good cheer and surefire happy endings. But a really good film like "Buck," a documentary by Cindy Meehl, does much more than serve as a drug substitute.
At first glance Buck Brannaman seems less remarkable than abundantly likable. A middle-age cowboy who travels around the country giving four-day horse-training clinics, he is eloquent, in a laconic Western way, and likes to downplay the potential uplift of the clinic experience. "A lot of people," he says wryly, "they want it to be fuzzy and warm and cosmic." Fuzzy it is not, and warmth doesn't play as much of a role as wisdom and control (of one's self and the horse, in that order). Yet you could make a case for cosmic once you've seen Buck in action -- teaching horses the way of the world without breaking their spirit, and riding them like a centaur out of Greek myth. "If you get a taste of it, a taste of what I'm talking about, you couldn't get enough of it," he says.
If training horses were all there were to Mr. Brannaman's story, the encounter would still be worthwhile. He's the closest thing imaginable to that staple of modern myth, the horse whisperer. Mr. Brannaman's techniques stress kindness (how you treat a horse reflects how you treat your family and other people in your life) combined with firmness.
What makes "Buck" the movie so uncommonly affecting is the tormented past of Buck the man. As little boys, he and his brother performed blindfold rope tricks in a theatrical act created by their brutish father. Buck was beaten regularly and unmercifully as a boy, broken in ways no one would wish on any animal. How he survived is a mystery. When you watch him now, though, giving horses the love he never got, you know in the deepest sense where he's coming from.
'Green Lantern'
A dud that gives green a bad name, "Green Lantern" starts with a contest between a drone guided by an artificial-intelligence program and a jet fighter controlled by Hal Jordan, a test pilot who appears to have the wrong stuff. He's played with unassuming -- and mercifully self-deprecating -- good humor by Ryan Reynolds. Once he becomes Green Lantern, however, unassuming doesn't cut it. The movie needs an assuming hero. It also needs a heroine with something more to do than act tentatively (Blake Lively wins this year's Kristin Stewart Award for Indistinct Diction), and a plot generated by something smarter than the artifice program that guides it.
"Green Lantern" was meant to be a sci-fi adventure, but it proves to be a genuine mystery. How could its megamoola budget have yielded a production that looks almost as tacky as "Flash Gordon" ? How could Martin Campbell, the director who gave us such stylish delights as the BBC miniseries "Edge of Darkness," have committed so much clumsiness? Why does the storyline function as a handbook for aspiring Green Lanterns and a set-up for a sequel, but not as a coherent adventure with appealing characters?
'City of Life and Death'
A drama that could pass for a documentary, "City of Life and Death" re-creates the Nanjing Massacre, when invading soldiers of the Japanese Imperial Army slaughtered some 300,000 citizens of what had been one of China's ancient capitals. Lu Chuan's epic film is harrowing in the extreme. Every atrocity, or so it would seem, every unspeakable moment of bestiality, has been culled from historical documents and woven into a narrative that begins with picture postcards of the period and ends with ritual dancing and drumming that could pass for a Japanese version of the Nazi rallies seen in Leni Riefenstahl's films.
The initial effect is both distanced and distancing, a remarkable simulation -- with stunning black-and-white cinematography by Cao Yu -- that chronicles the horrors without pausing to concentrate on individual victims or individual predators. Forces gather, sirens shriek, tank engines roar, troops march. (Lai Qizhen's sound design contributes strongly to the illusion of being in the midst of it all.) Little by little, though, the friezes of mortal anguish that resemble collectivist art give way to such vivid individual portraits as a Nazi proconsul aghast at the slaughter, his unprincipled Chinese secretary, a sensitive Japanese soldier and a prostitute who touches his soul without trying to. This is hardly a film to recommend as entertainment. As an act of remembrance, though, it is singular and, in its way, soaring.
'Mr. Popper's Penguins'
At one would-be poignant point in the proceedings -- Mr. Popper's perky secretary, Pippi, uses p-words so persistently that it's catching -- a family of penguins that has attached itself to Jim Carrey's title character must choose between fish or love. The fish are being proffered -- oops, offered -- by a cold-hearted functionary of the New York Zoo, while the love emanates from, yes, you guessed it. Unloved as a child, Mr. P. has had to learn how to love others. A cold-hearted observer might bet on the birdies opting for the food, but it isn't that kind of movie.
Given what it is -- a family comedy for very young audiences -- the fish fall short, love conquers all and the cuteness of the penguins carries the day.
Credit: By Joe Morgenstern
