We have all heard the catastrophizing: In a world of artificial intelligence, educational standards will collapse. Students will no longer have to do research, write essays or even think critically. ChatGPT will do it all for them.
That prediction is the equivalent of experts claiming that the internet, television and even the radio would destroy schools. Or that the arrival of the calculator would signal the end of mathematics instruction.
I am not minimizing the disruptive nature of ChatGPT and tools like it. Artificial intelligence presents serious ethical and privacy concerns, can include troubling bias and disinformation, and clearly heralds profound change in the ways we work and live. Even as we are still grappling with the long tail of the pandemic's impact, educators have been hit by the transformative -- and in many ways unknown -- power of an AI chatbot.
I've had a front-row seat as schools have crafted policies on this topic, directed teachers and coached students. It's prompted me to think about how to prepare my own children -- one still in preschool, the other finishing kindergarten -- to enter this new educational arena. The solution isn't to pretend that these technologies don't exist; it's also not to let them "do the work for you." The goal should be to educate children to think critically and creatively for the world they will enter. And the good news is that ChatGPT can actually help.
Praise process, not just results.
We grew up hearing teachers tell us to "show your work" for a math problem. "Show your work" should be the new normal for every discipline and assignment. Where teachers might previously have just assigned a humanities paper and graded it, sometimes relying on software to spot cheating, they will now want to develop a deeper learning experience. They will ask students to explain their paper, perhaps live in class or via recorded video: why they crafted their thesis statement, how they found their evidence, how they might improve their argument.
A math teacher I know has always created cheat-proof assignments: He gives students the answer and has them perform all the steps to get to that answer. Teachers are already allowing students to use ChatGPT, but they are asking them to explain what prompt they used for the bot and why, and how they might critique the bot's response. Parents can follow suit, praising the process over just "getting it right."
Scrutinize sources.
Many educators have decided they will allow students to use ChatGPT as a source, as long as it's cited, and even rate how well the chatbot did. Parents can model this at home with whatever sources children already encounter.
Recently, my 4-year-old son wanted to know all about icebergs. I gave him a quick definition myself and then pulled out the iPad to find a picture. When a video came up, he grew excited. But it was just what the internet had served me, with dubious sourcing. We moved on. Wading through search results, I found Encyclopedia Britannica's page -- the version for children -- and read my son the text. We looked at the picture. A better video search allowed us to peak into a diver's undersea iceberg exploration. Next up, a trip to the library for books about icebergs.
I had triangulated among several sources to give my son a relatively full picture of his topic of interest, rejecting some sources and amplifying others. Children must see that we evaluate everything a device provides us and piece together various kinds of input with a human touch.
Make it personal.
As they move away from cookie-cutter assignments, schools will emphasize skills that AI can't teach: discussion, group work, empathy and reflection. Prepare children for these types of uniquely human situations and skills. Already, many schools evaluate students on their ability to have a proper give-and-take with others. Use the dinner table to reinforce these skills. Help children understand cooperation and collaboration from a young age without dismissing it as a touchy-feely playground skill. And model empathy.
Exposing children to great literature allows them to come into contact with the range of emotions they may encounter in life and process them. And there's one kind of essay that ChatGPT can't write -- a personal narrative about your child's life, with their reflections on it. ChatGPT writes great college essays already, but it doesn't know your child.
Remind kids that the bot can't always help.
One summer as a teenager, I arrived at a homestay in Paris. I had six years of French instruction under my belt, but I was lost. My "host brother" and his friends discussed an upcoming trip in rapid-fire, colloquial French -- and I could follow none of it. At that moment, no online tool -- not even ChatGPT (if it had been around then) -- could have come to my aid. Could it have helped me write critical essays in French literature? Absolutely.
But sitting there in Paris, I could only rely on my language skills. Even the simultaneous translators of today would have undermined my goal of building connection and having meaningful experiences through fluency. The only solution in that French apartment was to be a little uncomfortable and learn what was required in the moment. As parents, we should highlight the many situations in life when ditching tech is actually the key to success.
Don't panic -- embrace what AI can teach.
Years after feeling locked in total language incomprehension, I actually became a French teacher, just as online translation programs were becoming available. After much hand-wringing, we language teachers realized that the translators should be embraced, not banned from school. We created assignments that asked students to write a paragraph first and then check it against a translator. My colleagues had students put a phrase into the translator and evaluate the result. For example, when Google came up with one way to phrase a paragraph, students had to analyze how and why Victor Hugo's or Baudelaire's or Sartre's versions were different.
Teachers are now blowing up blogs, faculty meetings and conference presentations as they build new assignments for their students at a rapid-fire pace and with immense creativity. These are excellent assignments that can adapt to our time. Even as we engage in important debates about how to manage and regulate this new technology, the answer cannot be to wish it away. We need to stay open to the unique learning experiences that AI and adults will create together.
---
Claire Goldsmith is an educator based in Los Angeles. A former teacher and online learning administrator, she advises schools, nonprofits, and technology companies.
Credit: By Claire Goldsmith

ERIC Subject: Mathematics Instruction; Electronic Learning; Language Skills; Video Technology; Creative Thinking; Language Teachers; Learning Experience; Educational Technology; World Literature; Empathy; French Literature; Essays; Student Evaluation; Parents; Mathematics Teachers; Thinking Skills; Artificial Intelligence; Personal Narratives; Academic Standards
