Artificial intelligence is being hailed as the holy grail for one of the toughest challenges facing doctors today: making the right diagnosis.
Despite years of advances in medical imaging and other technology, diagnostic errors are still the most commonly reported medical mistakes, affecting an estimated 12 million adults in outpatient care each year. Data from hospitalized patients indicate there are close to 250,000 harmful diagnostic errors annually, and most people are likely to experience at least one diagnostic error in their lifetime, sometimes with devastating consequences.
Now, researchers at academic medical centers are teaming up with AI developers and information-technology giants to figure out how to best pair machine learning and human know-how to improve diagnostic accuracy. They are training doctors on integrating the technology into their daily workflow, pitching it as "augmented intelligence" -- a tool to help doctors make the correct diagnosis and find the right treatment, rather than replace their own judgment.
But as hospitals begin to adopt new algorithms and chatbots, they are also recognizing the limitations and risks of the technology. While AI can process and interpret massive amounts of medical data, there is a human art to diagnosis -- and the new technology can't duplicate many of the nuances that doctors see. What's more, patients as well as doctors need to trust AI amid concerns about its accuracy.
Here are some early lessons about combining doctors and AI to reduce diagnostic errors.
AI can't replace experience
So-called predictive AI, trained with data by medical experts for a specific task, is being used to find patterns from images including X-rays, CT scans and MRIs, as well as pathology slides and other medical tests, to help predict cancer risk and recognize certain diseases. But another type, generative AI, includes chatbots trained on a trove of information from the internet and other sources, enabling it to suggest diagnosis and alert doctors to patterns or trends they might not easily notice about a patient's condition.
For now, diagnostic experts say, no form of AI can replace a human clinician's ability to strike up a personal bond with a patient, observe subtle cues and nuances in a physical exam or test result, spot gaps in a patient's story or medical history and revisit things that don't add up.
"AI has potential to reduce diagnostic errors, but current AI is unable to navigate the real-world messiness associated with making a clinical diagnosis, which involves dynamic interactions with patients and more uncertainty than diagnosing visual images," says Dr. Hardeep Singh, who studies diagnostic accuracy as the co-chief of health policy, quality and informatics at the Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center and is a professor at Baylor College of Medicine, both in Houston.
"Good diagnosticians don't take anything at face value," such as a patient who is uncomfortable or unwilling to talk about issues like substance abuse or trauma, says Dr. Ziad Obermeyer, an associate professor of health policy and management at the University of California, Berkeley School of Public Health. "Algorithms are never going to see how a patient looks or if they are avoiding a certain set of questions or topics."
AI is only as good as the data it uses
A major concern for AI in diagnosis is the quality of the data used to create, or train, AI algorithms. ChatGPT, the best known chatbot model, is trained on articles, images, and other data and can produce conversational text. It has shown an impressive ability to answer medical exam questions and suggest diagnosis from patient case studies. But its sources aren't fact checked and it relies on human feedback to improve accuracy.
Chatbots can also have so-called hallucinations, generating false or irrelevant information. And one U.K study found that while a chatbot fed simulated patient cases could produce relevant diagnoses, it missed one or more important diagnoses in 21 out of 35 cases for reasons that could not be determined. "The danger is that it misses crucial, often life-threatening, diagnoses that would be at the forefront of every seasoned clinician's mind," says Dr. Joshua Au Yeung, a clinical AI researcher at Guy's and St. Thomas' Hospital in London.
Advancements in technology could help solve some concerns. In one study, researchers at Stanford found that GPT-4, the current version of ChatGPT, did much better than earlier version GPT-3.5 in answering exam questions that required clinical reasoning -- it didn't produce any hallucinations, and it outperformed first- and second-year medical students.
ChatGPT developer OpenAI says the new version is 40% more likely to produce factual content than GPT-3.5, but there is much more work to do to further reduce the likelihood of hallucinations. OpenAI's official position is that its models are not fine-tuned to provide medical information and should never be used to provide diagnostic services for serious medical conditions.
Dr. Eric Strong, clinical associate professor at Stanford University School of Medicine, and an author of the study, says the improvement between the two versions suggests the AI will continue to get better. "We aren't saying chatbots are going to replace doctors soon," but if research demonstrates physicians perform better with the help of AI, "wouldn't it be unethical not to use it in their practice?" Dr. Strong says.
Some healthcare providers are turning their own electronic patient records to create reliable algorithms. But patient information that is incomplete or inaccurate has the potential to introduce new risks of diagnostic errors and oversights.
At the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., researchers spent several years ferreting out errors and inconsistencies in vast troves of medical data. "You have to curate and clean up data before you develop AI models," says Dr. John Halamka, president of the Mayo Clinic Platform unit.
To design algorithms that can help diagnose a range of diseases, Mayo is working with another large health system, St Louis-based Mercy. They are sharing patient data with identifying information stripped out to search for patterns from millions of patient encounters, to pinpoint disease earlier and Identify the best treatment options.
AI must be easy to use
AI models have to fit seamlessly into doctors' everyday practice, in order for them to adopt the decision aids. "Adding it into the workflow is an art," says Mayo's Halamka. "The last thing you want to say to a clinician is, 'Go to a separate app, take even more time out of your day.'"
For example, Mayo designed an algorithm that can detect signs of atrial fibrillation, or AFib, which would be undetectable during routine care. Their regular heart rhythm can increase the risk of a blood clot or stroke and worsen existing heart disease. The algorithm is currently available for doctors to review with one click on an AI dashboard embedded in Mayo's electronic health record for all patients who have an EKG for any reason.
Cardiologist Dr. Peter Noseworthy, a co-author of Mayo studies of the technology, says the information helps assess risk, but it is up to doctors to decide what further tests and treatments might be warranted, "to make the best decisions for the individual patient."
AI can be biased
Research by UC Berkeley's Obermeyer has also shown how racial bias can creep into healthcare algorithms. For example, if an algorithm is trained to predict healthcare costs rather than illness as a way to gauge healthcare needs, it will de-prioritize Black patients because they have lower costs. But that is because they don't have equal access to care so less is spent on them. This led one algorithm he studied to falsely conclude Blacks are healthier than equally sick white patients and need less care. Reprogramming the algorithm to focus on more relevant predictors could eliminate the racial bias in predictions, the study concluded.
Other researchers are trying to address inequities in diagnoses. Take peripheral artery disease, a condition that affects as many as 10 million Americans, but is underdiagnosed and undertreated -- especially in minority patients. Known as PAD, it narrows the vessels that circulate blood to the legs and feet, causing foot wounds and ulcers that can lead to amputations and death.
At the Duke Institute for Health Innovation, based at Duke University, researchers developed an algorithm to identify PAD patients based on diagnosis codes and other medical history, using data that included a substantial number of its Black patients. In a pilot program, a team that includes a PAD specialist uses the algorithm to identify new patients and update the status of existing patients, giving priority to high-risk patients with forthcoming medical visits so they can send recommendations to their primary-care providers.
Dr. Mark Sendak, a Duke physician who specializes in population health and data science, says one aim of the project is to close the racial gap in both diagnoses and care by identifying patients who need more tests to confirm a diagnosis, as well as patients who have been diagnosed but aren't getting the care they need to prevent limb amputations
By identifying those biases, "we can alter the process and remove barriers to diagnosis," Sendak says.
If doctors resist AI, find a compromise
For AI to be a diagnostic aid, doctors need to get on board with the technology. In radiology, which relies on interpreting images, studies suggest AI can perform better than radiologists in diagnosing certain diseases, while falling short in others. But the increasing use of AI has led to fears about job security for radiologists and some resistance to using the technology.
In a recent study, researchers at Harvard and MIT randomly assigned 180 radiologists into four groups to diagnose chest X-rays, giving them different information at the start. Two of the groups got either a chest X-ray with AI predictions only or medical-history information only. The other two got either both the AI predictions and medical history, or neither.
The radiologists were asked to provide the probability of a given disease and a recommendation for treatment or follow-up, with accuracy measured by a prognosis from five board-certified radiologists.
The study found that the AI predictions were more accurate than nearly two-thirds of the radiologists in the group that had access to the medical history, though that group performed better than those without the information.
However, on average, access to AI predictions didn't improve radiologists' diagnostic accuracy. The radiologists' biases included underweighting AI's assistance and ignoring any correlation with their own predictions. There were other downsides. Radiologists with AI assistance took longer to make decisions. And AI predictions hurt the accuracy of radiologists who were confident in their own conclusion (although predictions did help radiologists who weren't confident).
"Both AI models and radiologists have their own unique strengths and areas for improvement," says Dr. Nikhil Agarwal, a co-author of the study and a professor of economics at MIT. For example, radiologists often spot so-called incidental findings -- medical concerns the AI isn't programmed to look for -- which can result in the need for further testing for disease.
The optimal collaboration, the researchers concluded, would be to have an AI algorithm make an initial prediction on a chest X-ray; if the prediction has a more than 90% confidence level, the diagnosis could be relied on without radiologist review. For less-confident predictions, a radiologist without access to the prediction would review the X-ray, and if they agree with the AI, use the diagnosis. If they disagree, the case would be escalated for a second opinion.
---
Laura Landro, a former Wall Street Journal assistant managing editor, is the author of "Survivor: Taking Control of Your Fight Against Cancer." Reach her at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Laura Landro
