Facebook Inc. is battling a backlash from lawmakers, regulators and users on multiple continents. Some of the sharpest criticism is coming from close to home.
A succession of Silicon Valley rivals have stepped forward in recent weeks and months to speak out against the social-media giant, some reprising old points of contention and others reacting to revelations about its handling of user data and of deceptive or manipulative content on its platform. The list includes the chief executive of Apple Inc., an artificial-intelligence expert at Alphabet Inc.'s Google and several former Facebook executives.
A mix of factors is behind the barbs, observers say, from genuine concern to a desire to keep the scrutiny of regulators and lawmakers focused on Facebook and away from their own companies.
"Certainly a political stratagem would be to point to this one entity that's just gotten into trouble and say 'they're the problem, not us,'" said Roger Kay, president of Endpoint Technologies Associates, a technology market-research firm.
The industry opprobrium has grown louder with the revelation in mid-March that Facebook user data were improperly obtained by Cambridge Analytica, a data-analytics firm that worked for the 2016 Trump campaign. That incident has rekindled longstanding concerns about privacy practices at Facebook and other tech companies.
Apple Chief Executive Officer Tim Cook last Wednesday criticized companies such as Facebook and Google for their practices of collecting personal data across different products and using that data to build user profiles. Speaking to an audience in Chicago, Mr. Cook, who has long sought to differentiate Apple on privacy matters, contrasted its focus on selling devices with Facebook's and Google's ad-based businesses that are built on user data.
Asked what he would do if he were Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg, Mr. Cook replied: "I wouldn't be in this situation." He called for regulation of data and privacy, saying the companies had failed to self-regulate and limit what they collect from users. He also said that Apple could improve its privacy efforts and the way it polices content available on its devices.
Facebook and Google declined to comment. Mr. Zuckerberg has apologized for the Cambridge Analytica episode. He vowed to look for potential abuses of personal data by app developers and tweaked the privacy tools so users will be able to track and change with more ease some of the social network's data about them.
Days earlier, Francois Chollet, an artificial intelligence engineer at Google, sought to draw a line between his company and Facebook. He tweeted that Google products like search and Gmail help users "to do more, to know more." Facebook's newsfeed, he wrote, "manipulates your worldview and seeks to maximally waste your time."
Mr. Chollet pointed to his blog post about why he believes search engines are less dangerous than social networks. He declined to provide additional comment.
---
Deepa Seetharaman and Tripp Mickle contributed to this article.

Credit: By Yoree Koh
