Global advertising revenue will grow 7.8% in 2024 to nearly $990 billion, excluding U.S. political advertising, media-investment group GroupM said in a new forecast, significantly raising expectations from a previous estimate of 5.3%.
The revision puts the global ad industry on track to surpass $1 trillion in revenue in 2025, one year earlier than expected, by increasing 6.8% next year to $1.1 trillion, the forecast said.
GroupM, a unit of advertising giant WPP, in December had said growth this year might be adversely affected by potential factors such as the effect of high interest rates on consumer and business spending as well as lower growth from China-based companies.
But GroupM said its outlook has changed because of better economic conditions and a difference in how it models certain sectors.
GroupM now predicts ad revenue in the U.S. will reach $365.9 billion this year, excluding effects of political advertising, up from a December estimate of $360.4 billion. Restrictive interest rates in the U.S. haven't cooled consumer and business investment as much as previously predicted, GroupM said.
In China, ad revenue will total $199.4 billion this year, according to GroupM, compared with an earlier forecast of $148.2 billion. Much of the increase reflects a revision in how GroupM models out-of-home and digital advertising, according to Kate Scott-Dawkins, president of business intelligence at GroupM and author of the forecast report.
GroupM has changed some of how it calculates digital advertising, for example, to better capture commerce now done digitally.
"It's shifting from an area where we don't count it as media into a world where now we count it as media, so it looks like huge growth," Scott-Dawkins said. "It's coming into our sphere, and so we're now measuring it."
GroupM also said it now expects 69.5% of advertising revenue will be informed by artificial intelligence this year, with the proportion growing to 94.1% by 2029. That reflects how much ad revenue goes to companies such as Google, Meta Platforms and Bytedance, which are heavy users of AI tools.
"There's probably no other industry where AI is as integrated and as directly impactful on revenue as it is in the advertising industry," Scott-Dawkins said.
Credit: By Megan Graham
