As Washington and Beijing feud over the origins and implications of Covid-19 in a rapidly escalating information war, the U.S. is at a significant disadvantage. China invests substantial resources in efforts to translate and explore the contours of American culture and politics. But unlike during the Cold War, the U.S. government and private sector have failed to invest in the language skills and expertise to compete effectively with the Chinese Communist Party.
Both the U.S. National Defense Strategy and the National Security Strategy rightly argue that America and China are engaged in a long-term strategic competition. But you wouldn't know it looking at the U.S. media and the general lack of federal funding for Mandarin and Cantonese programs -- a gap that has been filled by Beijing's Confucius Institutes at 72 U.S. college campuses. Most Americans have to rely on what the Chinese Communist Party chooses to translate into English using state-run media and propaganda outlets. A sea of domestic discourse, debate and party documents remain hidden in plain sight. The U.S. journalist John Pomfret astutely remarked that when it comes to keeping Americans in the dark about the Chinese political scene, "the Chinese language is the first level of encryption."
Covid-19 highlights the problem. There are dueling narratives from the highest levels of the U.S. and Chinese governments about the origins of and responses to the virus, accompanied by vitriol and mutual recriminations. Yet when Americans talk about Beijing's side of the story, they generally refer to a small selection of commentary in English. This largely consists of the Foreign Ministry's spokesman, Twitter accounts of prominent Chinese commentators, and the Communist Party's newspapers.
Americans might be forgiven for not even realizing there has been a debate inside China about the government's slow response, coverups and doctored numbers. The problem is that these discussions are happening in Chinese, not English.
Beijing hasn't made the same mistake. Cankao Xiaoxi, the Chinese newspaper with the largest domestic circulation, is a compilation of foreign news articles -- including English-language reports -- translated into Chinese. There is sadly no equivalent in the U.S.
China has also invested significant resources in English-language training to understand its main competitor better. China's Foreign Language Publishing Administration, which sits under the Communist Party's Central Propaganda Department, distributes the party line on myriad issues to overseas audiences, conducts research on foreign media, and implements language training programs. Its operating budget doubled in the last 10 years, from $48 million in 2009 to $97 million in 2019.
The market for English-language training in China has ballooned to $18 billion, with 70% of that revenue coming from the instruction of children. The market size for all language instruction in the U.S. is $1.6 billion -- less than half as much per capita.
American leaders during the Cold War would have been appalled at this discrepancy. The "Long Telegram," one of the most influential U.S. government documents of the Cold War, was written by George Kennan, a Russian speaker par excellence and expert on the Soviet Union. Many of the influential U.S. Cold War thinkers, such as Kennan and Charles Bohlen, were true experts with a deep knowledge of Soviet and Russian politics, culture, history and language.
The American government also invested significant resources in information campaigns and translating Soviet documents into English. Among the most widely known U.S. organizations was the Foreign Broadcast Information Service. FBIS monitored, translated and disseminated massive amounts of news from the Soviet Union, Cuba and other countries. Researchers, activists, journalists and policy makers -- including the authors of this article -- relied on its invaluable translations.
When the Cold War ended, however, the U.S. slashed the budgets for these types of organizations. In 2019 with little fanfare, America shut down all outside access to FBIS's successor, the Open Source Enterprise. Kennan must have turned in his grave.
There's time to correct this error. One step is to build a 21st-century FBIS with congressional aid. The U.S. should start by translating materials from China and Russia and making them publicly available. Every Xi Jinping speech, for example, should be available in English within 48 hours. Machine learning and translation technology from programs like Google Translate have been helpful stopgaps. But they can't replace translation by humans with a nuanced understanding of Chinese culture, politics and history.
In addition, the government needs to increase the resources devoted to educating its diplomats, soldiers and spies in Chinese language, history, politics and culture. In the "Long Telegram," Kennan urged Americans to study the Soviet Union and truly understand "the nature of the movement with which we are dealing." He would likely say the same of China today. We have a long way to go.
---
Mr. Blanchette is author of "China's New Red Guards: The Return of Radicalism and the Rebirth of Mao Zedong." Mr. Jones is author of "A Covert Action: Reagan, the CIA and the Cold War Struggle in Poland." Both hold chairs at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.

Credit: By Jude Blanchette and Seth G. Jones
