Stocks fell, leaving the S&P 500 just shy of entering a new bull market.
The S&P 500 fell 8.58 points, or 0.2%, to 4273.79, just 19 points below a bull market, or a 20% rise from the low set last October. The blue-chip Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 199.90 points, or 0.6%, to 33562.86. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite fell 11.34 points, 0.1%, to 13229.43.
The broad-based S&P index has been in bear-market territory for 245 trading days, the longest such stretch since 1948, according to Dow Jones Market Data. It climbed for the three consecutive weeks ending Friday, driven by the tech sector. The Nasdaq has posted six straight weeks of gains.
The rally in technology shares, powered in part by excitement surrounding the rise of artificial-intelligence technology, has helped obscure a growing sense of uncertainty in the market. Investors have lately been expressing a cautious outlook: Net assets in both institutional and retail money-market funds are just below lows reached in April, according to Bank of America strategists.
Hedge funds and other speculative investors have made a large bet that the S&P 500 will decline, marking their most bearish positioning since 2007. Some contrarians are taking heart that investors seem convinced the rally can't go on.
"The reason I've been bullish, more than any other reason, is everyone is so negative," said Eric Diton, president and managing director of the Wealth Alliance, an investment-advisory firm.
Short-term Treasury prices rose and yields fell after the Institute for Supply Management said the services sector of the economy expanded more slowly in May than economists expected. The 2-year Treasury yield fell to 4.48% from 4.501% Friday, while the yield on the 10-year note closed at 3.691%, unchanged from Friday.
The ISM data could point to a slowdown many investors would welcome, in part because it might preclude Federal Reserve interest-rate increases.
"Today's report continues to support the idea of a slowing economy and prices coming down," said Luke Tilley, chief economist at Wilmington Trust. "On the margin, there's a little bit less need for the Fed to keep hiking."
Last week, lawmakers reached a deal to raise the debt ceiling and May jobs growth was stronger than expected, which sparked a stock rally. With those issues in the rearview mirror, investors are turning their focus toward the Fed decision next week.
Optimism is building that the central bank's tightening campaign is coming to an end. But investors aren't expecting rates to drop soon.
Derivatives markets show investors now expect the Fed's target interest rate to sit at 5% at year-end, according to Tradeweb, up from just above 4% last month.
Apple shares fell $1.37, or 0.8%, to $179.58 after the tech giant launched its virtual-reality headset, its first major new product in nearly a decade. Apple, which has advanced 38% this year, ended Monday with a market valuation slightly below $3 trillion.
This year's tech-sector rally is largely responsible for powering the S&P 500 higher. Less than a quarter of stocks in the broad index outperformed in May, according to Bank of America. That is the lowest of any month in data history going back to 1986. Just five of the S&P 500's 11 sectors are up on the year, despite the index's strong overall performance, while the information-technology and communications-services sectors have each gained more than 34%.
The narrow breadth has some strategists and investors wondering when more sectors will participate in the rally. "What I'd like to see is follow- through from cyclicals and economically sensitive stocks," said Matt Orton, chief market strategist at Raymond James Investment Management. "I think you want to be leaning into higher-quality, low-volatility names."
Brent crude futures rose 58 cents, or 0.8%, to $76.71 a barrel.
Cryptocurrency prices fell after the Securities and Exchange Commission sued Binance, the world's largest cryptocurrency exchange. The regulator accused Binance of operating an illegal trading platform in the U.S. and misusing customer funds. Shares of U.S.-listed crypto exchange Coinbase fell $5.85, 9.1%, to $58.71.
Overseas, Europe's Stoxx 600 fell 0.5%. Early Tuesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.4% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 1.3%. S&P 500 futures were flat.
Credit: By Charley Grant
