Sinovation Ventures, a China-based early stage investment fund led by former Google executive Kai-Fu Lee, has held a $200 million first close of its latest fund, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Sinovation's fifth fund began raising capital in November 2021 with a $500 million goal, according to a regulatory filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
A representative for Sinovation declined to comment on the fundraising.
The first close came as fundraising by China-focused general partners has dwindled to a trickle in light of heightened U.S.-China tensions and Beijing's regulatory assault on internet-focused companies.
A total of 22 China-focused venture-capital funds raised a combined $7.4 billion through Aug. 4, according to data provider Preqin Ltd. By comparison, 134 funds raised $22.4 billion over the same period last year. In 2018, the most recent peak for China-focused venture fundraising, 839 funds raised $93.5 billion collectively, Preqin data show.
Top-tier general partners continue to raise capital despite the fundraising lull. Qiming Venture Partners, which focuses on early- and growth-stage investments in China's consumer, internet and healthcare sectors, in July closed two funds which raised $3.2 billion.
Sequoia Capital China, led by entrepreneur Neil Shen, recently raised nearly $9 billion in four funds from predominantly international investors.
Beijing-based Sinovation was founded by Dr. Lee, who oversaw the China operations of Alphabet Inc.'s Google from 2005-09. The firm specializes in Series A and B round investments and has $3 billion under management, according to its website. Its roster of limited partners includes Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association and Spanish banking giant Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria SA.
The firm's fourth fund closed in 2018 after raising $500 million.
Sinovation says it focuses investments in artificial intelligence and deep tech, robotics and automation, enterprise software, semiconductors and chips, healthcare and sustainability technologies.
It has backed companies such as Chinese AI powerhouse 4Paradigm; Zhihu Inc., China's equivalent of Quora Inc.; and WeRide, an autonomous driving start-up.
Credit: By Jing Yang
