AIR FRANCE
Workers, Executives
Clash After Meeting
The management of Air France, the French arm of Air France-KLM, has outlined a plan to cut 2,900 jobs in a meeting with union representatives that was suspended after a clash between workers and company executives.
The company will encourage voluntary departures, but would fire workers if its enticement plan doesn't persuade enough to leave, said union representatives who attended the meeting on Monday. The firings would be the first at Air France since the mid-1990s.
Monday's meeting was set up last week after talks over a previous cost-cutting round broke down. Company executives were manhandled by workers after the meeting and Air France's human-resources chief, Xavier Broseta, had his jacket and shirt torn off by protesters and was evacuated by the police, television footage showed.
A spokesman for Air France declined to comment.
-- Inti Landauro
---
TELENOR
Company Divests
VimpelCom Stake
Telenor ASA of Norway said Monday it has decided to divest its one-third interest in VimpelCom Ltd., the Amsterdam-based telecommunications operator facing accusations of corruption by U.S. and Dutch authorities.
Based on VimpelCom's closing price on Friday, Telenor's 33% stake is worth approximately 20 billion Norwegian kroner, or roughly $2.4 billion. That compares with Telenor's overall market value of 233 billion Norwegian kroner.
Telenor said selling the asset could take some time, adding it expected to record a noncash impairment of 7.5 billion Norwegian kroner against its third-quarter earnings to reflect Vimpelcom's lower value in its books.
Shares in VimpelCom, one of Russia's largest telecom companies, have lost 67% of their value in the past two years.
U.S. and Dutch authorities suspect VimpelCom paid bribes to obtain business in Uzbekistan, according to court documents and people familiar with the matter.
VimpelCom has declined to comment on the accusation, saying only that it was cooperating with judicial authorities in both countries.
-- Dominic Chopping and Jens Hansegard
---
HTC
Smartphones Maker
Posts Quarterly Loss
HTC Corp. said Monday that it swung to a net loss for the third quarter as the company continued to struggle in the competitive smartphone market.
Taiwan-based HTC said its net loss totaled 4.48 billion Taiwan dollars (US$137 million) for the three months ended Sept. 30, compared with a net profit of NT$600 million a year earlier. The company's revenue dropped 49% to NT$21.4 billion from NT$41.9 billion in the same period last year.
The downbeat results came as no surprise as HTC has issued a profit warning and announced a series of restructuring efforts, including job cuts, in response to sluggish demand and weak sales in China. Once the world's top smartphone maker by volume, HTC in 2013 fell out of the top 10 largest handset vendors by shipments.
-- Lorraine Luk
---
SUNCOR
Takeover Bid Made
For Oil-Sands Firm
Suncor Energy Inc. on Monday said it launched an all-stock takeover offer valued at 4.3 billion Canadian dollars ($3.3 billion) for oil-sands producer Canadian Oil Sands Ltd.
Suncor, Canada's largest crude-oil producer, said its offer of 0.25 of a share for each Canadian Oil Sands share represents a 43% premium based on closing share prices on Friday. Suncor, based in Calgary, Alberta, values its unsolicited offer at C$6.6 billion, including Canadian Oil Sands debt.
The offer for Canadian Oil Sands, which owns 37% of the Syncrude oil-sands mining consortium, comes as the oil producer struggles with a slumping stock price due partly to low crude prices. It recently said it was looking at selling some of its future production amid slumping oil prices and a expanding debt load.
For Suncor, the deal would give it a growing presence in the Canadian oil sands. It recently agreed to boost its stake in the Fort Hills oil-sands project in Alberta to just over 50% by buying a 10% stake from project partner Total SA for C$310 million.
-- Judy McKinnon
---
APPLE
IPhone Maker Buys
Startup VocalIQ
Apple Inc. has purchased an artificial-intelligence startup that could help make iPhone users' interactions with the virtual assistant Siri more natural.
Apple bought VocalIQ Ltd., a U.K.-based software maker working on ways to improve computers' ability to understand human speech, and to "speak" more naturally. The terms of the deal weren't disclosed.
An Apple spokesman confirmed the deal with the company's standard statement after an acquisition, saying Apple "buys smaller technology companies from time to time, and we generally do not discuss our purpose or plans."
VocalIQ didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.
-- Jack Nicas
---
CKI
Investment Firm Buys
Wind Energy Stake
Cheung Kong Infrastructure Holdings Ltd. has agreed to buy a 50% stake in a Portuguese wind-energy company for around 144 million euros, or about $161.5 million, marking the company's first entry in Portugal's energy sector.
The infrastructure investment arm of Hong Kong tycoon Li Ka-shing said after markets closed Friday that its plan to buy a major stake in Iberwind-Desenvolvimento e Projectos SA is subject to approval from the Portuguese Competition Authority. The deal is expected to be completed by the end of 2015.
Separately, Cheung Kong Infrastructure's 38.9%-owned Power Assets Holdings Ltd. said it agreed to set up a joint venture with CKI for the management of the investment in Iberwind.
-- Joanne Chiu
---
BOC AVIATION
Two Airbus Jets
Placed With EVA Air
BOC Aviation, the aircraft-leasing arm of Bank of China Ltd., has arranged a long-term lease of two Airbus A330-300 jets to EVA Airways Corp. of Taiwan.
The placement of the twin-aisle planes, in addition to two Boeing Co. 777-300ER jets already flying with EVA Air, reflect the continued growth and maturity of the Singapore-based firm's leasing business.
The smaller single-aisle jets such as the Airbus A320 or the Boeing 737 are easier to place with airlines and preferred by leasing firms.
BOC Aviation has a portfolio of 256 owned and managed aircraft operated by 61 airlines. It also has committed to acquire an additional 195 planes.
-- Gaurav Raghuvanshi
