Facebook Inc. and Twitter Inc. have taken down a global network of fake accounts used in a coordinated campaign to push pro-Trump political messages, including some that used artificial intelligence tools to try to mask the behavior, the companies and outside research firms they worked with said on Friday.
The move targeted a U.S.-based media company that also operates out of Vietnam called The BL, which, Facebook alleges, used computer-generated profile pictures to cover up the orchestrated nature of its activities. Facebook linked the company to the Epoch Media Group, which has had ties to the Falun Gong movement, a spiritual movement based in China which has clashed with the Chinese government and supported President Trump's reelection.
The BL is "currently working with Facebook to resolve the issue," said Orysia McCabe, the website's editor in chief. She didn't say how the company planned to settle the matter with Facebook.
In a statement posted to his company's website, Epoch Media Group Publisher Stephen Gregory denied any connection between BL and his company, saying that BL was "founded by a former employee, and employs some of our former employees." Epoch Media is neither owned nor operated by Falun Gong, the company has said.
A Facebook spokeswoman responded by saying that executives of The BL were active administrators on Epoch Media Group-controlled pages as recently as Friday morning, when The BL accounts were deleted by Facebook.
The use of AI-generated photos to pass off the accounts as real represents a new tool for those trying to use fake accounts to amplify their message on social-media platforms. It adds to the longstanding practice of stealing other people's photos, using stock images for profile pictures and hijacking other peoples' accounts.
The large deployment of AI-generated photos in this way "was the first time we've seen this at scale," said Ben Nimmo, of Graphika, an analytics firm that worked with Facebook to investigate the network.
The tech giant said the BL, which the social-media company has now banned from its platform, ran 610 accounts, 89 pages, 156 groups on Facebook -- in addition to 72 accounts on Facebook-owned Instagram. The fake accounts accrued more than 55 million followers, Facebook said.
A Twitter spokesman said the company "identified and suspended approximately 700 accounts originating from Vietnam for violating our rules around platform manipulation -- specifically fake accounts and spam."
---
Alexa Corse and Betsy Morris contributed to this article.

Credit: By Jeff Horwitz and Robert McMillan
