When spending and employment grow as quickly as they have lately, it normally means inflation pressure is building and the Federal Reserve may have to raise interest rates.
But on Wednesday Fed chair Jerome Powell suggested otherwise. Demand, he said, has indeed grown rapidly, but so has supply. A supply-side boom generates the best of all worlds: brisk growth and falling inflation.
The Fed didn't raise rates this week mainly because higher bond yields had already done some of its tightening. Whether it decides to raise rates later will depend on the supply-side boom continuing. That, however, is hardly guaranteed.
Supply normally evolves slowly with demographics, investment and innovation, but it fluctuated dramatically during the pandemic and its aftermath. A shift toward spending on goods from services because of lockdowns and then stimulus checks pressured supply chains, leading to goods shortages. Millions of people left the labor force, changed occupations or moved, resulting in widespread job vacancies.
As a result, inflation leapt in 2021, even though by conventional metrics the economy had plenty of spare capacity. Unemployment, for example, was above the 4% Fed officials consider sustainable over the long run.
In recent quarters, Powell suggested, that dynamic has gone into reverse as supply chains have normalized and the labor force expanded. In September 2021, unemployment was at 4.8% and there were 10.9 million job vacancies. Two years later, unemployment was lower, at 3.8%, normally a sign of a tighter job market, but vacancies had fallen, to 9.6 million. That is largely because in the past year the labor force grew by about three million people, about four times the normal long-run rate, according to what the Congressional Budget Office estimated before the pandemic.
"In the labor market, what we've seen is a very positive rebalancing of supply and demand, partly through just much more supply coming online," Mr. Powell said on Wednesday. So even "with labor demand still clearly remaining very strong. . .you see wage increases coming down."
Fed officials put the U.S.'s long-run annual potential growth rate at 1.8%, meaning growth above that normally puts upward pressure on inflation. But Mr. Powell said that hasn't been true lately because improving supply chains and an expanding labor force have temporarily boosted potential. Indeed, unemployment actually rose and inflation fell between the second and third quarter, the opposite of what would normally happen when growth, at 4.9%, was nearly triple potential.
The possibility of higher potential is why some Fed officials are reluctant to raise interest rates further based on strong growth alone, at least so long as inflation keeps falling.
Yet Mr. Powell cautioned against extrapolating the good news on supply, for good reason. Labor-force participation for 15- to 64-year-olds is back to its prepandemic level. Immigration inflows, which have expanded the supply of workers, may slow as the processing backlog is whittled down. Millions of migrants have poured across the border seeking asylum status, but their contribution to supply is unclear since many lack work permits and skills. Higher productivity also boosts potential growth but of that there is as yet no sign, despite ample hype about artificial intelligence.
There is also evidence inflation may have stopped falling. After filtering out noisy components, several analysts find underlying inflation has stabilized around 3%, a full point higher than the Fed's 2% target. That last mile of inflation reduction will likely require more slack opening up in the economy, and it seems unlikely to happen entirely through a continued supply-side boom.
Credit: By Greg Ip
