Last year's names on The Wall Street Journal list of Tech Companies to Watch have turned out to be, well, worth watching. In particular, their fates say a lot about the trends that are affecting many tech startups these days.
Among those trends:
-- Home security is hot.
-- Car makers are evolving with the help of startups.
-- Investors are pouring money into new ways of delivering consumer services from renters' insurance to health-care platforms. But the health and education markets remain difficult for newcomers.
One of the clearest signs recently that the home-security market is booming was Amazon.com Inc.'s purchase of Ring -- a maker of video-connected doorbells that allow people to remotely see and communicate with people visiting their property -- in a deal valued at more than $1 billion. Ring, based in Santa Monica, Calif., was No. 7 on last year's Tech Companies to Watch list. The acquisition, completed in April, was one of Amazon's largest, second only to its roughly $13.5 billion purchase of Whole Foods last year.
Ring wasn't the only home-security company acquired since appearing on last year's list. August Home Inc., a San Francisco-based maker of internet-connected locks and doorbell cameras, No. 3 on the Journal's list last year, was bought by Swedish lock company Assa Abloy for an undisclosed sum. The deal will help Assa Abloy, which owns the Yale lock brand, expand in the U.S.
Established companies also continue to hunt for startup acquisitions that provide other types of security. Germany's Continental AG, the maker of premium tires and other technology for autos, agreed to acquire Israeli startup Argus Cyber Security, No. 24 on the Journal's list, for about $400 million. The acquisition of Argus, which makes products to protect vehicles from cybersecurity threats associated with onboard electronics and communications systems, gives Continental a foothold in the expanding and competitive driverless-car sector, where such systems are crucial.
Intense competition in another growth market, online financial services, spurred the acquisition by Navient Corp., a servicer of student debt payments, of Earnest Inc., No. 17 on the Journal's list, for $155 million. San Francisco-based Earnest makes personal loans and refinances student loans.
Aside from acquisitions, big rounds of venture-capital funding for some of the companies on last year's list reflect investors' interest in startups involved in expanding markets including ride sharing, cybersecurity and health-care services.
Daimler AG joined competitors Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Co. in jumping into ride-sharing services with its investment of $200 million in New York-based startup Via Transportation Inc., maker of a ride-hailing app. At No. 21 on the Journal's list last year, Via Transportation had previously raised some $137 million from investors. The Daimler backing and expanded partnership enables the startup to get into European ride sharing.
Japan's SoftBank Group has written a flurry of hefty checks for startups in recent months, including the $100 million it invested in cybersecurity startup Cybereason Inc., No. 14 on the Journal's list, in a deal that valued the Boston-based company at about $1 billion. Cybereason's technology uses machine learning to recognize threats as they enter a company's computer network, so they can be addressed quickly.
The growing market for consumer services in health care and insurance is driving some big venture investments, such as the $110 million funding of Collective Health Inc., the No. 2 company on last year's Journal list. The San Francisco-based online platform allows self-insured employers and their employees to manage their health, vision and dental plans.
But while investment in health-care startups is at an all-time high, they still grapple with the reality of growing within a complex, highly regulated industry. Collective Health is one of the few health-care startups expected by industry veterans to launch a public offering in the near future.
Telemedicine startup Doctor on Demand Inc., the Journal's No. 12 tech company to watch last year, saw its share price drop in its latest round of financing. Chief Executive Hill Ferguson cited the operational costs of the San Francisco-based company's shift to an enterprise model -- selling its service to companies, health plans and provider networks rather than directly to consumers -- as a reason for the decline in value.
Like health care, education has been tough for disruptive entrepreneurs to reshape. Education startup AltSchool Inc., No. 13 on last year's list, has raised more than $174 million in venture capital. But it closed nearly half of its private schools in November, saying they didn't appear to be sustainable financially in the long term. The company's technology provides a platform for teachers to create curricula and compiles data on students to help teachers personalize their lessons. AltSchool started out by opening schools based on the technology but now is selling the technology to existing schools.
Hollar Inc., the e-commerce dollar store that was No. 1 on the Tech Companies to Watch list last year, has expanded its operations. The company increased the number of products it sells by launching a marketplace that allows third-party merchants to sell via Hollar, and it raised $35 million from investors in December. Hollar had $35 million in sales last year, more than double the 2016 total, says David Yeom, a co-founder.
"We aren't profitable, but we are on that path," Mr. Yeom says. "Our expectation is that with this fundraising, we won't have to do another one. This will get us to profitability in 18 to 20 months." The company has reduced its workforce, in part by introducing robotics to its order-fulfillment process, he says.
---
Ms. Mack is a Wall Street Journal reporter in San Francisco. Email her at heather.mack@wsj.com.

Credit: By Heather Mack
