If the best-seller "Hillbilly Elegy" gave bicoastal elites in the U.S. a glimpse into the lives of poor white Americans, its equivalent in China might be Kwai, a social-networking video app that shows what life is like outside the biggest cities.
A few examples from Kwai: As geese cackle in the yard of a rural home, a bride holds up her white wedding gown so its hem doesn't touch the dirt. Three friends blast firecrackers behind each other for fun. An old man plays an electronic keyboard and sings a pop love song from the '80s: "I haven't forgotten you, yet you've forgotten me. You even called me by the wrong name."
Short videos like these have turned Kwai, pronounced "kuh-why" and owned by Beijing Kuaishou Technology, into the entertainment channel for less-affluent, small-town China. Each day, about 40 million people use the app and upload five million short and live-streaming videos less than a minute in length. With 400 million registered users, it's China's most popular short-video platform.
People living in China's bigger, more sophisticated cities got a shock when visiting their country cousins during the recent Lunar New Year holiday, finding their relatives glued to an app they had barely heard of. When I asked my followers on Weibo -- China's Twitter, with largely urban, educated users -- whether they use Kwai, few said they do.
Kwai's seemingly sudden emergence is creating a stir and some reflection about China's widening socio-economic divide, much like the red feed, blue feed breakdown on U.S. social media.
Some middle-class intellectuals view much of Kwai's content as crude comedy and silly pranks meant to attract eyeballs and make money. A few online commentators compare Kwai to "The Jerry Springer Show," a U.S. tabloid television talk show; and video blog WorldStarHipHop, which its founder called the "CNN of the ghetto."
To those critics, Kuaishou Chief Executive Su Hua says "Kwai is a happy, authentic place" tailored for average Chinese. "If you focus on the nostrils of a pretty woman, you'll find them ugly too," he says.
Cosmopolitan China -- centered in major coastal cities such as Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen -- is used to dictating what's popular and what's not for the rest of the country. The gap between those two worlds is real.
China's biggest cities increasingly look more modern than New York or London, while the countryside is stuck in the Third World. The upper middle class vacation in Paris and the Maldives, while many Chinese can only afford to travel domestically. Only 8.8% of the population is college-educated.
Kwai provides a medium for those in that less-developed part of the country to share what they find relevant and amusing. Many other user-generated video apps frequently showcase attractive women and the lifestyles of the new middle class. Kwai users, by contrast, often show themselves roaming farm fields or standing in front of shabby-looking buildings.
Zhang Yunhai, a 28-year-old car-service driver in the southwestern tourist town of Dali, uses Kwai to watch videos about modified cars, funny stunts and World Wrestling Entertainment. He says he doesn't watch TV because there's too much propaganda and he doesn't use Weibo because nobody pays attention to his posts.
"I find Kwai more down-to-earth than other apps," he says.
Researchers at Tsinghua University in Beijing find that the internet is helping the tens of millions of migrants who left rural China for the cities stay connected with relatives and classmates. It isn't, however, helping them integrate into urban society.
"New technologies can bring about social changes, but don't always help break the social structural barriers," says Guo Yuhua, a Tsinghua sociology professor, who led a team that researched the migrant population in seven cities from 2010-2014.
Started in 2011 as a machine-learning project on user preferences, Kuaishou has received investments from the likes of Baidu, DCM Ventures, Yuri Milner's DST Global and Sequoia Capital China.
Mr. Su, a former Google and Baidu programmer, says Kwai's underlying algorithm helps users discover what they're interested in. Users may buy virtual gifts to reward a performer. Kuaishou keeps 50% of the sum, and the performers are able to change their 50% share into real money. Though not yet profitable, the company is drawing hundreds of millions of yuan a month in revenue from these gifts, an executive says.
Li Jiuqiang, a former security guard without a high-school education, got on Kwai two months ago. Since then, the 22-year-old has posted videos on Kwai showing him eating a tube of wasabi paste, swilling a bottle of vinegar and consuming a bowl of live silkworms. He says he earns 100 yuan to 200 yuan ($15 to $30) a day from virtual tips his audiences give him. For eating a live goldfish, he earned 5,000 new followers and 700 yuan.
Mr. Su says his background also helped shape the Kwai community. The 34-year-old was born in a village deep in the mountains of southern Hunan province. The village didn't have electricity until 1998 or a paved road until 2012. When he studied software at Tsinghua -- a rare student from a poor, rural background -- travel during school breaks back to the village to visit his grandparents required a three-hour flight, two long bus rides and a two-hour trek by foot.
"I came from the bottom of the Chinese society. I didn't spend my whole life in big cities or was only exposed to sophisticated stuff," he says. "I know that besides the top of the pyramid, there are also the middle and bottom parts."
---
Follow Li Yuan on Twitter @LiYuan6 or write to li.yuan@wsj.com.
Credit: By Li Yuan
