[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Dell sold an awful lot of artificial-intelligence servers in its most recent quarter. The IT-equipment company also managed to turn a better profit on them.
Dell's fiscal second-quarter report late Thursday showed server revenue surging 80% year over year to nearly $7.7 billion. That blew away the 49% growth Wall Street expected. Shipments of AI servers specifically nearly doubled from last quarter, to $3.1 billion.
More importantly, the operating margin for the segment including servers picked up 3 percentage points from the 7-year-low Dell reported in May for its first quarter. That helped Dell's shares advance 4.3% Friday, though the stock is still a long way from recovering from the sharp selloff sparked by the last report.
It has been a rough season for AI stocks in general, driven by a mix of worries about valuation, Nvidia's product cycle and a general market rotation to less frothy segments. Even Nvidia has barely matched the Dow over the last three months. Super Micro -- Dell's arch-rival in AI servers -- has lost 47% as profits have disappointed and a short-selling firm has questioned the company's accounting.
For Dell, the latest improvements in its AI business are somewhat offset by the realization that sales in that segment won't follow a steady path. State-of-the-art AI systems are demanding machines, and not all Dell customers are ready to deploy them now.
Dell Chief Operating Officer Jeff Clarke cited "readiness of a data center, readiness of power, readiness of cooling if it's direct liquid cooling, the ability to have water in the data center" as factors affecting customers' ability to take delivery of AI servers.
Wall Street is confident Dell can manage through all that; 81% of analysts rate the stock a buy, compared to 47% for Super Micro and 38% for Hewlett Packard Enterprise, according to FactSet data. UBS wrote Friday that "over a multi-quarter period, the noise around the timing of shipments should not impact Dell's valuation."
Dell's AI story appears to be getting back on track.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
