Morgan Stanley is backing Huel, a supplier of plant-based food powders and meal-replacement drinks, marking the second deal made by the bank's investment-management arm from its 1GT carbon-reduction strategy.
Huel provides consumers with nutritional products such as powdered shakes and protein bars, as well as instant meals and beverages. The Tring, England-based business serves more than 900,000 active online customers across about 100 countries, said Chief Executive James McMaster.
The company generated more than GBP 144 million, about $175.2 million, in revenue for the year ended in July 2022, up 41% from fiscal 2021, McMaster said. The U.K. accounts for roughly half of the company's revenue, while a third comes from the U.S., he said.
Morgan Stanley's investment-management arm invests from the 1GT fund in businesses that will help the firm reach its 2050 goal of reducing greenhouse-gas emissions by a gigaton -- or about 10% of the carbon-dioxide gas the world's forests absorb annually. The growth strategy focuses on areas such as mobility, power, sustainable food and agriculture, as well as recycling.
By last May, Morgan Stanley raised $500 million for the 1GT fund, or about halfway toward a $1 billion target for the vehicle. Overall, the bank's investment-management arm oversees around $1.4 trillion.
In the only other investment so far through the 1GT strategy, the asset manager co-led a $50 million commitment to supply chain-focused Everstream Analytics this year. The German company uses artificial-intelligence technology to help clients improve the efficiency of their suppliers and make their operations more sustainable.
Vikram Raju, head of climate private-equity investing for Morgan Stanley's investment-management arm, said Huel attracted the firm with its large and growing active customer base, which the company said expanded by 22% in fiscal 2022. The bank also noted rising demand for alternative meals, he said.
Raju, who leads the 1GT strategy, said his team saw people drinking Huel products in the bank's London office, prompting them to check out the business. They liked what they found. "It was an opportunity to partner with what was already a compelling brand in Europe," he said of Huel.
Credit: By Luis Garcia
