The stock market Friday continued playing the hits: Nvidia reached new heights, and the S&P 500 notched its 15th record high of the year.
It helped the index log its 16th weekly gain in the past 18 weeks, a hot streak last seen when Three Dog Night's "Joy to the World" topped the Billboard Hot 100 in 1971.
All three major indexes traded in the green Friday, opening March on a high note after four consecutive monthly gains. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 0.2%, or 91 points, while the S&P 500 glided 0.8% higher. Thanks largely to semiconductor firms, the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite led the pack with a 1.1% climb, also setting a new record.
Shares in Intel, Qualcomm, Advanced Micro Devices, Broadcom and Micron gained 1.8% or more Friday to extend chip makers' relentless advance. Nvidia marched upward by 4%, pulling its market capitalization above $2 trillion just 180 trading days after hitting the $1 trillion mark, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
The market has continued grinding out gains despite strong economic data forcing investors to throttle back hopes for an interest-rate cut at the Federal Reserve's March meeting. Next week, traders will get additional hints at the path forward for monetary policy when Fed Chair Jerome Powell testifies before Congress and the Labor Department releases its February jobs report.
Leslie Thompson, chief investment officer of Spectrum Wealth Management, said a hot inflation print later in March could coincide with a seasonally bearish period for stocks, pushing down share prices and giving investors a chance to buy the dip.
"Things don't go up forever. You need some sort of natural pullback," she said. "That might be a better time to buy."
Benchmark 10-year Treasury yields slipped Friday after weaker-than-expected reports on U.S. manufacturing activity, consumer sentiment and construction spending. The benchmark settled at 4.180%.
In equity markets, New York Community Bancorp was back in the spotlight, and it wasn't a comfortable place to be.
The bank's shares tumbled 26% Friday after the company said it unearthed "material weaknesses" in loan controls, replaced its chief executive and took a $2.4 billion charge. The stock weighed down a broader index of regional bank shares.
Many energy investors had a better end to the week. Benchmark U.S. crude rose by 2.2% to $79.97 a barrel Friday, continuing a seasonal uptick as summer driving season approaches. Shares in oil-and-gas producers, refiners, drillers and tanker operators all trended higher as a result.
Utilities, on the other hand, were the S&P 500's worst-performing sector. That was due in part to Xcel Energy shares continuing to tumble, falling Friday by 5.9%, after the company this past week said it could face liability claims related to wildfires in Texas.
Meanwhile, shares of Spirit AeroSystems rose 15% after The Wall Street Journal reported that Boeing was in preliminary talks to buy the jet-fuselage supplier. Boeing, which split off Spirit two decades ago, lost 1.8%.
The session's other big winner was Dell, which reported Thursday that it had a backlog of orders for artificial-intelligence servers. Shares in the Texas PC maker ripped 32% higher afterward.
The bounce is the latest evidence that the AI-fueled exuberance powering markets in recent months is broadening, said Stephanie Lang, chief investment officer at Homrich Berg. She pointed to an oft-used metaphor in which Nvidia and other select chip makers are providing the technological equivalent of pickaxes and shovels for a coming gold rush.
"Now, it's moving down to the next layer," Lang said. "Can those gold miners find gold?"
---
Caitlin McCabe and Sam Goldfarb contributed to this article.
Credit: By David Uberti
