International Business Machines Corp. plans its biggest-ever business exit, spinning off a major part of its information-technology services operations to accelerate the 109-year-old tech pioneer's focus on faster-growing businesses like cloud computing and artificial intelligence.
The move IBM announced Thursday would separate its unit that manages clients' IT infrastructure and accounts for nearly a quarter of its sales and staff. But the business has shrunk as customers have embraced cloud computing and has become an earnings drag for Big Blue.
"We are redefining the future of IBM and where we will put our focus moving forward," Chief Executive Arvind Krishna said Thursday. The company, he told The Wall Street Journal, has seen major growth in client numbers and large deals in cloud computing, proving it could be competitive there.
IBM said it would separate operations that generated about $19 billion in sales over the past year, have about 90,000 employees and a backlog of $60 billion. IBM reported $77.15 billion in total revenue for 2019 and 352,600 total employees.
Investors welcomed the news, sending IBM's shares up nearly 6% in Thursday trading. The stock had been down 7% this year through Wednesday's close, lagging cloud rivals that have seen big gains during the pandemic with companies shifting more work online. Microsoft Corp. shares are up more than 30% and shares in online retailer Amazon.com Inc., the largest cloud-services provider, are up more than 70%.
The move marks one of the biggest shifts in the history of a company that has taken other major pivots. Once synonymous with the personal computer following the debut of the IBM PC in the 1980s, it sold its operations to China's Lenovo Group Ltd. in 2005 after falling behind more nimble rivals such as Dell Technologies Inc. In 2014, it exited its unprofitable semiconductor business, paying $1.5 billion to GlobalFoundries Inc. to take over the operations.
But none of those transactions was as large in scale relative to IBM's size as the spinoff announced on Thursday, which would fundamentally alter the makeup of one of America's oldest and most iconic technology companies.
The IT services operations that IBM is now partly shedding were central to former Chief Executive Lou Gerstner's drive in the 1990s to transform the company from a lumbering computer-hardware giant to a huge player in services that were booming at the time.
The spinoff news comes a few months after the Armonk, N.Y., company said it was cutting an unspecified number of jobs in the first major workforce reduction under Mr. Krishna. He assumed the role in April and is trying to revive growth. The layoffs were made against the backdrop of the Covid-19 pandemic, which has caused many IBM customers to dial back investments and hold off on big software deals.
Even before the health crisis, IBM has been struggling through a yearslong effort to reposition the company. Sales have fallen around 25% in the past eight years, and the company trails the likes of Amazon.com and Microsoft in cloud computing -- where companies rent rather than buy computing horsepower.
Shedding a legacy business that is performing poorly at a time when IBM's clients are adopting cloud computing is probably a wise bet, said Daniel Elman, an analyst at Boston-based Nucleus Research. "They were late to the cloud party, and this is now them doubling down and saying this is the direction of the company," he said.

Credit: By Asa Fitch and Dave Sebastian
