When Wells Fargo & Co. Chief Marketing Officer Jamie Moldafsky launched a recent new ad campaign for the bank following its sales-practices scandal, it was a mix of art and science.
Wells Fargo was already investing in how to better understand its customers and potential customers, but it stepped up the work in September, after the San Francisco bank paid a $185 million settlement for opening up as many as 2.1 million accounts using fictitious or unauthorized customer information. It has since faced two congressional grillings, a slew of management changes, large clawbacks of executive compensation, and a spate of investigations.
The bank intensified its efforts to use polls and focus groups to gauge sentiment about the brand among consumers, information it has used to help guide its marketing. Ms. Moldafsky recently spoke with The Wall Street Journal about what the bank has been doing to repair its brand, dive deep into data to get a better sense of what its customers want and experiment with new marketing channels.
Here are edited excerpts of that conversation.
WSJ: Last September was a busy month, not just with the sales-practices scandal but also with backlash from an earlier advertisement promoting the bank's "teen financial education day" program suggesting teens should choose careers in science over artistic fields. A number of well-known artists voiced objections over Twitter.
MS. MOLDAFSKY: The world of social media has fundamentally changed the way all of us do our jobs.
We do exhaustive research, more than we've ever done -- literally daily, weekly, monthly -- around understanding our customers, our prospects and the environment and how people feel about us, and which messages are resonating. But that can change in a minute if somebody tweets something with a different perspective or point of view that nobody had contemplated. That world is accelerating. It isn't a lack of control; the control has shifted to the marketplace.
Our first lesson learned on that was that things are going to happen in the market that can take off in a way that is unexpected or bad. You have to get much better at reading into all the different possibilities.
We did centralize marketing; that was completed in October. That's enabled us to have a much more holistic view of all our messaging, all our communications, and of our customers.
WSJ: After the settlement, the bank began its "Commitment" campaign in digital, print and television in efforts to explain actions it had taken following the sales scandal and to repair its brand.
MS. MOLDAFSKY: Clearly people were getting the message that we made mistakes and had done things wrong, but they hadn't heard the message that we felt badly about it. We're apologizing. We are committed to making it right.
WSJ: The bank halted its usual ad campaigns to focus on its apology and what it was changing. How does that impact customer relationships or new account openings?
MS. MOLDAFSKY: We knew there really isn't business as usual when you're in this sort of position. There's definitely data and insight behind that, but it's also intuition. You want to be careful not to hurt the brand. The right thing to do here may be to understand that we might have slightly lower results for a little bit but that we are actually building the brand back for longer-term viability and strength.
WSJ: How are you making use of data?
MS. MOLDAFSKY: Starting with September onward, we do daily polling. You see trends both on an immediate basis but also over time. And we've used that to understand things like favorability and people's perceptions of Wells Fargo as well as to actually test new creative content and new messages. We can actually get pretty discrete on different segmentations [of the population to see how] different segments sometimes view things very differently.
WSJ: Where are you getting your data from?
MS. MOLDAFSKY: Qualitative [research]. Polling is often online panels that we commission. And then we have focus-group research that we do. We do very specific advertising testing and messaging testing.
This campaign, for example, we went through multiple rounds of different concept testing to see which messages resonate, which messages are different, which messages make people feel positive, which messages make people feel negative. It provided a lot of direction for us.
WSJ: How are you using data and analytics?
MS. MOLDAFSKY: Best examples, if you're looking for a house on Zillow, Wells Fargo serving you a checking account may not be relevant, but serving you a preapproved mortgage may be.
WSJ: How else are you using artificial intelligence?
MS. MOLDAFSKY: Most people who close their bank accounts, as an example, don't really just close their bank accounts. They just over time use them less, they open one somewhere else. We're using artificial intelligence to look at all those underlying dynamics, how the behavior people have indicates that they may be someone who wants to deepen their relationship with Wells Fargo or is potentially someone who wants to lessen their relationship. You can then communicate differently. It's a way to use that data on more of a predictive basis.
WSJ: How do you think about a new marketing platform?
MS. MOLDAFSKY: One of the tenets, especially with social media, is to test and learn. When you're an established brand that's been there for 165 years, that comes with a lot of really strong positives, but it also comes with guardrails of what you can or cannot do.
WSJ: Like what?
MS. MOLDAFSKY: Virtual reality is a great example. Our agency and some third parties came to us. We thought about the best first use around sponsorships like Major League Soccer. We actually had, set in the old West, a stagecoach virtual-reality [station set up at soccer games] -- that was relevant to the brand and appropriate to the brand and didn't seem like some strange stretch.
WSJ: What else are you working on?
MS. MOLDAFSKY: The area of financial health, how you serve that up to make it appetizing. And certainly the connected home. For example, today what [the Nest smart thermostat] will tell you is you can save money if you lower your temperature. But if you could automatically have the savings that were generated from turning your thermostat down 5 degrees a day generated into your children's college fund, wouldn't that be cool?
---
Ms. Glazer is a reporter for The Wall Street Journal in New York. Email her at emily.glazer@wsj.com.
Credit: By Emily Glazer
