[In March 2020, the world realized that Covid-19 was going to change everything. After a year of unprecedented challenges, we asked leaders in business, politics, science and the arts to reflect on what the pandemic has taught them -- about themselves, society and the path ahead.]
This year has forced each of us to re-examine and to change how we live, work and relate to one another. And for that reason I don't think it's a coincidence that the year of Covid-19 was also the year where critical conversations about equity and systemic injustice attained both new urgency and a well-deserved central role in our national conversation.
In simple theory, a disease should affect all of us equally. But in plain fact, the opposite is true. We have all seen, in real time, how structural discrimination and obstacles to opportunity do their work in a crisis. In our communities, every burden -- from rates of infection and care outcomes, to economic adversity, to the challenges of virtual learning when schools are closed -- falls heaviest on those for whom true equity has always been farthest from reach. As someone who grew up during the civil-rights movement, it has been frustrating to see how much work is still to be done but heartening to see the degree to which people of good will have set aside comfort with the status quo to march and to demand something better.
When the pandemic recedes, we can't simply assume that healing follows. It falls on all of us -- individuals and communities, companies and governments -- to ensure that what's ahead is not just the end of a disease but a durable and hopeful future for all who sacrificed and endured during this unprecedented time.
An essential place to focus this work is on education, in all its forms. Education is a great equalizer, but it cannot do its work without tools and without a home. Our approach at Apple has been to ask, "How can we help?" That question has led us to build powerful learning tools and share them freely with tens of thousands of teachers, educators and parents.
And it's led us to undertake major new investments through our Racial Equity and Justice Initiative. These projects include the Propel Center in Atlanta, which we're helping to build in partnership with the country's historically Black colleges and universities, to support the next generation of leaders of color in fields ranging from machine learning to app development, entrepreneurship to design; and our first Apple Developer Academy in the U.S., in downtown Detroit, home to more than 50,000 Black-owned businesses and no shortage of great ideas for the app economy.
The old saying goes that the best time to plant a tree was 20 years ago, but the second best time is today. If this pandemic has taught us anything, I hope it's that none of us can use injustice's long history as an excuse not to act. Our lives on this planet are precious and fleeting, and fate has a way of reminding us that society is only as strong as those who, for too long, have gone overlooked and undervalued.
---
Mr. Cook is the CEO of Apple.
Credit: By Tim Cook
