SoftBank Group Corp. has lined up chip maker Qualcomm Inc. as an investor in the Japanese firm's new technology fund, helping the vast portfolio reach its $100 billion goal, according to people familiar with the matter.
San Diego-based Qualcomm has moved toward finalizing its commitment in recent days, the people said. It joins Apple Inc., which previously agreed to invest in the fund, the people said. The amounts to be invested couldn't be determined.
Together, the pair brings a Silicon Valley imprimatur to what would be one of the world's largest pools of private capital. SoftBank -- the conglomerate whose chief executive, Masayoshi Son, has spoken of a coming technology revolution -- plans to invest in next-generation technologies such as artificial intelligence and robotics.
The SoftBank Vision Fund was announced in October and thrust back in the public eye last month, when Mr. Son met with President-elect Donald Trump in New York and pledged to invest $50 billion in the U.S. and create thousands of jobs. That money is expected to come from the new fund.
The telecom company's fund has gathered the $100 billion in commitments it was seeking and is set to formally launch in the coming weeks, according to people familiar with the matter.
SoftBank said when it announced the fund that it will contribute $25 billion of its own cash over the next five years. Saudi Arabia's government fund has agreed to invest up to $45 billion over the period.
The Wall Street Journal reported Dec. 12 that Apple and the sovereign-wealth fund of Abu Dhabi have also discussed investing. Those negotiations have since advanced and are near being completed, people familiar with the matter said.
The Qatar Investment Authority, the wealth fund of another oil-rich nation, is also in discussions to invest, the people said.
Apple and the Qatar Investment Authority declined to comment. A representative of the Abu Dhabi wealth fund couldn't be reached.
SoftBank is the third-largest mobile carrier in Japan, but Mr. Son has been expanding its reach. SoftBank in 2013 bought majority control of U.S.-based Sprint Corp. and in 2016 spent $32 billion to acquire ARM Holding PLC, which designs microchips.
That takeover, SoftBank's largest ever, is a bet on the so-called Internet of Things, in which millions of everyday devices are connected online. Mr. Son has predicted that in the next 20 years, one trillion chips will go into gadgets from thermostats to watches.
Qualcomm and Apple both have made similar plays to expand beyond the smartphone, which may help explain their interest in SoftBank's fund.
Qualcomm in October struck a $39 billion takeover deal for NXP Semiconductors NV, a rival whose microchips are used in everything from home appliances to tractors.And Apple last year launched a connected watch and has been working on new initiatives including self-driving cars.
As it is, Apple, Qualcomm and SoftBank make a formidable triangle in the wireless-communications industry. They are connected through global supply chains, and Mr. Son is close to both Apple CEO Tim Cook and Qualcomm Executive Chairman Paul Jacobs.
Qualcomm licenses ARM Holding's designs to produce microchips that go into Apple's iPhones, which connect to services offered by Sprint and its competitors.
---
Jenny Strasburg and Tripp Mickle contributed to this article.
Credit: By Liz Hoffman and Ted Greenwald
