Traders are on alert for any signs the economy is coming under pressure. That is putting corporate earnings under extra scrutiny.
Strong growth for corporate profits has helped keep the stock market afloat during a recent bout of volatility, with Wall Street expecting earnings overall this year to jump the most since 2021. But the results have come with some worrying signs. Chief among them: Sales growth hasn't been as strong as usual.
For the second quarter, companies in the S&P 500 are on pace to deliver a 5.2% jump in revenue from a year earlier. That is higher than the 4.7% Wall Street expected at the end of June, but below the 6.7% average over the past five years.
"There's more pressure on the top line," said Keith Lerner, co-chief investment officer at Truist Advisory Services. "Consumers are pushing back on prices that are moving too high."
Here is what second-quarter results have shown so far:
1. Profits look strong
Earnings for companies in the S&P 500 are on pace to record a jump of 10.9% from a year earlier, better than what analysts expected at the end of June and headed for the biggest quarterly increase in over two years, according to FactSet.
The problem is revenue, which is underperforming. That suggests profits are being driven by cost-cutting and one-time items, rather than strong underlying performance.
"There's always one-time items, either gain or loss, or something close to the income to make that gain," said Justin Burgin, vice president of equity research at Ameriprise Financial. "The true tell is revenue."
2. People are cutting back on the little things
One reason for the underwhelming revenue is that people are budgeting more.
McDonald's said customers are picking cheaper items and going to its restaurants less often, driving down U.S. same-store sales for the first time since 2020. Starbucks reported another quarterly decline in sales and Chipotle said its sales growth was cooling.
"Low-income consumers, in many cases, they're dropping out of the market, eating at home and finding other ways to economize, cutting down on trips," McDonald's Chief Executive Chris Kempczinski said on the company's earnings call.
French-fry supplier Lamb Weston felt the crunch, with shares tumbling 28% after it missed profit and sales expectations. Potato chips are another casualty: PepsiCo said shoppers are buying fewer bags of them.
The S&P 500's consumer discretionary is down 1.7% this year, the only sector in the red.
3. High-end shoppers are economizing, too
The appetite for luxury watches, jewelry and clothes seemed endless not that long ago. Now, even high-end shoppers are taking a breather.
The parent company of Louis Vuitton and Dior said sales rose a disappointing 1% from a year earlier. Gucci owner Kering said sales fell 11% and issued a profit warning. French distillery Remy Cointreau flagged a sluggish market in China and posted an overall decline in sales. Germany's Hugo Boss cut its sales guidance for the year.
Those upscale companies aren't part of the S&P 500, but their performance offers insight into the financial health of both aspirational and ultrawealthy shoppers.
4. High interest rates are weighing on banks
After paying basically nothing on savings accounts for years, banks are being forced to offer higher yields to prevent customers from taking their deposits elsewhere. That is hurting their profit margins.
Higher rates also mean people take out and refinance fewer mortgages. Consumers are spending big on credit cards and carrying balances, which is giving banks a boost. But now more borrowers are falling behind on bills.
Meanwhile, investment banking and trading revenue at banks including Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase are showing signs of improvement.
5. Big tech isn't letting up on its AI dreams
Tech titans have been riding high on hopes about the transformative powers of artificial-intelligence technology. Now they are spending billions of dollars to make those dreams happen.
"When you go through a curve like this, the risk of underinvesting is dramatically greater than the risk of overinvesting," Alphabet Chief Executive Sundar Pichai said on a call with analysts.
Investors apparently aren't so sure. Six of the Magnificent Seven group of big tech companies have released results so far, and the stock prices of four dropped the day after they reported. Shares of Amazon tumbled 8.8%, Tesla dropped over 12%, Alphabet lost 5% and Microsoft slipped 1.1%.
Meta Platforms and Apple were the exceptions, with shares up 4.8% and 0.7%, respectively. Nvidia, the last member of the Magnificent Seven, reports on Aug. 28.
For the year, Wall Street remains optimistic. Analysts expect earnings will rise 10.3% in 2024, according to FactSet.
Generate image description

Credit: By Hardika Singh
