WASHINGTON, D.C.
Competitive Market
For AI Tools Vowed
FTC Chair Lina Khan said her agency would protect competition in the nascent market for artificial-intelligence tools, warning that big-tech companies could "start to panic" and try to block new entrants through unlawful tactics.
Speaking at an antitrust conference Monday, Ms. Khan said the Federal Trade Commission would be watching to ensure startups can compete in the nascent AI industry.
"As you have machine learning that depends on huge amounts of data and also depends on huge amounts of storage, we need to be very vigilant to make sure that this is not just another site for the big companies becoming bigger and really squelching rivals," Ms. Khan said.
Ms. Khan made the remarks at the 2023 Annual Antitrust Enforcers Summit, a daylong forum co-hosted by the FTC and the Justice Department.
-- Jan Wolfe
---
OHIO
State Alleges Collusion
By Drug Middlemen
A price-fixing lawsuit that Ohio filed against several firms that manage billions of dollars in drug benefits ratchets up scrutiny of the companies.
The suit filed Monday by the Ohio attorney general in a state court alleges Cigna Group, Humana Inc. and Prime Therapeutics LLC shared pricing and other information gathered by a Swiss subsidiary to gain leverage in negotiations with drugmakers for rebates.
The companies restricted coverage of some insulins and other medicines due to the collusion, the lawsuit said. If they didn't get the desired rebate, the companies wouldn't pay for the drugs or would favor competitors, the lawsuit said.
Neither Cigna nor Humana responded to requests for comment. Prime said it is a part owner of the Swiss firm to negotiate drug savings and improve affordability for health plans and their members.
Cigna's Express Scripts business and Prime said in 2019, when they announced a collaboration, it would provide more affordable care for clients while staying transparent and flexible with them.
The filing comes as some policy makers explore the role the healthcare companies play in high drug costs and after the Federal Trade Commission, House Republicans and several states have launched investigations into the firms, called pharmacy-benefit managers or PBMs.
-- Jared S. Hopkins
