Every year on World Malaria Day, April 25, the international community reaffirms its commitment to eliminate this treatable and preventable disease. Targeted investments by the U.S. and others drove deaths down 60% between 2000 and 2015 -- saving at least six million lives. In 57 countries, malaria cases dropped by 75% or more.
But progress appears to have stalled. More than 60 countries have reported that malaria-carrying mosquitoes are becoming resistant to insecticides. In Southeast Asia, the malaria parasite itself is developing resistance to the drug artemisinin, today's standard treatment. Africa could be next.
Unchecked, drug resistance could cause more than 100,000 new deaths each year. This tragedy can be averted -- and malaria defeated -- with decisive action. Based on my own experience working on malaria control and developing antimalarial treatments, I see three areas of focus:
First, invest in research and development, particularly through nonprofit public-private partnerships like the Medicines for Malaria Venture or the Innovative Vector Control Consortium. To bolster these efforts, Novartis will put more than $100 million over five years toward advancing R&D on our next-generation antimalarial treatments.
Second, expand access to affordable broadband internet in countries where malaria is endemic. Technology can aid the fight against disease. Novartis runs a program called SMS for Life, which helps village clinics use mobile phones to report when their supplies of antimalarial medicines are running low and need to be replenished. Policy makers are using geospatial mapping to track the disease's spread, and then machine learning and artificial intelligence to analyze the data and deploy resources efficiently.
Third, optimize the use of tools available today. Children under 5 represent 70% of malaria deaths. Yet only 1 in 5 African children with the disease receive the proper diagnosis and treatment. Since 2009, Novartis has provided more than 350 million pediatric antimalarials without profit to countries in need. We plan to expand this commitment, focusing on Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and at least two more sub-Saharan countries with high rates of malaria-related child deaths.
But the challenge is too big for any one organization. The time I spent working in Gambia and Tanzania 20 years ago convinced me that eliminating malaria depends on robust and responsive health systems. That means well-trained medical workers with the equipment and facilities to prevent, diagnose and treat malaria, as well as robust supply chains to halt the entry of counterfeit medicines.
Africa has long depended on donations to support these health initiatives. In a survey out this month and commissioned by Novartis, malaria experts in 14 sub-Saharan countries said that domestic funding to fight the disease needs to increase substantially. Such investments would pay dividends: Eliminating malaria by 2040 "could save an estimated 11 million lives and unlock an estimated $2 trillion in economic benefits," according to research by Aspiration to Action, a nonprofit supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Malaria is tough but beatable. Decisive action now can help wipe out this disease -- and achieve one of history's greatest health victories.
---
Dr. Narasimhan is the CEO of Novartis.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: We Were Winning the War Against Malaria" -- WSJ May 3, 2018)

Credit: By Vas Narasimhan
