Are sales deals affected by the cycles of the moon? Is it possible to determine credit risk by the way a person types?
Fast new data-crunching software combined with a flood of public and private data is allowing companies to test these and other seemingly far-fetched theories, asking questions that few people would have thought to ask before.
By combining human and artificial intelligence, they seek to uncover clever insights and make predictions that could give businesses an advantage in an increasingly competitive marketplace.
"The more hypotheses you can come up with -- hypothesis after hypothesis after hypothesis -- the more ways you have of finding things that other people don't find," says Anthony Goldbloom, chief executive of Kaggle Inc., a San Francisco-based predictive-analytics company that claimed to discover a couple of years ago that orange used cars are more reliable than used cars in standard colors.
Correlation, of course, is different than causality. Maybe people who buy orange cars are more attentive to their vehicles, or maybe not.
But finding surprising correlations has never been easier, thanks to the flood of data that's now available.
David Elkington, the chief executive of InsideSales.com Inc., for instance, wondered whether the cycles of the moon affect sales.
InsideSales.com makes software that helps salespeople figure out which potential customer they should call at any given moment, and he had heard from his father-in-law, a retired internist, that emergency rooms are packed when the moon is full.
"People think they are totally self-controlling, unique animals, and in reality we are affected by micro and macro trends," Mr. Elkington says.
By combining lunar data with InsideSales data, his company found that deals closed during a new moon are, on average, 43% bigger than when the moon is full.
Mr. Elkington isn't sure why -- he speculates that human emotions align with the seasons, and with the solar and lunar calendars -- and he says the strength of the moon's influence on sales may vary depending on what other factors are involved.
What's more, he has found other unusual linkages by crunching data.
People answer the phone more often when it's snowy, cold or very humid; when it's sunny or less humid they respond more to email. A preliminary analysis shows that they also buy more when it's sunny, although certain people buy more when it's overcast (possibly, Mr. Elkington surmises, because they're depressed).
"Predictive analytics is helping people like you and me and 22-to-35-year-old people who are sales reps predict like a Nostradamus," Mr. Elkington says.
The online lender ZestFinance Inc. found that people who fill out their loan applications using all capital letters default more often than people who use all lowercase letters, and more often still than people who use uppercase and lowercase letters correctly.
ZestFinance Chief Executive Douglas Merrill says the company looks at tens of thousands of signals when making a loan, and it doesn't consider the capital-letter factor as significant as some other factors -- such as income when linked with expenses and the local cost of living.
So while it may take capital letters into consideration when evaluating an application, it hasn't held a loan up because of it.
Indeed, Mr. Merrill himself, a former chief information officer at Google Inc., would be somewhat of a credit risk according to this hypothesis, because he doesn't use the Shift key when he types.
ZestFinance discarded another finding from its software that taller people are better at repaying loans, a hypothesis that Mr. Merrill calls silly.
Data scientists need to verify whether their findings make sense, says Mr. Merrill. "Machine learning isn't replacing people."
---
Ms. Gage is a reporter for The Wall Street Journal based in San Francisco. She can be reached at deborah.gage@wsj.com.
Credit: By Deborah Gage
