Facebook parent Meta Platforms is planning to allow businesses to use free artificial-intelligence chatbots on WhatsApp, a move to amplify the company's efforts to turn messaging apps into viable business units.
These customer-relations chatbots represent an early test of Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg's attempts to infuse Meta's apps with AI in ways that might eventually generate revenue. The social-media giant has taken a vastly different approach to the technology compared with rivals by giving away its model and chatbot free.
Investors have yet to endorse that strategy, especially as Meta's spending on AI continues to swell. With its latest quarterly earnings report, the company revealed it could increase its spending levels for 2024 by up to $10 billion to support infrastructure investments to support its AI investments. After the earnings report, the stock dropped 10%.
"The window of opportunity is pretty small for Meta to figure out how to create AI chatbots that businesses will want to use," said Debra Aho Williamson, chief analyst of Sonata Insights. "There could be a lot of options for these businesses."
By focusing on business uses for WhatsApp in countries such as Brazil and India, Meta surprised skeptics with its progress in generating revenue from messaging apps.
In recent years, Meta charged customers for WhatsApp Business Platform, which allows businesses to communicate with customers in the app. Meta has grown its click-to-message ads, which are advertisements that appear on Facebook and Instagram and launch conversations between users and business on both WhatsApp and Messenger.
The company said in February 2023 that click-to-message ads reached $10 billion a year in sales, and in April, Meta said its Family of Apps other revenue was $380 million for the quarter, driven primarily by WhatsApp Business Platform. Meta acquired WhatsApp for $19 billion in 2014.
Though these figures make up a small proportion of the $133 billion the company generated in total revenue for 2023, Meta has begun to disclose its plans for how to boost sales generated from messaging.
Meta revealed more of its strategy on Thursday at its Conversations event in Sao Paulo, where it unveiled key new features driven by AI.
The company said it plans to expand the number of businesses that can use AI to chat with customers through WhatsApp. The chatbots will help businesses handle the influx of responses they receive from customers. As part of that expansion, Zuckerberg said that next month the company will launch its Meta AI chatbot in Portuguese, its first language outside of English. Brazil is one of WhatsApp's top markets, along with India.
Additionally, Meta is going to allow users of its WhatsApp Business app to use AI to create ads. The company hopes that by giving away AI ad-creation tools, more businesses that would have never been able to make ads on their own will do so and pay Meta to promote their businesses.
Like others in Silicon Valley, Meta dived into the tech industry's AI race after OpenAI's launch of ChatGPT in late 2022. Meta released Llama 2, a large language model, and introduced its Meta AI chatbot last year, and it updated both in April.
With Meta's AI strategy, Zuckerberg has preached patience to shareholders, asking them to trust him and pointing to the company's shift to mobile advertising, its replication of Snap's stories feature and the deployment of Reels to compete with TikTok as past successes.
But trust with investors has been tested since Zuckerberg renamed the company three years ago and began spending billions on products like virtual-reality goggles and smart sunglasses to build a so-called metaverse. Meta's Reality Labs unit has spent nearly $60 billion on such initiatives, which seek to create software and hardware for virtual worlds.
"They need to find a way to show investors with some degree of conviction that there is a there there," Bernstein analyst Mark Shmulik said. "An AI-powered chatbot inside of business messaging feels like a great place to deploy it. You might be able to find product market fit sooner than you will on smart glasses."
Credit: By Salvador Rodriguez
