Shares of manufacturer 3M had their best day on record Friday, leading the Dow to a 654-point gain as investors continued to spread their bets beyond the big tech firms that powered stock indexes to new heights this summer.
Every industry sector in the S&P 500 ended Friday higher in a broad rebound from what had been a rocky week on Wall Street, including a midweek tech selloff.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 1.6% to end the week up 0.7%. The S&P 500 increased 1.1% but finished the week 0.8% lower. The Nasdaq Composite also gained but logged a weekly decline of 2.1% after suffering its biggest daily drop since 2022 on Wednesday.
The Russell 2000 continued its resurgence, adding 1.5% Friday. The index of smaller companies has risen for three straight weeks.
Treasury yields declined. The yield on benchmark 10-year notes ended Friday at 4.199%, down from 4.255% Thursday. Yields fall as prices rise.
Dec Mullarkey, managing director of investment strategy and asset allocation at SLC Management, said the rally's spread from a few giant technology stocks to old-economy businesses such as banks, landlords, utilities and manufacturers shows investors are hedging their bets on the artificial-intelligence boom.
"There is a broadening out of growth beyond big tech to other sectors that have been fairly beaten up," he said. "Investors are hunting around for value."
Though shares of the so-called Magnificent Seven tech stocks have declined lately -- Friday's gains notwithstanding -- Vince Lorusso, chief executive of fund manager Clough Capital Partners, said that it is too early to throw in the towel on the big tech stocks.
"The amount of free cash flow that these companies are generating is staggering," Lorusso said. "We're not overly concerned about whether these companies are exhibiting bubble characteristics."
Though Friday's rally was broad, trading was dominated by sharp moves related to earnings reports and updated sales outlooks. Shares of 3M surged 23% after the materials giant beat analysts' expectations for second-quarter sales and earnings and the company lifted the floor for its full-year outlook.
Flooring maker Mohawk Industries jumped 19% after it lifted its profit outlook. Cable television operator Charter Communications, pharmaceutical firm Bristol-Myers Squibb and freight railroad Norfolk Southern each gained more than 10% in response to their own quarterly results.
DexCom was a big drag on the S&P 500, plunging 41% after the maker of monitoring devices for diabetes patients cut its 2024 sales outlook.
Commodity prices fell. U.S. benchmark oil futures lost $1.12 a barrel, capping a third straight weekly decline and closing at $77.16.
August natural-gas futures traded as low as $1.997 per million British thermal units.
Generate image description

Credit: By Ryan Dezember
