SEOUL -- The current artificial-intelligence frenzy is expected to drive significant growth in memory chips. But that time isn't now.
The latest reminder came Friday, when Samsung Electronics, the world's largest memory-chip maker, forecast a 96% drop in its operating profit for its second quarter -- a sign that even the South Korean semiconductor giant isn't able to capitalize on the moment.
Memory plays an essential role in enabling more sophisticated versions of AI-based online tools like OpenAI's ChatGPT, which can generate humanlike responses from prompts. Working in tandem with graphic-processing units made by the likes of Nvidia, memory chips help speed up computing times and are important for building faster and more complex AI applications.
But the initial bump from the rush into generative AI services isn't yet enough to overcome a broader tech slump that has damped sales of semiconductors, including memory.
Samsung expects second-quarter operating profit of 600 billion won, or roughly the equivalent of $458 million, versus the prior-year period's 14.1 trillion won. Revenue for the April-June period is expected to slide by 22% to 60 trillion won.
SK Hynix is projected to post an operating loss of 2.8 trillion won in the April-June quarter, with revenue for the period falling 53% year on year to 6 trillion won, according to FactSet.
Samsung and SK Hynix will announce their full earnings later this month.
On an earnings call last week, Sanjay Mehrotra, chief executive of Micron Technology, said generative AI tools like ChatGPT had driven higher-than-expected industry demand for memory and storage for AI servers in its most-recent quarter. But U.S.-based Micron, No. 3 in the memory business, reported a net loss of $1.9 billion and a 57% year-over-year drop in revenue for the quarter ended June 1.
This year, global revenue for all types of chips is projected to decline by around 10% to $515 billion, according to the World Semiconductor Trade Statistics. As a category, memory chips are poised for the worst decline among the major types of semiconductors, with revenue expected to drop 35% to $84 billion, WSTS projects.
Prices of memory chips, more commoditized than other types of semiconductors, began falling steeply from the second half of last year and continued to slide through this year amid a glut.
Credit: By Jiyoung Sohn
