BOY SCOUTS
Abuse Settlement
Allowed to Proceed
The U.S. Supreme Court said the Boy Scouts of America's $2.4 billion settlement with sex-abuse victims can move forward, rejecting an attempt by some plaintiffs to suspend payouts until the high court decides the fate of a similar deal reached by opioid maker Purdue Pharma.
The Boys Scouts and Purdue settlements both involve granting legal immunity to parties who didn't themselves file for bankruptcy, in return for the contribution of funds for victims, a practice that the Supreme Court is reviewing in Purdue's case after it blocked the drugmaker's deal in August.
The Boy Scouts settlement was approved by a bankruptcy judge in 2022 and allowed the youth organization to exit from chapter 11 last year and begin distributing payments to victims.
The Supreme Court paused the Boy Scouts plan for nearly a week in response to a request from a fraction of more than 82,000 survivors who argued it should be suspended while the court reviews Purdue's bankruptcy plan.
-- Soma Biswas
---
TEXAS
Judge Upholds
School's Hair Rule
A Houston-area high school didn't violate a state law prohibiting race-based hair discrimination when it suspended a Black student who refused to cut his hair, a Texas judge ruled Thursday.
The student, Darryl George, has been suspended from Barbers Hill High School in Mont Belvieu, Texas, since August.
The Barbers Hill Independent School District said George's hair, which he wears in locs, violated its dress code, according to court documents. The district's dress code for male students says hair can't fall below the eyebrows, earlobes or a T-shirt collar when let down.
George said in court documents he refused to cut his hair because his locs are an expression of his cultural pride. George has had his hair in tight twists that are pinned up for several years, according to the documents.
George said in court documents the district's dress code affects Black males more than others. He also said forcing him to cut his hair limits his freedom of expression.
-- Joseph Pisani
---
WASHINGTON, D.C.
DOJ Hires First
Chief AI Officer
The U.S. Justice Department has named a Princeton University academic as its first chief artificial intelligence officer and chief science and technology adviser.
Jonathan Mayer, a computer scientist and lawyer, will serve as one of the primary policy advisers to Attorney General Merrick Garland and Justice Department leadership on issues that require technical expertise, particularly those related to artificial intelligence, cybersecurity and other areas of emerging technology.
He will also lead department efforts to build its technological capacity, such as by advising on technical-talent recruitment and helping to advise on issues related to emerging technologies, both across the department and with other federal agencies.
The creation of an AI chief at the Justice Department comes as advances in artificial intelligence have given rise to new legal and safety questions and as more governments look to rein in the disruptive yet rapidly growing technology.
-- Mengqi Sun
---
LAS VEGAS
Man Accused of Lie
About Biden Held
A former FBI informant who claims to have links to Russian intelligence and is charged with lying about multimillion-dollar bribery allegations against President Biden and his son Hunter was again taken into custody Thursday, two days after a judge released him, his attorneys said.
Alexander Smirnov was arrested during a meeting at his lawyers' offices in downtown Las Vegas. The arrest came after prosecutors appealed the judge's ruling allowing the 43-year-old, who holds dual U.S.-Israeli citizenship, to be released with a GPS monitor ahead of trial. He is charged with making a false statement and creating a false and fictitious record.
Attorneys David Chesnoff and Richard Schonfeld said they have requested an immediate hearing on his detention and will again push for his release.
Prosecutors say Smirnov falsely told his FBI handler that executives from the Ukrainian energy company Burisma paid Biden and his son $5 million each around 2015.
-- Associated Press
