There is no clear killer app in sight for 5G mobile networks. But it might not matter, given the boosts in speed and network capacity that 5G is expected to deliver.
A killer app is an application or a service that revolutionizes an industry and drives the adoption of a new technology. Text messaging drove 2G, and the mobile internet was the force behind 3G, according to wireless industry trade association CTIA. Streaming video and the emergence of the mobile-app economy, in turn, helped push wide adoption of 4G.
For 5G, it is a different story. For mobile-network operators, the dramatic expansion of capacity 5G offers itself could generate a new spurt of growth, wireless industry executives, researchers and academics say. Fifth-generation wireless holds the promise of being as much as 100 times faster than 4G, able to connect 100 times more devices, and offering significantly faster response times between machines, according to the CTIA.
Upgrading networks to 5G also helps wireless operators address a capacity crunch on existing 4G systems, according to John Thode, clinical professor of innovation, leadership and engineering entrepreneurship at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and a former executive at Motorola and Dell Technologies Inc. Video alone sometimes takes up as much as half of some networks, says Mr. Thode.
"If I put 5G everywhere in the urban area that there's 4G cells -- without adding any extra real estate -- I now can double, or triple or quadruple the amount of data that I can put down those pipes," says Mr. Thode. "So do you actually need a killer app? No."
That doesn't mean that killer apps won't develop over time. Some see fertile ground in efforts to promote virtual and augmented reality and mobile games.
"If you've ever used a VR headset, you turn your head and there's just this subtle delay or lag," says Jason Leigh, research manager, mobility and 5G, at International Data Corp. "A lot of people get very motion sick from that sort of experience," Mr. Leigh says. 5G could reduce those lags.
Increasingly immersive games are an important part of the future at gaming giant Electronic Arts Inc. With 5G, technology like AR/VR could add another level of immersion to the player experience, though Marija Radulovic-Nastic, the company's senior vice president of development technology and services, declines to detail specific 5G plans.
At Facebook, Vivek Sharma, vice president and head of Gaming, thinks 5G could change mobile gaming from a mostly single-player pursuit to one that is more fun with multiple players. With 5G devices connected to the cloud, multiple players could use augmented reality on their phones to engage in new, interactive games, Mr. Sharma says.
For now, however, there is still little in the way of apps catching fire with consumers and capitalizing on the strengths of 5G. In past network upgrades, consumers were the first to embrace killer apps such as mobile texts, email and other applications. This time, some observers think it will be apps developed for business that lead the way toward widespread adoption.
Deere & Co., a maker of heavy equipment and technology, is looking to use 5G to help monitor many aspects of its business, including the safety and productivity of workers on its assembly lines. Cameras could capture and send real-time images of how workers are standing or sitting for instant analysis, says Tami Hedgren, Deere's manufacturing lead for large tractors and combines. If someone's posture is off, a supervisor could immediately engage with the person, offering tools or techniques that could help them avoid an injury, she says.
Fast 5G networks also could end something of a bottleneck in the delivery of telemedicine. Existing networks are a challenge for real-time remote health monitoring, says Ryan Smith, chief information officer at Intermountain Healthcare, a not-for-profit system of 24 hospitals and 225 clinics in Utah, Idaho and Nevada.
With 5G, health-care providers may be able to provide monitoring to very sick patients in their homes.
"We'll be able to monitor them and take proactive actions," says Purna Prasad, chief technology officer at Northwell Health, New York's largest health-care provider.
---
Mr. McCormick is deputy editor of WSJ Pro Artificial Intelligence. He can be reached at john.mccormick@wsj.com.

Credit: By John McCormick
