A robot whose artificial intelligence leads to disco dancing and murder. A shape-shifting life-form at the center of an alien takeover of Earth. A scientist running a drug trial that sends people into their subconscious.
Roles like these have given actor Sonoya Mizuno a specialty in unsettling sci-fi dramas and dystopian tech thrillers, like "Ex Machina," "Annihilation," "Maniac."
Ms. Mizuno, a former ballerina, says she can only guess why she emerged as a sort of muse of the uncanny, including in a music video for electronic duo the Chemical Brothers that finds her transforming into a cyborg as she dances. "I think there's maybe a strangeness about me," she says. "And it's suited to worlds that have these mind-bending spaces."
Six years after leaving a career in dance, Ms. Mizuno now appears in a sci-fi story rooted in heady arguments about determinism vs. free will. In "Devs," an eight-episode TV series premiering Thursday, Ms. Mizuno plays Lily Chan, a software engineer desperate to learn the purpose of a secret development project within the tech company she works for.
FX will release episodes of "Devs" on the cable network's new streaming TV hub called FX on Hulu. "Devs" is the third release Ms. Mizuno has worked on with Alex Garland, who wrote and directed the TV series.
In discussing her science fiction roles, the half-Japanese actor touches on the genre's history of exoticism and "the way that Asians have been perceived as futuristic" by Hollywood. Though such stereotypes have receded, she says, Asian actors are still underrepresented in leading roles across genres. The growing number of exceptions to that includes the hit movie "Crazy Rich Asians," which featured Ms. Mizuno in one of her non sci-fi roles, as the bride in over-the-top wedding proceedings in Singapore.
Over the years, Ms. Mizuno and Mr. Garland say, they have discussed their industry's need for more Asian actors in leading roles. However, her role in "Devs" wasn't guaranteed. The director says many actors -- all of Asian descent -- were considered for the role of Lily, and narrowed down to a final four who auditioned for the part.
"I try to go into other auditions with the mind-set that the job is not mine anyway, so it's not a big deal if I don't get it," she says. "With this one I knew what it meant to get the job. I felt like I had something to lose."
It's the 33-year-old actor's first leading role. And, unlike some of her previous supporting characters who were wordless or otherworldly, Ms. Mizuno's protagonist in "Devs" goes through painfully human emotions as she struggles to solve a mystery that causes many casualties around her.
In 2014's "Ex Machina," the British novelist-turned-screenwriter's debut as a director, and Ms. Mizuno's debut as an actor, she played an automaton who turns on her creator, and co-starred with Domhnall Gleeson, Oscar Isaac and Alicia Vikander. In the second movie directed by Mr. Garland, "Annihilation," Ms. Mizuno was unrecognizable as a humanoid whose movements grotesquely mirror those of its prey, a character played by Natalie Portman.
While Ms. Mizuno's grounding in dance helped shape some of her earliest screen performances, her physical presence is only one aspect of what sets her apart from other actors, Mr. Garland says: "In the vibe she projects, she's atypical and she's got a different energy."
Born in Tokyo to a Japanese father and an English-Argentine mother, Ms. Mizuno was raised in England after her parents divorced. From ages 9 to 20 she trained at the Royal Ballet School in London, then danced professionally with the English National Ballet and companies in Germany and Scotland. She quit the Scottish Ballet in order to go shoot "Ex Machina." She had been offered a minor part in the movie, but didn't yet know that she would be promoted to the supporting role of Kyoko, who shares a memorable dance routine with Mr. Isaac's character.
"I had to get on that plane and I knew that nothing else was waiting for me after 'Ex Machina,' but I still knew it was the right thing to do," Ms. Mizuno recalls.
In "Devs," the explosion of Lily's life is caused by the disappearance of her coder boyfriend (Karl Glusman). He disappears shortly after joining an elite division within a Bay Area tech company overseen by a shaggy visionary (Nick Offerman) and his lieutenant (Alison Pill). The project leads to multiple murders and a corporate conspiracy involving big data. Despite such thriller elements the series is often quiet and hypnotic, and revolves around philosophical questions and quantum physics.
Mr. Garland says his production crew accentuated the "inbuilt oddness" of Lily's character in Ms. Mizuno's look in "Devs": hair cropped short, a lack of makeup, simple unisex outfits, often in white. "All that is to project a kind of protagonist that people feel unfamiliar with and think, 'I don't know how this one works,'" the director says.
With longevity as her prevailing career goal, Ms. Mizuno says she is looking to do theater, and for more characters dealing with "everyday circumstances" beyond sci fi. Mr. Garland says he plans to reassemble the cast and crew members of "Devs" for another TV series featuring a different title and premise. He says he has already written two episodes, so a return to the genre for Ms. Mizuno could be predetermined.

Credit: By John Jurgensen
