Europe has become a fertile breeding ground for young and innovative technology companies. Boosted by a proliferation of incubator funds, the continent's technology sector is vying to take on California's Silicon Valley at its own game.
Europe has always been a hub of innovation, but only recently have so many European technology start-ups begun to establish themselves as serious rivals to their Silicon Valley counterparts. The Wall Street Journal Europe brings you 10 European technology start-ups it has identified as companies to watch closely in the coming years.
The internet and mobile companies chosen for this list are regarded as top innovators. Admired for the scope of their ambition, recognized for the inventiveness of their business models and notable for the potential they have to disrupt the markets in which they are making their names. All are, naturally, pre-acquisition, and most are backed by venture capitalists from across the world.
The list represents a broad range of technology businesses emerging in Europe, including social gaming, sharing and collaboration, content monetization and e-commerce technologies. Social media marketing, mostly as a result of Facebook's massive growth, is another attractive breeding ground for start-ups in Europe. Some of these companies are opening or have opened offices in the U.S., but all the companies listed were founded in Europe and have a significant proportion of their employees on the continent. Most retain their headquarters in Europe: Others have had their main location nominally altered as a condition of a funding round.
Following the success of the European incubator and funding program, Seedcamp, other incubators modelled on similar lines are proliferating in Europe, particularly in the U.K. These are beginning to bear fruit, and several of the companies chosen for this list are graduates of such programs. Microsoft's BizSpark, which has done a great deal to accelerate growth for companies using Microsoft technology is well represented.
A characteristic of European start-ups is cross-country collaboration. Many of the companies listed outsource some or all of their development to other countries and are building customer bases right across the continent.
Out of the Starting Blocks
CRANE.TV
Switzerland
Founder:Constantin Bjerke
Funding: Undisclosed
Offering: Premium video content on demand
Crane.tv is an online video magazine specializing in high-end contemporary culture. In addition to being a premium publisher, Crane.tv is developing a sophisticated distribution and monetization platform for its own content, including interactive video overlays, and strong relationships with traditional luxury press and premium goods companies. An editorial team of leading filmmakers and "lifestyle scouts" curates and creates content for "a digital audience of style conscious and culturally curious global citizens".
Crane.tv's founder, Constantin Bjerke, is counting on being able to monetize high value, discerning consumers by creating premium content for web and mobile distribution on demand. A different approach to traditional media companies that are locked in battle for ever-higher unique visitor numbers. The website went live in October and managing directors of newspaper websites would be well advised to keep an eye on Crane.tv.
CRITEO
France
Founders: Romain Niccoli, Franck Le Ouay, Jean-Baptiste Rudelle
Funding: $23.4 million
16.9 million euros)
Offering: Tailored advertising
Criteo specializes in so-called "personalized retargeting", which is a way of structuring the right advertisement at the right time to maximize returns on advertising spend. The Holy Grail of advertising is presenting consumers with ads they actually want to see. Ads can be customized in real time according to a user's behavior and browsing history, and advertisers are only charged when a customer clicks through to an offer.
Criteo is the largest company by employee numbers developing this kind of technology. It is an alumnus of Microsoft's flagship BizSpark One program, a fast-track scheme for high-potential start-ups.Set up in 2005, its founders include two former employees of Microsoft.
ERPLY
Estonia
Founders: Kristian Hiiemaa, Kristjan Randma
Funding: $2.05 million
Offering: Business software
ERPLY is an enterprise software company focusing on retail and point-of-sale technology. It won the Seedcamp funding competition in London in 2009 and was called "the Skype of business software" by emerging technology blog TechCrunch the same year. The company provides elaborate inventory management, point-of-sale and sales management software that would normally be out of reach for small-to medium-sized businesses.
ERPLY experiences high conversion rates from its free version to paid subscriptions by undercutting similar services from more established players.
The company is already profitable and has been swiftly acquiring a large client base. It is using the $2 million it raised this year to mount an aggressive sales operation in the U.K. and the U.S. ERPLY is carving out a niche for itself in a $39bn market and its growth shows no sign of slowing. Its business model has been compared to those of open source software providers Zimbra and MySQL.
HUDDLE
U.K.
Founders: Andy McLoughlin, Alastair Mitchell
Funding: $14.2 million
Offering: Online collaboration
Perhaps the highest-profile start up in the U.K., and certainly the jewel in tech venture capitalist Eden Ventures' crown, Huddle has refined its online collaboration, file storage and project management offering over the past few years into a compelling cluster of products for businesses of all sizes. The company celebrated a minor but symbolic victory in August when it finally acquired huddle.com, having languished at huddle.net since being founded in 2006.
With an impressive client list including dozens of U.K., U.S. and European government departments, Huddle, along with its charismatic head of strategy, Andy McLoughlin, has become something of a media darling in Europe. But Huddle earns its place on a "to watch" list for its commitment to innovation, significantly in mobile, and its aspiration to become "the world's workspace". A revamped task manager launched in November this year is the first in a batch of rewrites and reimaginings that illustrate the company's commitment to incremental upgrades.
MIND CANDY
U.K.
Founder: Michael Acton Smith
Funding: $10 million
Offering: Safe social networking
Moshi Monsters, the social network for children, is already a household name in the U.K., but its parent company, Mind Candy, is surprisingly young. Profitable since 2009, Mind Candy is now solely devoted to the development of Moshi Monsters, which continues to grow at a remarkable rate, with over 30 million registered users.
Software filtering, moderation, tracking and the recent deployment of online child protection specialist Crisp's behavior management software makes Moshi Monsters one of the safest places on the internet for children. "Moshi Monsters maintains an unblemished security record," says founder Michael Acton Smith. "And we are determined to keep it that way."
Moshi Monsters' popularity has exploded in the last twelve months. Books, soft toys and collectibles are among the spin-off products planned for the immediate future. The company predicts $100m in merchandize sales next year.
PRIMESENSE
Israel and Europe
Founders:Tamir Berliner, Aviad Maizels, Ophir Sharon, Alex Shpunt, Dima Rais
Funding: $29.4 million
Offering: Movement technology
PrimeSense's flagship product is a microchip that can translate real-world movement into a 3D grid that a computer can process. Founded in 2005, the company rose to prominence in March this year, when Microsoft announced that PrimeSense's sensing technology would form a key part of games console Xbox's new Kinect controller system.
Kinect allows players to interact with the Xbox without needing a handheld controller. Unlike the other controllers, which use one point of reference, PrimeSense's system is capable of tracking thousands of points, and can accurately track body movement and complex gestures. PrimeSense's core technology allows people to operate televisions, set top boxes and Blu Ray players without a remote control. It could also be used in the boardroom or, potentially, as an interaction device for disabled users.
Tel Aviv has strong links to mainland Europe, partly thanks to the presence of father-and-son investment team Robin and Saul Klein. The partnership with Microsoft has pulled PrimeSense firmly onto the European radar.
SMARKETS
U.K.
Founders: Hunter Morris, Jason Trost
Funding: $1.6 million
Offering: Merging internet and financial technologies in betting
Electronic marketplaces have been transforming the economic landscape for over 25 years, but many of the benefits remain unrealized. A lot of trading still happens over the telephone. Smarkets is an exchange platform that combines financial and internet technology: "We want to harness the way that the internet has revolutionized business transactions and embed it fully in exchange platforms," says chief executive and co-founder Jason Trost. Smarkets is focusing on creating a fast, secure platform, and wants to broaden access to exchange trading.
Initially applying his expertise to the betting industry, Trost has his eyes set on online betting exchange Betfair -- challenging a $2.4 billion online sports betting industry through an innovative platform and by creating a social networking layer that allows a community of punters to trade against each other. Creating a betting exchange platform is only the beginning for Trost: "What we have built is an exchange platform customized for betting, but our vision is to see that platform used in all forms of exchange trading."
SOUNDCLOUD
Germany
Founders: Alexander Ljung, Eric Wahlforss
Funding: $3.3 million
Offering: Facebook for audio
Plenty of great ideas are cursed with the moniker of "the new Facebook", but SoundCloud is one of the few companies with the potential to achieve that level of success.
The company has ambitions to match, hoping to do for sound what Facebook has done for picture sharing and event management.
Co-founder and sound designer Alexander Ljung thinks the internet has neglected audio so far and wants to build SoundCloud into a social sharing platform for music that caters for professional music artists as well as amateur creators.
Mr. Ljung and his co-founder both came from backgrounds connected to music and found it "really, really annoying" to collaborate with others using existing sharing and music editing tools.
Simple but significant advantages over competitors include unique URLs for uploaded tracks and a set of widgets that can be used to embed music all over the web. The company took $2.5 million in Series A funding in 2009.
SPORTS NEW MEDIA
U.K.
Founders: Jae Chalfin, Nick Thain
Funding: $1.2 million
Offering: Integrated communications for professional athletes
Sports New Media is a hybrid technology company and communications agency that manages pages and social network presences for its clients. In its own words the firm's aim is "to connect brands with fans". The start-up manages Facebook pages and campaigns for athletes, sports agents, sporting governing bodies and associations, with the heavy lifting done by their in-house social system. This was created to automate much of the process of providing relevant and timely content to fans across social networks, and to monitor a brand's activity within those networks. Currently the company is focused on Facebook.
Sports New Media dominates the management of social media campaigns for football in the U.K. and is poised to expand rapidly into other sports. The company has been profitable for two years and is the brightest example of niche marketing technology married to comprehensive brand monitoring services.
STRUQ
U.K.
Founder: Sam Barnett
Funding: Undisclosed
Offering: Online advertising
Struq is one of London's burgeoning success stories and boasts some of the most complex and impressive technology in the online advertising industry. The company is reporting year-on-year revenue growth of over 1000% with advertising technology that targets web browsers who are "predictably profitable" and personalizes advertisements for them in real time. Struq's technology can resize and reposition elements in display adverts according to the behavior of the user. "The technology interprets human behavior and applies complex algorithms that only target those users that are likely to purchase, with products they are likely to buy, in ads formatted in a way that they are likely to click and buy from," says founder Sam Barnett. He describes his company as: "A combination of the art and creativity of advertising with the science of machine learning". The management team includes former executives of AOL, Criteo, Intel, TradeDoubler, Advertising.com and Ask.com, while clients include French Connection, Ted Baker and LOVEFiLM.
---
Mr. Yiannopoulos is a writer based in London. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com
Credit: By Milo Yiannopoulos
