International Business Machines Corp. said Chief Executive Ginni Rometty is stepping down after a challenging eight-year run at the top of the iconic technology company, as she struggled to deliver growth at a time other tech giants' fortunes blossomed.
Ms. Rometty, 62 years old, will formally step down on April 6. She will be succeeded by Arvind Krishna, who heads the company's cloud and cognitive-software division, the company said on Thursday. Jim Whitehurst -- the chief executive of Red Hat, the open-source software giant that IBM acquired for about $33 billion last year -- was appointed the company's president.
It is the first time IBM will have a leadership structure with a CEO and separate president. They form a dual executive team -- one member with deep IBM experience and another new to the company -- focused on reviving its fortunes.
Ms. Rometty will continue as the company's board chairman through the end of the year, at which time she will retire after almost four decades with Big Blue, the company said. Ms. Rometty has been one of the most high-profile female CEOs in business, where the top ranks are still male dominated.
During her time at the helm of one of the U.S.'s most storied companies, shares in IBM fell by more than 25%, lagging other tech giants. Microsoft Corp. shares are up more than 500% during the period. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index rose around 250% over that time. IBM sales during the period fell more than 25%.
"I think she made a lot of changes," said David Grossman, an analyst at Stifel Financial Corp. "You could argue that she didn't make enough changes quickly enough, but I think the business has transformed during that period."
The Red Hat acquisition was Ms. Rometty's signature effort to fast track IBM's revival. The deal, in the last quarter, returned the company to modest top-line growth, though analysts said the jury is out on whether Red Hat will return the hefty premium IBM paid for the business.
IBM shares rose more than 3% in aftermarket trading following the announcement that Ms. Rometty is stepping down.
The new leadership appointments highlight how IBM is betting its future on the booming cloud-computing field, where it has lagged behind rivals such as Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft.
IBM built its success on providing technology to other companies. But IBM was slow to adapt as corporations shifted from storing data on big servers they owned to renting that computing capacity from service providers, so-called cloud computing.
Ms. Rometty in recent years has emphasized IBM would become a forceful competitor in cloud computing, but the company still trails its main rivals. IBM is the fifth-largest public cloud infrastructure provider, according to research firm Gartner Inc., with less than 2% market share.
Ms. Rometty has tried to jump-start cloud growth, largely with Red Hat, the largest acquisition in IBM's 108-year history. The deal closed last year.
"The biggest issue has been the company's very slow transition in terms of its services portfolio and model to a very dynamic tech landscape," said Moshe Katri, an analyst at Wedbush Securities.
Mr. Krishna, 57, played a key role in IBM's acquisition of Red Hat. He joined the company in 1990 and studied at the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, and received an electrical-engineering doctorate from the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.
Ms. Rometty took over as IBM CEO in 2012 at a difficult time. IBM sales fell year-over-year in Ms. Rometty's first 22 quarters in a row. After a brief three-quarter period of rising sales, they fell again for another six quarters. Sales rose in the latest quarter.
A native of Chicago, Ms. Rometty rose up IBM's ranks as an executive in its fast-growing services division in the 1990s under CEO Lou Gerstner, who revived the company by shunning low-margin hardware sales and focusing on IT services. She made her mark under its next CEO, Sam Palmisano, by leading the integration of the consulting arm of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, which IBM bought for $3.5 billion for in 2002.
Her ascent into the CEO role came at the end of a decade of growth under Mr. Palmisano, who brought the company to new heights. Revenue grew from $79.64 billion in 2001, the year before Mr. Palmisano took over, to $104.78 billion in 2011, his last year as CEO -- only to fall back to $74.8 billion last year under Ms. Rometty.
While the company's sales had been growing, its big corporate customers that drove growth were changing how they were using technology. Rather than buying servers and paying IBM or others to maintain them, companies were renting computing horsepower from vendors. The shift hit IBM's cash cow -- providing IT services to other companies, selling and maintaining computer equipment and consulting with them on their IT strategies.
Ms. Rometty set about trying to shrink the importance of those slower-growing or less profitable businesses while building in more profitable areas. She placed big bets on providing IT services linked to health care and invested in artificial intelligence to find new growth avenues. Those efforts have been slow to show results, according to analysts, driving the many quarters of falling topline growth.
Ms. Rometty led the search for her replacement, beginning around a year ago, people familiar with the matter said.
Her status as one of only a handful of female tech CEOs meant her efforts to revamp IBM gained particular attention. There are 29 female CEOs of S&P 500 companies, according to Catalyst, a group that advocates for more women in executive roles.
---
Chip Cutter contributed to this article.

Credit: By Asa Fitch
