International Business Machines Corp.'s Virginia Rometty is still hunting for a turnaround some four years into her tenure as chief executive.
The Armonk, N.Y., company Monday reported first-quarter revenue slid 4.6% and profit fell a steeper 13.5% as its products have become increasingly threatened by an industry move to computing services delivered over the Internet.
IBM has posted revenue declines for four straight years.
Under Ms. Rometty's leadership, IBM has focused on higher growth businesses such as cloud computing and data analytics intended to extract useful insights from mountains of data. The company calls these analytics, transaction processing and artificial intelligence products cognitive solutions.
"We are becoming a cognitive solutions and cloud platform company," Ms. Rometty said in February during a meeting with analysts. But the transition has been tough, and IBM hasn't been able to solve its key problem: Its older businesses are shrinking faster than the new businesses are growing. Its stock has dropped 17% since Ms. Rometty took over in January 2012 compared with a 65% gain in the S&P 500 index. Its shares fell nearly 5% in after-hours trading after finishing at $152.53 in 4 p.m. trading on Monday.
IBM calls its newer businesses strategic imperatives, and said they grew 14% last quarter from a year-earlier.
But that growth wasn't enough to offset declines in services and hardware businesses, all of which were down during the period.
The company's cognitive computing group's revenues declined 1.7% year over year to $4 billion. The figure includes traditional transaction processing services used by banks and airline reservation systems, which fell 5% during the quarter.
IBM's cloud computing business fared better. Its revenues were up 34% over a year earlier in the quarter, including sales of Bluemix and SoftLayer cloud services as well as hardware sold to customers building in-house cloud computing services.
"If the strategic imperatives are really working, then the company's growth rate should be improving," said Toni Sacconaghi, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., ahead of Monday's earnings. "The evidence so far has suggested that has not happened."
That weakness isn't for a lack of trying. The company has shed tens of thousands of employees in the past year, even as it has hired tens of thousands of new employees in promising business areas.
"The bulk of our transformation is really around skills and shifting skills to these new areas," said IBM Chief Financial Officer Martin Schroeter. "Our overall employment could end the year relatively flat to what we have today," he said.
In addition, IBM last year spent more than $9 billion on acquisitions, buying nearly 20 companies. "That is more than IBM has ever spent in a 12-month period in our history," Mr. Schroeter said.
In all, first quarter revenue fell to $18.68 billion and net income was $2.01 billion, or $2.09 a share.
Excluding charges, profit in the quarter was $2.35 a share. Analysts had expected adjusted earnings for the quarter of $2.09 a share, according to a survey by Thomson Reuters.
---
Tess Stynes contributed to this article.
Credit: By Robert McMillan
