When Advertising Week kicks off Monday in New York, ad-industry executives will convene to discuss all the hot new marketing trends, from the branded emoji craze to location-based targeting to artificial-intelligence-driven marketing.
But beyond the excitement over newfangled approaches, there also will be plenty of hand-wringing over the very future of the ad business as it comes under threat.
In the digital world, the growing popularity of ad-blocking is the crisis of the moment, threatening the nearly $60 billion online ad industry. But it is just the latest source of heartburn. Marketers are also worried about piracy, fraud fueled by electronic "bots," transparency in ad-buying and the need to ensure that their ads are actually viewable instead of hidden in corners of websites.
Marketers are asking "who and what do I trust," said Bob Liodice, chief executive of Association of National Advertisers, Inc., a trade group that represents many of the country's largest marketers, such as Procter & Gamble Co.
Tens of thousands of advertising, technology and media executives will partake in the 12th annual Advertising Week conference. Companies such as Facebook Inc., Comcast Corp.'s NBCUniversal, Google Inc., and a host of ad agencies and ad-technology firms are expected to show off their latest ad products and services. Their mission: dazzle marketers such as General Electric Co., MasterCard Inc. and Under Armour Inc.
Facebook will be touting how its photo-sharing app Instagram drives results for marketers. Data and analytics company Acxiom Corp. will host a discussion that will explore how, by 2020, all advertising will be planned and bought using household-level and individual-level data.
A midweek panel hosted by PHD, an ad buying firm owned by Omnicom Group Inc., will discuss the role artificial intelligence can play in marketing.
There will be plenty of other fare and, of course, parties. Radio giant iHeartMedia and Snapchat will serenade marketers with a performance by Alicia Keys, while hip-hop artist Aloe Blacc is expected to entertain guests at a party hosted by YouTube and nonprofit Ad Council. There will be appearances by celebrities such as TV-personality Ryan Seacrest, new "Daily Show" host Trevor Noah and rapper Snoop Dogg. Caroll Spinney, the puppeteer that plays Big Bird on "Sesame Street," will be doling out advice on how to create characters that endure, during a panel hosted by digital ad firm DigitasLBi. Inevitably, the big problems of the day will dominate the chitchat. Once relegated to the geek crowd, ad-blocking is hitting the mainstream and threatening to derail the explosive growth in the digital-ad business. Digital-ad spending is expected to grow 17% this year to $58.1 billion, according to eMarketer. Last month, Howard Stern encouraged listeners of his talk show to download ad-blocking software after bashing the ad clutter that exists online. On Tuesday, Interactive Advertising Bureau, a trade group that represents online ad sellers, is expected to host a panel that will address the economic fallout of ad-blocking on small publishers.
On Wednesday, two panels, dubbed "Digital Shenanigans" and "Eradicating Bots," will talk about what has gone wrong in the industry, from ad fraud that is caused by bots to opaque billing practices that exist in the ad business.
Another hot topic will be the pressure that's mounting on the TV ad business as consumers turn to ad-free streaming platforms like Netflix Inc. and Amazon.com Inc. Rival Hulu LLC recently launched its own ad-free tier. The rise of streaming is wreaking havoc with ratings and forcing some marketers to rethink TV ads.
---
The Week Ahead looks at coming corporate events.
Credit: By Suzanne Vranica
