[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The breakup of venture-capital giant Sequoia Capital is a shrewd move to navigate increasingly treacherous waters running between China and the U.S. It also signifies the end of an era -- one in which investors and tech entrepreneurs in the world's two largest economies embraced each other for mutual benefit.
The storied Silicon Valley-based firm on Tuesday said it would split into three independent units by March 2024. Businesses in the U.S., India and Southeast Asia, and China will be run separately and no longer share a common back office or brand name.
Sequoia's Tuesday note flagged the increasing complexity of running a decentralized global investment business, highlighting problems such as portfolio conflicts in different parts of the firm. Geopolitics weren't explicitly mentioned, but they loom large nonetheless. Some of the companies Sequoia has invested in are already in political hot water -- at a time when everything, even fashion companies and crane manufacturers, are vulnerable to accusations of being a national security risk in the U.S.
Sequoia has invested in TikTok parent ByteDance and fast-fashion company Shein: Both are under increasing scrutiny in Washington.
In some ways, however, the split is simply a recognition of realities which have become too obvious to ignore in recent years. Early U.S. Sequoia investments like Google departed the Chinese market years ago. Beijing is increasingly leery of its own tech companies raising capital abroad -- especially if that means an eventual initial public offering that might require extensive disclosures to U.S. regulators. Such concerns helped trip up ride-sharing giant Didi Global's listing in 2021. And U.S. regulators are more wary of Chinese platform companies with dominant positions in the U.S., like TikTok.
In such an environment, any synergies from Sequoia's global footprint -- i.e., potential benefits from U.S. startups entering the Chinese market or vice versa -- look increasingly questionable.
The China and India businesses are largely run independently now anyway. Sequoia's China unit is led by veteran investor Neil Shen, who is probably more instrumental in attracting deals than the Sequoia brand. Shen co-founded Sequoia's China unit in 2005 after a stint as an entrepreneur himself. A global span may help generate leads or create collaboration opportunities, but probably doesn't outweigh the costs of trying to straddle two regulatory environments and tech economies that are increasingly growing apart -- and in many cases are now in direct opposition.
The split also may be insurance against regulatory changes already in the pipeline. The Biden administration is considering an order that could ban U.S. investment in certain sectors in China, such as quantum computing and advanced semiconductors. Artificial intelligence also is shaping up as a key technological battleground.
Sequoia's decision is the latest signal of the diverging paths of the two countries' tech sectors. Bilateral trade flows remain enormous but in tech, at least, the decoupling trend is clear: Mutual benefit is out, Balkanization is in.
Credit: By Jacky Wong
