Antin Infrastructure Partners has closed its largest fund yet -- the largest infrastructure vehicle to reach the finish line so far this year.
Closing at 10.2 billion euros, or about $10.7 billion, Antin Infrastructure's fifth main infrastructure fund exceeded a 10 billion euro target, the Paris-based manager said Thursday. The new fund is more than 50% larger than a predecessor vehicle, which closed with 6.5 billion euros in 2020.
The sum places Antin Infrastructure atop this year's fundraising rankings, according to information from PitchBook, a firm that tracks private-markets data. Before this closing, the largest infrastructure vehicle that closed this year was KKR Asia Pacific Infrastructure Investors II, with $6.4 billion, according to PitchBook. Global Infrastructure Partners and KKR are still in the market with infrastructure funds seeking $25 billion and $20 billion, respectively.
Closing the fund "is a big source of satisfaction," for Antin Infrastructure, although the current market "is very painful for everybody, and we are no exception," said Alain Rauscher, the firm's chief executive and chairman. He said the lack of exits has made it challenging to raise new vehicles.
More than 90% of investors in the prior Antin Infrastructure fund committed to the new one, and it also gathered more than 120 new investors, the firm said. Evercore Private Funds Group was placement agent and Kirkland & Ellis legal counsel.
Antin Infrastructures manages about 32 billion euros and makes value-added investments in Europe and North America across four sectors: energy and the environment, digital, transport and social infrastructure, the firm says.
"Our strategy has been completely unchanged since the first fund," Rauscher said.
Areas in which the firm is currently active include fiber optics, data centers and rail transport. The new fund is approximately 40% invested and has closed five deals, including renewable-energy company Blue Elephant Energy and safety-infrastructure company Consilium Safety.
Despite the slow pace of dealmaking overall, there is currently excellent availability of infrastructure opportunities, Rauscher said. He said the firm tries to stay disciplined, since factors such as government budget cuts could put parts of the infrastructure sector under pressure.
Antin Infrastructure also has a midcap strategy and one focused on clean-energy opportunities.
Much like private equity, infrastructure fundraising has been depressed for more than two years, with investors short of cash to commit to new funds. This year through Sept. 30, infrastructure funds gathered $61.2 billion globally, less than half the full-year sum for the 2021 peak, when such funds collected nearly $133 billion, according to PitchBook.
But many investors are bullish on the long-term prospects of infrastructure investment because of its important role in areas such as the transition to renewable-energy sources and the development of data-intensive technologies such as artificial intelligence.
By Chris Cumming
