Two members of Congress are urging the Commerce Department to consider toughening export controls on U.S. companies whose technologies they say are being used for state surveillance of citizens in China that enables human rights abuses.
In a letter to Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida and Rep. Chris Smith of New Jersey, the Republican heads of the bipartisan Congressional-Executive Commission on China, ask whether the agency is "tracking the sale of equipment and technology by U.S. companies that may be used by Chinese police and other security agencies for the surveillance and detention of individuals."
Mr. Rubio and Mr. Smith wrote that they had particular concerns about the use of U.S. technology in policing the country's restive Xinjiang province, where police have rolled out one of the most extensive state surveillance programs ever built. They said "ongoing abuses" in Xinjiang show how the government is using technology, including U.S. made, to keep watch on its people.
The Wall Street Journal has over the past year documented China's expanding, and increasingly high-tech, surveillance state. Across China, police are harnessing tools such as facial-recognition technology, voice prints and biometric-gathering techniques to better monitor the country's 1.4 billion people.
The letter aims to focus interest among Washington policy makers on the role that U.S. technology is playing in the monitoring of Chinese citizens. The commission is composed of 15 members of Congress and is charged with monitoring human rights and rule of law in China. The letter was sent to Mr. Ross on May 9 but hasn't been previously reported.
A Commerce Department spokesman said the department has received the letter and is currently reviewing it.
Chinese companies rely on U.S. suppliers for high-tech DNA sequencers as well as microchips and other components needed to build artificial-intelligence equipment used for state surveillance.
Companies that sell such products have escaped scrutiny, even as the tech sector has emerged as a front line in the growing U.S.-China trade battle.
The dispute has nearly felled ZTE Corp., a Chinese telecom firm currently banned from receiving U.S. exports for violating a settlement over its earlier sanctions-busting sales to Iran and North Korea.
The letter zeroes in on technology used in Xinjiang and made by Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., a Waltham, Mass.-based manufacturer of laboratory equipment.
According to the letter, Thermo Fisher has been identified by Human Rights Watch as selling DNA sequencers "with advanced microprocessors" under its Applied Biosystems Genetic Analyzer brand to police across China.
Thermo Fisher, in an emailed response to questions, said it follows "rigorous trade export policies," and works with governments "to contribute to good global policy overall."
Few locations in China are as extensively surveilled as Xinjiang, a province on China's western frontier where police are focused on rooting out a violent separatist movement by some members of the Muslim Uighur minority.

Credit: By Dan Strumpf and Natasha Khan
