When Phil O'Keefe wants to open a document or click a link on his computer screen, he can think about tapping his left ankle.
That brain activity is collected by sensors implanted in a blood vessel in Mr. O'Keefe's brain and relayed to a computer through devices in his chest. The signals are converted to a mouse click or zoom-in on his screen with the help of machine-learning software.
Mr. O'Keefe, 60 years old, is one of a small number of patients with mobility issues testing this new system, part of a wave of brain-sensing technology that aims to allow people immobilized by disease or injury to handle daily tasks requiring movement. In 2015, he was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a neurodegenerative condition commonly known as ALS.
Companies and academic labs world-wide are racing to build next-generation devices and artificial intelligence that can monitor and decode brain activity. With as many as 500,000 people a year globally suffering spinal-cord injuries, and strokes becoming more common among younger people because of Covid-19, the need is huge, neuroscientists said.
Success hinges on better understanding normal brain function and being able to build durable, accurate and safe devices that work outside research settings. Companies including Silicon Valley startup Synchron Inc., which developed the sensor in Mr. O'Keefe's brain, are working on technology to access the brain while limiting the potential for damage.
Experts said Synchron's Stentrode has the potential to expand mobility options for people who can't move. So far, its accuracy varies. Experts said that could improve with training or software updates.
The technology is in very early stages, and its long-term safety needs to be assessed in more patients, experts said: If the device ruptured the blood vessel it is in, the injury would likely be fatal. The company said it has done safety testing to mitigate risks.
The Stentrode has been implanted in three people so far as part of a small trial in Australia, said Thomas Oxley, Synchron's chief executive. The trial was described in a study published Wednesday by scientists affiliated with the firm.
Researchers expect to enroll a total of five participants to evaluate the device's safety, said Peter Mitchell, the surgeon who implanted the device.
"Within two or three months. . .the patients were already doing far more than we thought we'd be doing," said Dr. Mitchell, director of the neurointervention service at Royal Melbourne Hospital.
"My condition being terminal, it was really a question of, Do I want a quality of life or do I just want to sit and watch television all day?" said Graham Felstead, 76, the first patient implanted with the device.
Many people with limited mobility who want to use a computer or smartphone currently rely on eye-tracking technology, which is effective but can be tiring, experts said. Other methods are low-tech, such as placing buttons on a patient's wheelchair.
Researchers also are working on devices that can pick up residual nerve signals throughsensors on people's arms or hands. Devices for people who can't move much at all may need to interact with the brain directly, though that requires brain surgery.
"There's not too many options out there for allowing someone to have a little more autonomy without major surgery or without having that mental strain of eye tracking," said Tara Hamilton, an associate professor in electrical and data engineering at the University of Technology Sydney.
Recent work in neurotechnology aims to record from as many brain cells or regions as possible to give scientists more precise readings on the signals that underpin activities such as speech, walking and grasping. Data scientists can then translate those neural recordings into instructions that can be fed into a robotic device, or back into the nervous system, to produce movement, vision or even the sensation of touch, experts said.
Accessing so many of the brain's delicate cells comes at a price: The electrodes that reach into the tissue can cause inflammation over time. Developers are working on sensors made from less damaging materials.

Credit: By Daniela Hernandez and Mike Cherney
