The U.S. Tennis Association is turning to cloud computing and artificial intelligence to enhance the experiences of fans who can only watch this week's U.S. Open on televisions, computers and smartphones.
The USTA decided on June 17 to hold this year's tournament, which began Monday in New York, without fans due to the coronavirus pandemic and restrictions on large gatherings.
The decision led to sweeping changes to almost every aspect of the competition, from playing matches with electronic line calling to having athletes use food-ordering apps for meal deliveries to their hospitality suites at the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center.
The absence of fans immediately presented a problem for some of the USTA's recent AI projects. Last year, for instance, the USTA worked with International Business Machines Corp. to introduce a number of AI-powered additions to the tournament, including machine learning algorithms that rapidly compose broadcast highlight reels based on crowd reaction.
"June 17th was really a pivotal moment. A lot of the solutions that we had in the pipeline were no longer going to be viable," said Kristi Kolski, marketing program director for IBM's sports and entertainment partnerships unit. "No crowd, no roar, no AI highlights."
With a tight deadline, the USTA and IBM teams decided to focus on the fan experience, using AI-based techniques such as natural-language processing, or NLP, to create a number of new platforms for engaging audiences.
Part of the reason for this approach, said Kirsten Corio, USTA's managing director of ticketing and digital strategy, is that while the U.S. Open's website and app serve around 10 million visitors every year, the tennis association expects viewership to be higher in 2020 owing to the pandemic.
The first AI initiative, Open Questions, uses techniques such as NLP to serve up answers to plain-text debate questions.
A fan can ask, for example, whether a particular player is the greatest of all time. The platform searches more than 40 million pieces of unstructured data such as sports news and analysis articles. It extracts pertinent information, such as wins, losses and other records, and presents that as pros and cons for online debates.
Another project uses similar AI processes to generate fact sheets before matches by querying a trove of structured data, such as match and performance statistics, to digest detailed information on players and present it in a readable manner to fans.
Various U.S. Open tournament applications have been hosted in the cloud for years, but pulling off an event without fans in the stands and limited staff on location required a full shift to a hybrid private-public cloud infrastructure, said Jason McGee, chief technology officer for IBM's cloud platform.
Teams that previously handled on-site systems, including for scoring and statistics, needed to work remotely. Those systems are now hosted in a private cloud. The fan experience is hosted in a public cloud.
"Normally, statisticians capture stats courtside. Today they're in Jacksonville, watching matches on low-latency feeds," Mr. McGee said.
And while the U.S. Open won't use its AI capabilities for real-time highlights this year, IBM has been developing a system to add audience noise to broadcasts based on highlights.
Sports broadcasters, faced with similar issues in holding matches in empty stadiums, have also tried this, notably in soccer, but IBM says its project is unique.
IBM has analyzed how its AI used crowd reactions to determine moments of excitement for highlight reels to compile samples of audience noise that broadcasters can add to footage.
Appropriate sound clips will be suggested by IBM's Watson platform, based on similarities in play to footage captured in the previous tournament.
Decisions on when and where to use the audience noise system will be at the discretion of the USTA and ESPN, which is broadcasting the event.

Credit: By James Rundle
