HONG KONG -- The U.S. Defense Department agreed to remove Xiaomi Corp. from a blacklist banning U.S. investment in the Chinese tech giant, opting against further defending a Trump administration action that alleged ties between the smartphone maker and the Chinese military.
The retreat comes two months after Xiaomi won a key victory in a federal lawsuit challenging the listing, in which a Washington, D.C., judge criticized the Pentagon's rationale for the move and ordered a temporary halt against its enforcement.
In a one-page legal filing on Tuesday, lawyers for both Xiaomi and the Pentagon said the company's removal from the blacklist was appropriate following the judge's order. Shares of Xiaomi ended 6.1% higher in Hong Kong following the announcement.
In agreeing to delist Xiaomi, the Pentagon signaled a willingness to walk away from a sustained fight over one of the Trump administration's final actions against a major Chinese tech company. Xiaomi joins a small but growing list of Chinese tech companies including the owners of Chinese social-media apps TikTok and WeChat that have successfully won courtroom reprieves against Trump-era actions.
In an emailed statement, a spokeswoman for the National Security Council said: "U.S. courts found that the Trump administration failed to develop a legally sufficient basis for imposing restrictions on the company and compelled this action. The Biden administration is deeply concerned about potential U.S. investments in companies linked to the Chinese military and is fully committed to keeping up pressure on such companies."
Representatives for the Defense Department didn't respond to requests for comment.
A Xiaomi spokeswoman said the company was monitoring the issue, which still requires final negotiations with the Pentagon to implement the court order. The company has previously denied any affiliations with the Chinese military and says it sells products solely for civilian and commercial use.
The Pentagon's sanctions are aimed at punishing collaboration between big Chinese companies and the country's military. Under an executive order signed by then-President Donald Trump in November, addition to the list blocks any U.S. company from investing in securities issued by the listed company. The Trump administration added dozens of companies in sectors including telecommunications and semiconductors to its blacklist.
Only after Xiaomi challenged its listing in federal court in January did the Defense Department reveal its reasoning behind the action. Officials cited an award given to company founder and Chief Executive Lei Jun for his service to the Chinese state in 2019, as well as its ambitious investment plans to develop advanced technologies such as 5G and artificial intelligence.
In legal filings, Xiaomi said the evidence offered by the U.S. didn't prove ownership by or affiliation with the Chinese military.
In March, Judge Rudolph Contreras ordered a temporary halt to the enforcement of the investment ban, saying that the Pentagon had provided insufficient evidence to deem Xiaomi a military company. The judge called the firm "a publicly traded company that produces commercial products for civilian use, [which] is controlled by its independent board and controlling shareholders."
Last week, the same judge overseeing the Xiaomi case ordered a similar halt to the Defense Department's enforcement of its blacklisting of Luokung Technology Corp., a Chinese mapping and big-data company, after that company filed a lawsuit challenging its designation.
Other legal setbacks for officials include decisions by two federal judges last year to issue temporary halts to a ban on U.S. downloads of the Chinese social-media app TikTok, saying the U.S. overstepped its authority. U.S. officials also shelved efforts to force TikTok's Chinese owner Bytedance Ltd. to sell off its American business after legal challenges by Bytedance.
Credit: By Dan Strumpf
