Can Google Solve
The Big-Data Problem?
Ray Kurzweil, a leading thinker in the field of artificial intelligence, says he's developing systems at Google Inc. that will allow computers to understand what data actually means.
The hope is to allow businesses to make better decisions based on information they're amassing through Big Data platforms.
Mr. Kurzweil, who joined Google in December as its director of engineering, made his remarks Monday during a panel discussion at the Global Directions 2013 conference sponsored by Kodak Alaris.
Today, companies are collecting huge amounts of data at vastly increasing speeds, but are struggling to make sense of the information they've gathered. According to Mr. Kurzweil, business executives "can't make heads or tails of" their data because they're lacking the proper analytic tools to handle the scale of data being collected.
Mr. Kurzweil said he is also working on a way for computers to understand natural language rather than approximate the meaning of individual words by finding their synonyms. The problem that Mr. Kurzweil is employed at solving will be applied to the billions of documents on the Web, but the solution he develops could equally be applied to data repositories inside corporations, he said.
-- Michael Hickins
L'Oreal Smooths
Makeup Manufacturing
L'Oreal SA, the French maker of Maybelline lipstick, is rolling out a supply-chain collaboration platform the company hopes will make its manufacturing more responsive to shifting customer tastes.
The Web-based E2open software will allow L'Oreal to more quickly communicate shifts in consumer demand to its thousands of suppliers, said Richard Markoff, L'Oreal's director of supply chain standards. The company is trying to create a more agile manufacturing process, to help it achieve its goal of adding one billion new customers, mainly in emerging markets, over the next decade.
L'Oreal produces most of its own end products at factories that it operates. But the main "bottleneck" on quickly ramping up production is from its thousands of upstream suppliers, that provide the company packaging and components, Mr. Markoff said.
In the past, L'Oreal would send its suppliers spreadsheets indicating expected customer demand, extended out 12 months, to allow its partners time to ramp up production.
But in the makeup business, where products continuously fall in and out of favor, these forecasts have to be continuously updated. The back-and-forth between suppliers and L'Oreal analysts added days of delays on each side.
The new Web-based platform allows L'Oreal and its suppliers to operate from "the same version of the truth," by working off the same data fields and numbers, said Mr. Markoff.
Getting information earlier will also allow L'Oreal to seek out alternatives in its supply network.
-- Joel Schectman
---
CIO Journal is a Wall Street Journal news service for business-technology executives.
