Microsoft recorded its highest profit growth in more than two years last quarter as excitement about artificial intelligence helped power the growing demand for its cloud services.
Microsoft's net income rose 33% to $21.9 billion in the three months through December. That is the highest quarterly expansion for the technology company since the quarter ended in September 2021.
Microsoft has been on a run since last year. It has been the vanguard of current investor enthusiasm that new AI-driven products will transform the industry, helping Microsoft to dethrone Apple as the company with the highest market value in the world. It also climbed above $3 trillion in market capitalization last week, becoming only the second company after Apple to reach that mark.
"A growing body of evidence makes clear the role AI will play in transforming work," said Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella on a call about earnings.
The Microsoft results on Tuesday came in a week of much-watched quarterly reports from the biggest tech companies at a time when stock prices in the industry have soared. Google parent Alphabet, which reported on Tuesday, said its revenue rose more than 13% in the latest quarter driven by a rebound in its core ad-sales business, but ad growth fell short of analysts' estimates, causing its shares to slide after hours.
Microsoft shares surged nearly 70% over the past 12 months while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index rose less than 40%. Shares were little changed in after-hours trading on Tuesday.
The company's Azure cloud business grew 30%, beating analysts' estimates of 27%. Behind that demand has been the continuing interest in cloud AI services that Microsoft has been leaning into as part of its partnership with Open AI, the startup behind ChatGPT. Microsoft said six percentage points of Azure's growth came from AI demand. That doubled the amount AI contributed to Azure in the previous quarter.
Google and Microsoft are fierce rivals in new generative AI and investors have been keen for indications of how that nascent technology is affecting their businesses. Google Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat said AI was increasingly contributing to growth in the cloud division, without giving specific financial numbers.
Microsoft said Tuesday that revenue for its fiscal second quarter was $62 billion, up 18% from a year earlier and above analysts' estimates for 16% growth. The quarterly earnings of the Redmond, Wash., company incorporated results from videogame maker Activision Blizzard, which Microsoft completed buying late in the quarter. Activision sales lifted overall revenue by four percentage points.
Microsoft is one of the first technology titans to report quarterly results. Like many in the tech industry, it had to manage a sharp slowdown and reduce staff and other costs after years of high growth when the pandemic shifted work and life online.
Last year, the company went through a period of significant layoffs, reducing head counts that had ballooned during the Covid-19 pandemic. The slimming has continued in 2024, with companies such as Google and Salesforce still cutting employees -- although far less dramatically than they did a year earlier. Microsoft laid off 8%, or 1,900 employees, of its videogaming staff after completing its acquisition of Activision.
Beyond cloud services provided by Azure, the engines behind Microsoft's AI strategy are a series of AI software assistants called Copilot, powered by the same technology behind ChatGPT. Late last year, Microsoft rolled out Copilot for its popular workplace software suite Microsoft 365, which features apps like Word, Excel and Teams.
Analysts are optimistic that businesses will sign up for Copilot, which can perform tasks such as summarizing transcripts of video calls and generating emails, and the AI-powered upgrades will become a significant new revenue stream.
For its third quarter, Microsoft is projecting overall sales will be between $60 billion and $61 billion, which is in line with analysts' expectations of $61 billion.
Not all of Microsoft's AI tools have been hits. Its first release, an AI-powered chatbot for its Bing search engine announced nearly one year ago, failed to make any inroads in challenging Google's search dominance. Microsoft invested about $13 billion in OpenAI to gain a 49% stake in the profits of the startup's for-profit arm.
Credit: By Tom Dotan
