When Michael Savini came to Wall Street in 2006, banks and brokers had stocked their annual recruiting classes with a preponderance of new hires who shared at least one thing in common: They'd played college sports.
In New York and Chicago, trading floors teemed with former football and lacrosse stars, as well as veterans of college hockey, wrestling, tennis and crew teams.
Some ex-athletes, including former investment bank CEOs John Mack, Henry Paulson and Alan Schwartz, made it to the executive suite. Many others looked favorably on younger versions of themselves, building networks that drew athletes, typically male, from their alma maters.
Ex-jocks had the right stomach for risk-taking, the theory went, and the ideal temperament to win clients' trust and business.
"You saw a lot of big guys" in Chicago's trading pits, said Bernard McSherry, dean of the New Jersey City University's business school, who spent many years on the floor of the NYSE. "Those were physical jobs. And in an open-outcry market, you could bully your way into a trade."
As an economics major at Columbia University, where he was a four-year starter and co-captain of the wrestling team, Mr. Savini followed two brothers, also college athletes, into finance. There, he believed, his background gave him an edge. "Athletes are better equipped at knowing you're not always going to win," he said. "In sales, you're going to get a lot of doors slammed in your face. It's how you bounce back from those losses that define us."
Yet these days, when he attends mixers for former wrestlers in finance, Mr. Savini, 42 years old, says he hears more gripes than enthusiasm. If college athletes asked him for advice in pursuing a career on the trading floor, he said, his message would be a simple one.
Don't.
Two years ago, after nearly a decade working as an equity salesman, Mr. Savini left for 303 Capital Markets, a boutique investment-banking firm. "The business is changing," he said. "It's all going electronic."
"These guys are on the wrong side of Moore's Law," said Rett Wallace, a former investment banker, referring to the axiom on the exponential growth of computing power. "When Airbnb can handle two million unique properties at once, and Uber can manage more than a million drivers around the world in real time, are we really saying that a few hundred thousand bond issues can't be traded by computer?" said Mr. Wallace, who now runs Triton Research.
The industry started to shift away from athletes in the 1990s as derivatives grew in number and complexity. That necessitated a hiring spree for Ph.D.s. More recently, the advent of electronic trading and quantitative investing called for many more recruits with math or computer-programming skills.
Justin Yan, who graduated this month from Carnegie Mellon University with a degree in computational finance, is one of many young engineers who will descend on Wall Street this year in the industry's latest crop of recruits. Mr. Yan, 21, will start at Bank of America Corp.'s Merrill Lynch in the fall. During interviews, Mr. Yan said conversations often turned to his coding experience, and the programming languages on his resume. "It's when I learned that the quant nature of my academic background would be an asset to the firm," he said.
Overall employment in the U.S. securities industry has gradually returned to precrisis levels in recent years, according to the U.S. Department of Labor, as banks and brokers hired technology and compliance employees. But the numbers mask the shrinking pool for so-called front-office employees, such as traders and salespeople.
Carly Drum-O'Neill, president of recruiter Drum Associates, said she receives more calls than ever from younger finance employees confessing they "feel like a dinosaur." A former tennis player at Penn State, Ms. Drum-O'Neill said there is a "coachability" factor that will make the road ahead smoother for those who spent a big part of their life in sports. "When you say how we can retrain you, coach you into something else, they understand that," she said. "These people don't want to fail. They will do everything, at the end of the day, to win."
Lance Lonergan is taking this message to college students directly. The current chief executive at brokerage Weeden & Co. was a member of the 1986 Pennsylvania State University football team that won the National Championship.
Today, Mr. Lonergan talks to college athletes regularly. He said some have relayed their fears of being unable to break into the finance industry without a math or science background. He cautions them not to abandon Wall Street completely. "The core attributes of athletes are well-suited for the trading floor," he said.
Jeff Bahl was a bond trader at Goldman Sachs Group Inc. as Wall Street teetered on the brink of collapse in 2008. Prices spiraled downward, and "every decision you made," he recalls, "was a bad decision." The disarray took him back to a September afternoon seven years earlier, when as a linebacker for Washington and Lee University, he was beaten on a game-winning, 19-yard touchdown pass.
In the weeks following Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.'s September 2008 bankruptcy, Mr. Bahl said he thought a lot about that game, and his ability to put it out of his mind in time for the next one -- when he led W&L to victory.
Some say Wall Street may rue the day ex-jocks are cast aside. They say the core attributes needed to make multimillion-dollar bets are discipline and quick thinking -- two traits honed by sports. "It's hard to replace that with artificial intelligence," Mr. Bahl said.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Jocks and the Qualities of Superstar Traders" -- WSJ June 2, 2017)
Credit: By Justin Baer

ERIC Subject: College Students; Coding; Programming Languages; Computers; Electronic Equipment; Bond Issues
