Elliptic Enterprises Ltd. nabbed $60 million in new capital as the cryptocurrency risk-management startup builds on the momentum coming from increased regulatory scrutiny of the digital-asset ecosystem.
Elliptic raised the money in a Series C round led by new investor Evolution Equity Partners, with SoftBank Vision Fund 2 participating as another new shareholder. The injection follows a $28 million Series B round that was announced in February 2020.
The startup helps businesses and government agencies analyze cryptocurrency blockchains for financial-crime compliance.
It works with financial firms to ensure their customers' wallets and transactions are free from wrongdoing such as money laundering, and it teams up with law-enforcement agencies when digital coins are stolen to locate the money, among other services.
With the new capital, Elliptic expects to increase its head count from roughly 100 to closer to 150 people by year's end and bolster its suite of products to keep up with a crypto industry that continues to expand.
"The number of opportunities [represented by] banks and businesses of all kinds, who are really starting to lean into crypto and look at ways that they can embrace this new asset class is growing exponentially," Chief Executive Simone Maini said.
Elliptic, which generates over half of its revenue from crypto companies and financial institutions, received a boost in the past 12 to 18 months as regulators stepped up efforts to put the cryptocurrency industry under more control, spurring demand for compliance tools.
"We are seeing a lot more clarity coming from a lot more jurisdictions," Ms. Maini said.
These developments include the creation of a financial crime mitigation framework centered around crypto by the Financial Action Task Force, an intergovernmental policy-making body that combats money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
The framework is due for a major update by the end of the year that is expected to expand regulations related to cryptocurrency companies, among other changes, Elliptic said.
Elliptic said it is on track to achieve 100% annual revenue growth early next year based on the level of demand. The startup said it monitors activity on around 98% of all crypto assets by market capitalization and its products are deployed in 45 countries, with the U.S. being its biggest market.
Because every transaction taking place on a blockchain is permanently recorded on a public digital ledger, Elliptic can use the information contained in each block to populate its database, including on the anonymous wallets involved in each transaction and its amount.
By associating the blockchain data with a data set on real-world entities, Elliptic can map out the crypto system, identify who is using the anonymous wallets and unearth suspicious or illicit money movements.
Techniques used by the startup to assess the risk associated with a wallet include highly manual processes such as infiltrating cybercrime forums or darknet marketplaces, but also machine-learning methods, the company said.
The acquisition of Elliptic competitor CipherTrace by credit-card provider Mastercard Inc. in September is a testament to the strategic relevance these companies have gained in the crypto ecosystem, Ms. Maini said. Another peer, Chainalysis Inc., fetched a valuation of $4.2 billion in its latest funding round in June.
Overall, blockchain-analysis startups secured $690.9 million in venture-capital money this year as of Oct. 5, more than double the amount collected in all of 2020, according to research firm PitchBook Data Inc.
Existing investors including Digital Currency Group, Wells Fargo Strategic Capital and AlbionVC participated in the financing.
Credit: By David Carnevali
