TAIWAN SEMICONDUCTOR MANUFACTURING
TSM +9.8%
A chip-industry heavyweight sees a brighter year ahead for semiconductor makers. The Taiwanese company, also known as TSMC, said that it expects its revenue to grow over 20% in 2024 -- a stronger outlook than expected. TSMC is the world's largest contract chip maker and a supplier to Apple, Nvidia and Qualcomm. In 2023, chip makers dealt with an inventory glut left over from the pandemic-era electronics boom. But the artificial-intelligence arms race is fueling a surge in demand. TSMC's market value grew by roughly $31 billion to reach nearly $514 billion by the end of Taipei trading Friday, according to FactSet data. TSMC's U.S.-listed shares leapt 9.8% Thursday.
SPIRIT AIRLINES
SAVE -47%
JetBlue Airways and Spirit's merger won't take off after all. A federal judge on Tuesday blocked JetBlue's $3.8 billion deal to buy Spirit Airlines, saying it would hamper competition and lead to higher fares. The Justice Department sued last year to prevent JetBlue and Spirit from going ahead with their tie-up, which would have been the biggest U.S. airline merger in over a decade. The decision could have repercussions for other airlines hoping to merge. Spirit Airlines shares tumbled 47% Tuesday, while JetBlue shares rose 4.9%.
WALT DISNEY
DIS +2.1%
In a preliminary proxy statement filed with regulators, activist investor Nelson Peltz's Trian Fund Management called for streaming margin targets of 15% to 20%, which it describes as "Netflix-like." As of November, Disney's streaming business had lost nearly $11 billion since it launched Disney+ in late 2019. Peltz wants Disney to find a clear successor to Chief Executive Bob Iger, and Trian urged shareholders to vote to add Peltz and former Disney executive Jay Rasulo to the company's board. Disney shares gained 2.1% Thursday.
MACY'S
M -1.7%
Macy's is cutting about 13% of its corporate staff and closing five stores to trim costs and redirect spending to improve customers' shopping experiences. The job cuts total roughly 2,350 positions, or 3.5% of the department-store chain's overall workforce excluding seasonal hires. On Friday, online retailer Wayfair said it would lay off 13% of its staff. Macy's shares lost 1.7% Friday, while Wayfair shares jumped 10%.
IROBOT
IRBT -27%
The European Union's competition watchdog intends to block Amazon's $1.7 billion bid to purchase Roomba maker iRobot, The Wall Street Journal reported late Thursday. Amazon agreed to buy the smart robot maker in August 2022. Amazon has been under intensifying antitrust scrutiny for its market power and the way the company competes. Last year, the Federal Trade Commission sued Amazon claiming it maintains an illegal monopoly. IRobot shares sank 27% Friday.
MORGAN STANLEY
MS -4.2%
Bank earnings continued rolling in. Goldman Sachs quarterly profit jumped over 50%, as revenue in its asset- and wealth-management division rose 23%. Morgan Stanley said one-off charges helped send quarterly profit down 32% to $1.5 billion. Reports from JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America on Jan. 12 suggested that consumers and businesses remained on strong financial footing last year. Morgan Stanley shares lost 4.2% Tuesday, while Goldman shares rose 0.7%.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
