A war is raging over "diversity, equity, and inclusion." Opponents and supporters of DEI have very different ideas about what it is. "DEI is racist because reverse racism is racism," hedge-fund manager Bill Ackman tweets. "Good businesses look where others don't, to find the employees that will put your business in the best possible position to succeed," businessman Mark Cuban counters.
Both men have a point. Some of what happens under the DEI banner is truly objectionable, even illegal -- hiring, promotion and admissions standards under which race trumps qualifications, training sessions that create a hostile environment for whites. But as companies, universities and other organizations weed out these practices, they should be careful that the parts of DEI that the majority of us agree on don't become collateral damage. DEI as talent optimization is good for disadvantaged groups, good for organizations that embrace it, and good for America.
DEI at its best is about developing talent, measuring it in a fair way, selecting the best people for important roles, and finding hidden talent in a world where not everyone has an equal chance to exhibit their abilities. This approach focuses on overcoming individual disadvantages rather than on race. Its beneficiaries won't suffer the stigma that comes with unfair preferences.
Talent optimization has implications from preschools to boardrooms -- but strategies change as people grow older and have opportunities to prove themselves. What they do with these opportunities provides part of the signal we are trying to measure, serving as indicators of their underlying ability; when people lack these opportunities, we are left guessing.
To start with childhood, no 4-year-old has done anything to "merit" a better preschool than another. For that reason, efforts to help children who are falling behind, to improve failing schools, and to close racial gaps should be a high priority. As Steven Levitt and I showed in a study, there's a racial achievement gap by age 4, but it's explained by parental income and occupation. I have long challenged independent private schools in the Northeast to see each class of prekindergartners they admit as part of their core DEI strategy, rather than wait until high school.
As I have written in these pages, school-choice efforts have made immense progress in recent years but are still a long way from creating true competition and guaranteeing all students the chance to reach their full potential. Policymakers should revolutionize education from preschool through high school so that students from all walks of life have an equal opportunity to compete.
At the college level, an admissions policy focused on talent optimization would take into account the obstacles a student has faced. Imagine a rich kid who has had private schools and tutors and a poor kid from a broken home and an underfunded public school. If they have roughly similar academic performance after adjusting for their backgrounds, the poor kid has demonstrated more latent ability even if his unadjusted scores are lower. A talent-focused admissions policy would admit him over his rich competitor. But it wouldn't do the opposite -- accept a rich applicant over a poor one because the former is of an underrepresented race, or because his private-school counselors were able to massage his application to make him seem cultured.
Employers should stamp out racial bias -- not only because discrimination is wrong but because it is a market failure that prevents the right people from being placed in the right positions. Fair hiring and promotion maximizes productivity and profit and increases diversity. Meritocracy and diversity are at odds only if bias doesn't exist, but in my own work with dozens of corporate enterprises, I find that roughly 10% to 15% of racial disparities in hiring and promotion are due to bias -- meaning narrowly identifiable discriminatory practices gleaned from troves of empirical data, not mere statistical disparity.
A pattern I have seen in the data is that large enterprises don't weigh their internal performance reviews the same for all racial groups when they decide whom to promote. High-performing black employees are often more likely to be promoted than similarly performing whites, but among those with mediocre performance, whites enjoy a sizable advantage in promotion. Economists call that statistical discrimination -- the use of easily observable proxies such as race, sex or age when information about individual employees is imperfect. For those with nearly perfect performance reviews, black employees are promoted more often than white ones because those are easy decisions. For those with mediocre performance, judgments are more subjective and thus more prone to stereotyping.
Another pattern we see consistently in companies is that there are significant racial differences in starting compensation, even among similar employees, but these differences decrease over time as employers learn more about each employee's true productivity. I found a similar result using both a large sample of job seekers in New Jersey and a nationally representative sample of workers -- wage trajectories are 1% to 2% steeper annually for black employees than white ones. This is a classic example of how statistical discrimination manifests itself in human-resource data.
Getting rid of this type of bias as a DEI strategy increases both productivity and diversity. There are two ways to do so: provide more objective information at the time of decision-making so there is less need to rely on gut instinct, and use analytics such as machine learning to help with decisions like hiring or promotion to counter human biases. I prefer the second approach and have built several machine-learning-based algorithms to help companies maximize productivity and achieve diversity as a talent-optimizing DEI strategy.
The tumult around DEI has given me many sleepless nights. I received a minority scholarship to attend graduate school; I assume I was a DEI admit. My math GRE scores were in the 95th percentile, while my study partners' scores hovered around the 99th. But what I endured to achieve those scores -- a father in prison and a mother I had yet to meet -- were important context.
I worry that the desire to take down DEI in its entirety will make successes like mine harder, even impossible, to realize. What gives me hope is that there are important parts of DEI almost anyone can believe in. Optimizing talent and giving all the opportunity to reach their full potential are at the core of what it means to be American.
---
Mr. Fryer is a professor of economics at Harvard, a founder of Equal Opportunity Ventures and a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: DEI Can Never Properly Weigh Disadvantages" -- WSJ Feb. 1, 2024)
Credit: By Roland Fryer

ERIC Subject: Private Schools; Racial Differences; Preschool Education; Whites; Talent; Admission Criteria; School Counselors; Public Schools; Personnel Selection; Academic Achievement; Opportunities; Job Applicants; Admission (School); Algorithms; Racism; Diversity Equity and Inclusion
