SAN JOSE, Calif. -- The Nvidia frenzy over artificial intelligence has come to this: Chief Executive Jensen Huang unveiled his company's latest chips on Monday in a sports arena at an event one analyst dubbed the "AI Woodstock."
Customers, partners and fans of the chip company descended on the SAP Center, the home of the National Hockey League's San Jose Sharks, for Huang's keynote speech at an annual Nvidia conference that, this year, has a seating capacity of about 11,000.
Professional wrestling's WWE Monday Night RAW event took place there in February. Even Apple's much-watched launch events for the iPhone and iPad didn't fill a venue this large.
At the center of the tech world's attention is Huang, who has gone from a semiconductor CEO with a devoted following among videogame enthusiasts to an AI impresario with broad-enough appeal to draw thousands to a corporate event.
"I hope you realize this is not a concert," Huang said as he took the stage, warning the audience that a tech-heavy presentation was coming.
The tech luminaries speaking at the conference include executives from OpenAI, Elon Musk's xAI, Meta Platforms, Google and Microsoft. A broader slice of corporate users of Nvidia's AI chips -- L'Oreal, Lowe's, Jaguar Land Rover, Shell, Verizon Communications -- also were sending representatives.
This week's event is the first in-person version since 2019 of the Nvidia conference, officially known as GTC, short for GPU Technology Conference. The name is a reference to Nvidia's graphics-processing unit chips that have become the computational workhorses of the generative AI boom, doing the complex math needed to fuel language bots like OpenAI's ChatGPT. Prepandemic, Huang made his big address at nearby San Jose State University's indoor sports venue.
In his address on Monday, Huang gave more detail about Nvidia's next generation of AI chips, the successors to the wildly successful H100, which has been in short supply since AI demand took off starting in late 2022. The new chips, code-named Blackwell, are much faster and larger than their predecessors, Huang said. They will be available this year, the company said. UBS analysts estimate Nvidia's new chips may cost as much as $50,000, about double what analysts have estimated the earlier generation cost.
While Nvidia's earlier chips were "fantastic," Huang said as he showed off the new hardware on stage, "we need bigger GPUs. So ladies and gentlemen, I'd like to introduce you to a very big GPU."
In a highly technical presentation, Huang gave examples of the different ways the new chips can be used by customers developing and using AI systems. He also introduced new network switches designed for AI uses and supercomputer systems that incorporate the new chips.
Huang said the new chips could train the latest large AI models using 2,000 Blackwell GPUs using just 4 megawatts of power over about 90 days. Using the older model chips, that process would take 8,000 GPUs using 15 megawatts over the same amount of time, he said.
Huang also touched on his vision for some more far-flung technologies, including drug discovery, genomics and humanoid robots. Nine different humanlike robots flanked the CEO on stage near the end of his speech.
With investments in AI skyrocketing, Nvidia's quarterly sales have more than tripled over the past year to $22.1 billion. Its stock is also up threefold in that period, sending its market value above $2 trillion and making it the third-largest listed U.S. company, behind only Apple and Microsoft.
On Monday, the company's stock closed up less than 1% at $884.55 just as Huang's address at the GTC event began.
Nvidia has few competitors and a commanding market share in AI computation -- more than 80% of it, according to some estimates -- thanks to more than a decade of investment before demand exploded. Its success has lifted some of its partners, including Super Micro Computer.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
