Kishau Rogers, the chief executive of a software firm in Richmond, Va., was roped into playing fantasy football for the first time this year with her office. She embraced the usual rites of passage, including selecting a corny team name -- "We Have a Hulk," (a reference to Marvel movies) -- and drafting her players.
And crucially, she braced herself for one of the central parts of Fantasy Football, roasting colleagues and getting ribbed at the water cooler over one's team.
Still she was a bit jolted when her drafting skills were mega-dissed -- by a robot.
"We Have A Hulk's draft strategy seemed to be centered around defying all logic and common sense," taunted a 180-word takedown she received, written by ChatGPT, and sent by Yahoo Fantasy Football, in a wrap up of the league's draft. "It seems that We Have A Hulk is in for a season of epic proportions -- epic failure, that is."
Artificial intelligence-enabled bots already are taking burger orders at fast-food drive-throughs, writing fortune cookie messages, and fending off telemarketers.
Now they are elbowing into the annual Fantasy Football tradition of smack talk. And it turns out, the bots may be even ruder than people.
Fall is fantasy football season for millions of friend groups and offices that form leagues where members are known as team managers. Each selects real-life NFL players for their fantasy teams, and each week, the actual performances of these NFL stars determine how many points team managers score. The tallies fuel head-to-head battles within the league, as well as barbs, the more cutting the better.
Yahoo Fantasy Football, one of the largest organizers in the pastime, has for years sent participants AI-generated draft recaps and weekly game updates. But for the 2023 NFL season, that service has been supercharged by ChatGPT, an AI chatbot, developed by OpenAI and launched in November 2022, that's often freakishly adept at mimicking humans.
"They're pretty clever, funny and can be brutally honest," said Ryan Spoon, president of Yahoo Sports.
Yahoo produced more than 2,000 ChatGPT draft recaps a minute in the lead up to the NFL kickoff earlier this month, said Spoon, adding that the technology augments what the humans at Yahoo Sports are able to deliver. "We could not have done this by hand," Spoon said. "Even if we could, and I'm speaking against myself and my team, I'm unsure it would be as clever and funny at that scale, despite having great people."
ChatGPT has churned out one nastygram after another, blasting fantasy fans for offenses ranging from a "stunning display of draft ineptitude" to crafting a plan so weak that projected points "might as well be measured in unicorn farts," according to many descriptions shared on social media by fans.
The bots betrayed "an impressively sharp mean streak," conceded Michael Gilman, the chief executive officer of Arrakis Therapeutics who is in a fantasy league with colleagues in Waltham, Mass.
Gilman's AI-written draft report excoriated his team, Scarlet Fire, as a "flaming disaster." After much teasing by employees on Slack, Gilman decided to change his team name to Flaming Disaster.
Not everyone is so sanguine about the cranky robots. "Hey @Yahoosports @YahooFantasy," wrote a user on X, formerly Twitter. "Screw your draft evaluation. I'm gonna go 0-15?" The poster shared early results, insisting he was defying the bots.
Some worry -- could human hecklers be sidelined?
Christopher Morton, an IT manager in Portland, Ore., has played fantasy football for 16 years, and normally would write season previews for all the teams and churn out other cheeky commentary.
He's proud of the many insults he's thought up over the years, such as when Morton's team, Bull Moose, faced off against his roommate's team, Trash Pandas.
"Think hiding in a trash can will save you, until you become the metal football you furry rodents," Morton wrote. (Despite the gruff words, the Trash Pandas won.)
This season, though, when Morton set out to write the season previews, he saw he had been pushed aside by a piece of software.
ChatGPT took jabs at Morton's team ("The Bull Moose entered the draft with high hopes, only to stumble and fall flat on their antlers") and, Morton had to concede, wrote humorous missives about the other teams in his league.
Still, he felt a bit wistful, since he actually looks forward to writing those season previews each year.
"It hurts to see that being taken so easily by a program that took an hour and wrote 12 team reviews, which would've taken me a day or two," Morton said.
James Estime, a New York entrepreneur and 14-year veteran of fantasy football, plays for the ribbing and has seen it increase, thanks to ChatGPT. Unfortunately, a lot of it has been pointed in his direction, said Estime, whose team name is Lannister Always Pay, a nod to the show "Game of Thrones.""With a draft grade of D and a projected finish of 10th, it seems the Lannisters won't be sitting on the Iron Throne this season," ChatGPT wrote about Estime's team.
That write up has prompted his fantasy teammates to refer to him as Kingless James and Iron Wrong James, Estime said.
After losing his first week of the fantasy football season, Estime said he's now using ChatGPT himself -- to come up with some fresh trash talk to use against another member of his league.
"Are you playing fantasy football, or is your team just a fantasy?" ChatGPT wrote for Estime.
Credit: By Salvador Rodriguez
