OpenAI pushed out co-founder Sam Altman as chief executive officer, saying he wasn't being "consistently candid in his communications" with the artificial-intelligence company's board.
The startup said Friday that its board concluded after a review that Altman's actions, which it didn't specify, were "hindering its ability to exercise its responsibilities." The company's statement, unusually candid for such a situation, said: "The board no longer has confidence in his ability to continue leading OpenAI."
In a post on X, the former Twitter, Altman said: "i loved my time at openai. it was transformative for me personally, and hopefully the world a little bit. most of all i loved working with such talented people. will have more to say about what's next later." He couldn't be reached for additional comment Friday.
Altman told people after the announcement that he was shocked and angry about the board's decision. He also said he felt it was the result of a power struggle between him and members of the board, according to a person familiar with one of the conversations.
The announcement of Altman's abrupt ouster sent shock waves through the tech world. It came after a week in which Altman appeared several times in public to talk about the company, and marked a stunning turnabout for a man who had become the face of the generative AI boom that has gripped tech executives and regular people since OpenAI made its ChatGPT service public almost exactly a year ago.
Mira Murati, the company's chief technology officer, will serve as interim CEO, effective immediately, OpenAI said. Murati already has been heavily involved in OpenAI's day-to-day operations, people close to the company said.
The change came as a surprise to Microsoft, which has invested $13 billion into OpenAI for a 49% stake. Microsoft's top executives found out about Altman's ouster minutes before the announcement, according to a person familiar with the situation.
At an all-hands meeting with employees Friday afternoon, Murati started off by saying she had spoken with Microsoft's CEO, Satya Nadella, and its chief technology officer, Kevin Scott, and that she was confident about OpenAI's partnership with the tech giant. Asked why Altman left, Murati said she didn't know, according to a person who heard the remarks.
Ilya Sutskever, OpenAI's chief scientist and a member of its board, said at the meeting he couldn't discuss the reason for Altman leaving, and that there was an active CEO search under way.
Microsoft said the relationship between the two companies would be unaffected by Altman's departure. "We have a long-term partnership with OpenAI, and Microsoft remains committed to Mira and their team as we bring this next era of AI to our customers," a Microsoft spokesman said.
Microsoft's shares fell after the OpenAI announcement, ending Friday trading down 1.7%.
OpenAI's statement said that Greg Brockman, its president and another co-founder, was stepping down as chairman of the board, but would remain in his role at the company, reporting to the CEO.
But later Friday, Brockman announced in a post on X that he was leaving, saying he was proud of what OpenAI had accomplished, "but based on today's news, i quit." He couldn't be reached for comment.
One source of tension between Altman and some board members was around whether OpenAI was fully considering the safety implications of the products it has rolled out as part of its rapid expansion of commercial offerings, people familiar with the matter said.
In recent weeks, Altman has kept up a steady schedule of public speaking, talking about OpenAI's plans and his vision for a future defined by AI. At the company's first developer day earlier this month, he took selfies with people building apps on OpenAI's platform as his company announced a slate of new products.
In OpenAI's statement, the board said that it was grateful for Altman's contributions but "we believe new leadership is necessary as we move forward." It described Murati as the leader of the company's research, product and safety functions, adding, "We have the utmost confidence in her ability to lead OpenAI during this transition period."
Altman, 38 years old, co-founded OpenAI around eight years ago and has been seen as a driver of the artificial-intelligence revolution, thanks in large part to last year's launch of OpenAI's ChatGPT bot, whose ability to produce humanlike writing made it one of the most viral products in the history of technology.
A longtime venture capital executive, Altman helped guide OpenAI from a small nonprofit into a company valued at tens of billions of dollars at near-record speed, partly because of the launch of a for-profit arm that enabled it to raise money from backers including Microsoft.
Altman and Nadella have spoken of having forged a strong relationship as part of their companies' partnership. The corporate marriage has been awkward at times, as the two businesses have developed other strategic ties and launched competing products.
OpenAI has told investors that it expects to reach $1 billion in revenue this year and generate many billions more in 2024, The Wall Street Journal reported in September. The company has been talking to investors about a share sale that would value it at between $80 billion and $90 billion, roughly triple its level earlier this year.
---
Stephen Nakrosis contributed to this article.
Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman and Berber Jin
