Nvidia ended trading Tuesday with a valuation of more than $1 trillion, becoming the seventh U.S. company to reach that status.
Shares of the chip maker have risen roughly 181% this year, fueled by the boom in artificial intelligence that Chief Executive Jensen Huang recently said was ushering in "a new computing era."
Big tech companies and startups are spending billions of dollars on AI technology. Nvidia is a beneficiary of those investments because its semiconductors are seen as essential in building the largest, most powerful AI systems.
The chip maker joins fellow tech companies Apple, Microsoft, Google parent Alphabet and Amazon.com on the $1 trillion list. Facebook parent Meta Platforms and Tesla at one point also topped that level, though their share prices have retreated.
Tuesday was the first time that Nvidia closed above the $1 trillion threshold. The company crossed the mark in intraday trading on May 30, but the stock closed that day below the $404.858 price needed to have a $1 trillion market cap.
The stock ended Tuesday at $410.22, rising 3.9% on the day and giving Nvidia a valuation of roughly $1.01 trillion.
Nvidia, founded in 1993 by Huang and two like-minded engineers at a Denny's in San Jose, initially focused on making computer graphics better. Huang had his doubters in the early years among venture capitalists who didn't believe his target market -- PC gaming -- would ever take off.
"The entertainment value of computer games was very obvious to me, and I could imagine how it could be a very large market and a very large industry, but for a lot of people who were older, that sensibility didn't exist," Huang said during a talk at Stanford University.
Huang was proved right in the 1990s and into the 2000s, when Nvidia grew into a powerhouse in chips for videogamers who prized high-resolution graphics that ran smoothly.
From the outset, the Santa Clara, Calif., company designed chips but didn't make them. Nvidia relies on contract chip makers such as Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing and Samsung Electronics toproducethem. The chips often are among the semiconductor industry's most advanced processors.
Nvidia took a turn about 16 years ago, when Huang opened up the company's chips for purposes beyond computer graphics. Scientists and engineers started to use them for physics simulations and eventually for artificial-intelligence calculations, where they proved to be especially proficient.
In recent years, the company branched out further, moving into markets such as supplying chips for cars, many of which rely on AI for self-driving features.
Nvidia's AI-focused data-center business has since surpassed the gaming division as the company's main source of revenue. The AI calculations that underpin sophisticated language-generation systems typically take place behind the scenes, in huge server farms where Nvidia's chips are featured.
Nvidia said on May 24 that it expected to register about $11 billion in sales in its current fiscal quarter, a record. The figure blew past analysts' expectations and led to a 24% jump in the company's stock price the next day.
Nvidia's recent stock surge is rooted in the explosion of interest since late last year in AI tools that generate cogent responses to simple queries, including OpenAI's ChatGPT. A flurry of investment in those systems has led to increasing demand for Nvidia's chips that analysts expect will persist.
Investors have grown excited about the profit potential of the AI explosion. Their enthusiasm has helped the Nasdaq Composite Index outpace the broader stock market and has contributed to strong gains this year for many of the world's largest tech companies.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
