Canada wants to be an artificial-intelligence hotbed.
Don Walker, chief executive of Canadian auto-parts giant Magna International Inc. hosted a number of the country's leading executives, scientists and politicians, including Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, at his summer home in July to mull ways Canada could move past its reliance on natural-resource exports. Artificial intelligence was at the top of the list, according to several attendees.
In March, in part thanks to those discussions, the Canadian government said it would dedicate $125 million Canadian dollars (US$94 million) in funding toward developing AI in Montreal, Toronto and Edmonton -- cities with top universities.
The initiative, known as the Pan-Canadian AI Strategy, is one pillar -- along with research-and-development-friendly tax policies and entrepreneur-mentorship programs -- of an effort by academics, business leaders and government officials to boost Canada's capabilities in AI.
The goal is to ensure Canada can compete with countries like the U.S. and China as the push to commercialize AI ramps up and the race to hire artificial-intelligence experts becomes increasingly competitive world-wide. Already, the efforts are luring venture-capitalists from the U.S.
As swooning commodity prices and a volatile housing market threaten to weigh on the country's economy, Mr. Trudeau has made investing in high-quality jobs, notably in the tech sector, a priority for his government.
Canada's technology sector accounted for just 7% of the country's economy in 2015, according to a report published by the Brookfield Institute for Innovation + Entrepreneurship last year, below the country's mining, manufacturing and real-estate sectors.
AI is expected to have a global economic impact topping billions of dollars as it moves into industries like transportation, health care, financial services and cybersecurity.
"We want to be at the forefront of that," said Reza Moridi, the minister of research, innovation and science for Ontario.
At an event last week with Mr. Trudeau, Ford Motor Co. unveiled plans to invest C$500 million to hire 400 engineers from BlackBerry Ltd.'s mobility-solutions unit to help develop internet-connected vehicles and create a new research-and-development center in Ottawa.
The irony, according to Canadian academics, is that basic research that has enabled technologies such as speech recognition on smartphones and computer-vision systems in self-driving cars traces its roots, in part, to Canadian universities. But U.S. companies like Alphabet Inc.'s Google, Microsoft Corp., Facebook Inc. and Amazon.com Inc. have reaped the financial benefits, they say.
Among the reasons academics and entrepreneurs cite: the loss of top AI researchers to U.S. companies, a dearth of investors, plus a long history of Canadian startups moving to the U.S. to gain traction.
The first investment the pan-Canadian initiative made to address that was with the newly launched Vector Institute; two other institutes are in the works.
The Toronto-based organization is aimed at luring top minds in the field and developing new ways of incorporating AI into self-driving cars, banking and medicine, among other applications, according to Vector co-founder Jordan Jacobs.
Vector is funded by C$170 million -- about C$40 million from Pan-Canadian AI Strategy, plus provincial government and corporate money -- and will offer salaries competitive with industry wages, while supporting research collaborations with local companies and academics, Mr. Jacobs said.
Startup incubators and business-mentorship programs focused on AI have sprouted across Canada.
Credit: By Daniela Hernandez and David George-Cosh
