TPG is promoting a group of longtime partners to leadership roles as the private-equity firm prepares to launch an initial public offering of its shares.
TPG is naming Todd Sisitsky, a veteran healthcare investor who has been a managing partner of its flagship strategy since 2015, to the new role of president, according to company officials.
Nehal Raj and Jeff Rhodes, who focus on investing in software and healthcare, respectively, are becoming co-managing partners of the flagship strategy, TPG Capital, alongside Mr. Sisitsky. David Trujillo, who heads investing in internet, digital media and communications, is becoming co-managing partner of the TPG Growth strategy, joining its two existing co-heads.
All four have been with the company for more than 15 years.
The promotions are the latest leadership changes at TPG as it prepares for an IPO. TPG, which has more than $100 billion in assets under management and offices around the world, is one of the last of the original buyout giants to remain a private partnership.
Firms such as TPG that are on the IPO runway often make management changes to help get ready for life as a public company, which involves a new set of disclosure and other responsibilities.
TPG declined to comment on the IPO.
Jon Winkelried, who formerly served as co-chief executive officer with co-founder Jim Coulter, became sole CEO of the company in May, with Mr. Coulter moving to the role of executive chairman. In August, Jack Weingart, previously a co-managing partner of TPG Capital alongside Mr. Sisitsky, became the firm's chief financial officer.
"I think of it as continuing to build the leadership team but also sending a message that it's really important to have homegrown talent that's shown excellence in investing capability," Mr. Winkelried said in an interview.
Mr. Sisitsky, 49 years old, has led some of TPG's most successful deals, including investments in Allogene Therapeutics Inc., Iqivia Holdings Inc. and Par Pharmaceutical Holdings Inc. TPG sold Par to Endo International PLC in 2015, earning roughly seven times its initial investment.
Mr. Raj, 43, has overseen numerous TPG deals in the red-hot business-software sector, including a carve-out of Boomi from Dell Technologies Inc.; an investment in artificial-intelligence-software provider C3.ai Inc., which went public last year; and a deal for healthcare-technology company WellSky.
Mr. Rhodes, who co-leads TPG Capital's healthcare investing with Mr. Sisitsky (another title the latter will retain), has overseen deals for EnvisionRx, sold to Rite Aid Corp. in 2015, and Kindred at Home, sold this year to Humana Inc. for $5.7 billion. The 46-year-old also led a deal last year for a majority interest in outpatient-mental-health company Lifestance Health Group Inc., which went public in June, and co-led the WellSky deal with Mr. Raj.
Mr. Trujillo, who in addition to internet, digital media and communications co-heads TPG's Tech Adjacencies strategy, has overseen the firm's investments in new-economy standouts including Airbnb Inc., Spotify Technology SA and Uber Technologies Inc.
Credit: By Miriam Gottfried
