SEOUL -- Samsung Electronics Co. said its net profit fell 16.8% to 4.54 trillion Korean won ($4.0 billion) in the third quarter, as a disastrous recall of its premium Galaxy Note 7 smartphone caused the company's mobile division to report its smallest quarterly profit since it launched its first Galaxy series phone more than six years ago.
Samsung's mobile operating profit plunged 96% from a year earlier to 100 billion won after the discontinuation of the Galaxy Note 7, which went on sale Aug. 19. Dozens of reports of overheating forced the company to first recall the phone on Sept. 2 and then -- on Oct. 11 -- to abandon it altogether.
Overall operating profit for the three months ended Sept. 30 fell 30% to 5.2 trillion won from nearly 7.4 trillion won a year earlier, while revenue fell 7.5% to 47.82 trillion won.
The company said earlier this month that it expects to take an additional hit of about 3.5 trillion won from the Galaxy Note 7 fiasco in the last three months of 2016 and the first three months of next year.
Also Thursday, Samsung shareholders approved the appointment of Lee Jae-yong, the company's heir apparent, as an executive director on the company's board, consolidating his position as the emerging leader of the technology giant.
At the shareholder meeting, J.K. Shin, a Samsung co-chief executive and until last year the company's mobile chief, apologized to investors for the Note 7 debacle, saying that engineers are "carefully revisiting every aspect of the device, such as its hardware, software and manufacturing processes."
Mr. Shin said that the investigation would take time and pledged to share the findings "in an open manner."
In a conference call with analysts following the earnings announcement, Samsung executives said that the pain of the Note 7 would be blunted by introducing more mid- to low-end smartphones, while continuing to sell the popular flagship Galaxy S7 smartphone that it first began selling in March this year.
"We are expecting some difficulties until the first quarter of 2017, but we will achieve a business turnaround with the release of our new flagship smartphone," said Lee Kyeong-tae, Samsung's vice president for mobile communications.
For the new flagship smartphone, expected to be released next February as the Galaxy S8, Mr. Lee said the company would add an artificial-intelligence service, a possible reference to a function similar to the Siri virtual assistant function offered by Apple Inc. Earlier this month Samsung bought AI company Viv Labs.
For the third quarter, Samsung's earnings damage would have been much worse if it weren't for the relative stability of sales of semiconductors and display panels. The semiconductor division earned 3.37 trillion won, a decline of 7.9% from a year earlier, while display panels brought in 1.02 trillion won, up 9.7%.
As a result, semiconductors and display panels accounted for 84% of Samsung's overall operating profit -- the highest level in years. Mobile's diminished presence meant that it contributed just 1.9% of the company's overall operating profit. At its peak, the mobile division contributed more than three-fourths of Samsung's overall earnings.
Samsung's Galaxy Note 7 fiasco comes as longtime rival Apple is also struggling to maintain demand for its iPhones. On Tuesday, the Cupertino, Calif.-based smartphone maker reported its first annual revenue decline in 15 years, and offered an outlook for the holiday quarter that disappointed investors.
When Samsung first launched the Galaxy Note 7, the smartphone was greeted by positive reviews and strong preorders. Analysts increased their profit expectations for the company and on the day before the Galaxy Note 7 went on sale, Samsung shares jumped to their first fresh record high in three years.
But reports of the phone catching fire led Samsung to issue a global recall of 2.5 million devices. It rushed out millions of supposedly safe replacement smartphones before being forced to recall those devices as well.
As a result of the Galaxy Note 7 woes, Samsung's mobile operating margins, which had risen to more than 16% in the previous quarter, plummeted to nearly zero.
Partly in response to the company's shifting fortunes, Samsung said Thursday that it would spend more than 27 trillion won in capital expenditures this year, a record high, as Samsung doubles down on components like 3-D NAND flash memory and organic light-emitting diode, or OLED, displays, to drive profit.
The company's cash pile also continued to grow, reaching a record high of about 83 trillion at the end of September.
Samsung shares gained 2% by midday trading Thursday in Seoul, after a two-day slide of 2.5%.

Generate image description

Credit: By Jonathan Cheng and Eun-Young Jeong
