J2 Ventures has raised $150 million for its second venture fund, bolstering its strategy of backing startups and helping them secure capital through government grants and contracts.
The firm's new fund targets technologies with applications for civilian and government customers and more than doubles the size of its last investment pool.
Boston-based J2 formed in 2020 to finance startups and help them augment their venture backing with government funding. It initially raised $52.4 million for its debut fund, which grew to $67.5 million in 2022, and invested in 16 startups. The firm focuses on advanced computing, cybersecurity, telecommunications and infrastructure, and healthcare, said co-founder and Managing Partner Jonathan Bronson, a former investor with D.E. Shaw Group.
None of J2's companies from its first fund have gone public or been acquired. But the valuations of most of those startups have increased since J2 initially invested, said co-founder and Managing Partner Alexander Harstrick.
Nearly all limited partners from the debut fund returned and several new ones invested in J2's latest vehicle, which closed in June above the firm's $120 million goal, Harstrick said.
LPs in the fund include return backer JPMorgan Chase and new investors MetLife and New Mexico State Investment Council, he said.
Overall, fundraising for U.S. venture firms has slipped as investors have struggled to make returns. Last year U.S. venture capitalists raised $81.5 billion across 725 funds, compared with $191.3 billion in 1,550 investment pools in 2022, according to market tracker PitchBook Data.
U.S. venture investors collected $37.4 billion for 255 funds in the first half of this year, according to PitchBook.
J2's premise is that many startups have technologies with "dual use" potential and could secure government funding more easily with help from investors experienced in navigating the process.
Because of the urgency of securing new capabilities for defense applications, the U.S. government often will adopt novel technologies before the commercial market recognizes their value, Harstrick said.
All of J2's portfolio companies have an active relationship with the U.S. government or are pursuing one, Harstrick said.
The firm's team also includes Dr. Matt Goldman, a partner who previously was chief medical officer of the Defense Innovation Unit, a Department of Defense group that helps the military adopt commercial technology.
"Pursuing these opportunities sooner is almost always better," Bronson said.
Portfolio company Lumia Health has developed an in-ear wearable to measure blood flow to the head. It was focusing solely on civilian healthcare applications when J2 invested in the company in late 2022, said co-founder and Chief Executive Daniel Lee.
After investing, J2 helped Lumia identify opportunities for government funding, and in early 2023, Lumia secured its first grant, Lee said. Lumia -- officially known as STAT Health Informatics -- has received more than $2.4 million in grants from agencies including the U.S. Air Force and the Defense Health Agency and is applying for additional grants, Lee said.
Without the funding, Lumia would have needed to fundraise later this year or early next year, Lee said, adding its cash runway extends well into 2025.
Some companies already have government funding in their sights when J2 invests. Startup Code Metal's artificial-intelligence-based software is designed to help software developers more quickly write code for edge devices, which run software locally instead of in the cloud. The devices can include drones, said co-founder and CEO Peter Morales.
Code Metal had planned to pursue government funding when J2 initially invested last year, and in May was selected for an Air Force award to fund work on part of its technology platform, Morales said.
J2 wasn't involved with the award, but it has made introductions to other agencies, including the U.S. Army, that could lead to additional funding, Morales said.
Credit: By Brian Gormley
