AFTER RISING EARLY in their careers, many women get stuck in middle management.
More big businesses are trying to fix that by taking inventive steps to propel female managers into the executive suite.
International Business Machines Corp. helps high-potential women win critical stretch assignments through an intensive leadership program. Other companies, including Chevron Corp. and Xerox Corp., take flexible approaches to relocation better tailored to the lives of women staffers. Rising technology stars at Intuit Inc. enhance their professional visibility through coaching and introduction to important contacts from powerful executive sponsors.
Increased efforts to move women up the ladder come amid their slow gains at work. The share of women in middle management was unchanged at 33% and rose slightly in C-suite roles to 20%, concludes a new study by LeanIn.Org and McKinsey & Co.
And while more than half of senior managers want to be a top executive, the study showed, just 39% of female ones think they will achieve their career goal, compared with 44% of men.
The disparity in advancement expectations and achievements reflects deep-rooted attitudes about women as potential leaders, gender experts say. "Women aren't given a real chance at the fast track," says Deborah Gillis, president of Catalyst, which conducts research about women.
"Unconscious bias, the lack of sponsorship and a lack of access to hot jobs are key barriers that hold women back from making that transition from middle management to those more senior roles," Ms. Gillis continues. "They are still not getting the acceleration they need."
Getting key women the acceleration they need is why IBM introduced its Elevate program in 2015. The technology company targets female middle managers in sales, consulting and technical jobs who deal directly with customers -- especially in artificial intelligence and cloud computing.
"We want to prepare more women for executive roles in [these] new business areas," which represent "a super-important piece of our transformation," says Lindsay-Rae McIntyre, IBM's chief diversity officer.
Bosses in 20 countries propose top female performers for Elevate. Participants in the one-year program devise both their personalized development plan and leadership plan, with help from their bosses. They also get the chance to shadow executives, among other activities. IBM says about half of its 700 participants already have won executive positions.
Among them is Sree Ratnasinghe. The Raleigh, N.C.-based manager took her first executive spot in July. She supervises 40 cloud-computing staffers, up from 15 while a middle manager. Ms. Ratnasinghe landed three stretch projects through Elevate, such as helping a vice president craft the budget and set strategic priorities at a 300-person unit. She recalls earning valuable skills "that I am using every day in my executive role."
Stretch assignments and a manager's advancement advice significantly improve the odds of women receiving promotions, McKinsey and LeanIn found.
At energy giant Chevron, so-called 28/28 rotations assist female middle managers eager to advance in its upstream operation to search for potential oil and gas fields, among other things (though the longstanding program "wasn't designed specifically for women," a spokeswoman says).
The arrangement requires job-sharing pairs to work 28 consecutive days followed by 28 days off. Rotations often occur abroad.
"You get the best of both worlds," says Chevron staffer Michelle Pflueger. "You get to run an operation and get family flexibility."
Ms. Pflueger speaks from experience. She was a U.S. front-line supervisor in 2012 when Chevron sounded her out about becoming a middle manager overseas. She considered a 28/28 job aboard a deep-water vessel offshore Nigeria and conventional expatriate gigs elsewhere.
Ms. Pflueger chose the Nigeria rotation. She says she was attracted by the operational opportunity, lack of relocation and time off to travel with her significant other, a Chevron colleague who lives in Australia with four children from a prior marriage.
Two years ago, Chevron promoted Ms. Pflueger to offshore installation manager -- the highest spot on the Nigerian vessel. This August, she became a U.S. upstream adviser, a post Chevron considers a steppingstone to executive management, she adds.
Yet companies still give more international assignments to men even when both genders express willingness to move, according to a Boston Consulting Group survey of 203,756 employees world-wide. In an analysis issued in May, the consultancy said fewer than 30% of the women willing to move for international postings had done so, compared with nearly 40% of men in similar situations. The practice disadvantages promising female managers, BCG warned.
Intuit, which makes TurboTax and QuickBooks, uses a different tactic to keep promising women from getting stuck in middle management. Several female executives recently sponsored such staffers through its advancement initiative for midlevel tech women.
Intuit formalized its sponsorship push this summer, matching nearly two dozen male and female leaders with midcareer women.
Merline Saintil, Intuit's head of operations, product and technology, says being a sponsor often involves urging women to step outside their comfort zone by expanding their internal and external visibility. She believes would-be executives must develop strong personal brands.
Ms. Saintil encouraged technology middle manager Kevina Finn-Braun to speak at a major industry conference in June. She also critiqued her protege's draft speech and provided presentation pointers.
"She went way out of her way," Ms. Finn-Braun says. "That was the largest presentation I had done."
---
Ms. Lublin is The Wall Street Journal's management news editor in New York. She can be reached at joann.lublin@wsj.com.

Credit: By Joann S. Lublin
