Tesla shareholders voted to reapprove Elon Musk's multibillion-dollar pay package, signaling support for the EV maker's longtime leader and giving the board ammunition in its fight to preserve the court-rejected compensation plan.
Approval of the company's proposal was announced Thursday at Tesla's annual shareholder meeting in Austin, Texas.
The company didn't provide a percentage breakdown of the vote; in 2018, 73% of the voted shares backed it.
After the results were announced, Musk appeared on stage dancing and thanking shareholders. "I just want to start out by saying, hot damn, I love you guys," he said.
Musk talked through the company's opportunities for growth with self-driving vehicles and robots. "We're not just opening a new chapter for Tesla. We're starting a new book," he said.
The vote followed an intense campaign by the board and Musk to secure shareholder support, and it had become a referendum on Musk's future at a company he helped build into an electric-vehicle powerhouse.
Tesla's board had argued that the pay package -- representing a sizable portion of Musk's personal wealth -- was needed to motivate him to continue to lead the world's most valuable automaker in the long term.
Tesla shares were roughly flat in after-hours trading following news of the vote. The stock has fallen 27% in 2024.
Shareholders also voted in favor of moving the company's legal home from Delaware to Texas, where Tesla has its headquarters and one of its key factories. The board had urged investors to support the move saying that Texas was Tesla's "home state."
Asking voters to reapprove Musk's pay package was seen as a gamble for Tesla's board. The company's shareholder base has changed since the deal was first approved in 2018, and current holders were being asked to approve pay for past performance at a time when Tesla is dealing with slowing EV sales and questions about demand for its vehicles.
In a late-night post on X Wednesday, Musk previewed the victory, saying the pay-package proposal was winning by "wide margins."
The record-setting compensation deal has been criticized for its size and the way it was awarded. A Delaware judge in January ordered the entire plan -- now valued at about $48 billion -- rescinded, saying the process was deeply flawed because of Musk's close ties to several board members. The court also said Tesla had failed to prove that shareholders had been sufficiently informed about the deal.
Shareholder reapproval Thursday doesn't override the judge's decision, but it gives Tesla's lawyers some leverage in challenging the verdict. Tesla is trying to persuade the Delaware court to reverse the ruling, and it also has vowed to appeal the decision.
Legal experts said the company could petition the judge to reconsider her decision, arguing that the court's concerns were presented to shareholders and they still backed the package.
In a regulatory filing in April, Tesla said it hoped shareholder ratification would resolve concerns raised by the court, including that Tesla failed to adequately disclose important details of the package to investors.
Approval of the plan to move Tesla's incorporation to Texas from Delaware adds another wrinkle. A new case could be brought against the pay package in Texas, and that case could take precedence if decided before the Delaware appeal plays out.
Delaware Chancellor Kathaleen McCormick, who is overseeing the case, seemed to reject this idea recently. The judge said she interpreted recent communication by Tesla to mean they "do not plan to litigate any matter related to this action anywhere but Delaware."
Musk's pay package was challenged in 2018 when Tesla shareholder Richard Tornetta sued the company. Tornetta, who owned nine shares in the company, alleged the chief executive controlled the approval process for his own compensation plan and the board had misled shareholders, who then signed off on it.
Lawyers for Tesla and the shareholder are expected to meet in early July with the judge. The vote has also created new legal challenges for Tesla, including one from a shareholder who sued last week, accusing Musk of coercing investors to vote in favor of his compensation deal.
Ahead of the vote, Tesla board chair Robyn Denholm and other directors tried to rally shareholder support, saying that Musk earned his pay by hitting difficult financial targets.
In addition to seeking to win over institutional investors, Tesla reached out to its sizable number of individual shareholders. Individual investors are less likely to cast votes in a shareholder meeting, so Tesla took to social media to encourage them to vote and offered factory tours as an enticement.
About 45% of Tesla's shareholders are institutional investors, a relatively low percentage compared with the largest companies that make up the top of the S&P 500.
Two proxy-advisory firms, Institutional Shareholder Services and Glass Lewis, argued against ratification, saying the compensation plan had failed to ensure that Musk paid more attention to Tesla than his other ventures.
Musk leads other businesses, including rocket maker SpaceX, social-media service X, and an artificial-intelligence startup called xAI that recently raised $6 billion.
Tesla stockholders supporting the reapproval included ARK Investment Management and billionaire investor Ron Baron.
The unorthodox pay package doesn't include a salary and instead compensates Musk with 12 tranches of stock options, each one tied to the company hitting certain performance milestones.
When the package was approved in 2018, the targets appeared ambitious for a company then bleeding cash. In addition to clearing various profit and revenue thresholds, the plan required Musk to boost the company's market value from a little under $60 billion in 2018 to more than $650 billion.
Since then, Musk has succeeded in transforming Tesla, once a scrappy, unprofitable startup, into the envy of the auto industry with profit margins exceeding those of traditional car companies.
Musk has a roughly 13% stake in Tesla, and the shares from the pay package could push it to more than 20%. Musk has said he would like to control 25% of the company.
Generate image description

Credit: By Sean McLain
