The hangover from the bursting of the startup bubble is weighing on big U.S. university endowments, with write-downs in their growth and venture-capital investments driving a second straight year of weak returns.
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology reported a loss of 2.9% and Duke University a loss of 1% for the fiscal year ended June 30, while endowments at Yale and Stanford gained 1.8% and 4.4%, respectively. The median return for endowments and foundations of more than $1 billion was 5.6%, according to a preliminary estimate from Cambridge Associates.
That was well behind the overall stock market. The MSCI All Country World Index and the S&P 500 gained 17.1% and 19.6% for the period, including dividends, respectively. They were boosted by the rally in tech giants including Microsoft and Nvidia that have benefited from developments in artificial intelligence. Small endowments of less than $500 million, which typically have less exposure to private investments and more to public equities, had a median return of 8.8%, according to Cambridge.
"You were at the mercy of portfolio construction," said Matt Bank of Charlotte, N.C.-based Global Endowment Management, an outsourced investment firm. "Those decisions drove your short-term results, and the specific decisions you made within categories mattered less."
Exposure to China also had a negative impact on returns, several endowment chiefs said.
Universities could face pressure on their operating budgets in coming years should their endowments continue to post returns well below their long-term targets. Even some endowments that posted modest gains shrank in size, with their performance and donor gifts failing to keep pace with distributions. Many schools already are grappling with higher interest rates, which have increased their costs.
Some schools also have faced pushback from major donors over their responses to the attacks by Hamas on Israel; should those universities experience a significant drop in giving, they could be more dependent on endowments to perform.
Endowments once were wary of venture capital, seeing it as a risky offshoot of private equity. But years of ballooning startup valuations -- with many companies staying private for longer -- led more endowments to plow into venture capital, focusing on both early and later-stage investments. Overall, large endowments had 14.5% of their assets in venture capital as of June 2022, up from 7% in 2017, according to the National Association of College and University Business Officers, a higher-education trade group. The growth partly reflects investment gains.
Endowments' embrace of venture capital contributed to their biggest gains in a generation in the fiscal year that ended June 2021.
But rising rates made fast-growing, unprofitable tech companies far less appealing to investors. Spending cuts at mature tech companies took away a key source of growth for startups, the market for new listings collapsed and the flood of institutional money into venture slowed to a trickle.
Venture valuations tend to lag behind in downturns, and many fund investors have said they are concerned that the values reported by venture firms still have further to drop.
Credit: By Juliet Chung and Eliot Brown
