To train an artificial intelligence using "machine learning," you give it a goal, such as getting a high score in a videogame or picking out all the photos in a set that have a cat in them. But you don't actually tell the AI how to achieve the goal. You just give it lots of examples of success and failure, and it figures out how to solve the problem itself.
But imagine this sorcerers' apprentice scenario, first proposed by the philosopher Nick Bostrom. One day in the future, someone builds an advanced AI very much smarter than any current system and gives it the goal of making paper-clips. The AI, faithfully following instructions, takes over the world's machines and starts to demolish everything from pots and pans to cars and skyscrapers. so it can melt down the raw material and turn it into paper clips. The AI is doing what it thinks its creator wanted, but it gets things disastrously wrong.
On social media, we may face a version of this apocalypse already. Instead of maximizing paper clips, Facebook and Twitter maximize clicks, by showing us things that their algorithms think we will be interested in. It seems like an innocent goal, but the problem is that outrage and fear are always more interesting, or at least more clickable, than sober information.
The gap between what we actually want and what an AI thinks we want is called the alignment problem, since we have to align the machine's function with our own goals. A great deal of research in AI safety and ethics is devoted to trying to solve it. In his fascinating new book "The Alignment Problem," writer and programmer Brian Christian describes a lot of this research, but he also suggests an interesting and unexpected place to look for solutions: parenting.
After all, parents know a lot about dealing with super-intelligent systems and trying to give them the right values and goals. Often, that means making children's priorities align with ours, whether that means convincing a toddler to take a nap or teaching a teenager to stay away from drugs. A lot of the work of being a parent, or a caregiver or teacher more generally, is about solving the alignment problem.
But when it comes to children, there's an added twist. Computer programmers hope to make an AI that will to do exactly what they want. But as parents, we don't want our children to have exactly the same preferences and accomplishments that we do. We want them to become autonomous, with their own goals and values, which may turn out to be better than our own.
One possible solution to the alignment problem is to design AIs that are more skilled at divining what humans really want, even when we don't quite know ourselves. This would be a sort of Stepford Wife AI, slavishly devoted to serving us.
But it might be better to think of creating AIs as more like parenting, as the science fiction writer Ted Chiang does in his beautiful story "The Lifecycle of Software Objects." The story imagines a future where people adopt and train childlike AIs called "digients" as a kind of game. Soon, though, the "parents" come to love the artificial children they care for, and ultimately they face the same dilemmas of independence and care that parents of human children do. If we ever do create truly human-level intelligence in machines, we may need to give them mothers.

Credit: By Alison Gopnik
