IRAN
U.S. Drones Returned
But Cameras Missing
Iran returned two captured U.S. maritime drones on Friday after being confronted by U.S. destroyers, but the unmanned vessels were missing their cameras, a U.S. official said.
It wasn't clear if the Iranians kept the cameras, the official added, or if they fell off when the Iranians hauled the drones out of the Red Sea and later put them back in the water.
U.S. officials have said that the cameras, radars and other equipment on the drones are commercially available and aren't classified technology.
But retaining the cameras and inspecting the drones up close could give Iran a better idea of the system's capabilities.
The U.S. Navy has been deploying a network of advanced aerial and maritime sensors in the region, known as Task Force 59, which is designed to use artificial intelligence to monitor Iran's activities at sea and potential threats.
The episode began Thursday afternoon when an Iranian navy ship seized two of the unmanned vessels that were operating in international waters.
The capture marks the second time that Iran has sought to seize unmanned U.S. maritime craft following an attempt on Tuesday.
-- Michael R. Gordon
---
MYANMAR
Ex-U.K. Ambassador
Is Given Prison Term
A court in junta-controlled Myanmar sentenced a former British ambassador and her husband to one year in prison each for violating immigration law, as the military regime continues to defy international pressure since seizing power in a coup last year.
Vicky Bowman, a citizen of the U.K. who lives in the Southeast Asian country, was convicted of residing at an address -- of a property owned by her husband -- that was different from the one registered on her official documents, according to the junta. Her husband, Htein Lin, a Myanmar national, was convicted of abetting her. The couple was arrested Aug. 24.
Thousands of people have been detained since last year's Feb. 1 coup that ended the country's decadelong transition to democracy.
Ms. Bowman served as the U.K.'s ambassador to Myanmar from 2002 to 2006. Since 2013, she has been the director of the Myanmar Center for Responsible Business, a nonprofit initiative that advises investors on human-rights issues in the country. She is a fluent Burmese speaker.
Her husband is an artist who became known internationally for works he produced secretly while he was a political prisoner under a former military regime.
-- Feliz Solomon
---
GERMANY
ArcelorMittal Will
Close 2 Steel Plants
ArcelorMittal SA, one of the world's largest steelmakers, said it plans to close two of its plants in Germany amid soaring electricity costs.
Steelmakers have also been hit by efforts to reduce emissions and by lower metals prices, as slowing global growth impacts order books. Luxembourg-based ArcelorMittal said separately on Thursday that it will close a blast furnace in Spain amid low demand.
On Friday, it said the company will close a blast furnace in Bremen, Germany, in the country's north, and a plant that produces wire rod in Hamburg.
"The high costs for gas and electricity are putting a heavy strain on our competitiveness," said Reiner Blaschek, chief executive of ArcelorMittal's German business.
The cost of gas has leapt in Germany and around Europe as Russia throttles back supply. Russia shut down its main artery for natural gas to Europe, citing maintenance, on Wednesday. Gas flows are expected to resume over the weekend, but Russia has throttled back its overall sales to Europe dramatically. Western governments have accused the Kremlin of weaponizing energy.
-- Alistair MacDonald
