I recently got a ride in an autonomous car. Very cool. I want one! Ever since October 2005, when a Stanford autonomous vehicle traversed 132 miles of desert terrain and won the $2 million Grand Challenge prize from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, dreams of self-driving cars have become feverish.
Cars that drop you off at a restaurant and park themselves while you dine, restful commutes, hyperbolic Elon Musk predicting a million Tesla robo-taxis by 2020, 40,000 annual U.S. car crash fatalities dropping to almost nothing. All I can think is, are we there yet? Unfortunately, I suspect patience is in order.
In recent years, the rubber has met the road and hit a few potholes. General Motors subsidiary Cruise planned to launch self-driving taxis in San Francisco this year. It didn't happen. Daimler recently had a "reality check" on plans for 10,000 robo-taxis by 2021. Ford chief executive Jim Hackett, doing joint research with Volkswagen, said in April, "We overestimated the arrival of autonomous vehicles." The initial hype cycle has played out, and now it's time to wait for vehicles to get cheap enough to make economic sense. Just like every other new technology product ever.
Alphabet subsidiary Waymo is testing self-driving Chrysler Pacifica hybrid minivans. Sitting on top is a giant 1,000-foot-range lidar, which is basically a radar that uses laser light instead of microwaves. It costs more than the minivan itself. Plus it has image sensors to see color, and audio sensors to hear emergency vehicles. There are also several radars to see through snow, rain, fog and dust. And attached to the front and back are six short-range lidars to find curbs and pedestrians.
If a pedestrian even flinches an arm into a crosswalk, the car stops. Waymos do get confused by lane-splitting motorcycles, especially when one approaches rapidly from the rear. The sensor can't figure out whether it's a bike, person, animal. Waymo's next version will use Jaguar's I-PACE electric car.
It's not a game for the thin of wallet. Uber lost $125 million in their self-driving effort -- last quarter alone. Even Apple autonomous cars have been spotted in Silicon Valley with expensive-looking sensors. I estimate that Waymo minivans cost at least $200,000 a pop, and so far they have 50 of them that operate only in Mountain View, Calif., and 150 near Phoenix, where Alphabet is planning a limited ride-sharing partnership with Lyft.
Waymo meticulously captures every inch of every road. Google Maps data is insufficient. The sensors carefully measure the width of roads and lanes to keep the car centered. They measure curb height. To record a three-lane highway, a test car drives the length of one lane, then turns around and drives the other two. And Waymos actually stick to the speed limit. I can't drive 55!
Early fatalities mean lots of caution. In one incident last year, a Tesla's autopilot camera misread faded lane stripes and drove the car into a lane divider. That's why mapping is critical. Uber's self-driving cars have a history of accidents, and an investigator says one death occurred last year because the sensors "did not include a consideration for jaywalking pedestrians." The system identified a person as "other object" 5.6 seconds before the crash, but did nothing to avert it.
Data is king. Tesla collects GPS and imaging data from every one of its cars. This is a huge advantage, as they can feed all this info to their artificial-intelligence system. But Teslas are equipped with radar and cameras only. There's no lidar, and the mapping is much less extensive than Waymo's.
SAE International has set standards for self-driving capability, called "Levels of Driving Automation." Level 3 counts as self-driving, but a driver needs to take over in some circumstances. Level 4 is fully autonomous -- no driver necessary -- but it won't work in extreme conditions like fog, dust, snow or heavy rain. The dream, Level 5, works under "all conditions." Teslas are essentially Level 3. Waymo, in fair-weather Phoenix, hopes for Level 4. The tests continue.
So we wait. Autonomous trucks on interstate highways might make sense long before cars, with drivers snoozing and taking over only on local streets. For the rest of us, start getting excited when the cost of a self-driving car drops to only a 20% premium over a standard car, rather than five times the cost. I hate to guess when that will happen, but here goes: 2030.
Technology is usually not sprung on us, so expect gradualism. Many discrete features of autonomous driving are already showing up in cars: blind-spot monitoring, adaptive cruise control, lane-departure warnings, automatic braking systems, automatic parking -- some even read speed-limit signs. Each model year will bring more new features, starting with the high-end models. Level 5 autonomous cars will sneak up on us over a decade, rather than with the flip of a switch.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Ask the Horses How Gradual Change in Transportation Is" -- WSJ Dec. 24, 2019)

Credit: By Andy Kessler
