Tesla Chief Executive Elon Musk has made clear he is making robotaxis a centerpiece of his long-term strategy. The hard part will come next.
This summer Tesla plans to show a future model -- which is expected to have no steering wheel and pedals -- that the automaker can deploy in its own ride-hailing service. Musk last week floated the idea of letting owners rent out their robotic Teslas, comparing it to Airbnb.
The strategy amounts to a sizable bet on a yet-to-be-built car underpinned by technology that remains under development. A combination of regulatory ambiguity and technology hurdles make widespread deployment of driverless taxis any time soon a long shot, analysts say. "Robotaxis are likely years away from mass-market adoption," said RBC Capital analyst Tom Narayan.
It is a concept that is years beyond its deliverable date: Musk and many tech and auto executives once predicted robotaxis would be ubiquitous by now. But Musk is leaning into the autonomy story. And investors are cheering him on.
Today, a complicated, evolving patchwork of rules govern autonomous vehicles. Musk's plan to deploy self-driving cars on public roads is expected to set up a face-off with federal regulators, which are looking into the automaker's advanced driver-assistance technology and how it was rolled out.
Technological hurdles will take years to overcome, many experts say. Today's most sophisticated robotaxis require remote human operators to step in when the vehicles encounter situations they cannot handle.
Musk's robotaxi focus during Tesla's first-quarter earnings call came amid stagnating sales and price deterioration that hammered the stock this year. Investors bid up shares as Musk outlined a tantalizing vision of future revenue growth. Tesla didn't respond to a request for comment for this article.
On Monday, the stock rallied after Musk won approval from China to roll out Tesla's most advanced driving technology, called Full Self-Driving.
Tesla last week teased what its ride-hailing app could look like. Musk said an owner could deploy their robotaxi -- he referred to Tesla's planned model as "Cybercab" -- to ferry passengers around when it isn't in use. Musk has said Tesla could split fare revenue with owners.
Tesla's Full Self-Driving controls speed and steering in certain situations, but it requires drivers to pay attention and doesn't make cars autonomous.
Tesla relies on data gathered from owners' use of the system to help develop driverless tech. In 2016, Musk said the company would need to log 6 billion miles of autonomous driving to secure approval from regulators worldwide. Today, Tesla says owners have driven more than 1 billion miles using its Full Self-Driving feature.
Tesla has bucked industry norms by deploying a system that primarily relies on cameras and artificial intelligence. Other driverless-car companies use expensive radars and laser-based sensors that many in the industry consider crucial to help driverless cars navigate.
While camera-based systems are cheaper, they can be prone to false negatives that can't necessarily be addressed through software fixes, said Raj Rajkumar, a professor at Carnegie Mellon who specializes in autonomous vehicle driving.
Musk said recently: "It is obvious that our solution with a relatively low-cost inference computer and standard cameras can achieve self-driving."
Credit: By Ryan Felton
