Stocks rose after a fresh slate of economic data and corporate earnings reportscontinued to paint a mixed picture of the economy's direction.
The S&P 500 added 44.21 points, or 1.1%, to 4060.43, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite gained 199.06 points, or 1.8%, to 11512.41. The Dow Jones Industrial Average edged up 205.57 points, or 0.6%, to 33949.41, rising for five consecutive trading days.
All three indexes are up for the year so far, though their rally has been choppy and tentative. On Wednesday, the major indexes had closed nearly flat after many earnings reports.
New data on Thursday showed U.S. economic growth slowed less than expected in the fourth quarter of 2022, capping last year's cool-down from red-hot growth in 2021 that was fueled by a pandemic rebound. Initial jobless claims also declined last week, indicating the U.S. labor market remains strong, despite having lost steam in recent months.
Investors were also sifting through another batch of corporate earnings, with American Express and Chevron among the major companies still due to report. Shares of Tesla, popular with individual investors, ended up $15.84, or 11%, to $160.27, the best performer in the S&P 500, after the electric-car maker reported a record quarterly profit this week.
Out of the 11 sectors in the S&P 500, 10 ended higher, with gains led by energy, consumer discretionary and communication services stocks. Only consumer staples stocks were in the red.
Riskier assets have recovered some after last year's steep declines, with investors hoping the Federal Reserve will begin to temper -- and eventually halt -- its interest-rate increases as inflation shows signs of easing. The resilience of the American economy, however, is damping some of those hopes.
Next week, the central bank is expected to continue moderating its rate increases to a quarter-percentage point, down from a half-percentage point at the previous meeting, after a key metric showed inflation slowed for the sixth straight month in December. On Friday, the Fed's preferred inflation gauge is set to be released.
"Everything is pointing to inflation having reached that tipping point and starting to turn over. That necessitates at least a pause in some monetary tightening," said Altaf Kassam, head of investment strategy and research for Europe, the Middle East and Africa at State Street Global Advisors.
Economists and investors are concerned that higher rates are increasing the chance of a recession in the U.S. But the economy has shown greater strength than expected, boosting hopes that the Fed can manage a soft landing, in which it reduces inflation by slowing growth without causing a recession.
Seth Wunder, chief investment officer at Acorns, said he has been recommending the firm's customers, mostly retail traders, to stay invested in the market through the turbulence, citing that "time in the market is better than timing the market."
He said he has noticed increased interest from individual traders about how to invest and earn yield through bonds. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note rose to 3.491% from 3.461% on Wednesday.
The WSJ Dollar Index edged up 0.1%. The dollar rose against the euro and Japanese yen but fell against the British pound.
The details of Thursday's GDP report were mixed. Consumer spending, the economy's main engine, remained solid, but its pace of growth slowed from the previous quarter. Business investment ticked up at a weaker rate and the housing market, which has been hit by rising mortgage rates, continued to slump. Most of the report's gains came from businesses adding to inventories, higher government spending and lower imports, analysts said.
In jobless claims, the number of people seeking ongoing unemployment benefits ticked up to 1.675 million, an increase of 20,000. Continuing claims are up from last spring's lows, suggesting it is taking longer for some to find a new job.
A wave of major layoff announcements in recent weeks could also push initial claims higher later this year.
Austin Graff, chief investment officer at Opal Capital, expects the higher-rate environment to extend the dominance of low volatility and dividend-paying stocks this year and drive people away from more volatile technology, industrials and biotech.
In recent weeks, Mr. Graff has lowered exposure to stocks related to airlines, insurance, healthcare and pipelines because of high valuations. Opal Capital runs the TrueShares Low Volatility Equity Income exchange-traded fund.
On Thursday, shares of Seagate Technology added $6.76, or 11%, to $69.01, the second-best performer in the S&P 500, after the company posted better-than-expected earnings results. Sherwin-Williams shares fell $22.03, or 8.9%, to $225.06, the index's worst performer, after saying it expects sales and profit to decline in 2023 from a year earlier.
Shares of BuzzFeed rose $1.14, or 120%, to $2.09, after The Wall Street Journal reported the media company plans to use artificial intelligence to help create content.
Late in day, bitcoin traded $23,068.12, down 2.15%.
Nicole Webb, senior vice president and financial adviser at Wealth Enhancement Group, said she is following the bond market's lead that the Fed will cut rates in the next 12 to 18 months. Ms. Webb said she has bought more of beaten down megacap tech stocks this year that were lowered during last year's market turmoil.
Overseas, global markets were mostly higher. In Europe, indexes rose across the board, with the Stoxx Europe 600 finishing 0.4% higher.
Early Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 0.1%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was up 0.2% and South Korea's Kospi was up 1%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.25%. Markets in mainland China were closed for the Lunar New Year.
Credit: By Will Horner and Hardika Singh
