A Delaware judge struck down Elon Musk's multibillion-dollar pay package at Tesla after finding the process for securing its approval "deeply flawed," a major setback for the chief executive of the world's most valuable automaker.
The decision, issued Tuesday in the Delaware Court of Chancery, calls into question how Tesla's board plans to compensate Musk, an entrepreneur with an array of other business interests.
It also raises questions about whether his ties to his board are too close and puts greater attention on Musk's personal wealth. Musk doesn't accept a salary from Tesla, and while in recent years he has ranked as the world's richest person, most of his assets are tied up in shares of his companies.
Tesla, as a publicly traded company, is a financial pillar for his business empire. Musk has also borrowed against his stake in the electric-car maker.
"The process leading to the approval of Musk's compensation plan was deeply flawed," Chancellor Kathaleen McCormick wrote in the opinion, citing Musk's "extensive ties" with those negotiating his deal, approved by shareholders in 2018. The pay package was valued at a maximum of $55.8 billion, McCormick wrote.
"Musk was the paradigmatic 'Superstar CEO,' who held some of the most influential corporate positions (CEO, Chair, and founder), enjoyed thick ties with the directors tasked with negotiating on behalf of Tesla, and dominated the process that led to board approval of his compensation plan," she wrote.
Tesla shares fell 2.55% in after-hours trading Tuesday.
The ruling could mean the electric-vehicle maker will have to draft a new compensation package for the CEO, throwing into question how Musk, deeply tied to the automaker's early days, should be rewarded.
In the weeks before opinion landed, Musk had begun pushing for greater control over Tesla, where he is the largest shareholder with 13% ownership.
He said he felt uncomfortable transforming Tesla into a leader in artificial intelligence and robotics without controlling around 25% of the company. At the time, Musk said the Tesla board was waiting for a decision in the Delaware case before revisiting his compensation.
"Never incorporate your company in the state of Delaware," Musk tweeted Tuesday after the decision was released. An attorney for the plaintiff praised the decision.
Musk's 2018 pay package, which consisted of 12 tranches of stock options, has fully vested, though he has yet to exercise any of those options. The compensation package is the largest ever granted to a CEO of a U.S. publicly traded company, according to Equilar.
Rarely, if ever, does a Delaware court rescind a compensation agreement," said Charles Elson, a corporate governance expert at the University of Delaware.
Credit: By Rebecca Elliott
