A child born today won't ever need to get a driver's license, says Jing Wang, senior vice president of Baidu Inc., the Chinese search-engine giant. The Wall Street Journal's Joanna Stern spoke with Mr. Wang about the company's ambitions in the driverless-car race. Edited excerpts follow.
MS. STERN: When does Baidu put its self-driving car on the road?
MR. WANG: We will make our car commercially available in three years, but in mass production in five years. We hope we can partner with car makers to produce a car.
MS. STERN: Why is Baidu getting into this business?
MR. WANG: Baidu has been working on artificial-intelligence technology for a long time. And we've found that if we apply this technology into the car, it will make a very good self-driving car.
MS. STERN: Will the first cars have steering wheels? Or is it a combination of human interaction and the computer and the AI?
MR. WANG: The first batch might still have the steering wheel, but it really doesn't have to. We imagine during the transition that some people might still want to drive for fun.
MS. STERN: You're confident that the car is a better driver than most humans?
MR. WANG: Yes. There are three major benefits for the self-driving car: One, it's much safer.
Every day globally there are more than 3,000 people who get killed in traffic accidents. In China, 500 people a day. More than 500 people. And 93% of these fatal accidents are because of human errors. So a self-driving car can make you much safer.
MS. STERN: The two other benefits?
MR. WANG: The self-driving car is the best to share. Today in the U.S., a private car, 95% of the time it's parked in the parking lot. So the usage of a vehicle is really low. If we can increase this to 30% for car sharing, then the ownership of the car can be much cheaper.
MS. STERN: And does that include ride sharing? The idea that people would not own their own car?
MR. WANG: Yes.
MS. STERN: And third?
MR. WANG: It's much more efficient for transportation. Traffic can work with the self-driving car much more efficiently than with humans.
MS. STERN: Because the cars communicate on the road?
MR. WANG: Yes. It can communicate with the system, it can be navigated to avoid traffic jams.
MS. STERN: There's a fear about all of these people who might lose their jobs, whether it be in Uber, or truck drivers. What is going to be the impact? Do you worry about the impact on China's economy?
MR. WANG: New technology, while it's reducing some jobs, Baidu will create more jobs. For a self-driving car, you will need a lot more software engineers. And I think the purpose for the self-driving car is to replace private cars. So you will have a lot more cars for public use, and then you'll need a much bigger workforce for customer service and to help navigate the system. The traffic system will be much bigger.
There needs to be some human intervention, for customer service or those things. Down the road, with the self-driving car, public transportation, the fleet, will be much bigger than today, and there need to be people to manage that, to repair that, to handle that.
MS. STERN: Are you working with any ride-sharing companies on using your technology? Or are they looking to partner with you?
MR. WANG: Baidu already invests in Uber globally, and in Uber China.
MS. STERN: Where are you currently testing?
MR. WANG: In three cities: Beijing, Shanghai and Wuhu. And we are hoping to expand to 10 different cities in China, to test for different weather, traffic, road conditions.
MS. STERN: You're starting to build some test-driving options in the U.S.
MR. WANG: I have a big engineering force working on self-driving cars in the U.S., in Silicon Valley.
MS. STERN: And your intent would be to bring out one of your cars there to have your cars on the road in the U.S.?
MR. WANG: I certainly look forward to it. When the law permits us.
MS. STERN:Google has a huge presence in the U.S. and dominates a lot of the smartphone services of U.S. customers. That would be a big hurdle, how would you get over that?
MR. WANG: The marketing right now is very early. It's also big enough for many players in this field. And also, I think the more important factor is who can build the car safer. This is the major competition. I don't think anyone can dominate in this area.
Credit: By Joanna Stern
