STOCKHOLM -- The world's largest clothing brand is turning to artificial intelligence to win back shoppers, as it works to reverse one of the worst sales slumps in its history.
Hennes & Mauritz AB's H&M retail chain is ramping up its use of data to customize what it sells in individual stores, breaking with its longstanding practice of stocking stores around the globe with similar merchandise.
The 71-year-old fast-fashion chain is aiming to arrest a slump in same-store sales that has lasted 10 straight quarters as it faces problems bedeviling the industry: A spike in online shopping has led to fewer customers visiting stores, and digital startups are putting up fierce competition. H&M has repeatedly slashed prices to clear out $4 billion of unsold goods, and its shares are down 56% in the past three years.
H&M, like most retailers, relies on a team of designers to figure out what shoppers want to buy. Now, it is using algorithms to analyze store receipts, returns and loyalty-card data to better align supply and demand, with the goal of reducing markdowns. As a result, some stores have started carrying more fashion and fewer basics such as T-shirts.
Analysts remain skeptical that the new strategy will pull H&M out of its slump. Almost half of analysts who cover the stock have a "sell" recommendation on it compared with 36% a year ago, according to data provider FactSet.
H&M is the latest retailer to turn to technology to win customers. Inditex SA's Zara is using robots to make it easier for shoppers to pick up online orders in stores; Gap Inc. is relying on Google analytics and market-research data to monitor consumer preferences.
But H&M's strategy of using granular data to tailor merchandise in each store to local tastes, rather than take a cookie-cutter approach that groups stores by location or size, is largely untested in the industry, consultants say.
Getting every store right is a mammoth task given H&M's size. The brand has 4,288 stores, compared with Zara's 2,127 and Gap's 1,301.
The H&M store in Stockholm's swanky residential Ostermalm neighborhood hints at how data can help. The store used to focus on basics for men, women and children, with managers assuming that was what local customers wanted. But by analyzing purchases and returns in a more granular way, H&M found most of the store's customers were women, and fashion-focused items like floral skirts in pastel colors for spring, along with higher-priced items, sold unexpectedly well.
The company says sales at the store -- an early adopter of the technology it has begun rolling out globally -- have improved significantly but declined to provide figures.
To detect trends three-to-eight months in advance, H&M is analyzing data from blog posts, search engines and other sources rather than relying mainly on staff. With the help of about 200 data scientists, analysts and engineers -- internal staff and external contractors -- H&M also is using analytics to look back on purchasing patterns for every item in each of its stores.
In some cases, staff have to be convinced to rely on the numbers rather than gut instincts. "There's an overestimation of one's personal capabilities and taste which is very, very human but can be very, very bad," says Michael Feindt, founder of Blue Yonder, a consultancy that helps retailers use data. "Artificial intelligence is way more unemotional and that's good."

Credit: By Saabira Chaudhuri
