SoftBank Group Corp. and its Vision Fund are closing a $1 billion investment in online sports retail company Fanatics Inc., part of a sizable bet the startup's licensing agreements with the National Football League and others give it the power to compete with e-commerce giant Amazon.com Inc., according to people familiar with the matter.
The investment in the e-commerce company is scheduled to close this month as part of a round of funding that will lift its total valuation to $4.5 billion from $3 billion, the people said. Other investors in this round include the NFL and Major League Baseball, which invested about $95 million and $50 million, respectively, earlier this year.
SoftBank in April made an initial investment of an undisclosed sum, according to a person familiar with the matter, but the bulk of the $1 billion investment comes fromSoftBank's $100 billion Vision Fund. The fund, whose investors include Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi sovereign-wealth funds as well as companies such as Apple Inc. and Qualcomm Inc., is still being completed after gathering $93 billion in an initial closing in May.
In addition to Fanatics, the Vision Fund has committed to invest nearly $3 billion in shared-office-space giant WeWork Cos. and $1 billion in satellite-internet startup OneWeb Ltd., among others.
The Fanatics deal reflects the belief by SoftBank and its Vision Fund that the company has built an e-commerce business that can withstand the pressures of Amazon, the people said.
Still, selling sports jerseys and caps online appears to stray from Vision Fund's stated mission: investing in startups at the forefront of artificial intelligence and machine learning. Investments fitting that mold include the acquisition of Google's robotics division Boston Dynamics and a stake in chip maker Nvidia Corp.
Fanatics has signed long-term licensing agreements through at least 2030 with major U.S. sports leagues, giving it exclusive rights to sell and make licensed merchandise. It also has agreements to manage e-commerce sales and operations for international soccer clubs such as Manchester United and Real Madrid.
The company's revenue last year topped $1.4 billion, up from about $1 billion in 2015. It expects to generate $2.2 billion in revenue this year. About three-quarters of revenue is direct-to-consumer sales from Fanatics.com or the 200-plus team and league sites that the company operates.
Fanatics' revenue pales in comparison to Amazon, which had $94.66 billion in net product sales last year, and eBay Inc., which did nearly $80 billion in gross merchandise volume on its marketplace.
Analysts largely believe those large e-commerce players will continue to grow by acquiring smaller competitors or forcing rivals out of business. Only some niche players are expected to survive.
SoftBank has been burned by previous e-commerce investments. It invested $627 million in India's Snapdeal in 2014 only to see the online marketplace lose ground to Amazon. In May, SoftBank said it took a $1.4 billion loss on investments in its most recent fiscal year, largely from its stakes in Snapdeal and India taxi-hailing app Ola.
Fanatics has tried to differentiate itself from other e-commerce companies by adding manufacturing capabilities. In May, it acquired Majestic, a division of VF Corp., giving it several manufacturing facilities. It is making Under Armour Inc.-branded MLB uniforms for retail and using the factories to accelerate its efforts to bring fast-fashion to sports.
For example, after New York Yankees slugger Aaron Judge won the home-run derby in July, Fanatics began marketing and manufacturing T-shirts celebrating the victory. It was able to do so quickly, people familiar with the company said, because it is an official licensee of MLB and owned the manufacturing facilities to make the shirts.
Other Fanatics investors include Singapore state-owned investment company Temasek Holdings Pte. Ltd., Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., Insight Venture Partners and Andreessen Horowitz.
---
Mayumi Negishi contributed to this article.

Credit: By Tripp Mickle and Liz Hoffman
