Nvidia has become an investor darling because of an artificial-intelligence boom built on its chips. More quietly, the company also has made itself into one of the business world's hottest venture-capital investors.
Nvidia invested in about three dozen startups last year, according to Dealogic figures, more than tripling its activity from the previous year.
The value of its investments in other companies reached about $1.55 billion at the end of January, according to Nvidia's financial statements, up from $300 million a year earlier.
The stakes are about more than betting on a good financial return: The investments give Nvidia a window into developing trends in tech as AI pushes into new industries and solves new problems. They also help the company build out the future ecosystem of businesses that depend on its technology at a time when rivals are attacking its dominance in the field of chips used to train powerful AI models.
Vishal Bhagwati , who leads one of Nvidia's two venture-investment arms, said the uptick in activity wasn't preprogrammed, but flowed naturally from the company's surge to the forefront of the AI boom.
"Our platform grew, and therefore our ecosystem grew," he said. "And there were more and more companies on the platform and as part of the ecosystem that we wanted to support."
Nvidia's growth has been supercharged in the past year as its GPUs, or graphics processing units that are worth tens of thousands of dollars each, have become an essential resource amid Silicon Valley's AI gold rush.
Voracious demand for Nvidia's advanced chips pushed its market value to beyond $2 trillion last month, putting it below only Microsoft and Apple among the most-valuable U.S. companies.
The company's venture investment strategy might offer a window into how Nvidia Chief Executive Jensen Huang thinks about the future. Huang, who signs off on every investment deal, often portrays the tech industry as fast-moving and Nvidia in danger of extinction if it doesn't make early investments in the far-flung future.
Nvidia has made numerous investments in the medical and drug-discovery fields, for example, areas Huang has discussed as ripe for the application of AI.
"We're fairly adept investors," Huang said at a JPMorgan healthcare conference in January, speaking with the chairman of Recursion Pharmaceuticals, a drug-discovery company in which he invested $50 million last year. "Please, if you have a hard time with computation or artificial intelligence, send us an email, we're here for you."
Umesh Padval, a managing director at the venture-capital firm Thomvest Ventures who has known Huang for decades, said the Nvidia investment strategy fits with its co-founder's tendency to make bets based on a vision 10 years into the future. Thomvest participated with Nvidia in a funding round last year for Cohere, a Canadian AI company.
"The customer like Cohere will give them more details about what features are needed in the chips and their [software] to improve their next iteration of chips," he said. "So it's a close cooperation with both of them to try and get the right features and performance."
Avram Miller, who co-founded Intel's venture arm Intel Capital in the 1990s, said Nvidia was following a time-tested model of placing bets on companies that could eventually grow the broader market for its products.
"The ones that succeed will grow Nvidia as a whole, and the value of this will be way greater than the financial returns from the investment," he said. "Nvidia realizes it is not a time for over-analyzing."
Still, venture-capital investing is risky. Some estimates suggest as many as 3 of 4 venture-backed startups fail -- and failures have been rising. Carta, a company that manages share ownership and transfer, said 212 of the startups it tracks shut down in last year's third quarter, the largest number in at least several years.
For startups, the imprimatur of Nvidia can be worth more than money. It is an endorsement from the buzziest company in AI -- a selling point both for customers and other investors.
In mid-February, Nvidia disclosed an investment in SoundHound AI, which specializes in voice-enabled artificial intelligence, sending its shares up 67% in a single day -- one of a number of company stockholdings that complement its venture deals. Analysts cheered the investment from Nvidia as validating SoundHound's technology and brand.
Anne Osdoit, chief executive of French startup Moon Surgical, said her company began working with Nvidia around three years ago, when it was developing chips for the life-sciences field. That relationship eventually led to an investment, and Nvidia has helped the company navigate technical regulatory concerns about the company's surgical robots, she said.
"There's a lot of pragmatism on their side, just, 'Hey, tell us what you need,' " she said.
Nvidia's AI-focused chips have been some of the hottest commodities in tech over the past year. Nvidia executives said they don't give special access to those chips to the companies it invests in.
Still, there are advantages. Recursion, for example, has gotten access to cloud-computing resources through Nvidia following its investment, CEO Christopher Gibson said. There was no requirement that Recursion use Nvidia hardware, he said.
"It's really more about us and them working together to try and push the future of what biopharma looks like and for them to learn and for us to learn from each other," he said.
Nvidia's venture-capital strategy is spearheaded by Bhagwati and Sid Siddeek.
Siddeek oversees an arm called Nventures, which invests in startups to bring in financial returns and to grow the universe of technology that intersects with Nvidia's products. Bhagwati oversees investments that further Nvidia's core strategy.
One of the more notable investments of the past year was in CoreWeave, a company that operates large data centers filled with Nvidia's AI chips and rents their computing power out, putting it in competition with huge cloud-computing companies such as Amazon.com and Microsoft.
"We would not invest in companies that don't use our infrastructure," Bhagwati said. CoreWeave also was helping grow a new industry in which Nvidia's chips are front and center, he said: cloud-computing providers that specialize in AI chips.
Industry executives said Nvidia's venture-capital investments can help it stay ahead of competitors and on top of fast-moving technology trends. Investors typically have access to more information about companies' strategies and business relationships than any chip supplier would.
"You learn what's coming next," said Nick Harris, CEO of Lightmatter, a silicon-photonics startup that counts Google among its investors. "Nvidia does need to see what the trends are and where it's going and what things need to go into your hardware to make it better."
Credit: By Asa Fitch
