WASHINGTON
Order Seeks to Boost
Artificial Intelligence
President Trump is expected to sign an executive order Monday aimed at boosting U.S. development of artificial intelligence -- and at blunting China's momentum in the field.
The order will direct federal agencies to prioritize artificial intelligence in research-and-development missions, officials said. In what could prove more controversial, the president will also direct agencies to expand researchers' access to government data that could sharpen AI applications.
That raises at least the potential for heightened risks of data breaches and is likely to meet scrutiny from privacy advocates.
-- John D. McKinnon
---
NORTH CAROLINA
Rep. Walter Jones,
Trump Critic, Dies
Rep. Walter Jones, a 12-term Republican congressman known for his opposition to the Iraq war and, more recently, his criticism of President Trump, died on Sunday. He was 76 years old.
Mr. Jones was re-elected to his congressional seat in November but didn't return to Washington. The Republican lawmaker became known for his independence from his party. In 2003, he led a fight to rename the french fries and french toast at congressional cafeterias to "Freedom Fries" and "Freedom Toast," in protest of France leading the opposition to the war in Iraq. Mr. Jones became one of few Republicans to criticize Mr. Trump and joined Democrats in calling on the president to release his tax returns.
-- Natalie Andrews
---
WASHINGTON STATE
Pacific Northwest
Braces for More Cold
Pacific Northwest residents who are more accustomed to rain than snow were digging out from a winter storm.
Snowfall amounts were expected to range from 1 to 3 inches through Sunday night. Temperatures were in the teens or single digits Sunday, and low-temperature records could fall, meteorologists said.
-- Associated Press
---
COLORADO
Denver Teachers Plan
Strike Over Base Pay
Denver teachers plan to strike on Monday for the first time in 25 years after failed negotiations with the school district over base pay. The teachers union and Denver Public Schools met Saturday in an attempt to reach a new contract after over a year of talks, but both sides left disappointed.
-- Associated Press
