Pinterest Inc. is boosting its user and ad-revenue numbers at a much faster pace than most of its social-media peers -- and it has artificial intelligence to thank for it.
The image-search site lets people post, or pin, photos and videos into collections called boards. The key to the site's popularity is that it lets you discover ideas through images saved by people and brands you follow -- and suggests other images that might be a good fit for you. You also get ads that follow your interests but carry a "promoted" tag.
If someone is interested in home improvement, for instance, the site will deliver pins and ads showing tools and remodeling ideas, says Brandon Purcell, a principal analyst at tech-research firm Forrester Research Inc.
The process of figuring out what people like and finding appropriate images happens without human intervention. It is handled by an advanced AI called a neural network that makes millions of calculations incredibly quickly to find pins to catch your eye.
Neural networks are driving "nearly 100%" of growth, says Jeremy King, Pinterest's senior vice president of engineering.
"It's like this giant machine-learning engine that is being powered by the people that are [pinning content]," he says.
The neural-network formula drew nearly 480 million people to Pinterest in the first quarter looking for style tips, gardening ideas and more. That number is up 30% from last year's first quarter, while ad sales have more than doubled since 2018. In comparison, U.S. ad sales at YouTube and Facebook, with which Pinterest is often grouped, are up 80% and 56%, respectively, according to eMarketer.
Pinterest is just one of many organizations taking advantage of this technology. For these groups, neural networks are a leap forward in analysis. In the past, it was easier for computers to delve into "structured" data, such as numbers in a spreadsheet, than "unstructured" data such as images. With neural networks, AI can tackle unstructured information more easily, bringing advances in medical imaging, automated voice response and other uses, says Mr. Purcell.
Forrester and International Data Corp. say about a third of companies that use AI in some form have adopted neural networks or will do so within 12 to 18 months.
But the growth of the technology has some critics worried. For one thing, neural networks are often fueled by data on users, which is supposed to be anonymized. However, Nader Henein, a research VP at Gartner Inc., says that the networks are incredibly good at finding patterns. They could, with a large enough data set, theoretically make enough connections to identify people whose data is in a repository.
And the more layers there are in a neural network, the less is known about how it's actually making those connections.
This lack of visibility leads consumers to wonder about "black box" decisions -- neural-network outcomes that a system's owner can't explain, says Stephen Messer, co-founder and vice chairman of AI company Collective[i].
Pinterest says users share information about themselves and their interests through profiles and pins, knowing the company will, with their permission, use that data to find content that interests them. The company says it takes steps to protect that data, but declined to provide specifics.
The power of neural networks lies in how they analyze information, and apply those lessons.
The systems are composed of artificial neurons designed to mimic the way human neurons transmit and process information. They ingest large amounts of data and use it to learn about the features of a specific object.
At Pinterest, neural networks crunch mountains of data about users, such as the boards of people they follow and what pins they click on and save. At the same time, the networks look at ad data on users, such as what content gets them to click on ads. The neural networks learn users' interests and can serve up content that is increasingly relevant.
Let's say a homeowner is thinking of installing a bathroom floor and pins flooring ideas, such as images depicting tiles. Pinterest needs to figure out what the user is pinning and what those images signify. A "convolutional" neural network -- which analyzes images -- will scrutinize the pixels in the tile pins and classify them by, say, material, size and color.
The system will match those attributes to other pinned images of tiles on the site with similar features. Now it's got some attributes of the tiles figured out. Next up: figuring out what the tiles are for.
The neural network looks at those images of tiles and the other images in those pictures. If the network spots something like a bathtub, it might determine the tiles are for bathroom flooring.
The network then needs to find images to show the user that have to do with bathroom flooring, as well as related images. A Pinterest "graph" neural network -- which looks for different types of relationships on the site -- analyzes the user's behavior. It looks at pins the user searches for and saves, and how he or she organizes them into boards.
The system also analyzes the boards of other people with related interests, to make related recommendations.
From there, the AI may spot a pattern: For instance, people interested in bathroom flooring often shopped for a vanity by using one of Pinterest's shopping pins.
Likewise, neural networking analyzes its advertisers' pins, classifies the objects in their ads, and shows the user images with a style and price to match the user. A homeowner may be paired with ads from a small retailer offering a rustic-looking bathroom vanity.
Pinterest's neural networks make associations a user wouldn't normally make. Users installing a new bathroom floor might not even think about buying a vanity until an ad popped up showing a unit that fits their interests.
Floor & Decor, which sells hard-surface flooring and related accessories, says that when Pinterest users look for bathroom-floor tile, a Floor & Decor ad may appear that includes a vanity. Users "may not realize that we carry vanities as well," says Andrea Striebel, vice president of marketing. "So, it's a great way for us to tell the whole picture of everything we have to offer."
---
Mr. McCormick is deputy editor, WSJ Pro Artificial Intelligence in New York. He can be reached at john.mccormick@wsj.com.
Credit: By John McCormick
