The answer is: This "Jeopardy!" victor is the Bronze winner in this year's Wall Street Journal Technology Innovation Awards.
And the correct question: What is IBM's Watson?
Watson is a supercomputer-based question-answering (or, perhaps more accurately, the answer-questioning) system developed by International Business Machines Corp.'s Watson Research Center. Using a series of algorithms, the system can analyze the meaning of natural-language questions and deliver an answer -- after measuring the probable accuracy of the various alternatives -- within seconds.
The system was fast enough and accurate enough to defeat two "Jeopardy!" grand champions in a televised contest last February.
Judges for the Innovation Awards praised Watson for overcoming the immense challenges involved in parsing natural-language questions and providing answers across such vast domains of knowledge.
"Although Watson's semantic comprehension would occasionally still miss the meaning of complex human statements, its net ability is astounding and a true step forward in machine learning," says Robert Drost, an Innovation Awards judge and founder and chief executive of Pluribus Networks Inc., a virtualization-technology company.
A computer that can take a normally phrased question and deliver a single correct answer -- not a list of a million Web pages -- has long been the goal of researchers. Such a system could aid physicians in making complex diagnoses or help executives make better decisions by quickly analyzing vast amounts of data.
A team led by David Ferrucci, a researcher at IBM, began in 2007 to tackle the problem. Their goal from the start was to develop a computer that could win at "Jeopardy!", which offered an especially challenging format for a question-answering system.
The show's puzzles cover a broad range of human knowledge and rely on puns, false clues and other less-than-straightforward queries. The game also requires a quick response. And the answers have to be correct, since contestants lose money if they give a wrong answer.
Behind Watson's performance is a purpose-built supercomputer made up of 90 servers capable of performing 80 trillion calculations a second and a database built up from encyclopedias, dictionaries, novels, news articles and other texts.
When given a question, Watson breaks it down into parts of speech, proper names and other components, and then analyzes the relationships between the words based on sets of rules. To determine the correct answer, Watson -- named for IBM founder Thomas J. Watson (in case the question ever comes up) -- runs thousands of algorithms to generate possible solutions. It then ranks the answers on the basis of their probable accuracy; for the show, it was programmed not to respond unless it was at least 50% sure of the answer.
"The single breakthrough is that there was no single breakthrough," says Mr. Ferrucci. "We solved this with a broad and diverse collection of different algorithmic techniques."
Since winning the "Jeopardy!" contest in February, IBM has announced a partnership with WellPoint Inc. to create a Watson-based health-information system. The system could be used to help physicians review patients' ailments and suggest possible diagnoses and treatment options.
Credit: By Michael Totty
