WASHINGTON -- A former academic mentor of the man charged with stealing U.S. government secrets described Harold "Hal" Martin as intensely focused and burdened by a sense that his insights weren't appreciated.
Roy Rada, a professor of information systems at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County until he retired in January, said he served as an academic mentor to Mr. Martin about a decade ago, when they worked together for several months. Mr. Rada, in an email to The Wall Street Journal and two other news organizations, said Mr. Martin was "highly motivated" and had an "intense personal and professional interest in the post-traumatic stress disorder."
"He believed that my department's eye-tracker could be used to diagnose earlier and more reliably than existing techniques whether or not a person was suffering from PTSD," Mr. Rada wrote.
Mr. Martin had been hopeful he could secure enough funding to finance his graduate work on PTSD but wasn't able to, Mr. Rada recounted. Mr. Martin then decided to work with another mentor at UMBC, and Mr. Rada said he and his former mentee "lost touch."
Mr. Rada wasn't Mr. Martin's first mentor at UMBC, and he wouldn't be his last. Mr. Martin's LinkedIn page says he started his Ph.D. work at UMBC in 2007 but it remained incomplete. "Trying to finish that dissertation," he wrote on his page. He described himself as a "programmer and scientist."
The Federal Bureau of Investigation in August arrested Mr. Martin at his home in Glen Burnie, Md., and the Justice Department unsealed charges against him on Wednesday alleging that he stole classified secrets. Officials are still trying to determine what Mr. Martin planned to do with the classified information he allegedly took home with him.
Lisa Monaco, the White House's top homeland-security and counterterrorism official, said at an event hosted by the Washington Post on Thursday that "this is the type of activity we take exceptionally seriously, the protection of national security and classified information."
Mr. Martin worked at government contractor Booz Allen Hamilton until he was fired in August after his arrest. He worked inside the National Security Agency and the Pentagon on some of the government's most secretive programs, according to people familiar with his work.
Mr. Martin's LinkedIn page doesn't mention his affiliation with Booz Allen or the NSA, but it does say he worked "for various cyber related initiatives across DoD [the Department of Defense] and the IC," or intelligence community. It says he worked on "offensive cyber issues," which are considered some of the military's top secrets.
He appears to have been a contractor and consultant for much of the past 16 years, since he left the Navy. His LinkedIn page says he was "with a very good firm of top-notch people."
Mr. Rada said Mr. Martin's military service included time spent "in the wars in the Middle East."
Mr. Martin's lawyer, Jim Wyda, said the criminal charges are "mere allegations" and that "there is no evidence that Hal Martin intended to betray his country."
Mr. Martin appears to have had a relationship with UMBC since 2007. Mr. Rada described Mr. Martin as "thoughtful, sensitive, and dedicated."
"While he had a commanding physical presence, emotionally he suffered from the feeling that his relatively special situation was inadequately appreciated," he said, without expanding on what that special situation might be.
He said the news of Mr. Martin's arrest came as a surprise.
Mr. Martin's research page at UMBC describes him as a Ph.D. candidate with interest in a constellation of subjects known collectively as CAMBRIC: cloud computing, artificial intelligence, mobility, big data, robotics, Internet of Things, and cybersecurity.
"My goal is to advance state of the art in several areas of computing practices in the public/private sector by pursuing research and engineering solutions to CAMBRIC issues," the LinkedIn page says.
Credit: By Damian Paletta
