Cancer can blow up even the best-laid plans.
More than two million people in the U.S. are expected to be diagnosed with the disease this year, and there are more than 18 million survivors.
More strikingly, an increasing number of patients are working-age people, as the risk of some cancers has risen for younger generations. Breast cancer is the most common for patients under age 50, but gastrointestinal cancers are rising the fastest.
These patients face challenges including managing their careers, health insurance and fertility. Here are some of their stories.
Not many of the patients coming in to have their teeth cleaned by Amanda King know she has stage-4 breast cancer. When co-workers or patients learn about the 38-year-old dental hygienist's diagnosis, they are often surprised and comment on how good she looks.
"I try to push through and not let my patients know that I'm struggling," King said.
Nearly six million working-age people between ages 20 and 64 had a history of cancer as of 2022. Like King, many of them must hold on to their jobs for access to health insurance. About 40% of working cancer survivors report having no paid sick leave.
King battles aching tiredness and stomach issues while constantly on her feet and tending to patients. The Tulsa, Okla., resident has only 10 sick or vacation days a year and tries to schedule her own appointments on her days off.
Her employer-tied health insurance covers her local care, but the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, where she gets scans every two months, isn't part of her insurance network. That leaves her with around $15,000 a year in out-of-pocket expenses, including lodging and travel to Texas.
"There's always the scary thought of, 'There might be a time when I can't work,'" said King, who moved back in with her mother to help lower her monthly costs.
King is taking an antibody-drug conjugate, which works to deliver chemotherapy with more precision and fewer side effects. But it still comes with fatigue and nausea. A tumor gave her a hoarse voice and cough for months before surgery resolved it.
"I try to live life as normally as I can," King said.
Michael Riotto was in a financial bind after he was diagnosed with the blood cancer multiple myeloma at age 51.
Treatments kept the Jamison, Pa., man alive. Some years, even with his employer-sponsored insurance, Riotto had $12,000 to $14,000 in out-of-pocket medical costs. His income as a department-store manager made him ineligible for aid from charities meant to help with costs. Many patients earn too much income for such aid yet still are unable to afford the cost of being sick.
He and his wife cut out spending on things such as family vacations and new bicycles for his two children.
"We literally just scraped to survive to keep me alive," said Riotto, now 64.
Six years after his diagnosis, long before retirement age, Riotto stopped working because of the bone pain. He began to collect disability insurance but only for a portion of his prior salary. The loss of income eventually made him eligible for grants from nonprofits including the PAN Foundation and the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, which cover about half of his continuing out-of-pocket costs for things such as blood work and imaging scans.
Many patient-assistance charities have limited funding, so they open funds for new applications or renewals only a few times a year. One $5,000 grant to Riotto expired in March and he wasn't able to apply for a renewal until July. Riotto has become skilled at navigating the charity-fund landscape, and he now volunteers helping other patients.
Victoria Seamon had always felt certain that she would have a baby. That was before her stage-3 breast cancer diagnosis at the age of 34. She was still clawing her way out of a financial hole -- student loans, a car loan and credit card debt -- when she was given a choice: pay $10,000 to freeze her eggs or risk forfeiting her fertility to start cancer treatment.
Seamon's insurance wouldn't cover it, and she couldn't afford it. She reluctantly started treatment without preserving her eggs.
"It was just this terrible reality of me losing a dream," said Seamon, now 38 and an adolescent therapist living in White Bear Lake, Minn. "You imagine what they might look like and all the things you could do with your kid."
Fertility preservation is an increasing concern in oncology, as more young people get diagnosed. Some 18 states have passed legislation requiring insurers to cover fertility preservation procedures for cancer patients. Minnesota isn't one of them.
Seamon had a mastectomy. She sat for infusions of doxorubicin, dubbed "The Red Devil" for both its color and its side effects, including infertility risk. Her hair started to fall out and she shaved her head. Seamon's partner shaved her own head in solidarity. They nicknamed the tumor "Tina," saying Seamon would kick its butt.
In 2021, she was declared cancer-free. But to prevent its return, she needs hormone therapy for the next seven years, by which time she will be in her mid-40s. Getting pregnant while on hormone therapy isn't recommended because it can harm the baby, so that means she likely won't be able to have biological children.
Some early-stage breast-cancer patients can pause hormone therapy and safely give birth, data show. The chance of success is higher if the patient is younger and freezes her eggs first.
"The messages that I was hearing led me to believe that it wasn't an option at all," said Seamon, who wishes her care team had asked her about family planning sooner. But Seamon still has hope: She's open to adoption or fostering.
Renee Firato had finally settled into a career as a preschool teacher when she found out she had cancer a second time. This diagnosis would not only threaten her health but also uproot her career and livelihood.
"I've had two cancer diagnoses in my life, and I felt the financial blow of both of those," said Firato, 40, who lives in Pleasanton, Calif.
Nearly half of working-age people who have had cancer report a change of employment after diagnosis, including long-term leave or a change in career trajectory. Many lose income. Those who lose their jobs also often lose their health insurance.
Firato had to go on medical leave for three months, at a 60% pay cut. Then the Covid-19 pandemic hit, and Firato was laid off.
Medicare and Medicaid would cover most of her treatment -- a mastectomy, chemotherapy and radiation. But Firato needed to pay for rent, car insurance and utilities. Her $4,000 in savings quickly vanished. At one of her lowest points, she had as little as $2 in her checking account.
"I've had to call my landlord to beg them for a couple more weeks to make rent," Firato said.
Firato's first experience with cancer -- acute myeloid leukemia -- had ruined her senior year of high school, sending her in and out of the hospital for months for treatment that included a bone-marrow transplant. Firato spent the next year in isolation due to her immunocompromised status. Her plans to attend college and study marine biology were nixed, and she later struggled to hold down a job.
"Where does someone work after they had a bone-marrow transplant and they have a brand new immune system?" Firato said.
Since her second bout with cancer -- likely a result of the leukemia treatments -- Firato has gotten some financial relief. A group called Family Reach paid some of her bills and set her up with an adviser. Friends and family started a GoFundMe.
Firato found a job working part time helping breast-cancer patients with fitting a prosthesis after surgery, a process she went through.
Colon cancer marred Shambi Imari Broome's entrepreneurial dreams.
Broome, who lives in Columbia, S.C., had high hopes for her website-design business and a computer-science education nonprofit she founded. The 48-year-old had plans to boost web-design profit and get more grants and contracts for her nonprofit in the new year.
Then, a screening colonoscopy detected colon cancer in December 2022. "My first thought was, 'I'm gonna die, how do I tell my kids?'" she said.
Small businesses might not survive if a founder takes time off or finds it tough to work when ill. Self-employed people who get cancer experience steeper losses of income and slowdowns in business than entrepreneurs with other chronic diseases, a study published in the journal Stress and Health in July found.
A few weeks after the diagnosis, Broome had surgery to remove the tumor and part of her colon, followed by months of chemotherapy to try to eradicate traces of the cancer. Mostly the side effects of chemotherapy were mild.
At first, she kept working -- she designed new websites, handled social-media strategy for clients and proceeded with plans of an artificial-intelligence summer camp for children via her nonprofit.
But a bout of Covid-19 in the summer of 2023 knocked her out of commission, on top of the chemo side effects. She felt extreme fatigue and brain fog, and it became much more difficult to work.
"I was behind. I was missing emails," she said.
Some clients took their business elsewhere and Broome raised only a fraction of the funds needed for a matching grant for her nonprofit.
"It became this whirlwind of feeling like a failure, thinking of all the people, funders and supporters and everyone that I've let down because I got cancer," she said.
A November PayPal statement showed income from many of her clients was down nearly 70% from a year earlier. She slashed expenses, ending the nonprofit's lease in a co-working space and cutting out certain software services for her business.
After taking a month off to reset, she scaled back her workload and is relying more on contractors.
Her cancer is at bay, but she is still dealing with the financial toll. Though insurance covered most of her treatment, she owes about $8,000 out of pocket.
She tells collection agencies when they call: "I know I owe it. Whenever I can pay, I will."
Credit: By Brianna Abbott and Peter Loftus
