Like most large enterprises, the Defense Department needs to strike a balance between meeting immediate demands and anticipating future ones -- in business parlance, operations vs. investment. These days the Pentagon is getting the balance wrong, reflecting the current administration's priorities.
Jumping from one crisis to another, the U.S. is failing to invest enough to meet its most important defense challenge: China's growing technological and military power. As a result, there is a risk that China will acquire advanced capabilities to target U.S. forces, bases and satellites, endangering American interests and allies in the Pacific.
Numbers tell the story. U.S. defense spending rose following Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, and the Pentagon has requested $850 billion in its 2025 budget. Much of this money will go toward operations in Europe, the Western Pacific and the Middle East. That isn't surprising given events in Ukraine, Taiwan and Gaza. But it also means that the U.S. isn't investing enough in military research and development. Operational needs are taking precedence over strategic ones.
That isn't to say that today's hot spots don't merit support. But the need to outperform China is being overlooked. Timing is critical. We are experiencing a wave of new technologies of enormous military potency: artificial intelligence, quantum computing, chip and battery design, and new space systems. The U.S. has to win this competition.
And the U.S. can win. While the Chinese government is mainly responsible for developing the country's technology, the locomotive of American invention is the private sector. America's free-enterprise system is larger and more innovative than China's state capitalism.
Yet while Beijing can shovel money and talent directly into the People's Liberation Army for quick results, it takes years for U.S. national defense to benefit from private innovation. To compete with China in military technology, the U.S. government could turn to direct government spending, increasing defense spending by, say, $50 billion to $100 billion each year. This would mean a Pentagon budget of roughly $1 trillion, dwarfing military spending by China, Russia and all other U.S. adversaries. It also would increase the federal budget deficit and interest obligations. From the Cold War, we know that profligate American military spending can aggravate inflation.
There is a way, however, that the U.S. can invest sufficiently to outperform China in military technology without neglecting current defense requirements: alliances. Europe is a case in point. America's allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization have said they will spend $380 billion on defense this year. Russian ground, air and naval forces have performed poorly in Ukraine and would be overmatched in a war with NATO. Fossil-fuel exports have stabilized the Russian economy at around $2 trillion, equal to about 7% of America's. But because of the demands of the war in Ukraine for soldiers and rubles, Russia now faces rising inflation and sagging productivity.
European allies also have top-notch naval and commando capabilities to augment American efforts to counter Iran and its proxies. As for the Western Pacific, the U.S. can look increasingly to Japan, which is mounting a major military upgrade and now is willing to help contain China in the region. It is time to capitalize on this so that the U.S. can commit more to its strategic competition with China.
What, then, would the Pentagon do with additional billions earmarked for military technology? While America's private high-tech companies are poised to ride the wave of science and innovation, the Defense Department and other government agencies must make their markets more inviting. Pentagon business reform has become more focused lately, but it still takes five years or so for promising private innovations to produce actual military capabilities. Entrepreneurs require confidence that successful R&D will be rewarded with major contracts, sooner rather than later.
America's need to shift resources to strategic investment is urgent. It is time to recognize that increased reliance on allies and the use of the private sector can enable the U.S. to deny China a military-technological edge -- without neglecting today's needs.
---
Mr. Gompert served as acting director of national intelligence, 2009-10.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Next-Gen Weapons Won't Win Today's Wars" -- WSJ June 11, 2024)
Credit: By David C. Gompert
