Until last year, Madelyn Machado, 33 years old, worked for Meta Platforms Inc. Except she says she didn't really work at all.
Ms. Machado, who held a position as a recruiter, said that after joining the company in September 2021, she spent much of her time in meetings that didn't accomplish anything, and that the parent of Facebook and Instagram had too many recruiters and not enough work for them to do.
"We just don't hire anybody and, like, we still get paid," she said she was told by other recruiters in a viral TikTok video documenting her experience. She added that she was paid $190,000 a year and was told she wasn't expected to hire anyone in her first year, given that she was still learning the ropes. Meta declined to comment.
In recent weeks, other former tech workers have posted similar videos, racking up millions of views. They say they collected paychecks from large tech companies without doing much.
Such confessions -- which have drawn plenty of criticism online -- aren't surprising, executives and industry professionals say. Tech companies that boomed during the pandemic were flush with cash, they say, and snapped up workers to build a deep bench and hoard talent from competitors, even if those workers weren't being fully utilized.
"They were hiring ahead of demand," said Vijay Govindarajan, professor at Dartmouth's Tuck School of Business. A shortage of tech talent at the time, he said, contributed to a sense of urgency that fueled recent hiring sprees. When there's a war for talent, "you want to hire ahead of others," he said. Other sectors such as the finance industry in the early 2000s, he said, similarly overhired during periods of fast growth, leaving some workers without enough to do.
In an interview, Ms. Machado, who is based in Tampa, Fla., and has reinvented herself as a career coach, said that during a typical day at Meta, she might log on at 11 a.m., when her West Coast colleagues began their day, sit in meetings from noon until 3:30 p.m., and then check recruiting efforts on LinkedIn for an hour before logging off.
"I do think a lot of these companies wanted there to be work, but there wasn't enough," she said of her six months at Meta. The company terminated her, she said, after reprimanding her for posting on TikTok, where she offers career advice, saying her videos posed a conflict of interest.
Ms. Machado said she now has seven employees working for her coaching business. She said she landed her Meta role after three short interviews and was offered a $70,000 raise to leave her previous role at Microsoft Corp.
Since the start of the year, tech companies have laid off more than 168,000 people, according to Layoffs.fyi, a website that tracks job cuts. Many tech executives, including Meta chief Mark Zuckerberg, have issued mea culpas for overhiring and their mistaken belief that pandemic shifts to online spending would be more permanent.
Keith Rabois, an early PayPal executive and venture capitalist, has accused large tech companies of seeing hiring as a "vanity metric," deliberately hiring talent to keep them from working for other companies. Mr. Rabois made the remarks at a recent event held by the investment banking advisory firm Evercore.
Some laid-off workers agree. "They were just kind of, like, hoarding us like Pokemon cards," a former Meta worker hired in April 2022 said in a recent TikTok video about her experience at the company. In an interview, Britney Levy, 35, said she was hired as part of a yearlong training program dedicated to recruiting diverse talent, and she was frustrated to receive only one assignment shortly before being laid off in November.
"I was like, am I being set up for failure?" she said.
Patrick Moloney, who co-leads the global technology practice at the advisory firm Willis Towers Watson PLC, said that forecasting hiring needs was difficult during the pandemic. For tech companies, it can be prudent to make long-term bets on roles that are especially hard to hire for, such as software engineers, or in in-demand fields such as artificial intelligence, he said. The companies expect that strategy will eventually pay off, even if there is lag time between hiring an employee and giving them enough work to fully occupy their time.
Others blamed what they view as a permissive corporate culture in Silicon Valley that creates environments where it is possible to stay employed without working hard. Thomas Siebel, head of the software company C3.ai Inc., said tech employers' embrace of remote work has made matters worse.
"People were job-hopping from jobs where they were doing nothing, working from home, to another where they were doing nothing, working from home, and got paid 15% more," he said. Employees at Mr. Siebel's company are expected to work full time from the office, which he called essential.
Credit: By Te-Ping Chen
