'I would like Google to be broken up into eight or 10 different monopolies," declared tech investor Roger McNamee earlier this year. Machine-learning pioneer Yoshua Bengio called Big Tech's size and power "dangerous for democracy." Jonathan Taplin, former director of USC's Annenberg Innovation Lab, has called for government antitrust action. These are not dissident voices, but members of a growing chorus.
They are united in the belief that the large market shares of a few tech companies stifle competition, harming consumers and the country. What they fail to articulate is how the breakups would actually work, and how antitrust action would affect the companies and the broader tech marketplace.
Here's the problem: Breaking up tech companies means that the government would have to split up their teams and their underlying technology. It would also require a legal and regulatory system to keep each targeted company separate from the others' markets. These restrictions would pose challenges for any company. But for highly integrated tech firms, they'd be a death sentence.
Google and Facebook rely on flexible teams that cross the normal divisional boundaries to solve problems. These multipurpose teams drive their firms' productivity; breaking them apart would risk killing the golden goose. By encouraging coordination among their internal departments, the tech titans have developed complex and constantly shifting organizational webs. This structure would frustrate any Standard Oil-style trustbusting effort because there are so few natural breaks within the companies. Splitting up these firms would require government officials to go cubicle by cubicle -- a difficult and draconian move.
Trustbusting would also require breaking up the companies' technologies. Facebook has developed its own suite of software to address unique problems dealing with vast troves of data: BigPipe to load pages faster, Haystack to store photos efficiently, and Unicorn to search its social data, among others.
Google's back end is also tightly integrated. The Google File System stores massive data sets; Spanner distributes stored data across multiple servers; and Dremel enables effective queries.
Where do you cut these shared technologies when splitting up the companies? Who gets what?
Ev Ehrlich, a former undersecretary of commerce for economic affairs, has proposed breaking up big tech companies by spinning off their ad networks into a new company. But this move would set the industry back two decades.
Tech platforms struggled to raise revenue until they developed large, national advertising networks. "We really couldn't figure out the business model," remembers early Google investor Michael Moritz in a 2005 book on the company's beginnings. Google turned its first profit only after it cultivated a dominant advertising position. Tearing apart its advertising base would destroy its value.
Breaking up these companies would also stymie innovation. The new firms formed from the titans' components would be barred from straying into each other's services, but many would likely be unprofitable on their own.
YouTube, for example, is widely believed to be unprofitable, but it is currently supported by Google's other operations. In addition to the streaming-video service, Google sustains many other unprofitable services, such as a broadband network, self-driving cars, and artificial-intelligence research. Facebook also uses its profits to fund more-advanced technologies, such as virtual reality.
Economics professors from Stanford and MIT have shown that getting productive ideas to the market has become more expensive. So rather than limiting innovation as their critics allege, large tech companies have picked up the slack, using their size and profitability to underwrite projects that might fail on their own. Antitrust action would require government bureaucrats to decide if these services should continue to exist, and then stay abreast of nearly every decision the new companies make.
The breakup of AT&T in 1982 provides an ominous example. The split yielded a two-part system: AT&T was limited strictly to long-distance service, while seven regional "Baby Bells" covered local calls. The regional companies later expanded into the nascent cellular market, but because they couldn't operate freely between markets, cell service remained a largely local affair for years. Only after many restrictions were waived with the 1996 Telecommunications Act did cell service take off.
Breaking up Big Tech would not create more competition or better options for consumers. Instead, it would destroy value for the companies and their customers.
---
Mr. Rinehart is director of technology and innovation policy at the American Action Forum.

Credit: By William Rinehart
