Long-term bond yields hit a 16-year high, weighing on stocks already pressured by the conflict in Gaza and corporate earnings results.
The 10-year U.S. Treasury yield rose to 4.902%, the highest closing level since July 2007. The S&P 500 fell 1.3%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average shed 1%. The Nasdaq Composite lost 1.6%.
A swift climb in bond yields has dented enthusiasm for stocks in recent weeks. Investors are also monitoring the Israel-Hamas war that threatens to disrupt the global energy market. A mixed bag of corporate earnings results further complicates the outlook. .
"The market is walking this tightrope," said George Cipolloni, portfolio manager at Penn Mutual Asset Management. "There's a lot of risk in front of it."
A string of hotter-than-expected economic reports in the past several weeks has prompted investors to weigh whether the Federal Reserve may lift interest rates again this year to cool inflation.
Some Fed officials have signaled the run-up in long-term yield could substitute for a further central-bank rate increase. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia President Patrick Harker told The Wall Street Journal he thinks the central bank can likely wait until early next year to see how the economy is responding to a rapid climb in interest rates before lifting further.
Traders are pricing in a roughly 37% probability that the central bank will raise its benchmark rate in its final policy meeting of the year, up from about 26% a week ago, according to CME Group's federal-funds futures.
"Investors are very focused on . . . determining the next course of action for the Fed," said Todd Jablonski, global head of multiasset and quantitative investing at Principal Asset Management.
Morgan Stanley's stock fell 6.8% after the bank posted a drop in quarterly net income, with investment banking and trading still in a slump. Shares of some regional banks, such as U.S. Bancorp, fell after several lenders reported being squeezed by higher interest and other expenses.
About 11% of the companies in the S&P 500 have reported third-quarter earnings so far, according to FactSet. Of those, about 81% have topped analyst expectations, compared with the five-year average of 77%.
Airline stocks pulled back after United Airlines cut its earnings forecast for the end of the year. Shares of United Airlines fell 9.7% in its worst one-day percentage decline since July 2022. Delta Air Lines and American Airlines also fell.
Semiconductor stocks dropped for a second day after the U.S. said it would significantly constrict exports of artificial-intelligence chips, making it harder for U.S. companies to sell products to the Chinese market. Nvidia lost 4% and Intel shed 1.2%.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 fell 1.05%. At midday Thursday, Japan's Nikkei 225 and South Korea's Kospi were down 1.7%, while Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 1.6% and the Shanghai Composite was down 0.8%. S&P 500 futures fell 0.1%.
Credit: By Hannah Miao
