In a new effort to combat global crimes and terrorism, banks around the world increasingly are conducting joint investigations that rely on sharing the details of suspicious transactions and the accounts that are involved.
Authorities in the U.S. and elsewhere have lauded the effort, but it has raised concern among privacy advocates, who worry it could lead to some people or companies being penalized without due process.
In one example of the cooperative efforts, seven of the world's largest banks have been working together to facilitate the sharing of data such as the identities of account holders and the dates and other details of certain financial transactions. This has allowed them to experiment with ways to analyze large amounts of transactions data using artificial-intelligence tools as they try to uncover activities like money laundering or terrorist financing.
Created in 2015, this group includes J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., Citigroup Inc., Bank of America Corp., Wells Fargo & Co., U.S. Bancorp, HSBC Holdings PLC and Standard Chartered PLC.
"We are working together with other banks and with law enforcement around the world to share information in a more open way," says Colin Bell, HSBC's group head of financial-crime risk. "We play an active or founding member role in partnerships in six countries," he says, adding that together these efforts have "contributed to dozens of arrests and the seizure of millions of dollars of suspected criminal funds."
The banks declined to publicly discuss the details of their cooperation under this group.
Banks in the U.S. were given the legal authority to share limited amounts of information with each other, regulators and law-enforcement authorities by the 2001 Patriot Act, a package of measures designed to combat terrorism. But such coordination has spread significantly in recent years.
Regulators over the past decade have encouraged banks to form information-sharing groups by signaling that the Patriot Act's protections for such cooperation extend to dozens of suspected underlying crimes that can produce tainted money -- including weapons or human trafficking as well as more benign activities like food-stamp fraud.
"We are highly encouraged by, and supportive of, the private sector's willingness to engage in this type of exchange," Sigal Mandelker, the Treasury's under secretary for terrorism and financial intelligence, told a Senate panel in January. But privacy advocates worry that banks may be stretching their authority to share sensitive customer data, unnecessarily exposing personal information, leading to the possibility of individuals or companies being penalized over the mere suspicion of wrongdoing.
"My concern with this program is what customer information is being shared," says Shana O'Toole, president and founder of the Due Process Institute, a Washington nonprofit that acts as an advocate for what it considers fairness in the legal system. "Efficiency is great, but constitutional protections are mandated."
Traditionally, individual banks have relied on markers such as the size of transactions or names of people on government sanctions lists to flag suspicious activity, an approach that can result in many so-called false positives, or warnings about transactions that turn out to be entirely legitimate. But now banks are using sophisticated new technologies in analyzing the information they're sharing. Artificial intelligence allows them to detect patterns in data that wouldn't otherwise be readily apparent, and sharing information gives the technology more data to work with. For instance, a single bank may be unable to tell whether a company is receiving an atypical amount of income given its size and the business it's in. But by extrapolating from a broader set of data, an artificial-intelligence application could spot an outlier. "What you would get with information-sharing is smarter positives," says Greg Baer, president of the Clearing House, a trade group for large banks.
As information moves more smoothly between financial institutions, the government could also have an easier time obtaining customer data. Reports often filed by banks in conjunction with information sharing can be used by law enforcement in investigations without any need for judicial approval, though a subpoena is needed for the information to be used as court evidence.
There are "all sorts of underlying criminal activities that generate proceeds and therefore potentially tie things to money laundering. So we do look at that broadly," says Jamal El-Hindi, deputy director of the Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, which collects and analyzes financial intelligence. "At the same time, we don't want financial institutions to take that so broadly that their purpose in information sharing is not related to countering money laundering and terrorist financing." Information sharing, Mr. El-Hindi adds, can produce more-targeted investigations. "The more that they can look at some of those things together, the better they're able to piece together some of the puzzles of this criminal activity," he says.
---
Ms. Clozel is a Wall Street Journal reporter in Washington. She can be reached at lalita.clozel@wsj.com.

Credit: By Lalita Clozel
