A Tesla Model S abruptly shifted lanes and braked on the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge last Thanksgiving, causing an eight-car pileup that injured nine, including a toddler. The driver claimed to have been using the car's full self-driving function, which appears to have malfunctioned. Complaints of "phantom braking" even when Teslas aren't "self-driving" have been piling up too.
Of the 518 complaints filed with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration for Tesla's 2022 Model 3, 438 concern faulty "forward collision avoidance" systems, designed to brake automatically if drivers get too close to pedestrians or vehicles. The NHTSA database likely underestimates such incidents, because many people aren't aware of the complaint-filing process.
Tesla drivers have said their cars pump the brakes when they shouldn't -- say, when a plastic bag blows across the road or when traffic approaches in a two-way lane. Tesla didn't respond to a request for comment.
"While driving on the highway at highway speeds, our Tesla Model 3 frequently will perform a phantom braking action, presumably due to incorrectly sensing a collision," one driver complained. "Thankfully, so far the traffic has been light on the freeways. Otherwise, this could've easily caused a wreck. This has happened to us approximately 20 times in the past two days." The NHSTA has been investigating automatic-braking glitches, which have also reportedly occurred in Nissans and Honda Accords.
Cars rolling off assembly lines today are often described as computers on wheels. Yet typically when computers freeze or crash, people don't die. Automatic-braking technology has the potential to improve road safety, but not before engineers smooth out bugs. Yet the NHTSA is rushing out the technology with reckless abandon.
The agency last month proposed a 288-page rule that would require automakers to outfit new vehicles with automatic emergency braking technology more advanced and reliable than is currently achievable. Talk about a car crash waiting to happen. Why would the agency do this? If your cynical suspicion is that the Biden administration is seeking to pay off its trial-lawyer allies, you may be on to something.
Automakers in 2016 committed to making automatic emergency braking that works at low speeds -- 12 to 25 mph -- a standard feature in cars by September 2022. But many have struggled to perfect the technology because of the complexity of software systems that rely on radar sensors and cameras trained by machine learning.
Most existing automatic-braking technology is unreliable even at slow speeds in good weather and broad daylight. It hardly works at all in higher speeds and in dimmer light.
Only five of 11 new vehicles that NHTSA tested in 2020 avoided collision with an adult mannequin in at least one of multiple tests at speeds up to 37.3 mph in daylight. That means less than half of vehicles could brake at least 16% of the time in good conditions. Only one vehicle consistently avoided impact in daylight and lower-beam conditions and only at low speeds.
Nevertheless, the NHTSA wants to mandate automatic braking that can operate at speeds up to 62 mph and avoid hitting pedestrians at night. The effects could prove devastating. Phantom braking on a busy street with cars traveling 30 mph might cause a fender-bender. On a busy highway it could cause a pile-up. The jolt could also result in whiplash and more-serious injury -- all of which means more business for plaintiff attorneys.
Plaintiffs have filed class actions against Nissan and Tesla over alleged phantom braking. Under the proposed new rule, attorneys could sue automakers for collisions and injuries caused by glitches and for those that the technology is supposed to but doesn't prevent. The more damage the rule causes, the more potential liability.
It isn't surprising that plaintiff attorney allies such as Public Citizen and Consumer Watchdog have been pressing for the mandate. Illinois Sen. Dick Durbin, one of the trial lawyers' best friends in Congress, slipped a provision requiring the NHTSA to write a rule requiring automatic emergency braking into the 2021 bipartisan infrastructure bill. Republicans got rolled again.
The rule was midwifed by NHTSA chief counsel Ann Carlson, who orchestrated environmental lawsuits against businesses before joining the Biden administration. President Biden withdrew her nomination to lead the agency last month amid opposition from moderate Democrats owing to those lawsuits and aggressive fuel-economy mandates she has spearheaded at the agency.
Yet electric vehicles may be making roads less safe. One reason is that they're significantly heavier than old-fashioned cars and thus cause more damage in collisions. They also accelerate faster, increasing the risk of rear-end collisions. "As heavy EVs proliferate, their weight may be a drag on safety," the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety notes.
But who cares about safety? More injuries and totalled cars means more money for Democrats' trial-lawyer friends.
(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Mandating New Technology" -- WSJ June 15, 2023)
Credit: By Allysia Finley
