China invades Taiwan and migrants surge across the U.S.-Mexico border in a video depicting the aftermath of President Biden's re-election. In a series of images, former President Donald Trump is pursued on foot and apprehended by uniformed police officers. Another photo shows the Pentagon engulfed in flames following an explosion.
The common denominator among these scenes? They are all fake. Rapidly evolving artificial intelligence is making it easier to generate sophisticated videos and images that can deceive viewers and spread misinformation, posing a major threat to political campaigns as 2024 contests get under way.
Phony imagery isn't new to campaigns. During the 2020 presidential race, Trump shared a fake animation of Biden repeatedly sticking his tongue out with the caption "Sloppy Joe." A slowed-down video that falsely made then-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi appear impaired racked up millions of views in 2019.
What has changed is that synthetic media has become far easier to create with the rollout of so-called generative AI systems that can quickly transform simple inputs into sophisticated-looking videos, photos, music and text. That has left campaign officials bracing for 2024 to usher in a level of digital creation and proliferation unlike any previous election season now that millions of users have access to such tools.
"It's not going to create brand-new realms or types of disinformation that we've never before imagined, but it's going to make it easier and faster and cheaper to produce," said Teddy Goff, digital director for former President Barack Obama's re-election campaign. "And the consequences of that are going to be pretty profound."
The Republican National Committee was behind the video portraying a dystopian America should Biden secure a second term. Trump posted a manipulated video of CNN anchor Anderson Cooper reacting to the former president's appearance at a town hall hosted by the network.
Trump also shared a parody of Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis's glitch-filled presidential-campaign launch on Twitter Spaces. The fake video posted by Trump features DeSantis, Twitter Chief Executive Elon Musk, Democratic donor George Soros, former Vice President Dick Cheney, Adolf Hitler and the devil and appears to use AI-generated voice clones, including of Trump.
Spokespeople for the Trump campaign and the RNC didn't return requests for comment.
The speed at which AI can generate content is seen as a game changer. Rather than having to rely on consultants and digital experts, AI is a far cheaper means through which campaigns can respond to events in real time.
Democratic and Republican consultants say they are also testing AI and the viral chatbot ChatGPT as digital organizing tools that can help draft speeches, fundraising emails and texts and build voter files. Although campaigns will still need to review and edit AI-generated content, the technology could help significantly reduce the amount of time spent on day-to-day voter contact.
Online watchdogs are warning that the technology could be used for more nefarious purposes, including to spread false information about polling hours and locations, voter-registration deadlines or how people can cast their ballots.
On the eve of the initial round of Chicago's mayoral election in February, staff for candidate Paul Vallas noticed a video circulating on Twitter. It showed his photo and played a voice that sounded like his, appearing to condone police brutality, said Brian Towne, Vallas's campaign manager.
The video didn't circulate widely and likely didn't affect the vote, Towne said. Vallas finished first in the February round but lost a runoff.
Social-media platforms often have policies that state they will take down misleading, manipulated content. Enforcement of those policies can be inconsistent or slow, and platforms sometimes make exceptions for false posts by candidates in the name of allowing free political debate.
The rise of generative AI systems has prompted tech leaders to call for a new labeling system. Google and Microsoft, a backer of ChatGPT creator OpenAI, have both said they are launching tools that will mark AI-generated content with data about its origin.
Robert Weissman, president of Public Citizen, said political parties and media outlets should declare the use of fraudulent media as "out of bounds." He added, "We are not actually prepared for the challenge."
Credit: By Sabrina Siddiqui and Ryan Tracy
