Venture capitalists are piling into young companies developing technology to help find and extract precious materials such as lithium, cobalt and nickel needed to power electric vehicles.
These companies are adapting technology from fields including biochemical engineering and autonomous vehicles to detect mineral-rich ore among rock and to make extraction faster and more cost-efficient.
The mining-tech investments come as automakers pledge to produce more electric vehicles and consumers take advantage of incentives in the Inflation Reduction Act. Some mining-tech startups have received support from automakers looking to align themselves early with companies developing potentially game-changing technology. General Motors, for instance, said in April its venture-capital arm would lead a $50 million funding round for Texas-based EnergyX, a startup developing technology to more efficiently extract and process lithium from salt flats.
"I think a lot of our ecosystem sees that there's an opportunity for tech implementation of new products, services, technologies, to gain efficiencies in the mining space," said Cliff Ryan, co-head of venture and growth at climate-focused investment firm Galvanize Climate Solutions.
Mining-tech startups have raised $350 million this year through the second week of August. Last year, venture investors pumped $748 million into global mining-tech startups, according to analytics firm PitchBook Data.
Those amounts pale in comparison to other hot startup sectors like generative artificial intelligence, which attracted $1.7 billion in venture capital in this year's first quarter alone. This is because mining tech is a niche industry and startups developing this technology often need large amounts of upfront capital to get off the ground, investors say.
Investments in mining tech aren't certain to pay off, said New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology professor of mineral engineering William Chavez. Much of the mining-related technology focusing on critical materials for EV batteries is still under development. Scaling up that technology to serve commercial mining applications could take years to perfect with the EV boom already well under way, Chavez said.
"It's going to be a yearslong process or longer to get what's proposed into the market," Chavez said.
Still, startups are forging ahead. Menlo Park, Calif.-based Aether Biomachines is developing technology that can be used to help extract lithium, a critical material for many EV batteries. The technology would allow miners to extract lithium from deposits that are less concentrated than what is typically considered cost efficient to mine. To do this, Aether's machines are mixed with brine, or salty water, where they separate the target element from other materials.
The company uses robotics, machine learning and synthetic biology for a variety of mining and manufacturing applications, said Pavle Jeremic, Aether's founder and chief executive.
Aether recently raised a $49 million Series A round led by venture firms Natural Capital and Unless Partners. Jeremic said finding the right investors to join the round after its lead investors were set was more difficult than in prior fundraising efforts. Jeremic said that given a rush of new investors, he spent additional time while raising the round weeding out new investors that don't know the industry well.
"Unfortunately, whenever there's some craze for a certain industry, you do have a lot of [venture capitalists] going after that industry without really understanding how the market works," Jeremic said.
Credit: By Marc Vartabedian
