Nvidia's sales more than tripled in its fourth quarter, as the semiconductor maker scrambled to meet the demand for its chips that are powering new artificial-intelligence systems.
Chief Executive Jensen Huang described AI as hitting "the tipping point" and indicated demand for the computing power that underlies AI remained astronomical. "Demand is surging worldwide across companies, industries and nations," he said.
That demand showed up in the company's results Wednesday. Nvidia projected similar sales growth for the current quarter and earnings in the last quarter surged more than eightfold. The results exceeded analyst expectations.
Nvidia's results act as a bellwether for the strength of the AI boom, as companies like Microsoft, Google and Apple place large bets on the technology and need Nvidia's hardware to drive them.
In addition to ChatGPT, a number of other popular AI products have started to hit the market in recent months, including digital assistants for coding and business from Microsoft. Nvidia transformed itself in the space of three years from a company focused on chips that help videogames run faster to the red-hot center of the AI boom.
The company's stock has soared, including a rise of about 8% after its earnings report on Wednesday. Nvidia crossed the $1 trillion valuation mark in June, and it topped $1.8 trillion before pulling back in the lead-up to its earnings report.
Nvidia had revenue of $22.1 billion in its most recent quarter. Net profit was $12.29 billion, compared with $1.41 billion a year earlier.
Nvidia began its just-completed fiscal year with quarterly sales of $7.19 billion and wound up with more than three times that amount at the end of it, capping one of the quickest rises in corporate history.
Huang laid the groundwork for the explosive growth nearly two decades ago, when he decided to open up Nvidia's graphics chips for use in non-graphical applications. That allowed scientists and medical researchers to exploit their aptitude for doing many calculations at once. For AI, a breakthrough came in 2012, when researchers using Nvidia's chips dominated a computer-vision competition.
Nvidia has been hamstrung by more demand for its chips than it can satisfy, leading to a long-lasting shortage as other parts of the semiconductor industry wade through a downturn in electronics and electric-vehicle markets. A major bottleneck has been the complex packaging that goes around chips after they are made.
Colette Kress, Nvidia's finance chief, said on a call with analysts that the company was supply-constrained on its latest generation of AI chips and would continue to face limitations as it rolls out its next generation of chips, expected later this year.
On the call, Huang said Nvidia expects "demand will continue to be stronger than our supply provides through the year, and we'll do our best." The company was working to allocate limited supplies of chips fairly, he added, while avoiding shipping them to people who weren't set up to use them immediately.
Political pressures have added to Nvidia's challenges. The Biden administration placed curbs on the sale of its high-end AI chips to China in the past two years, concerned they could be used for cyberespionage or in military applications. Nvidia developed versions of its chips for the Chinese market that fall below the performance thresholds that would require a U.S. export license, but strict U.S. limits crimped its business there.
Kress said that sales of AI chips to China declined significantly during the company's most recent quarter due to U.S. government restrictions.
In a securities filing, Nvidia said China represented a mid-single-digit percentage of its data-center revenue in the fourth quarter and it expects China to be in a similar range in the first quarter. Huang told analysts the company paused activities in China when the latest U.S. restrictions came in October. The company was working on new chips that complied with U.S. performance limits, he said, and would "do our best to succeed" in the market within those strictures.
In China and several other jurisdictions, Nvidia is also facing inquiries from competition authorities. France's antitrust authority raided Nvidia's offices there in September, and the chip maker has received inquiries about its business from regulators in the European Union and U.K., the company said in the filing.
For Nvidia, the bulk of its sales now come from its division that focuses on data centers, the huge server farms where most AI computation takes place. Data center revenue was $18.4 billion in the company's latest quarter, more than five times as much as a year ago.
The company's gaming division, once its primary source of sales, logged $2.9 billion of revenue for the quarter, up 56% from a year earlier.
Credit: By Asa Fitch
