For more than a year, the Federal Election Commission has faced calls to regulate the use of artificial intelligence in political campaigns. But we have neither the expertise nor the legal authority to do so. That's why I offered a proposal to end the agency's pending rulemaking on AI with no further action. On Aug. 15, the commission is set to vote on it.
Any special rules for political ads generated with AI that the FEC might issue would exceed its statutory authority. Existing laws do charge the FEC with administering and enforcing disclaimer and disclosure requirements for political ads, but Congress hasn't given us the power to draft regulations specifically for AI or any other technology.
More practically, we don't have the experience or expertise to craft effective and appropriately tailored rules. Neither do most other federal agencies, including the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Trade Commission, and Equal Employment Opportunity Commission -- each of which has put out reports or proposed rules on the matter. These agencies can't even agree on a definition of AI. Defining the scope of regulatory authority is properly the job of Congress, not unelected bureaucrats.
Regulation could also have the unintended consequence of stifling AI's potential as a tool to broaden public participation in the political process. AI can make political ads more visually appealing, cheaper and more compelling. Government interference risks trampling on Americans' rights to speak and to hear about candidates and important public issues.
Despite apocalyptic predictions about AI's potential to sow chaos and upend elections in the U.S. and abroad, its salience in political campaigns has so far been limited. When the Republican National Committee launched an AI-generated advertisement last year, the committee voluntarily included a disclaimer in the ad that it was "built entirely with AI imagery." Tech companies like Google and Meta have implemented their own regulations and founded organizations like the Content Authenticity Initiative and the Partnership on AI, which produce detection tools and industry guidance for AI. Voters have demonstrated that they can reliably detect AI dupes much of the time, and examples of bad actors deploying AI deepfakes to sway federal or state election outcomes have been rare.
Current FEC regulations are sufficient to maintain the integrity of political campaigns. The FEC will continue to enforce campaign-finance laws and regulations on political ads. That includes rules that require disclaimers and that ban anyone from fraudulently claiming to speak for a campaign. The commission will keep reporting the millions of contributions and expenditures that federal campaigns make every month and quarter, allowing the public to follow the money. But we shouldn't regulate for the sake of regulating -- especially when it comes to innovative technologies that can make us all better off.
---
Mr. Cooksey is chairman of the FEC.
Credit: By Sean Cooksey
