SEOUL -- The victims were reportedly teachers, military officers, undergraduates and elementary-school students. Across a labyrinth of Telegram group chats, anonymous users submitted photos of South Korean girls and women without their permission that were manipulated into sexually explicit images and videos viewed by hundreds of thousands.
South Korean authorities on Wednesday began an investigation to tackle faked pornographic images after a massive network was uncovered -- involving hundreds of victims, many of them minors.
The revelation reflected the scale of the problem facing South Korea, which according to some researchers is the source for roughly half of so-called deepfake porn videos spread globally.
Many countries, including the U.S., are confronting a rise in AI-generated fake nudes targeting young women and girls.
The current protections in South Korea haven't kept pace with the threats posed by AI-generated sexualized content -- much of which is created by teenagers or younger children, local officials said. The country's education ministry is reviewing the maximum punishment for middle-school-aged perpetrators, or those as young as 10 years old. Lawmakers are looking to close legal loopholes, such as widening punishments beyond those who intentionally disseminate the illicit content.
"Deepfake videos may be dismissed as mere pranks, but they are clearly criminal acts that exploit technology under the shield of anonymity," South Korean President Yoon Suk Yeol, a former prosecutor, said at a Tuesday cabinet meeting. "Anyone can be a victim."
The scale and number of victims remain under investigation.
Many of the Telegram groups were organized by school name or region to allow users to easily identify mutual acquaintances and make fake nudes they could share. To gain entry, some users were required to provide photos of a woman, which often were lifted from a female classmate's social-media account, officials and activists said.
Communication in these Telegram group chats was conducted almost exclusively in Korean, suggesting an overwhelming majority of members were local.
Public awareness skyrocketed after a Telegram group chat focused on one university became public this month after a police probe. It had been active since 2020 and included about 1,200 members, authorities said, sharing not only computer-generated sexualized images but other personal information, such as the subject's phone number, address and student ID number.
Roughly 500 schools -- from universities to elementary schools -- might have been affected, according to one online tally compiled by volunteers who have combed through the group chats. The website containing the list of schools has drawn about three million page views since going live on Tuesday.
A Telegram representative said the company removes millions of pieces of harmful content each day on its platform, based on moderating, AI tools and user reports.
More than 6,000 South Koreans this year requested the removal of faked pornographic images made without their consent, according to the state media regulator's figures that run through July. That volume is already approaching last year's total of roughly 7,000.
Credit: By Timothy W. Martin and Soobin Kim
