Identity-management company CyberArk Software said it plans to buy Venafi for $1.5 billion in a cash-and-stock offer, as money starts to flow through the cybersecurity industry again.
Venafi, which specializes in identifying machines on a network, such as applications, bots and internet-of-things devices, will bolster CyberArk's human identity-management products, said Chief Executive Matt Cohen.
"We've noticed a strong explosion in the number of machine identities that are out there, and the complexity of the communications that they need to make, to data sources or to other machines has also taken off," he said.
The deal, which is subject to regulatory approvals, will involve CyberArk acquiring Venafi from private-equity firm Thoma Bravo for roughly $1 billion in cash and $540 million in shares. The deal is expected to close in the second half of 2024, CyberArk said.
Identity management has emerged as a key security principle, and a foundational practice to implementing zero-trust strategies, which focus on controlling access to systems inside networks, rather than preventing breaches of firewalls and other defensive technologies.
Recent developments in artificial intelligence and the growth of internet-of-things devices in all critical infrastructure sectors have also put pressure on security teams to identify and control the digital entities in their systems.
A company can have anywhere from 10 to 100 times the number of nonhuman identities to manage than human ones, said Danny Brickman, CEO of Oasis Security, a Tel Aviv startup also focused on authenticating these tokens, interfaces and other bits of code. "That's a large attack surface," Brickman said.
Oasis, launched in 2022, said May 1 it had raised $35 million in a Series A extension round, bringing the total raised to $75 million.
CyberArk's acquisition marks the latest in a flurry of deals, public offerings and significant investments in the cybersecurity industry.
Data-management company Rubrik started trading on the New York Stock Exchange on April 25, in a closely watched initial public offering that valued the company at $5.6 billion.
Meanwhile, Thoma Bravo announced its acquisition of artificial intelligence and cybersecurity company Darktrace on April 26, in a take-private deal worth more than $5 billion.
On May 7, cloud security company Wiz raised $1 billion in a funding round, giving it a $12 billion valuation.
The company will use the money to fund further acquisitions, executives told The Wall Street Journal, with the round coming around a month after it acquired another cloud startup, Gem Security.
Credit: By James Rundle
