China sought to pitch itself as a friendlier global power to governments in the Middle East this week. Yet its reluctance to offer a security presence is limiting Beijing's influence in the region.
Chinese leader Xi Jinping hosted officials from Arab nations -- including the leaders of Egypt and the United Arab Emirates -- for a China-Arab states conference in Beijing on Thursday. With the Biden administration facing heavy criticism over its handling of the Gaza war, China sees an opportunity to promote its brand of foreign policy to leaders in the region.
But, despite the blowback against the U.S. over its support for Israel, the Gaza conflict has shown that Washington remains the pre-eminent foreign power in the Middle East. A year after orchestrating a landmark deal between Iran and Saudi Arabia, Beijing has been on the outside of negotiations over a Gaza cease-fire and has stayed on the sidelines as a crucial trade route through the Red Sea comes under fire.
Its main tool for gaining clout has been a willingness to invest, particularly in the energy sector. And it has benefited from an Arab world eager to use its relations with China as leverage against Washington.
In opening a Thursday conference between China and the 22-nation Arab League, Xi used his keynote speech to press home his position on the Gaza conflict. He also harked back to longstanding trade ties along the ancient Silk Road, promising to help his guests boost economic development and bring peace to the region.
"In this turbulent world, peaceful relations come from mutual respect, and lasting security is built on fairness and justice," Xi said, restating China's support for an international peace conference to end the war in Gaza and the establishment of an independent Palestinian state.
Middle East resentment over Washington's backing of Israel provides an opening for China to deepen ties with traditional American partners in the region such as Egypt and the United Arab Emirates, analysts say. The question is how far China is willing to go, and what risks it is willing to take, to exert its influence.
Beijing has shown little interest in displacing Washington as a political and security force in the region, said Steven Wright, an associate professor of international relations at Qatar's Hamad Bin Khalifa University. "Instead, it is more about economics and a development-first agenda," he said.
The absence of a Chinese military response to attacks by Yemen's Houthi rebels on ships in the Red Sea underscored the fact that Beijing won't replace Washington as a security guarantor in the region. The U.S., in contrast, has launched a series of airstrikes against the Houthis in response to the attacks.
"China sees one of its strongest features as a great power is the fact that it has positive relations with all countries" there, said Dawn Murphy, an associate professor at the National War College in Washington.
That approach hasn't played as well in Israel as Beijing might have hoped, according to Dr. Avner Golov, vice president of Mind Israel, an organization that provides consultation to Israel's national-security establishment and decision makers.
While the U.S. response to the Red Sea attacks "showed its ability to back its allies and mobilize forces quickly and get results," the Chinese reaction revealed the constraints on Beijing's clout, Golov said.
In his Thursday speech, Xi doubled down on promises of economic cooperation with Arab states, including investments in energy, finance, food security and artificial intelligence -- channeled through his signature Belt and Road Initiative to develop global trade infrastructure.
Xi also pledged to donate 500 million yuan, equivalent to $69 million, to support humanitarian efforts and postwar reconstruction in Gaza, in addition to a package of 100 million yuan that China committed earlier.
Arab nations collectively count China as their top trading partner, with two-way trade reaching $398 billion in 2023, up from $36.7 billion in 2004, according to Chinese state media. All 22 members of the Arab League have signed agreements to cooperate with Beijing on the Belt and Road Initiative.
Chinese officials have courted Muslim-majority nations in the Middle East also to temper international criticism of the Communist Party's efforts to forcibly assimilate Muslim minorities in the northwestern region of Xinjiang.
Credit: By Chun Han Wong
