Nvidia's record quarter wasn't enough to lift the stock market.
The S&P 500 initially looked set to build on its best day since June but finished 1.3% lower. Each of the benchmark's 11 sectors closed in the red. Air came out of big tech stocks: Shares of Tesla and Amazon.com, which comprise hefty portions of the market, dragged down the Nasdaq Composite to a 1.9% loss.
Disney shares extended this year's rout, falling 3.9% to their lowest close in nearly nine years. Those losses weighed on the Dow industrials, which slid 1.1%.
Nvidia gained just 0.1% after its 3.2% rise the prior day. The graphics-chip maker at the heart of the artificial-intelligence boom reported record sales that doubled from a year ago. Nvidia looked set for a big bounce, reaching its highest level on record during trading, but those gains fizzled as investors took profits on their positions.
The company's shares -- which have more than tripled this year -- may have reached a valuation on par with its rosy earnings picture, leaving less room to further appreciate and lift broader indexes.
Nvidia's results were not good enough to justify its valuation," said David Trainer, chief executive of investment-research firm New Constructs.
The stock opened at more than $500. That means the company would need to increase revenue by an average of 20% a year for the next 25 years, according to Trainer.
"That is an extremely high bar, even with its AI prowess," he added.
Meanwhile, precarious signs for the economy's trajectory are emerging, just as the Federal Reserve kicks off its Jackson Hole, Wyo., symposium.
New orders for long-lasting goods fell 5.2% in July, the steepest slump since April 2020 and worse than the 4.1% slide expected by Wall Street Journal-polled economists. The prior day, an S&P Global report showed business activity fell to a six-month low in August. Manufacturing is becoming worrisomely weak in the U.S. even as the labor market remains strong.
Unemployment filings fell last week and remain near historic lows, another sign that the Fed's tightening has yet to unravel the U.S. labor market. Thursday's stock slump might be the first inkling of investor worry that the market cannot withstand higher interest rates for much longer.
"Equities look like they had priced in a soft landing, but that picture can get distorted by such large tech stocks driving the market-cap-weighted indexes," said Mark Heppenstall, chief investment officer of Penn Mutual Asset Management.
Heppenstall said a recession isn't on the horizon unless the labor market cracks. He is keen to see the August jobs figures, due next week. Should they come out strong again, "it's hard not to see 'higher for longer' growing as the Fed's mantra," he said.
Bonds mostly pared some of Wednesday's gains, as long-term yields retraced what was the biggest one-day slide since May. The 10-year Treasury yield climbed to 4.234% from 4.197% on Wednesday. Traders said they are waiting for Powell's speech to jump into action.
Overseas, Europe's Stoxx 600 fell 0.4%. Turkish assets benefited from a massive rate hike that took interest rates to 25% from 17.5%. Early Friday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was down 1.9% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 0.9%. S&P 500 futures rose 0.1%.
Credit: By Eric Wallerstein
