Seeing the new artificial intelligence-powered chatbots touted in dueling announcements this past week by Microsoft and Alphabet's Google drives home two major takeaways. First, the feeling of "wow, this definitely could change everything." And second, the realization that for chat-based search and related AI technologies to have an impact, we're going to have to put a lot of faith in them and the companies they come from.
When AI is delivering answers, and not just information for us to base decisions on, we're going to have to trust it much more deeply than we have before. This new generation of chat-based search engines are better described as "answer engines" that can, in a sense, "show their work" by giving links to the webpages they deliver and summarize. But for an answer engine to have real utility, we're going to have to trust it enough, most of the time, that we accept those answers at face value.
The same will be true of tools that help generate text, spreadsheets, code, images and anything else we create on our devices -- some version of which both Microsoft and Google have promised to offer within their existing productivity services, Microsoft 365 and Google Workspace.
These technologies, and chat-based search, are all based on the latest generation of "generative" AI, capable of creating verbal and visual content and not just processing it the way more established AI has done. And the added trust it will require is one of several ways in which this new generative AI technology is poised to shift even more power into the hands of the biggest tech companies.
Generative AI in all its forms will insinuate technology more deeply into the way we live and work than it already is -- not just answering our questions but writing our memos and speeches or even producing poetry and art. And because of the financial, intellectual and computational resources needed to develop and run the technology are so enormous, the companies that control these AI systems will be the largest, richest companies.
OpenAI, the creator of the ChatGPT chatbot and DALL-E 2 image generator AIs that have fueled much of the current hype, seemed like an exception to that: a relatively small startup that has driven major AI innovation. But it has leapt into the arms of Microsoft, which has made successive rounds of investment, in part because of the need to pay for the computing power needed to make its systems work.
The greater concentration of power is all the more important because this technology is both incredibly powerful and inherently flawed: It has a tendency to confidently deliver incorrect information. This means that step one in making this technology mainstream is building it, and step two is minimizing the variety and number of mistakes it inevitably makes.
Trust in AI, in other words, will become the new moat that big technology companies will fight to defend. Lose the user's trust often enough, and they might abandon your product.
On the other hand, proving your AI more trustworthy could be a competitive advantage more powerful than being the biggest, best or fastest repository of answers. This seems to be Google's bet, as the company has emphasized in recent announcements and a presentation last Wednesday that as it tests and rolls out its own chat-based and generative AI systems, it will strive for "Responsible AI," as outlined in 2019 in its "AI Principles."
To see just why trust in these kinds of search engines is so tricky, you can visit other chat-based search engines that already exist. There's You.com, which will answer your questions via a chatbot, or Andisearch.com, which will summarize any article it returns when you search for a topic on it.
Even these smaller services feel a little like magic. If you ask You.com's chat module a question like "Please list the best chat AI-based search engines," it can, under the right circumstances, give you a coherent and succinct answer that includes all the best-known startups in this space. But it can also, depending on small changes in how you phrase that question, add complete nonsense to its answer.
In my experimentation, You.com would, more often than not, give a reasonably accurate answer, but then add to it the name of a search engine that doesn't exist at all. Googling the made-up search engine names it threw in revealed that You.com seemed to be misconstruing the names of humans quoted in articles as the names of search engines.
Andi doesn't return search results in a chat format, precisely because making sure that those answers are accurate is still so difficult, says Chief Executive Angela Hoover. "It's been super exciting to see these big players validating that conversational search is the future, but nailing factual accuracy is hard to do," she added. As a result, for now, Andi offers search results in a conventional format, but offers to use AI to summarize any page it returns.
One analogy for the future of trust in AI systems could be one of the least algorithmically generated sites on the internet: Wikipedia. While the entirely human-written and human-edited encyclopedia isn't as trustworthy as primary-source material, its users generally know that and find it useful anyway. Wikipedia shows that "social solutions" to problems like trust in the output of an algorithm -- or trust in the output of human Wikipedia editors -- are possible.
But the model of Wikipedia also shows that the kind of labor-intensive solutions for creating trustworthy AI are likely to entrench the power of existing big technology companies. Only they have not just the computing resources, but also the human resources, to deal with all the misleading, incomplete or biased information their AIs will be generating.
The obvious and immediate utility of these new kinds of AIs, when integrated into a search engine or in their many other potential applications, is the reason for the current media, analyst and investor frenzy for AI. It's clear that this could be a disruptive technology, resetting who is harvesting attention and where they're directing it, threatening Google's search monopoly and opening up new markets and new sources of revenue for Microsoft and others.
Based on the runaway success of the ChatGPT AI -- perhaps the fastest service to reach 100 million users in history, according to a recent UBS report -- it's clear that being an aggressive first mover in this space could matter a great deal. It's also clear that being a successful first mover in this space will require the kinds of resources that only the biggest tech companies can muster.
Credit: By Christopher Mims
