A year ago, Lang Yongchun was delivering news on state television about how the Internet helped traditional industries become more efficient. Then the former anchor of China Central Television's prime-time news program became part of the story himself, joining industrial e-commerce startup Zhaogang.com as a senior vice president.
After 20 years at CCTV, "I yearned to be challenged," Mr. Lang says. "I joined an Internet startup instead of a big corporation because I want to learn many things, fast."
Mr. Lang is among the many Chinese professionals and executives leaving traditional industries for the fast-growing Internet sector, just as Internet companies extend their reach into retail, finance, manufacturing and other industries. These companies' dynamic work environment, fast growth and better compensation packages help them attract some of the nation's brightest and most ambitious talents.
No statistics track the trend, which is hardly new in either the U.S. or China. In 1999, George Shaheen quit as chief executive of management-consulting firm Andersen Consulting (now Accenture) to join online grocer Webvan Group, which went bankrupt in 2001. Katie Couric left broadcast television in 2014 to become Yahoo's global news anchor. Last year, Ruth Porat quit Morgan Stanley to become chief financial officer of Google parent Alphabet.
China's three biggest Internet companies each tapped professionals from established businesses. Joe Tsai, executive vice chairman of Alibaba Group Holding, worked as a lawyer and private-equity investor in New York and Hong Kong before helping to found the e-commerce giant in 1999. Martin Lau, president of games and messaging company Tencent Holdings, joined in 2005 from investment bank Goldman Sachs (Asia). Jennifer Li held finance positions at General Motors in the U.S., China and elsewhere before becoming chief financial officer of search giant Baidu.
Recruiters and executives say this wave of talent migration is wider and the impact deeper than earlier waves, when Internet businesses were less mature. Beyond operational positions such as general manager and leaders of functions such as finance or human resources, Internet companies increasingly seek experts in subjects from payments and consumer credit to tourism, says Bill King, a partner at executive-search firm Egon Zehnder's Shanghai office who leads the firm's technology practice in China.
"It's evident that local digital companies are increasingly investing in talent," he says.
The competition is intensifying as Internet firms expand their ambitions. Leshi Internet Information & Technology has made headline hires in the past two years as it expanded from a video site to a film studio and a maker of smart TVs, smartphones and electric vehicles. It hired a former vice president of Bank of China to lead its financial-technology business, the former general manager of Shanghai General Motors to run its electric-vehicles division and a former CCTV sports anchor as the chief content officer for a new sports division.
Big Internet companies are attractive employers. Other large companies are often state-owned, an unappealing concept for young, ambitious workers. By comparison, working for Alibaba or Tencent in China is like working for Apple or Google in the U.S., industry insiders say.
Multinational companies, once the most coveted employers in China, have lost some favor. After 23 years at Procter & Gamble, Laura Xiong left as head of its Greater China beauty-care business last year to run marketing at e-commerce company JD.com. "This is an age of disruption. If you don't disrupt yourself, somebody else will," she wrote in a farewell note to her former P&G colleagues that was widely circulated on Chinese Internet.
In an interview, Ms. Xiong says she left P&G because she saw consumer products shifting from traditional sales channels to e-commerce. She says decisions are made much faster at JD.com than at P&G.
It isn't easy for somebody who built a successful career in a traditional industry to jump into the unpredictable world of Internet startups. Zheng Yudong, a veteran of Citigroup and Standard Chartered, declined several offers from financial-technology companies in recent years because of concerns about the companies' business practices.
In early 2015, he got an offer from Jimubox, a startup that offers online wealth-management products. He mulled the offer for six months, and talked to the company many times, before joining in August.
Not every job-switcher is happy. Some technology professionals who left the banking industry two years ago at the peak of the fintech boom are considering returning after the market turmoil in late 2015, says Chen Kunde, chief information officer of China Merchants Bank. Traditional companies can create the right work environment for employees to stay by adapting to technological changes, he says. His bank is investing in big data and machine learning. But he admits pay is a sore issue for banks competing with Internet companies, many of which have deeper pockets.
When things don't work out, many people simply move on to other Internet companies because opportunities there still seem greater, say recruiters and people who made the switch.
Even amid the market turmoil, some startups are raising plenty of capital. Zhaogang.com, the e-commerce site joined by Mr. Lang, the CCTV anchor, raised 1.1 billion yuan ($169 million) in January.
---
Follow Li Yuan on Twitter @LiYuan6 or write to li.yuan@wsj.com.
Credit: By Li Yuan
