[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The stunning rally in semiconductor stocks has been surprising for two reasons: It has been bigger and longer than nearly everyone anticipated, and it has changed the pecking order among the biggest chip makers.
This may have investors understandably nervous about when the turn may come. But the companies driving the most recent surge have strong prospects ahead that don't look to diminish soon.
As of Friday, the PHLX Semiconductor Index is up 22% for the year, against the Nasdaq's 17% uptick. This comes after the chip index surged 37% last year, making it the best performer in tech. And this has continued even as big M&A activity cools. The semiconductor sector has seen just under $9 billion worth of deals so far this year, following a splurge that totaled $134 billion worth last year, according to Dealogic.
One big change is that Nvidia and Broadcom are now among the five largest companies on the PHLX Semiconductor Index, ranked by market cap. Earlier this week, Nvidia's market value briefly surpassed that of Qualcomm, which was once the second-most-valuable chip company next to Intel Corp. Qualcomm's market value has bucked the trend, falling by nearly a quarter over the past two years as the company's lucrative licensing business faced an array of problems that now includes a legal war with Apple.
Another is that Intel, long the No. 1 chip maker by market cap, was passed last month by Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing. TSMC, as it is also known, is Intel's biggest rival in chip production and has benefited from the boom in mobile devices and from growing demand for other types of chips such as graphics processors.
Investors should expect further gains. Broadcom is in a good position, even though its market value more than doubled since its merger with Avago early last year. The company reported an 18% jump in revenue for its fiscal second quarter on Thursday, beating expectations. It projected a similar gain for the current period, getting a boost from the buildup of the next iPhone models, which use the company's wireless filter chips. At just 15 times forward earnings, Broadcom is still at a slight discount to the PHLX average.
Nvidia could see further gains as well. The company's graphics processing chips have a prime opportunity ahead as companies like Amazon, Google and Microsoft build artificial intelligence into their vast global networks.
Nvidia's high multiple of around 48 times forward earnings admittedly makes the stock a bit more precarious. But the PHLX Index in general is averaging only 16 times, less than 10% above its five-year average and about 30% below the Nasdaq's average, so chip investors needn't rush to cash out just yet.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
