Late-night host Jon Stewart said Apple asked him not to interview Federal Trade Commission Chair Lina Khan when he was hosting a show and podcast on Apple TV+.
Stewart made the comments about the tech giant during Monday night's episode of "The Daily Show" in an interview with Khan.
"I've got to tell you, I wanted to have you on a podcast, and Apple asked us not to do it, to have you," Stewart said. "They literally said, 'Please don't talk to her.'"
Apple didn't return a request for comment. A spokesperson for Stewart said he wasn't available for comment.
Stewart returned to "The Daily Show" in February, serving as a part-time host on Monday nights in the run-up to this year's presidential election. He previously hosted Comedy Central's satirical cable news show for 16 years before leaving in 2015.
Stewart returned to television after a six-year hiatus to host "The Problem With Jon Stewart" on Apple TV+, but the show ended last year.
Federal authorities have stepped up scrutiny of Apple's business practices and influence in the tech industry. The Justice Department filed an antitrust lawsuit last month, alleging the tech company makes it difficult for competitors to integrate with the iPhone, ultimately raising prices for consumers. Apple said it would vigorously defend against the suit.
Khan, the FTC chair and Stewart's guest on Monday, has been a strong critic of tech companies such as Facebook parent Meta Platforms and Amazon, and her agency has attempted to rein them in.
During the interview, Stewart said Apple wouldn't have approved a bit about artificial intelligence that aired earlier on Monday's "Daily Show." He asked Khan "why are they so afraid" to have those types of discussions.
"I think it shows one of the dangers when you concentrate so much power and so much decision-making in a small number of companies," Khan said.
Khan thanked Stewart for having her on to discuss "the importance of holding corporate executives accountable for lawbreaking, and how monopolies can use their power to bully, coerce, and censor speech."
Credit: By Joseph De Avila
