Parkland, Fla. -- Lawmakers are starting to get calls from a surprising group of kids -- dead ones.
Uzi Garcia: "I'm a fourth-grader at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas. Or at least I was, when a man with an AR-15 came into my school and killed 18 of my classmates, two teachers and me."
Ethan Song: "In 2018, when I was 15 years old, I was killed by an unsecured gun at my friend's house."
And there's 17-year-old Joaquin Oliver: "The thing is, I died that day in Parkland. My body was destroyed by a weapon of war."
Then they say something like this: "I'm back today because my parents used AI to re-create my voice to call you."
These automated calls -- starting on the sixth anniversary of the Parkland school shooting that left 17 dead -- are part of a campaign to raise awareness for gun safety and push for greater gun control. But this column isn't about gun policy, it's about a defining moment in artificial intelligence, and the use of deepfakes to spread messages and channel the dead.
Joaquin's parents, Patricia and Manny Oliver, are behind the project. Outspoken activists since the death of their son, they say this approach is born of frustration.
"This is a United States problem, and we have not been able to fix it," Manny told me. "If we need to use creepy stuff to fix it, welcome to the creepy."
Their nonprofit has launched The Shotline, a website where you can pick one of the six AI-generated calls, type in your ZIP Code and direct a call to one of your elected representatives.
But just because we can bring these voices back from beyond the grave, should we? After talking to these parents, I can understand their motivation.
How were the voices resurrected?
These hauntingly realistic voices were created with an AI voice generator from ElevenLabs. It's the same service I used last year to create my own audio clone, which fooled my family and my bank.
I uploaded nearly an hour of audio so the machine-learning models could match my rhythm and intonation. Then I typed what I wanted my audio deepfake to say. These parents didn't have the opportunity to record clear audio of their kids. Most of the samples pulled from home videos were marred with background chatter or music. Yet the technology has gotten so good (and scary), it created near-perfect facsimiles.
When Brett Cross first heard his son Uzi's voice, "I bawled hard," he told me. "When I think about it, I tear up." Kristin Song, Ethan's mother, said she sobbed as well.
Patricia said hearing the voice felt like Joaquin was still here. "It was exactly like him," she told me. "You want that to be true. I wanted him to say, 'Hi, Mommy, how are you? I love you.'"
Why were the voices resurrected?
Deciding what these voices should say presented an ethical knot. How do you know what someone who isn't here anymore would feel? How do you know what they would -- or wouldn't -- want shared?
Every parent I spoke with said they were confident: Their kids would say they wished they were still alive. They would say they wouldn't want other children to be shot and killed.
Joaquin's parents used his social-media posts as a guide. Before his death, he'd discussed protecting children from guns and school shootings. Joaquin's father, Manny, said his son wanted to be remembered as "big -- like Lennon, like Mandela, like Ali." He sees this as a way to carry out his son's wish.
There's a strong sense from the parents involved that this will help cement their children's legacies and bring new protections for kids at risk of being killed by guns. Other parents who lost children in shootings, including other Parkland parents, decided not to participate, said Manny.
Should the voices be resurrected?
One fear with this application of AI is how it could be used for harm. Imagine the voices of these very same children being used to spread disinformation or hate speech.
Recently, audio deepfakes of dead celebrities such as Robin Williams and George Carlin have popped up online, to the objection of their families.
Estate planning now often involves directives for social media and other online accounts when you die. Going forward, expect to say yea or nay to posthumous AI re-creations of your likeness as well, said Alison Arden Besunder, chair of the trusts and estates group at law firm Goetz Fitzpatrick.
In my experience of reporting on the intersection of death and technology, I've learned two things: First, everyone deals with death in their own way.
"You're not truly dead until the last person who remembers you is gone," Brett, Uzi's father, told me. "So for however many years I have left, I'm going to keep introducing him to this world so that he'll outlast me."
And second, tech will continue to evolve the ways we celebrate and grieve those who are no longer here. If you think what we have today is nuts, wait a few more years.
Some will call it creepy. Others will say it's world changing. Both are probably right.
Credit: By Joanna Stern
