WASHINGTON -- The Federal Trade Commission proposed new limits to protect children from what it says are tech companies' increasingly invasive surveillance tactics.
Wednesday's move is the latest effort by FTC Chair Lina Khan to use her legal authorities to rein in often lightly regulated tech companies, including YouTube-owner Google and Meta Platforms, owner of Instagram.
Relying on a 1998 law, the agency would require that ads targeted to children be turned off by default, would limit push notifications by online services, and would restrict what it called "surveillance" in schools, among other steps.
The announcement marks an early step in the development of a proposed new rule, which would amend an existing children's privacy rule. The FTC will take public comment for 60 days on its proposed rule before making it final, which would have a good chance of passing in the Democratic-led agency.
If adopted by the commission, the rule "will enter its second quarter-century stronger and better prepared to protect children online," commissioner Alvaro Bedoya wrote in a statement.
The FTC said its proposal "aims to shift the burden from parents to providers to ensure that digital services are safe and secure for children."
"Kids must be able to play and learn online without being endlessly tracked by companies looking to hoard and monetize their personal data," said Khan. "By requiring firms to better safeguard kids' data, our proposal places affirmative obligations on service providers and prohibits them from outsourcing their responsibilities to parents."
Major tech companies including Meta and Google either declined to comment or didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.
Despite widespread praise for the proposal among children's advocates, some suggested the impact could be limited. The statute that forms the basis for the FTC's proposed rule, the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act, also called Coppa, is now 25 years old and showing its age, many children's advocates say.
Among other things, Coppa requires parental consent for companies to collect personal information on users under the age of 13. But it lacks sufficient teeth in forcing platforms to verify the ages of younger users, advocates have said.
Coppa's sponsor, Sen. Edward Markey (D., Mass.), said the law should be updated to ban targeted advertising to children and teens. But progress on Markey's Coppa 2.0 legislation to expand children's privacy has been slow in a sharply divided Congress.
Some advocates also worry that the FTC's proposed new changes to its Coppa rule need to be clarified so that it covers cutting-edge surveillance tactics that rely on artificial intelligence to better target children.
The FTC last made changes to its Coppa rule in 2013.
It has been weighing the Coppa changes for several years, in light of evolving marketplace practices, including new educational technology and big platforms hosting child-directed content.
One major change in the proposed new Coppa rule would be to require websites and platform operators to obtain separate, verifiable parental opt-in for targeted advertising. Businesses wouldn't be able to condition access to services on disclosure of children's personal information to advertisers.
The proposal also reinforces an existing prohibition on conditioning participation in an activity on the collection of personal data.
In addition, the proposal puts new limits on nudging children to stay online through push notifications.
It also aims to prohibit tech providers from making commercial use of students' personal information.
Credit: By John D. McKinnon
