Corporate technology leaders are concerned that California's artificial-intelligence safety bill will have a downstream impact on how they actually use the technology, even as they mostly agree that AI should be regulated in some form.
Called SB 1047, the California bill passed the state legislature in August and requires makers of large AI models to conduct safety tests to reduce the risks of "catastrophic harm" from their technology. Developers also must ensure a human can shut down their AI if it starts behaving dangerously. Gov. Gavin Newsom has until Sept. 30 to sign or veto the bill.
So far, debate around the bill -- seen as a bellwether for how AI will be regulated across the country -- has been dominated by AI startups and tech giants, many of which have opposed the bill.
Others such as the AI lab Anthropic have suggested amendments to the bill, about two-thirds of which were implemented in revisions, said Scott Wiener, a state senator and the bill's author. Wiener spoke in an interview during a Wall Street Journal CIO Network event on Monday.
Business technology leaders are no less divided in their opinions. For many, the bill raises questions and concerns over how it will impact their vendors, and whether they will be subject to additional risk if they use affected AI technologies. Such additional cautions could slow down their use of AI, some said, while others said more certainty and confidence in the regulatory sphere could speed up their deployments.
Lawrence Fitzpatrick, chief technology officer of financial services firm OneMain Financial, said "safety and fairness" of generative AI is important, but that the legislation is premature. "The world literally has less than two years of experience with this technology," he said. "In the short term, this may add a layer of friction for adopters that can only slow learning as they now may need to evaluate compliance of foundation models against the requirements of the bill."
Additionally, many enterprises are already taking a cautious approach to AI use, especially in regulated sectors, Fitzpatrick added.
Though corporate technology leaders aren't subject to those AI model tests, there will be an indirect, "downstream" impact on them if the bill passes, said Tim Crawford, a chief information officer strategic adviser at enterprise IT advisory firm AVOA.
While the AI safety act serves an important purpose, it could create confusion among tech leaders. Confusion typically leads to greater hesitation -- and perceived risk -- in using a technology, he said, and could cause businesses to take a more conservative approach to using AI.
On the other hand, CIOs like Aaron Gwinner of tobacco company Reynolds American say they are cautiously optimistic about the bill.
Although Gwinner has been holding back on fully deploying AI in areas such as compliance, marketing and finance -- in part because regulation remains nebulous and unclear -- bills such as SB 1047 are a step in the right direction for codifying certain standards, he said. That could give him the confidence he needs to expand the company's use of AI, he added.
"If we don't start and take a step forward, then we'll be waiting six more years for the federal government to do something," Gwinner said.
This month, Newsom told Salesforce Chief Executive Marc Benioff at the business software maker's annual conference that Wiener's bill could have a "chilling effect" on AI development in California.
Credit: By Belle Lin and Isabelle Bousquette
