WASHINGTON -- Four members of China's military have been indicted by the U.S. government on charges of hacking into Equifax Inc. and plundering sensitive data on nearly 150 million Americans as part of a massive heist that officials said also stole trade secrets from the credit-reporting agency.
In an escalation of U.S. efforts to counter China's alleged attempts to use cyber theft and other means of technology acquisition to become the world's dominant economic power, a federal grand jury in Atlanta returned a nine-count indictment made public Monday against the four Chinese nationals working for the People's Liberation Army. They are accused of conspiring to steal reams of data as part of a sophisticated hacking operation that exploited a major vulnerability in the software used by Equifax's online dispute portal.
The charges for the 2017 breach came as the U.S. and China remain locked in negotiations over trade after recently hammering out the first phase of an agreement. In brief remarks on Monday, U.S. Attorney General William Barr sought to distinguish the alleged Equifax theft from accepted intelligence gathering that governments conduct.
"This was a deliberate and sweeping intrusion into the private information of the American people," Mr. Barr said. "We collect information only for legitimate national security purposes; we don't indiscriminately violate the privacy of ordinary citizens," he said.
China has historically denied involvement in hacks on U.S. businesses.
The Chinese Embassy in Washington didn't respond to a request for comment.
The indictment is the latest from U.S. authorities to blame China for a compromise of a massive tranche of personal data. Officials have previously blamed China for a hack of more than 20 million files on government employees and their associates at the Office of Personnel Management and a theft of tens of millions of records from the health-insurance provider Anthem Inc. Mr. Barr also mentioned China's alleged hacks on managed service providers -- a campaign known as Cloud Hopper -- that a Wall Street Journal investigation in December revealed was far larger than previously known.
Investigators have concluded that China was responsible for the hack of hundreds of millions of records from hotel company Marriott International Inc. and are working to prepare an indictment related to that breach as well, people familiar with the matter said.
In May 2014 the U.S. indicted five Chinese military officers, publicly accusing employees of a foreign power with cybercrimes against U.S. firms for the first time.
Beijing has repeatedly denied conducting such activities and has rejected previous U.S. cybercrime prosecutions, calling them attempts to vilify China and warning that the accusations could harm relations between the two countries.
But in recent years, U.S. hacking charges against China -- as well as Russia, Iran and North Korea -- have grown increasingly common.
U.S. intelligence officials have warned that such large data sets like those allegedly pilfered by China can have significant counterintelligence value and can be collated with one another to create detailed dossiers on, for example, U.S. diplomats or spies working undercover.
"For years, we have witnessed China's voracious appetite for the personal data of Americans, including the theft of personnel records from the Office of Personnel Management, the intrusion into Marriott hotels and Anthem health insurance company, and now the wholesale theft of credit and other information from Equifax," Mr. Barr said.
Mr. Barr's mention of Marriott appeared to be the first public U.S. acknowledgment that China is believed responsible for that breach, which was disclosed in November 2018.
Officials said they didn't know what the alleged hackers did with the Equifax information, but said they expected Chinese intelligence could use the massive data trove -- considered to be one of the largest hacks on record -- to develop artificial-intelligence capabilities.
The breach into Equifax, publicly disclosed in September 2017, prompted prolonged public outrage and led to a series of hearings in Congress in which the company came under bipartisan scrutiny and resulted in the resignation of then-chief executive, Richard Smith.
Though China's alleged involvement had been previously reported in the media, the indictment lays out details of the operation in which hackers allegedly maintained persistent access to Equifax's systems for weeks, stole login credentials and ultimately ran about 9,000 queries for data, which were masked through encrypted channels, before being detected and booted out.
But the indictment doesn't provide much detail on a new claim that emerged Monday: That the Equifax act also constituted economic espionage.
According to the indictment, the stolen trade secrets included information on how Equifax compiled personal data from a variety of sources "at significant effort and expense" and the use of a "proprietary database scheme" to store that information. It doesn't state how or if that technology is being used to benefit the Chinese state.
The Trump administration has previously accused China of violating a 2015 bilateral pact not to engage in cyber theft of trade secrets. But experts who track Chinese nation-state hacking said the Equifax indictment seemed to lack strong evidence to support the claim of trade-secret theft and that the compromise of the database might have been incidental to the goal of siphoning another massive trove of data on Americans from a U.S. business.
Equifax has struggled with concerns about Chinese espionage for several years, including worries dating back to 2015 that a former employee had stolen information that could help China develop its national credit-reporting system, the Journal reported.
Last year, Equifax agreed to a $700 million settlement with the Federal Trade Commission in an effort to compensate victims.
"There was a very close collaboration with the authorities," Equifax Chief Executive Mark Begor said. "This is obviously a pretty complex situation, particularly when you've got a military arm of a foreign state like China doing these kind of attacks on a company like Equifax."
The data that was stolen included Social Security and driver's license numbers, addresses, birthdays and other information. The breach began in May 2017 at the latest and continued through July 2017.
The indictment alleges that the defendants used 34 servers located in nearly 20 countries to infiltrate the company's network.
The four defendants -- Wu Zhiyong, Wang Qian, Xu Ke and Liu Lei -- are allegedly members of the People's Liberation Army's 54th Research Institute, according to the indictment, and are believed to be residing in China, outside the reach of U.S. law enforcement. Officials acknowledged they were unlikely to face prosecution in a U.S. courtroom.
---
Catherine Stupp contributed to this article.

Credit: By Aruna Viswanatha, Dustin Volz and Kate O'Keeffe
