The S&P 500 rose to its highest level in more than a year, as investors looked ahead to a busy stretch packed with key economic reports and the Federal Reserve's interest-rate decision.
Coming off its fourth straight week of gains, the S&P 500 rose 40.07 points, or 0.9%, to 4338.93. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 189.55 points, or 0.6%, to 34066.33, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite advanced 202.78 points, or 1.5, to 13461.92.
After getting pummeled last year by a rapid rise in interest rates, stocks have recovered this year thanks in part to a stronger-than-expected economy and hopes that rates might not have much further to climb.
Shares of a few big technology companies have led the way, buoyed by booming interest in businesses involved with artificial intelligence.
But the rally has broadened in recent days, with investors flocking to previously beaten-down stocks such as the online used-car retailer Carvana.
Stocks face a major test this week.
Consumer-price index data on Tuesday will provide insight into the direction of inflation, which remains well above the Fed's 2% annual target.
After that, the Fed on Wednesday is widely expected to keep interest rates steady but could signal more rate increases in the future.
Thursday will bring a rate decision by the European Central Bank, as well as U.S. retail-sales data.
Some investors are skeptical that stocks can keep rising. Many have pointed to the narrowness of this year's rally as a cause for concern, noting that indexes can more easily reverse when they are relying on just a handful of winners.
More recently, the broadening of the rally has struck some as encouraging but failed to convince others, who see in it more last-gasp profit chasing than fundamental strength.
Many individual investors "like to buy those beaten-down stocks because they feel the upside is bigger," said Zhiwei Ren, a portfolio manager at Penn Mutual Asset Management.
The pessimistic view of this month's surge in smaller-cap stocks is that investors are "just buying anything to catch up to the rally," he added.
Monday's gains spanned a mixture of old and new winners. Tech giants such as Meta Platforms, Alphabet and Nvidia climbed. Tesla shares finished up $5.43, or 2.2%, to $249.83, extending their winning streak to 12sessions -- the longest on record, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
Among the newly ascendant, Carvana climbed $2.19, or 11.5% to $$21.26, building off its strong performance last week after it said it expects to post improved profit metrics for the second quarter.
Cruise operator Carnival rose $1.63, or 12.45% after JPMorgan analysts upgraded the stock to overweight from neutral. Shares in several airline companies also posted strong gains.
Weighing down indexes, meanwhile, were shares of energy companies as oil prices declined.
Benchmark U.S. crude fell 4.3% to $67.12 a barrel, while Brent crude dropped 3.9% to $71.84 after Goldman Sachs Group cut its year-end outlook for Brent to $86 from $95, citing swelling supplies from Russia, Iran and Venezuela.
In the bond market, the yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note settled at 3.763%, up from 3.744% Friday after the government sold $40 billion of 3-year notes and $32 billion of 10-year notes.
Yields on both short and longer-term Treasurys have climbed substantially since early May, reflecting declining recession fears and increasing expectations that the Fed will keep interest rates higher for longer.
Interest-rate futures on Monday suggested investors believed there was a better than 75% chance that the Fed would keep interest rates unchanged this week, according to CME Group data, but a roughly 70% chance that it will resume lifting rates at its next meeting in July.
Overseas, Europe's Stoxx 600 rose 0.2%. Early Tuesday, Japan's Nikkei 225 was up 1.6%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 0.3% and the Shanghai Composite was down 0.1%. S&P 500 futures rose 0.1%.
Credit: By Sam Goldfarb
