Though global advertising growth slowed to begin 2023, it will resume a more typical pace during the rest of the year as inflation eases and supply-chain issues continue to resolve, according to a new forecast from media investment group GroupM, a unit of WPP.
Ad spending will increase 5.9% this year to $874.5 billion, excluding U.S. political advertising, the report said. That figure is slightly behind global inflation as predicted by the International Monetary Fund, meaning it represents a slight decline in real terms, said Kate Scott-Dawkins, president of business intelligence at GroupM, in a presentation Thursday. The projection is in line with GroupM's forecast late last year.
Growth will come partly from the automotive sector, which once again has inventory to promote after long stretches of constrained supply, GroupM said. The computers and TVs that consumers snapped up at the start of the pandemic in 2020 also will reach the beginning of the usual upgrade cycles as the year ends, driving new demand, according to GroupM.
"Of course, there are large consequential events that prevent any true normalcy; the war continues in Ukraine, and the application of artificial intelligence to absolutely everything means each day brings something new," GroupM said in the report.
Consumer businesses such as Walmart and Uber are increasingly using their data and ad space on their websites and apps to help advertisers reach consumers through so-called retail media networks. That segment, which has emerged as an engine of growth in the ad industry, will grow 9.9% to $125.7 billion in 2023 and is expected to top TV revenue in 2028, GroupM forecast.
Connected-TV ad revenue, another growth driver, will increase 10.4% from 2023 to 2028 on a compound annual basis to $42.5 billion, GroupM said. And out-of-home advertising, which includes ad placements such as billboards, is expected to grow 13.4% to $35.6 billion in 2023, with digital out-of-home in particular forecast to rise 26.1% to $13.3 billion.
Meanwhile, digital advertising is decelerating, with expected growth of 8.4% in 2023. GroupM said the downshift should be viewed as a function of the size and maturity of the digital space instead of a result of any broader economic slowdown. Digital ad revenue in 2023 is expected to account for 68.8% of total global ad revenue.
"With digital now more than two-thirds of total advertising, digital growth at historic double-digit rates has become difficult to achieve, and we expect digital to decelerate further over the next five years," the report said.
GroupM expects artificial intelligence to inform or touch at least half of all advertising revenue by the end of 2023. Though AI has long been widely used, new tools and the advancement of generative AI mean the technology will disrupt more elements of advertising and media, GroupM said.
"The inflection point now [is that artificial intelligence is] growing much more broadly across use cases and channels, and the number of companies that are involved and potentially involved in creating those tools is different, and is something that we continue to discuss and watch and plan for as that ticks up to 60%, 70%, 80%, 90% of advertising revenue globally," Scott-Dawkins said.
Credit: By Megan Graham
