NASA said it will begin using artificial intelligence and citizen reporting to study unidentified flying objects to develop a better understanding of the phenomena that have fascinated the public for decades.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration announced the new measures in conjunction with a report released on Thursday by a panel appointed by the agency tapped to make recommendations to address the shortcomings of current UFO data-collection practices.
The panel's report called on NASA to use its fleet of Earth-observing satellites to look for environmental conditions that coincide with UFO sightings. It also said NASA should partner with commercial satellite companies to examine the objects. The report said NASA should use an aviation safety-reporting system so that commercial pilots have a centralized point to report sightings of the phenomena.
NASA said it is evaluating the report and assessing its recommendations.
Interest in "unidentified anomalous phenomena," a phrase the federal government uses to refer to what are commonly known as UFOs, has risen sharply in recent years.
"The presence of UAP raises serious concerns about the safety of our skies," said Dan Evans, assistant deputy associate administrator for research at NASA, at a press briefing.
NASA and the U.S. Defense Department have said there is no credible evidence that the observed flying phenomena are extraterrestrial in origin.
Bill Nelson, NASA's administrator, said the agency is working to assure the public that it is sharing what it knows about UAP.
NASA said it appointed Mark McInerney to the newly created role of director of UAP research. McInerney previously worked at the space agency's Goddard Space Flight Center, as well as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Hurricane Center. McInerney will act as a liaison to the Pentagon. He will also centralize communications and resources to develop a database to evaluate UAP data, the agency said.
NASA has already said it will move forward with a few of the report's recommendations, which include the use of AI and machine learning. It also said it will use public crowdsourcing to allow the public to report UAP.
Credit: By Joseph De Avila
