Sony Corp. plans to keep making smartphones -- while weaning its customers off them.
"People have become too obsessed with smartphones," said Hiroki Totoki, chief executive of the electronics maker's mobile unit, in an interview.
When Mr. Totoki took charge of Sony Mobile Communications Inc. in late 2014, he said his first job was to stanch the struggling unit's losses. With restructuring nearly complete, he says he now wants to redefine how people communicate.
That might seem like a tall order for Sony, whose share of the global smartphone market is just 2%, according to research firm IHS. But growth in smartphones is slowing for other makers, too, and Sony says it is looking to a future in which other devices occupy the cutting edge of mobile technology.
At the Mobile World Congress in Barcelona this week, Sony introduced Xperia Ear, a smartphone-companion earpiece that can read out emails, map directions or other notifications. The aim is to free users of the need to continually check their phones, Mr. Totoki said. Sony hasn't announced the price of the gadget, which is compatible with Android phones.
Sony says Xperia Ear will be available in major markets starting this summer, though Izumi Kawanishi, an executive vice president of Sony Mobile, described it as an experimental product. He said the company is also working on other gadgets, incorporating technologies such as augmented reality and machine learning, as it seeks to improve communications not just among people but between individuals and their devices.
While many electronics companies have rolled out so-called wearable technologies, including smartwatches, smart glasses and even smart shoes, there have been few big successes. Mr. Totoki said Sony hopes to create a new market with its devices. Otherwise, he said, smartphone companies, includingSony's mobile unit, may struggle to survive.
"What we need to explore is a new form of communication devices that wouldn't tie down users but still provide convenient ways to get information and communicate with other people," Mr. Totoki said.
Sony, which as a smartphone maker trails not only Apple Inc. and Samsung Electronics
Co. but also China's Xiaomi Corp.and ZTE Corp., has pruned its mobile business by cutting back in the U.S. and Chinese markets and by reducing its workforce.The cost cuts will reduce the division's operating loss in its fiscal year ending in March to 60 billion yen ($532million), from 220.4 billion yen in the previous year, according to the company.
Analysts say the pace of the cost cuts has been faster than they had expected, which may mean a smaller loss than projected. Mr. Totoki, however, noted that sales tend to be weak in the January-March quarter.The unitalso plans to book some restructuring costs.
Mr. Totoki saidthe improved cost efficiency means the unit should be able to deliver on Sony's earlier pledge to achieve profitability in its fiscal year ending in March of 2017, and remain profitable after that.
As a small player in smartphones, Sony is betting on selling high-end models in advanced markets such as Japan and Europe -- though IHS cautions that sales have stagnated and price competition will pick up there as well.
"Smartphones are already commoditized in terms of design, hardware specifications and features," said Jusy Hong, principal analyst for mobile telecommunication at IHS Technology.
At the show, Sony unveiled a new flagship smartphone line. Xperia X offers a camera with an upgraded auto focus, Sony says, and so-called adaptive charging technology to increase battery lifespan.The California-based startup behind the technology, Qnovo Inc., said it can also reduce charging time, but that feature isn't offered in the Xperia X. Sony said it had invested in the startup, but declined to disclose any details.
In attention and investment from Sony management, smartphones trail the PlayStation 4 videogame system and camera sensors, the company said. But analysts say the business is essential if Sony wants to be relevant in consumer electronics.
"If it dropped out of smartphones, Sony would become just a component supplier," said Tatsuyuki Negoro, a professor at Waseda Business School.
Credit: By Takashi Mochizuki
