Happy Valentine's Day! This is Cupid, ready to answer all your questions about love, sex and the weird friends who brought me to life. Are you ready to feel the love?
This was the very first question uttered by the very first chatbot I'd ever built. Cupidbot's introductory question was also a great question for me, a chatbot skeptic: Was I ready to feel the love toward chatbots, the notionally intelligent conversation partners that now appear in instant-messaging apps like Facebook Messenger, voice-controlled virtual assistants like the Amazon Echo, and an increasing number of customer-care websites?
After all, chatbots can be pretty hard to love. I've always hated corporate voice-response systems and every other form of structured, scripted interaction. There are so many problems with bots: the glitches, the misunderstandings, the desperate search for the keywords (help? operator?) that will actually connect me with a human being.
But, I wondered, maybe chatbots can become more useful and less annoying if I understand how they work.
So, I spent the last six hours of Feb. 13 building Cupidbot, an interactive Valentine's chatbot for my friends that could live on my website and on Facebook Messenger. The experience finally helped me get my mind around the chatbot phenomenon.
For the first time, I felt like I understood what I'm interacting with when I'm intercepted by a customer-service bot. I also began to understand where bots can and can't be helpful.
I can't say that I learned to love chatbots. But there's definitely a friendship brewing.
I built my bot in Dexter, one of a growing number of chatbot platforms that aim to make it easy for regular folks to build their own bots. You don't need to be a programmer to use Dexter, but it helped that I have experience building websites and doing some basic scripting.
In theory, bots are pretty simple computer programs: You set up a bunch of triggers (things people might say to a bot) and then a bunch of responses (things your bot will say in return). The problem is that there are an awful lot of things people might say, and an awful lot of potential answers to each of those potential questions.
Given my limited time, I structured my Valentine around just a few menus that ensured people could find some options for interesting interaction, like: "What kind of Valentine's Day ideas are you looking for? 1) gifts 2) a romantic evening 3) fun with friends 4) romantic gestures."
Behind the scenes, every service bot is trying to do the same thing as my Cupidbot: channel customers down a limited set of paths to one of a predefined set of options. Unlike my little experiment, businesses may go through months of developing their bots, testing their interactions and then iterating new paths. But at the end of the day, the number of paths is limited.
The lesson for those of us using bots was pretty basic: Unless we enjoy wrestling with a robot, we're more likely to have a positive experience by working within the structure and choices a bot offers us so that we get the answers and information we need as quickly as possible.
As people started interacting with my chatbot, I discovered a whole new set of dilemmas around the rise of bots. I kept an eye on the chatbot's logs, so I would know if there was an error in my logic. The most obvious clue was seeing that a user had received the message "[Dexter Error] This bot doesn't have a response for that."
But looking at the logs meant looking at what people were asking and saying to Cupidbot -- and much to my surprise, some of that felt very personal:
-- I am in love with a guy who lives too far away.
-- What is the secret to a happy marriage?
-- How do I get to third base when I'm a 70-year-old guy?
If I felt uncomfortable reading questions like these anonymously, you can imagine how I felt when people started interacting with my bot via Facebook Messenger. For these, my chatbot logs showed each Facebook user's real name. So I knew exactly which of my friends was worried about her diminishing interest in "Star Trek," and which was wondering if he should try Tinder.
It all was eye-opening. Despite all the talk about how robots will never be able to satisfy the human need for intimacy and emotional connection, it was pretty clear that on some subjects, it's easier to talk with a faceless, impersonal bot, because they offer the illusion of a judgment-free, secret confidant.
Emphasis on illusion. Looking behind the scenes at my bot's logs, I immediately thought about every other bot I've ever interacted with. I've shrugged off my friends' privacy concerns when they've asked me if I worry about all the stuff I tell the various chatbots I interact with on a regular basis. Some companies do keep their chatbot logs, depending on their privacy policies. So now I'm suddenly visualizing those conversations sitting captured forever in logs that look like Cupidbot's, and I don't feel so sanguine.
If reading conversation logs left me uncomfortable with the prospect of bot-enabled surveillance, my overall experience with Cupidbot also got me excited for the first time about the business and social potential of bots.
A Valentine chatbot might have been a disposable trifle, but the process of building it helped me see how chatbots could become a valuable tool for me and for many organizations.
I knew I'd embraced the bot as an extension of myself when I found myself getting mildly offended by friends or family members who swore at my bot or made fun of it -- and equally, when I took pride in its success delivering the perfect response to a given question. Soon I was imagining the potential of an Alexbot that can serve up tech advice based on my archive of blog posts and columns. Now that I've seen how satisfying it can be to build a bot, watch it start interacting with people, and work on continually improving it, it's easy to anticipate a time when most of us will have these virtual selves as a way of answering routine questions or extending our professional footprint.
Before I built my own chatbot, I would have felt uncomfortable at the prospect of a world where humans and bots work alongside one another, where we can't always tell the difference between them, and where we no longer necessarily care. But now that I've built one myself, I'm no longer so frustrated by what bots can't do, because I can also see where they uniquely excel.
There are many situations in which we provide the same information or solutions over and over again, and in which having actual humans parrot these repetitive answers is an exercise in frustration. (Have you ever had a chat with a service rep who is obviously working from a script?) I'd far rather deal with an actual bot in these circumstances -- and see them complemented by human service teams that are empowered to address the atypical questions or problems that robots can't resolve.
So do I feel the love for chatbots yet? As I said, maybe not. But I'm starting to be less afraid of the coming of our robot overlords -- as long as they're willing to answer my awkward personal questions, and to delete the chat logs as soon as we're done.
---
Ms. Samuel, a frequent contributor to Journal Reports, is a technology researcher and writer in Vancouver, British Columbia. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Alexandra Samuel
