Pittsburgh -- In a room full of researchers and neuroscientists, Greg J. Siegle pointed to an image of a patient's brain scan and tried to think up a better treatment for her depression.
"In every other medical specialty in the world you say, 'I feel like I'm about to die,' they do a test," said Dr. Siegle, director of the Program in Cognitive Affective Neuroscience at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. "In psychiatry, where's the test?"
That's what he and a small army of other scientists are searching for. There's a flurry of research looking at whether brain scans or other tests can predict which patients suffering from depression will respond to a particular treatment. The hope is to uncover so-called biomarkers that can direct patients to the medication or therapy that will help the most.
The research is still in its early stages -- it could be years before such tests are available in psychiatrists' offices. In Pittsburgh, Dr. Siegle and his colleagues are already starting to use some of the research data to explore recommending treatments for patients. What's going on there provides an early window into what the mental health exam of the future might look like.
Dr. Siegle started his career in artificial intelligence, developing a program to enable computers to exhibit positive and negative emotions.
One evening, he accidentally left the computer on all night. In the morning, Dr. Siegel found that the device, it seemed, had fallen into the computer equivalent of a rut of negative thinking, labeling everything it analyzed as "bad." He wondered if depressed people got caught in the same trap.
About 16% of Americans will have major depression in their lifetime, according to data from researchers at Harvard Medical School. A major drawback of current popular medications, including drugs like Prozac and Lexapro, is that they often take a month or more to give patients relief.
And they often don't work at all. In a 2006 study published in the American Journal of Psychiatry of nearly 3,000 patients taking the antidepressant citalopram (brand name Celexa) for up to 14 weeks, only about one-third achieved remission from their depression. Many patients cycle through multiple drugs before they stumble upon one that works for them.
"If you can avoid a four-to-six-week trial of an expensive drug that won't work, that is valuable," said Steven Zalcman of the Division of Adult Translational Research & Treatment Development at the National Institute of Mental Health.
NIMH is funding a $19 million study of about 400 depressed patients to search for biomarkers identifying those who respond to the antidepressant sertraline (whose brand name is Zoloft). A second stage of the study will look for biomarkers that can predict response to another antidepressant, bupropion, with the brand name Wellbutrin, which has a different mechanism of action.
Recent studies have revealed some promising clues. Researchers at the University of California, Los Angeles have found a certain pattern of brain electrical activity can largely indicate which patients will respond to several popular antidepressant drugs. The activity can be picked up via an electroencephalogram (EEG) test within the first week of a patient's taking a medication.
"We can see with about 80% accuracy whether that treatment is likely to get the patient well or not," said Andrew Leuchter, a professor of psychiatry and biobehavioral sciences at UCLA's medical school. "You can start to see changes in the patterns of electrical activity in the brain of that individual before they start to feel better."
Researchers at Columbia University have used positron emission tomography (PET) scans to predict which patients will get better with antidepressant medication. In one small study published in 2009 in Psychiatry Research of 33 depressed patients, those who responded to drugs had lower activity levels in the midbrain and the rostral anterior cingulate, areas that contain receptors for the neurotransmitter serotonin. The test was able to predict about 80% of responders and 65% of non-responders, said J. John Mann, professor of psychiatry at Columbia and a co-author of the study.
In Pittsburgh, Dr. Siegle's lab has found that depressed patients whose fMRI scans show low reactivity in the subgenual cingulate cortex, which is believed to be involved in monitoring emotional responses, are more likely to get better with cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), a type of treatment that focuses on changing negative thoughts.
Overall, the new research on tests to predict treatment response in depression has largely remained confined to the laboratory. But Dr. Siegle is already using his lab's findings, and those of others, to help advise a small number of depression patients involved in Pittsburgh studies on the best course of treatment.
On a recent Tuesday morning, social worker Michele Feingold sat in a room with Dr. Siegle and several other Pittsburgh researchers and neuroscientists and relayed the case of a 42-year-old woman, a subject in a current research trial.
"She has had nine lifetime episodes of major depression," Ms. Feingold said.
The patient had attempted suicide as a teenager, had been a witness to a violent crime in her 20s and was still struggling with the death of her father in 2010 and the recent death of her boss, Ms. Feingold said.
Then Dr. Siegle presented the patient's brain. "She has well over 60 abnormalities," he said, while pointing to a projected image showing the activity of various brain regions -- and the strength of the connections between them -- compared with the activity found in a sample of people without mental illness.
Dr. Siegle was presenting information gleaned from a nearly 15-minute test that measured the response of the patient's brain to positive (for example: "adorable," "joyful"), negative ("helpless," "unhappy") and so-called trauma words ("nightmare," "scream") flashed on a screen while she was in an fMRI scanner.
The patient's amygdala, a part of the brain involved in recognizing and generating emotions, had a strong initial reaction to trauma and negative words. Then amygdala activity dropped. Activity in many other areas of the brain plummeted in response to trauma words. Indeed, the patient's brain appeared to "shut down" to trauma words, Dr. Siegle said.
Marrying the brain data and picture presented by Ms. Feingold, the group of researchers decided to recommend a treatment called interpersonal therapy, which addresses a person's relationships and specifically includes a focus on grief. Because the patient's brain scan showed high reactivity in the subgenual cingulate cortex, CBT wasn't recommended. Dr. Siegle also suggested that "attention bias modification" exercises done via computer could teach the patient's brain to disengage from emotional stimuli.
Dr. Siegle and his team are also trying to come up with tests to predict treatment response that are cheaper than a brain scan, which can run $1,000 or more. (Insurance companies largely don't cover scans used to help guide treatment decisions.) Dr. Siegle is studying EEG exams and eye tracking (following where people look in response to emotional words and images) as possible tests.
His lab has also found that how a person's pupils respond to emotional words can predict their response to CBT. (Those whose pupils dilate less in response to negative emotional words are more likely to get better with the therapy.)
"It's a poor man's brain scan," he says.
Credit: By Andrea Petersen
