It seems almost quaint that 10 years ago the Justice Department had to fight to open up the real estate market so buyers could find homes online without the help of an agent. Now, sites like Zillow and Homes.com are commonplace, but they couldn't have thrived without the department's intervention.
In 2005 the Justice Department sued the National Association of Realtors to force an end to a NAR practice that allowed traditional brokers to withhold listings from new web portals. The department argued the practice locked in outmoded business models and discouraged price competition. In 2008 the two sides reached a deal that made NAR and its associated organizations treat web-savvy brokers the same as traditional Realtors. Real-estate search engines took off, giving consumers new power in home buying.
Last November the settlement lapsed, giving the Justice Department an opportunity to open up the residential real-estate market to even greater innovation. While the nation's roughly 1.3 million residential brokers no longer monopolize the flow of housing information, they've shielded themselves with a skein of anticompetitive practices, such as restrictive "all or nothing" membership rules and commission tying practices. These have kept the high fees they charge unchanged since 1991.
The Realtors' anticompetitive practices have had a greater negative impact on the American economy than anything Canadian dairy companies or European car makers could do to their counterparts in the U.S. At 5% to 6% of transaction value, U.S. broker fees are significantly higher than those paid elsewhere in the developed world. Real-estate agents in Canada and Belgium get only 3% on average, while those in Denmark, Finland and Australia take home 2%. If American consumers paid a 2% fee, they'd save an estimated $60 billion a year.
The high fees might make sense if residential Realtors always offered an extremely valuable service. But according to NAR itself, most buyers do the work themselves, spending months on the Internet identifying attractive neighborhoods and homes before calling a real-estate agent simply to open the door. While agents no longer routinely drive their clients around for consecutive weekends showing them homes, their fees remain as high as ever.
So how do Realtors keep fees so costly? Through skillful Washington lobbying and local boards of Realtors, which control some 750 separate multiple listing services across the country. These minicartels are still up to their anticompetitive tricks. Boards of Realtors mandate that if any member of a brokerage firm belongs to a service, every agent at the firm must be a dues-paying member as well -- a potentially unconstitutional requirement in light of the Supreme Court's 2018 ruling that government unions can't exact fees from nonmembers.
Each of these agents, in turn, is required to hand over customer data to the multiple listing service and prohibited from sharing it with nonmembers. Homeowners are required to hire a buying agent if they employ a selling agent through a multiple listing service -- a potentially illegal tying arrangement under the Sherman Anti-Trust Act that keeps buying agents paid though they offer almost no useful services.
With the lapse of the Justice Department's settlement, regulators have the chance to go after these practices and potentially boost growth across the economy. Technology streamlines and makes buying and selling homes much more transparent, sinking transaction costs. As the U.S. stock market and basic economics have shown, when transaction fees go down, volume goes up.
The positive ripple effect would reach virtually every economic sector. Home sellers and buyers would keep more of their equity. The increase in housing sales would help everyone from mortgage bankers to home insurers to remodeling companies to electricians and do-it-yourself retailers. The government would take in more taxes, both on the transactions and on rising home valuations on which property taxes are based.
Technology like Zillow is here to stay, no matter what Realtors do. But they'll work hard to slow down innovative technologies and business models that undercut their cartel. Consumers over the past decade have grown comfortable conducting even the most sensitive transactions online, from banking to executing legal documents. It's time for the revolution in residential real estate to come to fruition.
---
Mr. Ryan is a co-founder and CEO and Mr. Friedland manages brand and public policy at REX, a real-estate brokerage that uses big data and machine learning.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: How Realtors Add Value for Their Customers" -- WSJ March 11, 2019)

Credit: By Jack Ryan and Jonathan Friedland
