A few months ago, Susan Lobell returned to St. John's College, her alma mater, to study themes of art, relationships, memory and love in Virginia Woolf's novels. Her husband, also an alum, took a class comparing and contrasting plays by Euripides, Sophocles and Aeschylus.
What they didn't return to: claustrophobic dorms and a college meal plan. Instead, the couple, both 70, rented a one-bedroom casita in downtown Santa Fe, N.M. They walked to restaurants, visited the Georgia O'Keeffe Museum and explored the city on electric-assist bikes. "We were ready to move off campus," jokes Ms. Lobell.
There are signs that more adults are heading back to school for a holiday. St. John's College in Santa Fe is offering 30 classes the summer of 2020 compared with 18 in 2014, reflecting increased demand. Kenyon College's Kenyon Review arm, which holds summer writers workshops, is anticipating 250 participants this summer compared with 140 in 2015.
College campuses can be beautiful in the summer. Often near lakes and rivers, in towns with eclectic restaurants and cultural offerings, they tend to be quiet, green spaces with architecturally interesting buildings and great gyms and libraries. And their offerings span the country and cover a range of fields. Amherst College in Amherst, Mass., offers an annual adult sports camp marketed as "perfect for those who want to play like children but relax like adults," while Stanford University in Palo Alto, Calif., offers seminars like "A Crash Course in Artificial Intelligence" and "Four Hundred Years of Great Opera Performances."
The catch, of course, is living there. Dorms tend to have tiny rooms, shared bathrooms and often no air conditioning.
One week every summer, Penny Skitol Haitkin, a 75-year-old retired special-education teacher, heads to Cornell University to study political science and history in classes like "Trial Law" and "The History of American Humor." "It kind of reminds me I have a brain," she said. But the 1965 Cornell graduate, who lives in New York City, eschews the on-campus living options, staying instead at a a Hilton hotel in downtown Ithaca, which she finds more comfortable.
Cornell calls its adult university an "education vacation." Taught by its professors and outside experts, its classes, which range from math courses to golf clinics, are held over four one-week sessions, with about 100 adults enrolling for each session. At night, there are lectures given by Cornell faculty, concerts on the Arts Quad and films on campus.
Most adult students stay in a Cornell residence hall, which is air-conditioned and has semi-private baths. The cost for a double-occupancy room is $2,030 a week, including the course and meals. Travelers who want more space can rent anything from a room in a house in Collegetown for $200 a night to a $900-a-night, 3,300-square-foot, five-bedroom, three-bathroom house on 4 acres, adjacent to hiking and bike trails. The course alone is $1,295.
Kenyon Review will hold 22 weeklong writers workshops the summer of 2020 that range from poetry to spiritual, translation, fiction and nonfiction. At night, there are readings by instructors, visiting writers and workshop participants. Rolling admissions started earlier this month.
Most people stay on campus, says Elizabeth Dark, associate director of the workshop program. "We are quite remote," she explains. A single, air-conditioned dorm room with a shared bath is included in the $2,295 cost for the program, which also covers tuition and meals.
However, there are other options: The late-1800s, remodeled, three-bedroom, two-bathroom Bent Canoe Farm Guest House overlooking the Kokosing River goes for $190 a night in July, while a two-story, two-bedroom apartment associated with Gambier House, a local bed and breakfast, is $170 a night in July. Kenyon offers a $150 discount for those who choose to stay off campus.
St. John's College will hold 30 seminars the summer of 2020 for adults, both in its Summer Classics program, which includes liberal arts offerings in philosophy, literature and political science and its Science Institute, which in past summers has included courses like "The Origins and Meaning of Probability and "The Mathematical Delights of General Relativity." On campus, room and board in a single-occupancy bedroom (not air-conditioned) arranged around a shared living room with a shared bathroom room cost $525 a week.
Jonathan Doram, a 25-year-old teacher from Indianapolis, rented a one-bedroom house he found on Airbnb when he took two St. John classes in summer of 2019 on George Eliot's Middlemarch and Italian cinema. Mr. Doram liked the wide range of ages of the students in his seminar, but wanted a more local experience at night. "I discovered a whole other part of Santa Fe I wouldn't have if I'd stayed on campus," he says.

Credit: By Nancy Keates

ERIC Subject: Adult Students; Dining Facilities; Seminars; Sanitary Facilities; Climate Control; Dormitories
