"Google" is already a verb for finding information online. Now, Google the company wants to make it synonymous with finding information orally.
The Alphabet Inc. unit Tuesday revealed a wireless speaker called Home to take on Amazon.com Inc.'s Echo and two versions of a new high-end smartphone called Pixel aimed at fighting Apple Inc.'s iPhone.
All of the new devices have a digital helper called Google Assistant, which aims to integrate Google's work in artificial intelligence to respond to voice commands, potentially marking the next step in search.
Google envisions a world in which users ask their phones to make dinner reservations or their home speakers to give advice on removing a stain from a rug.
"When I look at where computing is headed, it's clear to me that we're evolving from a mobile-first to an AI-first world," Sundar Pichai, Google's chief executive, told an audience at a San Francisco event.
Google's Assistant is starting behind rivals including Apple Inc.'s Siri, Microsoft Corp.'s Cortana and Amazon's Alexa. Alexa powers Amazon's Echo, a surprise hit that allows users to ask questions and to perform tasks.
The rise of these digital assistants threatens Google's spot as the go-to place to search for information, which helped Alphabet generate 90 % of its revenue last year through advertising.
The company wants to go from "Google it" to the voice command "Ok, Google" to engage Assistant for help.
Just as Google wasn't the first search engine for the web, Google executives hope their artificial-intelligence smarts will ultimately overcome the others.
Executives on Tuesday touted the company's search technology and its so-called knowledge graph, an index of more than a billion entities.
"Google on paper is much better positioned to do something like this" than Amazon, said Jan Dawson, founder of research firm Jackdaw Research. But Mr. Dawson said Google needs to move more quickly to make use of Assistant across its product line.
Beyond the Home device, Google said Assistant would also be built into the new Pixel phones; it is also used in Google's new messaging app, Allo, where users can text with the Assistant. But it will not yet be a standard part of the Android mobile operating system, used by dozens of other smartphone makers.
"If Assistant doesn't come to Android, in general, very, very quickly, the whole strategy is flawed, frankly," Mr. Dawson said.
In a statement, Google said it is "experimenting with these changes to assess user reaction and feedback."
Home, which will be available in retailers in the U.S. beginning Nov. 4, will cost $129, undercutting Echo, which costs $180. Google aims to make Assistant more useful by linking it to more third-party applications.
Credit: By Tim Higgins and Nathan Olivarez-Giles
