Exercise-equipment company Tonal is cutting its staff by 35% and emphasizing profitability, the company said Wednesday, as layoffs and hiring freezes mount across businesses.
The job cuts will affect corporate functions at all levels, Tonal founder and Chief Executive Aly Orady said in an internal memo viewed by The Wall Street Journal.
"To make it through what's ahead, we must prioritize becoming a self-sustaining and profitable business," Mr. Orady said in the memo. "Becoming self-sustaining requires us to scale back significantly, both operationally and in our headcount."
Mr. Orady added that the company's "costs, growth, and investment levels were shaped by and built for a hyper-growth trajectory."
Tonal didn't comment on the number of people it currently employs.
CNBC earlier reported the layoffs at Tonal.
The reductions come as many companies that grew sharply during the Covid-19 pandemic are now scaling back. Peloton Interactive Inc., a Tonal competitor, said in February that it would cut 2,800 corporate jobs amid weaker-than-expected demand for its equipment.
Some companies, including Twitter Inc., Netflix Inc. and Amazon.com Inc., are slowing hiring or cutting jobs as fear of a recession mounts. Some employers have warned staffers to brace for tougher times ahead.
Tonal's Mr. Orady said employees let go would get at least eight weeks of continued pay, among other benefits.
San Francisco-based Tonal, the creator of an at-home digital weight machine, was valued at $1.6 billion in March 2021, according to the company, as part of a $250 million fundraising round. Its investors include athletes such as basketball star Stephen Curry and tennis star Serena Williams.
The company's machine -- which is supposed to be mounted on a user's wall -- uses artificial intelligence to make exercises tailored to individual customers.
Tonal's machine costs $3,495, according to Tonal's website. Consumers can also pay an extra $495 for the device's smart accessories.
Like other pandemic darlings, the company saw sales skyrocket during the earlier days of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Credit: By Allison Prang
