FRANKFURT -- More German bankers are trading ties for T-shirts and trying to boost the country's struggling tech-startup scene.
Axel Hoerger spent 20 years rising through Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and UBS Group AG. Last year, he shifted gears and launched a messaging app called Poltergeist.
"At some point I thought I'd seen enough in banking and decided to take a break and start something on my own," Mr. Hoerger said.
The 48-year-old, who has hired a chief executive for his venture and started a new banking job, said Poltergeist has around 200,000 users and continues to grow.
"The first few months were thrilling," he said. He is "now looking to raise funds that propel us to the next stage."
He isn't alone among German bankers with Silicon Valley dreams.
"Many of the startups we're talking with over a potential investment are founded by former bankers and business consultants," said Frank Seehaus of German venture-capital firm Acton Capital Partners GmbH. "Those people stand out because they know how to present the value drivers of business models."
The trend started after the financial crisis. It is picking up speed, as many European leaders are calling for more homegrown tech champions, industry officials said.
The situation is especially acute in Germany, where venture-capital firms last year invested less than $1 billion in young German companies, according to the country's private-equity and venture-capital association, BVK. Across Europe, the figure is roughly $15 billion, still dwarfed by the U.S.'s $75.3 billion, according to Dow Jones VentureSource.
Only two German companies are in the Billion Dollar Club of the world's 50 biggest startups: online fashion retailer Zalando SE and Rocket Internet SE, which itself develops startups.
For entrepreneurial bankers, the shortage of new-venture funding is itself an opportunity. Ex-Goldman Sachs banker Toby Triebel in 2014 founded Spotcap, an online credit platform that provides short-term loans to small and midsize enterprises.
"Whenever a portfolio in our region is looking at raising more than 20 million euros ($22.6 million), we can't just rely on Europe or just Germany," said Martin Korbmacher, who was chairman of Credit Suisse AG's German and Austrian investment bank until 2011.
He then founded Event Horizon Capital & Advisory GmbH, a firm that invests in young companies and advises startups on strategy and fundraisings. Mr. Korbmacher said former colleagues initially smiled at what they called his "rather esoteric move for a banker."
His investments include Zurich-based Starmind, a knowledge-management company that uses artificial intelligence to automatically route any employee's question to the right expert within an organization. "Europeans need to find their own solutions instead of relying on Silicon Valley," he said.
Dagmar Bottenbruch, who previously ran the German operations of Dutch lender Rabobank NV, is now co-chief executive at Crosslend GmbH, a platform that securitizes loans of all sizes and markets them to investors.
"There is abundant liquidity on the market," she said, "but it doesn't flow to where it's needed."
Credit: By Eyk Henning
