[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Having decided to sell off one of its largest wireless-chip businesses, Broadcom's bigger challenge will be finding the right buyer for it.
The chip maker is formally shopping the unit that makes radio-frequency, or RF, chips for smartphones. The Wall Street Journal reported Wednesday that Broadcom is working with Credit Suisse to find a buyer with the hopes of landing a deal in the neighborhood of $10 billion. This comes just days after the company used its fiscal fourth-quarter conference call to announce that it no longer considered wireless part of its "core," which was widely interpreted as hanging a "for sale" sign on the business.
Broadcom is certainly no stranger to selling. The company has played the role of the seller in six M&A deals since merging with Avago in early 2016, according to FactSet. But none of those even broke the $1 billion mark. Moreover, most were divestitures of recent acquisitions by the company.
Selling the RF unit is different: Chips that filter signals for smartphones was a key segment for Avago before it began a wave of acquisitions early in the decade. The business is highly concentrated; Apple Inc. accounted for more than one-fifth of Avago's revenue before the merger with Broadcom. Apple and Samsung are still believed to account for the majority of Broadcom's RF chip sales, which also makes both problematic as potential buyers. Apple is highly unlikely to buy a business that would continue supplying key components to its longtime rival.
Broadcom's main competitors in RF chips present other possibilities, but Skyworks Solutions only has about $1 billion in cash on its books and Qorvo a little more than half that much.
Other strategic buyers face their own challenges. Qualcomm is ramping up its own RF business but may balk at striking a deal with Broadcom given those companies' recent, tumultuous history. Foreign suitors such as Taiwan's MediaTek and Japan's Murata would likely face regulatory scrutiny since a deal presumably would include Broadcom's domestic chip-fabrication facilities. Intel also has been named as a speculative suitor. But the chip giant's recent M&A activity is going more toward artificial intelligence.
The lack of easy buyers could make Broadcom's $10 billion target a challenge, but a deal is still likely. History has shown that when Broadcom is motivated to make a deal, it tends to happen.

Credit: By Dan Gallagher
