SEOUL -- Samsung Electronics Co. is developing a voice-activated speaker powered by its digital assistant Bixby, according to people familiar with the matter, joining an arms race in tabletop devices.
The timing is far from determined, the people said. The English-language version of Bixby has been delayed and they said many of the speaker's features and other specifications are yet to be decided. But the project -- internally code-named Vega -- has been going on for more than a year, several of the people said.
Should a Samsung speaker hit the market, the South Korean tech giant would face the likes of Amazon.com Inc., Alphabet Inc. and Microsoft Corp. in a race to create and install such speakers to eventually run internet-connected homes, cars and offices -- from turning off lights to adjusting the thermostat.
To Silicon Valley, voice-activated speakers are more about big data than big bucks. The ultimate payoff is advancing voice-activated artificial-intelligence technology. The virtual assistants, like Amazon's Alexa, Apple Inc.'s Siri and Bixby, improve with use as the software learns from mistakes, industry executives say.
Amazon's Echo has captured more than 70% of the U.S. market for voice-activated speakers, with Alphabet's Google Home next at around 24%, according to eMarketer, a market-research firm.
The number of Americans using such speakers at least once a month will reach about 36 million this year, eMarketer said, double last year's figure.
One variable slowing Samsung's progress is the postponed U.S. launch of the English-language version of Bixby, which would operate the speaker much as Alexa operates Amazon's Echo device, according to people familiar with the matter.
Bixby's voice features were a key selling point for the smartphone maker's latest flagship model, the Galaxy S8, introduced April 21.
The company vowed the English-language Bixby would be ready by spring, but now Samsung internally believes those voice features are unlikely before the second half of July, one of the people said.
A Samsung spokeswoman said the company doesn't comment on rumors and speculation.

Credit: By Timothy W. Martin
