Amazon.com Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google are considering a new use for their popular home speakers: becoming the home phone.
Amazon's Echo or the Google Home could be used to make or receive calls, people familiar with the matter said, a functionality that would give them further control over consumers' digital lives at home.
The tech giants could launch the feature this year, the people said -- but the effort is hung up over concerns about privacy, telecom regulations and emergency services. And they are aware of the inherent awkwardness of having phone conversations on a speaker.
Amazon and Google are part of a broader race among technology giants to create and install digital assistants in everything from cars to homes. Adding phone capability is a way to tack on more functions, which could lead to greater adoption and more frequent use.
Such a feature would further disrupt traditional telecom firms like AT&T Inc. and Verizon Communications Inc. The speakers could diminish the dwindling landline business and take attention away from smartphones.
Commanding the Echo or the Google Home to call friends or local businesses is the logical next step for the artificial intelligence-powered speakers, the people familiar with the matter said. They currently respond to voice commands to do things like play music, answer questions and control aspects of the home. The Echo lets consumers order from Amazon.
Amazon launched its Echo in 2014, and by the following year was working on the phone feature, according to these people. However, employee turnover has slowed the effort, according to one of the people. Amazon has failed in phones once before, when its Fire smartphone flopped in 2014. The Echo, on the other hand, has tapped a big audience: more than 11 million units have sold, according to Morgan Stanley estimates.
While Google only started selling its Home speaker late last year, it has more experience with telephony. The internet search giant has been running voice, text and other online communications services for about a decade. It has also been working on voice recognition and transcription software as part of its Android operating system for years.
One concern is potential consumer anxiety over speaking on a device that has the ability to record conversations, according to one of the people. People consider phone conversations to be the third most sensitive data category, after social security numbers and health conditions, according to a study by Pew Research Center.
The Echo and Google Home, which are always on, already continuously record audio locally in chunks of a few seconds at a time, overwriting the audio file until they hear their activation word -- such as "Alexa" for the Echo. The devices then transmit that audio to the cloud for answers. The companies also store and analyze the data to train their artificial intelligence. Both companies provide the option to go back and delete recordings from the cloud.
"We're headed to a world of embedded sensors in everything, that measure everything, that see everything, that hear everything," says Albert Gidari, director for privacy at Stanford Law School's Center for Internet and Society. "The reality is that technology . . . kind of blurs law for privacy."
If it adds a phone feature, Amazon would only collect each call's metadata -- what numbers were dialed and how long each call lasts, not the conversations themselves, another one of the people said. It is unclear what information Google would retain on the Home, but its existing Google Voice app says it only keeps metadata, SMS messages, voice mails and any calls users have recorded themselves.
The Echo and Home would most likely use voice over internet protocol technology, or VoIP, like Microsoft Inc.'s Skype or Vonage Holdings Corp.
Amazon is considering multiple options for how the phone feature could work, the people said. The Echo could get its own phone number. Call forwarding could enable calls to that number to be answered remotely on a cellphone, and vice versa.
Another option is to sync a user's existing phone number and contacts with the Echo. Incoming calls would ring on the user's cellphone.
Amazon and Google could develop the calling tool themselves, or they could allow external providers such as Skype or Vonage onto their platforms.
There are other considerations, such as the difficulty in switching a call from the Echo to a handset, meaning calls couldn't easily be taken off speakerphone midway through a conversation, the people said. Ending the call is also complicated, because the trigger word for hanging up could also be used in conversation, and the device needs to know how to differentiate between them.
An obstacle to the rollout of Echo or Google Home calling is how the phone feature would mesh with federal laws requiring phone companies to allow law enforcement agencies to wiretap calls in real time. App-to-app internet calls from services like Facebook Inc.'s WhatsApp and Apple Inc.'s FaceTime are immune to the law, as is Skype. Whether it would apply to phone calls made on the Echo or Google Home is unclear. However, the metadata records would likely be accessible by law enforcement with a warrant, experts say.
---
Greg Bensinger and Jack Nicas contributed to this article.
Credit: By Ryan Knutson and Laura Stevens
