On Jan. 29, the National Commission on the Future of the U.S. Army released its report on a wide range of issues confronting the Army. Its more than 60 recommendations addressed details as specific as the proper ratio of attack-helicopter battalions between the active Army and the Reserves. Yet for all its good work, the commission neglected to tackle the Army's biggest problem: its declining ability to wage the kind of protracted irregular wars that America's enemies increasingly prefer to fight.
The roots of this problem lie chiefly in the social choice the American people made following the Vietnam War to abolish the draft and field the military entirely with volunteers. That decision has become so expensive that it now threatens to limit U.S. defense options.
The shift to a volunteer force seemed logical at the time. A Cold War Army of volunteers would stand guard in Europe and Korea to deter aggression. In the event war came, the National Guard and Reserves would be mobilized and the draft reinstated if necessary. Following the Iraq war that began in 2003, however, the Army found itself in protracted conflicts against irregular forces in Afghanistan and Iraq. These are the new "Vietnams" the Army's civilian masters said it didn't need to plan for again.
It turns out there is a big difference between attracting volunteers for service in the peacetime Army as opposed to one that sends its soldiers on repeated combat tours. To maintain the numbers of soldiers needed for these wars, compensation had to be increased and the risk of casualties reduced. Since 9/11, the Army's personnel costs have increased, on a per-soldier basis, by over 50% after adjusting for inflation.
The Army has also taken unprecedented steps to reduce casualties. For example, it has spent more than $40 billion since 9/11 on heavily armored vehicles, and nearly $20 billion on other ways -- such as detection and defusing methods -- to reduce the threat of roadside bombs.
Providing protections for soldiers is only going to get harder. Developing and fielding improved vehicle armor to protect soldiers against roadside bombs takes months or years to accomplish. Yet enemies have consistently found ways -- such as simply emplacing larger bombs -- to defeat these improvements far more quickly and cheaply than we can counter them. Enemies like al Qaeda in Iraq and the Taliban in Afghanistan are daunting enough. But they have nothing like the firepower possessed by terrorist groups like the Iranian-backed Hezbollah, which has tens of thousands of rockets, missiles, mortars and artillery munitions.
The Obama administration's response to this challenge has been to reprise "No More Vietnams." Hence the president ordered the withdrawal of troops from Iraq and major force reductions in Afghanistan, and has directed the Pentagon not to size the Army for these kinds of wars.
But to paraphrase Trotsky: While the U.S. may not be interested in irregular warfare, its enemies are. Iran has increased its support of its proxies in the Middle East. Moscow has employed its own proxies to annex Crimea and seize chunks of eastern Ukraine. ISIS has emerged from the power vacuum created by the Army's withdrawal from Iraq, while the Taliban are resurgent in Afghanistan as the U.S. Army's footprint there fades.
The administration has now curtailed the drawdown of American forces in Afghanistan. But it isn't clear that the small residual force will be able to do much more than defend itself -- thus becoming what the military refers to as a "self-licking ice cream cone." Nor is it clear what a handful of U.S. Special Forces troops can accomplish in the Middle East.
There are ways the Army can address the persistent threat of modern irregular warfare without returning to a draft, which is neither politically feasible nor necessary. It involves investing in better training of allies and partners, in unmanned systems and in special forces. The administration needs to do a better job of identifying partners and supporting its allies in these conflicts. Spending $500 million to field a few Syrian freedom fighters against Bashar Assad does not square with the president's injunction to avoid doing "stupid stuff." The Kurds, though, have proven to be reliable and effective partners. They deserve more support, and we should look for similar partners to assist. Fortunately Gen. Mark Milley, the Army's new chief of staff, is exploring creating specially designed training and advisory brigades for this purpose.
Second, the Army must leverage technology. As the Air Force's use of remotely piloted drones has shown, rapid advances are being made in the area of artificial intelligence and robotics. The Army needs to exploit these technologies.
During the Korean and Vietnam wars the Army sought to minimize casualties by substituting firepower for manpower whenever possible. Increasingly the Army will need to send in the "droids" instead of soldiers whenever possible.
Finally, the Army must concentrate on protecting the size and readiness of its special-operations forces, preserving these high-quality forces to offset the effects of a continuing 20% cut in the active Army's size that began in 2012 and should be completed in 2019.
America's enemies are pursuing an effective strategy, creating irregular-warfare forces to exploit its weakness in this form of warfare. The proper response to this challenge is not to abandon the field to those enemies, but to develop unique advantages and leverage them in ways that transform weaknesses into a strength.
---
Mr. Krepinevich, who served in the Army for 25 years, is president of the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments.
Credit: By Andrew F. Krepinevich
