[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Mark Zuckerberg really needs to hope Facebook's advertising growth doesn't start slowing again.
The co-founder and chief executive of Meta Platforms took to the stage at the company's headquarters on Wednesday to tout the latest efforts in mixed reality, which blends virtual reality with real-world images. There weren't many surprises -- especially because Zuckerberg scooped himself by unveiling the new Quest 3 headset in June as a way to get ahead of Apple's unveiling of its first mixed-reality device the following week. Zuckerberg used the event to jump on the bandwagon of generative artificial intelligence, announcing a new personal assistant chatbot called Meta AI.
Meta is hardly alone among big tech companies not named Apple that are still dabbling in hardware. Microsoft and Amazon held events last week to showcase their lineups of new devices for the fall, while Google is scheduled to introduce its latest Pixel smartphones next week.
Still, the parent of Facebook stands out. Reality Labs, the segment that houses Meta's work in VR and augmented reality, generated 1.5% of the company's revenue for the 12-month period ended June. It produced an operating loss of $15.7 billion for that time. That loss has effectively taken about 35% off the operating earnings over the past four quarters by the company's Family of Apps -- mainly Facebook and Instagram advertising. Alphabet's Other Bets ventures cost about 7% of the operating earnings of the core Google business for that time.
For Meta, that won't be getting better soon. It warned in its second-quarter call in July that losses from Reality Labs will "increase meaningfully" next year. There is always the possibility that the Quest 3 headset will be a hit, but the VR/AR market has so far proven to be more of a showcase for quick flameouts. According to data from IDC, Meta's headset shipments in the first half of this year slid 72% from a year earlier, which was helped by the brief popularity of its Quest 2 headset. IDC projects total headset shipments across the industry will fall 3% this year from last year.
That might explain why Zuckerberg quickly pivoted to AI after announcing the Quest 3 will start shipping next month. In addition to the Meta AI chatbot, he announced more specialized chatbots fronted by celebrities. Meta will start selling new smartglasses next month with Meta AI through its partnership with Ray-Ban.
But AI is expensive. And unlike big-tech peers such as Microsoft and Google that already rolled out prices for their GenAI-based services, Zuckerberg said nothing about any business model being attached to the new AI tools.
Hence, the company still in the midst of its "year of efficiency" faces growing bills. Meta's share price surged 147% this year -- the second-best performer on the S&P 500 -- mostly on the belief that the Facebook and Instagram ad businesses will keep accelerating their recent growth trends. Zuckerberg's metaverse can't afford to have many friends tap out.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
