Microsoft's profit rose last quarter as artificial intelligence bolstered demand for its software and cloud services, prompting the company to spend billions of dollars on the infrastructure needed to accommodate the booming appetite for the hot technology.
The tech giant's revenue increased 17% from a year earlier to $61.9 billion, beating analysts' estimates. Its net income grew by 20% to $21.9 billion.
Microsoft has been among the bigger winners in the AI race thanks to its close relationship with ChatGPT maker OpenAI. The company has woven the startup's technology into an array of products called Copilot, which are AI assistants that plug into key offerings like its workplace software suite, Microsoft 365.
Artificial intelligence is also boosting demand for its cloud services. Microsoft's Azure cloud services rose 31% during the quarter.
Microsoft said that 7 percentage points of the Azure growth came from its AI services, up from 6 percentage points the previous quarter.
Microsoft hopes that Copilot will become a major contributor of new revenue to its software business. Some analysts believe it could end up adding billions to the company's top line.
"They have been a leader in AI," said Gil Luria, a software analyst at D.A. Davidson. "They're really the only ones that can put their finger on actual AI revenue."
Microsoft shares rose 5% in after-hours trading Thursday.
Early users of Copilot, which was released last year, have lauded the assistant for its ability to transcribe meetings done online with Microsoft's Teams software. Other areas, like creating spreadsheets and writing emails, have been less successful, some customers said.
Microsoft is making more money as customers use AI software hosted on its cloud. Microsoft's cloud hosts ChatGPT, software made by startups like Mistral and Cohere, and models made by tech giants like Meta.
The Redmond, Wash., company has been ramping up its spending on data centers and other infrastructure to host the rising AI demand. That spending has sent some of Microsoft's capital expenditures soaring.
Microsoft said its capital expenditures were $14 billion last quarter, a marked increase from the $11.5 billion the company spent the preceding quarter.
Microsoft shares rose around 5% in after-hours trading Thursday.
On a conference call after earnings were announced, Chief Financial Officer Amy Hood said that the company will continue to increase spending.
She said the customer demand for AI services is beyond what Microsoft is able to provide, pushing the company to pour more money into building its infrastructure.
Microsoft projects revenue of between $63.5 billion and $64.5 billion in the quarter through June.
Microsoft's AI success has helped push its market value above $3 trillion this year. It has surpassed Apple's, making it the world's biggest company by that measure.
Over the past 12 months, its stock has climbed 45%, while the Nasdaq Composite Index rose 32% and Apple shares gained 4%.
Generate image description

Credit: By Tom Dotan
