Corporate cybersecurity leaders are looking for ways to spend less in 2024 and still focus on securing technologies for business operations as companies face continued hacking threats.
High priorities include protecting artificial intelligence and cloud computing, which have seen increasing corporate use, and reducing the number of cyber suppliers, chief information security officers say.
Company budgets, including for cybersecurity, came under pressure last year and security chiefs expect more of the same in 2024. Many are tightening their belts and being extra cautious about how they choose vendors and tools.
"You have to be very judicious about where you're spending," said Steve Pugh, CISO at Intercontinental Exchange. The biggest change for many CISOs over the course of 2023 was that they were given less money, he said.
Plus, cyber departments aren't immune from the effects of cuts in the wider business. Cybersecurity often relies on other groups, such as technology and engineering staff, to implement tools and policies.
Those departments have typically suffered heavier cuts to staff and budgets in recent years, meaning they sometimes have less capacity to take on security projects.
Giving priority to the most important projects will be crucial for security chiefs in 2024, said Boaz Gelbord, chief security officer of cloud and security company Akamai Technologies.
"The effects of that aren't just being seen now, but are going to be seen over the coming year," he said.
At Intercontinental, one 2024 priority for Pugh is to move employees away from using passwords. Most hacks are caused by compromised employee credentials, which attackers steal through phishing lures and other means. Pugh said he hasn't yet chosen a password replacement. Intercontinental has worked with hardware tokens and other technologies, he said, adding that he will take time to study alternatives.
Making a business case for cyber spending is critical at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, said Chief Technology Officer Chris Carmody.
Carmody's team recently spent about a year crunching the numbers on services from Rubrik, which tracks and encrypts customer data. The team determined that the benefits made financial sense for UPMC, which runs more than 40 hospitals and 800 healthcare facilities worldwide.
If UPMC were hacked, Rubrik's services would dramatically reduce recovery time and expense, he said.
"We have to be very smart and almost surgical with the precision in how we invest our dollars," he said.
Last year, as companies slowed their purchasing decisions and became more selective, several cybersecurity suppliers laid off workers. The industry was also reshaped by acquisitions. As a result, corporate cyber chiefs say they are concerned about relying too much on one supplier.
Nemi George, information security officer at California-based Pacific Dental Services, which operates dental and medical offices in 24 states, said several cyber suppliers now offer similar services and he plans to consolidate this year.
Cutting ties with some suppliers will mean extra funds for other security projects, he said.
"I'm looking to do more with what I have," he said.
Insurance and investment management company Principal Financial will have a steady budget in 2024, and the cyber team will give priority to cloud security and technologies like generative AI that are focus areas for the company overall, said CISO Meg Anderson.
Some employees working on cloud security are part of Principal's broader cloud platform team and don't draw from the cybersecurity budget, Anderson said. The structure has several benefits: It saves on cyber spending, and means security features are built into the cloud, she said.
"That's a little bit of a shift where security is getting done earlier in the process," she said. "We try to make sure that we're spending our time and money on the priorities of the business."
---
Kim S. Nash contributed to this article.
Credit: By Catherine Stupp and James Rundle
