WALMART INC.
WMT +0.6%
Shoppers are going back to basics. U.S. retail giant Walmart reported Tuesday that inflation is contributing to a budgeting shift by customers, who are spending more on food and less on other goods like electronics and apparel. The trend led to larger-than-expected quarterly sales growth for Walmart, which relies on groceries for the majority of its sales. The company said it is gaining market share in grocery, including among higher-income households that are spending cautiously. Still, Walmart gave a muted outlook for the rest of the year. Walmart shares added 0.6% Tuesday.
BATH & BODY WORKS INC.
BBWI +4%
An activist investor wants to freshen up Bath & Body Works. Dan Loeb's Third Point LLC plans to launch a proxy fight against the soap and fragrance maker, The Wall Street Journal reported Wednesday, targeting what Third Point says is excessive executive pay and lagging performance. The activist investor first disclosed a stake of over 6% in December. Third Point's move comes at a time of increased activism as beaten-down share prices embolden investors, with companies such as Salesforce Inc. and Walt Disney Co. recently attracting activists. Bath & Body Works shares rose 4% Thursday.
DOMINO'S PIZZA INC.
DPZ -12%
Domino's sales are cooling off. The pizza chain said its U.S. delivery business took a hit as more consumers cooked at home to save money. Domino's said it expects the trend to last, and cut its two- to three-year sales outlook. Pizza chains gained sales earlier in the pandemic as people sheltered at home, but demand has leveled off as restaurants reopened. Domino's shares dropped 12% Thursday.
MODERNA INC.
MRNA -6.7%
Covid-19 vaccines are no longer giving Moderna a boost. The drugmaker reported lower quarterly revenue and profit as demand for its Covid shots sank from a year earlier, when the spread of the Omicron variant boosted sales. Meanwhile, Moderna is preparing to distribute the vaccines commercially, shifting away from federal supply contracts that made doses available to Americans at no cost. Chief Executive Officer Stephane Bancel said in January Moderna was considering a range of $110 to $130 per dose, compared with the range of $15 to $26 in federal contracts. Moderna shares lost 6.7% Thursday.
NVIDIA CORP.
NVDA +14%
Nvidia predicts the AI boom will supercharge its business. While the semiconductor company on Wednesday reported a sharp fall in quarterly profit, it pointed to buzzy artificial-intelligence tools like popular chatbot ChatGPT as a potential boon for its chips. Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress said Nvidia was working with all the major cloud-computing providers -- which include Microsoft Corp., Amazon.com Inc. and Alphabet Inc.'s Google -- on so-called generative AI tools. Nvidia has struggled with declining demand for electronics and computers that use its chips. Nvidia shares gained 14% Thursday.
NETFLIX INC.
NFLX -3.4%
Netflix is cutting subscription prices, but not for U.S. viewers. The streaming giant reduced the cost of its service in more than three dozen countries in recent weeks, including Yemen, Kenya and Croatia, The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday. Netflix is trying to appeal to customers around the world who have ever-growing streaming options. Meanwhile, several major streaming services upped their U.S. prices in recent months. Netflix launched a lower-price ad-supported plan in November and is cracking down on password-sharing among subscribers. Netflix shares lost 3.4% Thursday.
WAYFAIR INC.
W -23%
Wayfair is falling from its pandemic heights. The online furniture seller lost five million customers in 2022, shrinking the company's shopper count to near its size before the 2020 arrival of Covid-19 triggered a consumer-spending surge. Wayfair is trying to stem significant losses in response to declining demand. The company in January laid off about 1,750 workers, or 10% of its global workforce, following about 870 job cuts in August. Both rounds were part of a broader program to find $1.4 billion of annualized cost savings. Wayfair shares plummeted 23% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
