Facebook Through
Google's Glasses
Despite Facebook's new virtual-reality goggles, investors may be more puzzled than ever about the company's vision for its own future. One clue comes from a rival that makes some nifty glasses of its own: Google.
Facebook has been on a shopping spree, spending $19 billion on messaging service WhatsApp and $2 billion on goggle maker Oculus VR. The deals call to mind Facebook's surprise $1 billion deal for Instagram two years ago. Chief Mark Zuckerberg has said the recent acquisitions fall under his goals of "connecting everyone" and "building the knowledge economy" -- big bets on the future of social networking, in other words.
This high-stakes strategy of throwing stuff against a wall to see what sticks is redolent of Google. The technology industry knows that today's incumbent platforms won't be tomorrow's. Facebook and Google are using their highly profitable advertising businesses -- and, in Facebook's case, high stock valuation -- to invest in what might become the next big thing, even if that this is only tangentially related to their core businesses.
For every Oculus, WhatsApp and Instagram, Google has a Nest Labs, a Waze and a YouTube, for which it paid $3.2 billion, just over $1 billion and $1.65 billion, respectively. Both firms have invested in artificial intelligence and have projects devoted to expanding Internet services to underserved populations.
Both also are helmed by founder-CEOs with controlling stakes, giving them scope to do big deals without approval. By buying in, shareholders essentially sign up for the ride; an implicit expression of faith that these companies' visionary leaders can keep coming up with brilliant ideas.
There are some differences. Facebook has stuck to purchases that can all be seen as loosely related to its core business. All are new platforms for social interaction, be it sharing photos on Instagram, sending messages on WhatsApp, or, if virtual reality takes off, interacting in a new way with Oculus's product.
Google has embarked on many more so-called moonshots: projects mostly unrelated to search advertising. Among these are its deal for biotech company Calico, which focuses on combating aging; multiple robotics deals; and its investment in Google Glass and Fiber. Google X, its secretive laboratory, works on projects such as self-driving cars, balloon-powered Internet and airborne wind turbines.
But for both firms, most of these options on the future are just that. Google got 91% of its core business revenue from advertising in 2013, and that likely generated the vast majority of its profit, too.
Facebook's recent purchases come with virtually no revenue, let alone profits, so investors must return to what they know and can more easily predict: the prospects for the core business. These look strong. Analysts forecast earnings per share to nearly double in the next two years, versus a 41% increase at Google.
So Facebook's stock likely deserves some premium. Even so, 46 times forward earnings looks rich against Google's 21 times. Both firms have built very profitable, world-changing businesses and represent options on the future. It is difficult to see the edge that justifies Facebook's premium of about 120% -- which is bigger still if you adjust for Google's much-bigger cash pile.
This implies that Google's investors are paying a reasonable multiple for its core business. By extension, they are paying relatively less for those options on the future than Facebook's investors are paying for the vision thing.
There is an added wrinkle: Google's cash gives it plenty of firepower for more deals. Facebook has favored stock deals -- and why not, given the multiple awarded by the stock market?
Investors with a nervous eye on Mr. Zuckerberg's predilection for bold moves should remember that they enable him by supplying the currency.
-- Miriam Gottfried
Tough Bet on China Property
China property investors are betting that help is on the way. They shouldn't get too giddy.
As prices and transaction volumes fall, several Chinese cities are considering looser limits on home purchases and mortgages, according to state-run media. The moves could shore up weak housing markets by bringing back buyers -- especially speculators -- who were boxed out by authorities when markets were too hot.
Talk of a loosening has enlivened shares of China's big developers, which got an added boost Wednesday from an announcement that Beijing is rolling out a limited stimulus package of railway spending and the like. The CSI Real Estate index is up 16% in the past month, according to CapitalVue, a data provider.
But while the restrictions may have damped property sales, removing them won't necessarily restore the good old days. Curbs on mortgage loan-to-value ratios and limits on the purchase of second and third homes were more stringent in China's biggest cities such as Beijing, Guangzhou and Shanghai. Those also are China's healthiest housing markets.
The bigger problems are in China's once-fashionable second- and third-tier cities, where developers flocked in recent years. Inventories are swelling and prices are falling. Unsold residential space nationally has grown to 342 million square meters, equal to 42% of all the residential space built in 2013 and the highest level in years. In second-tier cities -- generally smaller than China's very biggest -- Standard Chartered estimates supply has quickly swelled to 25 months of sales, from a long-term average of 16 months.
New construction starts so far in 2014 are down more than in any year since 1996. Property investors are right to worry that all the excess supply will take substantial time to be absorbed. Higher borrowing costs and fears of a credit freeze hover over the sector.
Yet China's big developers seem to think they are immune. On average, the top 20 tracked by Citigroup target sales growth of 25% this year, while the overall market is expected to grow just 8%.
Take midsize developer Agile Property: It targets 19% sales growth, despite exposure to second- and third-tier cities and aggressive price cuts at several of its projects. Its net leverage of 72% exceeds the industry average of 59%. Perhaps reflecting doubt about the home market, Agile is among a slew of Chinese developers that have launched projects abroad, in its case a development in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
China's stimulus and property-loosening measures could end up like a dose of smelling salts after a blow to the head -- causing a quick stir, followed by a long malaise.
-- Alex Frangos
