WOODSIDE, Calif. -- President Biden and Chinese leader Xi Jinping struck a less contentious tone at their summit Wednesday, a reset that will be quickly tested by deep U.S.-China disagreements.
With relations between the two countries near a low point, Biden and Xi agreed to resume communications between their militaries, cooperate on choking off fentanyl production and begin a dialogue on the risks of artificial intelligence. Their four hours of talks at a secluded estate outside San Francisco included a walk in the wooded grounds.
"We made real progress," Biden said in a tweet. The talks, he later told reporters, were "some of the most constructive and productive conversations we've had."
The outcome is likely to face pressure in coming months, with disagreements over an election in Taiwan and the Chinese navy's harassment of ships from the Philippines, a U.S. ally. The U.S. and China have differed sharply over the Israel-Hamas war. Biden, a Democrat who is running for re-election next year, also faces political risk at home from Republican politicians who argue he is going easy on Beijing.
Biden and his top aides spent months negotiating with top Chinese officials over the summit, hoping that face-to-face communication would prevent tensions between the two world powers from escalating. Xi too had an incentive to meet as he grapples with economic turbulence at home and seeks to stem the exodus of foreign capital.
But U.S. officials said the real success of the summit is less concrete: a rare opportunity for direct diplomacy with the authoritarian leader of the world's second-largest economy.
The agreements reached Wednesday, though incremental, and the more positive tone contrast with the meetings of recent years and give Washington and Beijing more time to steady ties that have been on a downward pitch for years.
Biden said he and Xi agreed that if there is "any concern about anything between our nations, or happening in our region, we should pick up the phone and call."
Underlying tensions were clear.
While Xi said that for the U.S. and China, "turning their back on each other is not an option," he also indicated Beijing's continued resolve to hit back at any moves from the U.S. deemed to hurt China's interest, according to an account of the summit by China's official Xinhua News Agency.
"China has no plans to surpass or replace the United States," the Xinhua account quoted Xi as saying, "and the United States should not have any plans to suppress and contain China."
Both countries are still set on courses certain to continue to generate friction.
Washington and Beijing find themselves in opposing camps on both Russia's war in Ukraine as well as the Israel-Hamas conflict A senior Biden administration official said Biden made clear to Xi Washington's concerns about Ukraine and asked for China's help in urging Iran against steps that could escalate the Middle East conflict.
Meanwhile, Xinhua said Xi urged Biden to clearly demonstrate that the U.S. doesn't support Taiwan independence and support China's "peaceful reunification" with the self-governed island.
The senior administration official said the leaders had "a substantial exchange" about Taiwan, and that Biden had responded by saying that the longstanding U.S. position is "a determination to maintain peace and stability." Biden urged Beijing to "respect the electoral process in Taiwan," the official said.
Xi also appeared to push back against the White House's view that relations with China are defined by competition, saying that he rejects the idea of a "major-country competition."
Given the array of the two countries' differences, administration officials have said the U.S. goal is to manage those tensions.
The agreement reached on contacts between the militaries reopens communication channels between the countries' defense chiefs, their military commanders and others. Beijing in the past has cut those contacts during bouts of tension with the U.S., most recently over then-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's visit to Taiwan in 2022.
Likewise, on fentanyl, a previous agreement to cooperate in combating trafficking of the opioid languished after the Trump administration placed sanctions on a major Chinese police institute. The current agreement, Biden said, involves cooperation on choking off chemicals to make fentanyl and the presses to make pills.
Asked if he trusts Xi, Biden said, "Trust but verify, as the old saying goes. That's where I am." Responding to a separate question of whether he sees Xi as a dictator, Biden said, "Well look, he is." In June, China lashed out at Biden after he described Xi that way.
U.S. and Chinese officials had been negotiating for weeks over every detail of the summit, from the decor and the seating chart to the meeting agenda.
Outside the Chinese Consulate in San Francisco on Wednesday morning, far from the meeting venue, a few hundred protesters gathered, some waving Tibetan and Taiwanese flags. Protesters also lined some streets on the way to the site of the summit, though crowds of pro-Beijing spectators waving red flags made it easy for Chinese state television coverage to show only supporters.
Wednesday's summit was the first meeting between the two leaders since the U.S. shot down a suspected Chinese surveillance balloon in February. The incident sent U.S.-China relations plummeting further and was followed by protracted diplomatic maneuvering to try to stabilize ties.
The summit was also likely to be the two men's last in-person meeting before the intense U.S. presidential election campaign, in which China could become a hot-button issue. That had lent a greater sense of urgency to use Wednesday's meeting to steady relations.
---
Berber Jin contributed to this article.
Credit: By Andrew Restuccia, Charles Hutzler and Lingling Wei
