Alphabet Inc.'s Google agreed to pay more than $3.8 million to resolve a case of hiring and pay discrimination at several locations, the Labor Department said.
Under the agreement, Google agreed to give nearly $1.4 million in back pay and interest to 2,565 female employees in engineering positions and about $1.2 million in back pay and interest to 1,757 female and 1,219 Asian applicants for software engineering positions who weren't hired.
The company also agreed to set aside at least $1.25 million over the next five years for potential pay-equity adjustments for employees in engineering positions at Google's Mountain View, Calif., Kirkland, Wash., Seattle and New York offices.
If the pay adjustments for any year are less than $250,000, Google is to use the difference to support diversity and inclusion efforts and programs, according to the agreement.
Google also agreed to strengthen policies related to hiring and compensation and correct any discrepancies to ensure nondiscrimination, the Labor Department said.
Alphabet had about 132,000 employees as of Sept. 30, according to a securities filing.
The Labor Department spotted pay disparities affecting women in software engineering positions at Google's Mountain View, Seattle and Kirkland offices during a routine evaluation. It also found hiring-rate differences that disadvantaged female and Asian applicants for software engineering positions at Google locations.
The company said it had run annual internal pay-equity analyses for the past eight years to identify discrepancies and that the allegations in question appeared in the 2014-2017 audits. "We believe everyone should be paid based upon the work they do, not who they are, and invest heavily to make our hiring and compensation processes fair and unbiased," the company said.
Google has faced pushback from workers who said, among other things, that the company has done little to address complaints of discrimination and harassment. Some employees have since formed the Alphabet Workers Union, a Communications Workers of America Local 1400 affiliate, for employees at Alphabet businesses.
The union criticized the company's actions against Margaret Mitchell, Google's co-head of ethical artificial intelligence, and pointed to the firing of former co-lead Timnit Gebru, saying: "Together these are an attack on the people who are trying to make Google's technology more ethical."

Credit: By Maria Armental
