Intel Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger retired abruptly, ending a nearly four-year run that saw the chip maker fall behind rivals in building semiconductors to power the artificial-intelligence boom.
The company on Monday said it named Chief Financial Officer David Zinsner and Michelle Johnston Holthaus, general manager of Intel's client computing group, as interim co-CEOs. The board has formed a search committee to find a permanent successor to Gelsinger, 63 years old, who stepped down Sunday.
Gelsinger's exit comes in the middle of his multiyear turnaround strategy to build a so-called foundry business manufacturing chips for other companies. At the same time, Intel's stock has underperformed the market and rivals.
Strategic missteps and missing out on the artificial-intelligence boom have combined to reshape the fortunes of the company, which reportedly was a takeover target earlier this year. "We know that we have much more work to do at the company and are committed to restoring investor confidence," said Frank Yeary, independent chair of Intel's board.
The change in leadership indicates the board wants to move in a new direction, but what that means isn't clear, Bernstein Research analyst Stacy Rasgon said.
"Is the focus on manufacturing going to start to wane? Will they carve it up for parts? Will cost cuts get bigger? There's a lot of uncertainty," Rasgon said.
Shares of Intel fell 0.5% Monday and remain down by 52% from the start of the year.
Gelsinger had been CEO since February 2021. During that period, Intel's sales are on track to have fallen by nearly a third, its stock has declined 61% and the company lost its spot as the standard-setter in chip technology. During the same period, the S&P 500 index rose 53%
Last month, Intel was replaced by Nvidia in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, a sharp reversal of fortune for the chip maker.
The problems started with manufacturing setbacks before Gelsinger took the helm. And they have worsened as the CEO pursued a costly turnaround strategy to begin manufacturing chips for other companies, something that required billions in investment to build new plants.
Intel set an internal goal to be the second-largest contract chip maker in the world by 2030. In reality, it has struggled to attract big customers and has cycled through several leaders.
"We now see a greater possibility that [Intel] considers separating its Products and Foundry arms, which would grant both businesses their much-needed operational and financial independence," said Vivek Arya, a Bank of America analyst. Arya noted that any such separation could be complicated by the company's agreement to accept government funding.
Meanwhile, Intel failed to foresee how the explosion of interest in AI would redirect demand toward a type of chip made by rival Nvidia. Nvidia has since risen to be the most valuable company in the world, while Intel has continued to tread water.
The investment surge in computing infrastructure for artificial intelligence in late 2022 crimped customer budgets for Intel's chips. In an effort to preserve the turnaround effort, Intel cut costs. Earlier this year, it laid off about 15,000 employees, suspended dividend payments for the fourth quarter and cut $10 billion in costs for next year.
"With the foundry business burning so much cash, the current situation is not sustainable," said Ivana Delevska, chief investment officer of Spear Invest, an asset manager in New York that owns chip stocks and has evaluated Intel.
Gelsinger continued to plow resources into the turnaround, hoping for large financial efficiencies from the revamp. To offset a factory expansion that could cost more than $100 billion in the coming years, he made partnerships with investment firms and applied successfully for almost $7.87 billion in government money through the Chips Act, passed in 2022.
"Today is, of course, bittersweet as this company has been my life for the bulk of my working career," Gelsinger said. "It has been a challenging year for all of us as we have made tough but necessary decisions to position Intel for the current market dynamics."
The board likely wanted Gelsinger out because he was committed to a growth strategy that was taking too long to work, as evidenced by declining revenue and ballooning expenses over the past two years, said David Yoffie, a former Intel board member for 29 years until 2018.
Gelsinger joined Intel in 1979, when he was just 18. The Pennsylvania farm boy turned engineer rose up the ranks to become the company's youngest-ever vice president at 30 and its first chief technology officer in 2001.
That role effectively made him responsible for upholding Moore's Law, which is named after one of Intel's founders and posits that the number of transistors on a chip doubles roughly every two years.
In his first three decades at Intel, Gelsinger played a key role in designing some of its most successful and lucrative chips that were the computational workhorses inside the personal-computer boom of the 1980s and 1990s. He became a disciple of legendary Intel CEO Andy Grove and helped pioneer USB ports and Wi-Fi, both of which are ubiquitous.
Gelsinger left in 2009 to run VMware, a maker of business software, where he spent eight years, roughly doubled sales by abandoning the company's cloud-computing business and opted to profit through partnerships.
His return was supposed to mark a turning point for Intel in its battle against market-share losses and address questions about its business model of both designing and manufacturing chips when most rivals have specialized in one or the other.
Gelsinger's inability to reverse Intel's fortunes shows that even with decades of industry experience, "this stuff takes a long time to correct," said Eric Ross, analyst at Cascend.
Generate image description

Credit: By Dean Seal and Sarah E. Needleman
