To get Facebook unblocked in China, Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg has tried everything from lobbying Chinese leaders to taking a run past smoggy Tiananmen Square. Facebook's recent difficulties with violent videos posted to the social network are giving Mr. Zuckerberg a taste of what it would be like to operate in China.
In Facebook's latest problem, a live video of a man in Thailand killing his 11-month-old daughter stayed online for 24 hours before being removed. As a result, Facebook said last week that it will add 3,000 more people to review content, bringing the total to 7,500.
Chinese social media cackled in response to the news, with many comments noting that China has plenty of censorship experience to offer. "Come learn from us," ran one post on the popular microblogging platform Weibo.
There's a vast difference between trying to get rid of fake news and violent videos and the severe censorship imposed by an authoritarian government. Content banned in China goes beyond the violent and pornographic to include the politically unacceptable. China's sophisticated internet censorship system employs filtering technologies and squads of actual police and requires private companies to self-censor -- or risk losing their business licenses.
If Mr. Zuckerberg is serious about getting unblocked in China, he might want to consider the advice of Chinese counterparts about what it takes to survive in such a restrictive environment.
A Facebook spokeswoman says the company remains interested in China and has yet to make a decision "on our approach to China."
According to Chinese executives, effectively monitoring online content comes down to three things: lots of bodies and multiple layers of monitoring, plus the help of artificial intelligence.
Facebook's announced total of 7,500 content reviewers might sound like a huge commitment of resources, but Chinese executives say it would be far from adequate to meet government standards in China.
Inke, a live-streaming video app, has 1,000 full-time employees monitoring live videos -- from big events such as concerts to clips of daily life such as a woman eating a bowl of noodles. Though the two-year-old startup won't disclose its current tally of active users, a year ago it said 50 million users have downloaded the app and activated accounts.
Facebook by contrast has 1.9 billion monthly active users. "If Facebook were in China, it would have to hire at least 20,000 reviewers for videos alone," says Feng Yousheng, Inke's founder and chief executive.
Mr. Feng says Facebook would need many times more than that number if it had to police photos and text as Chinese social media do.
While it's cheaper to outsource, as Facebook is partly doing, live-streaming app Douyu's 800 reviewers are all staff members, to ensure rigorous monitoring, says Chief Executive Chen Shaojie. Douyu attracts more than 20 million viewers and over 50,000 streamers on average every day. During the 7 p.m. to 11 p.m. traffic peak, the team monitors over 20,000 streams of live video nearly simultaneously.
It's a significant expense for all online content firms. On average, the live-streaming startups pay the reviewers, mostly fresh university graduates, between 3,000 yuan and 5,000 yuan ($435 and $725) a month, aside from the costs of office space, payroll taxes and other expenses.
Artificial intelligence offers a way to augment human monitoring. Douyu's Mr. Chen says the company's first layer of monitoring is image-recognition technology to screen pornographic and other problematic images. Douyu investor Tencent Holdings, a social-media and games powerhouse, developed the technology for videos on its QQ and WeChat messaging platforms, which have 1.75 billion active accounts combined -- on par with Facebook.
Tencent is working with Kneron, a San Diego startup, to develop software that can detect emotions and behavior, according to Kneron founder Chunchen Liu. Tencent declined to comment.
Among the trickiest of tasks Tencent set was raising the accuracy of the program to 98% from 95% in detecting when someone unfurls a protest banner, says Mr. Liu. "It took us almost two months," he adds.
The Chinese executives envy Facebook's freedom to decide what content it polices and how. Censoring content is a life-or-death matter for their businesses.
With their greater experience, Inke's Mr. Feng says, perhaps Facebook should consider offshoring. "It can put its monitoring team in China. We can help. Their monitoring task is so much easier than ours," he says.
---
Follow Li Yuan on Twitter @LiYuan6 or write to li.yuan@wsj.com.
Credit: By Li Yuan
