Johns Hopkins University is blowing up its business-school curriculum.
Starting in the fall, the university's traditional two-year master of business administration degree will take a hard turn toward health, with a particularly heavy focus on quant skills, from exposure to coding to data analysis, said Alexander Triantis, dean of the Carey Business School.
The move follows five straight years of declining applications to American M.B.A. programs, according to data from the nonprofit Graduate Management Admission Council, and a 14% drop in applications to Johns Hopkins over the same period.
Young professionals have questioned the wisdom of taking two years out of a hot job market to go back to graduate school, especially if it requires taking on a large debt load to do so. As a result, several U.S. business schools have opted to shut down their full-time M.B.A. programs in favor of shorter, specialized master's and online degrees. Shutting down the Johns Hopkins M.B.A program wasn't off the table, school officials said.
"There was a recognition that employer taste or needs for M.B.A.s may be changing over time and that prospective students may be sort of re-evaluating, based on the cost, based on opportunity cost," Mr. Triantis said.
Mr. Triantis said that even in a gloomy business-school market, a university of Johns Hopkins's caliber should prove an exception to the rule. To understand why it wasn't, the university enlisted the help of an outside consulting firm, Prophet, to understand what the Carey Business School was lacking.
Johns Hopkins opened the Carey school in 2007, before a global recession changed the business landscape. The school launched its full-time M.B.A program in 2010, after the recession ended. But schools outside the most highly ranked universities weren't seeing the kind of bounceback in enrollment that many expected, said Bernard Ferrari, a former McKinsey & Co. consultant, who was dean of the business school when it embarked on studying how it could revamp.
"The M.B.A. marketplace was not behaving as it usually did coming out of the tough times in 2008," he said.
Part of the research process Mr. Ferrari launched involved asking intensive questions of companies about what specific skills they were looking for when they hire newly minted M.B.A.s. A key finding from the research: Employers said they needed M.B.A.s with data-science and data-analytics skills.
While students don't need to be data scientists, they need to be able to supervise a team of them, Mr. Triantis said. That means they have to understand what certain software and tools are capable of, what analyses can be done with them and then make solid decisions based on sifting through data.
More broadly, employers want to see an emphasis on science, technology and math skills in combination with softer skills like leadership that have been so in vogue in recent years.
The revamped M.B.A. program being launched in the fall is meant to capitalize on the university's existing prestige in the medical field, including by adding an optional specialized track for its students called Health, Technology, and Innovation.
Johns Hopkins is consistently ranked as having one of the best medical, nursing and public health schools in the country.
Mr. Triantis said the school can do a better job emphasizing the health sector, an area the university is already known for, and by teaching students more quantitative skills that employers desire.
Instead of focusing on health care or health-care management through electives in the second half of the two-year degree, when Johns Hopkins reboots its M.B.A. in the fall, the health-intensive track will start almost immediately, Mr. Triantis said.
The new curriculum will include a consulting project where students partner with a company, such as a hospital chain or pharmaceutical maker, to analyze data that can help solve a problem for them. The program also will require students to take a course on artificial intelligence, and M.B.A. candidates will need to learn statistical programs in boot-camp-type courses when they first arrive on campus.

Credit: By Patrick Thomas
