MORGAN STANLEY
Wealth-Management
Staff Form Own Firm
More than a dozen Morgan Stanley employees have left the bank's wealth-management unit to launch their own practice, the latest group of financial veterans to bolt from big, traditional brokerages in favor of independent investment-advisory firms.
Morgan Stanley's Kirk Bahm Group, in Wichita, Kan., said it resigned this month to form investment-advisory firm 6 Meridian LLC. The group, led by 14-year industry veteran Margaret Dechant, is reaching out to their Morgan Stanley clients to transfer most of the more than $2.2 billion in assets that they managed there.
Most of 6 Meridian's clients are business owners, corporate executives and medical professionals, and the firm has focused on building in-house portfolios for those investors. As a stand-alone firm, 6 Meridian will be able to expand its investment offerings and conduct due diligence on products and offerings that may not have been possible under a big brokerage like Morgan Stanley, executives of the new venture say.
A Morgan Stanley spokeswoman confirmed the departures but declined to comment further.
-- Michael Wursthorn
---
E*TRADE
CEO Is Replaced
E*Trade Financial Corp. shook up its executive ranks in an effort to make its brokerage business more competitive, a move that comes as the online financial-services firm looks to move beyond several years of postcrisis retrenching.
E*Trade unveiled several top-level executive changes Monday, including the departure of Chief Executive Paul Idzik, who had been in the post since January 2013.
Karl Roessner, previously the firm's general counsel, will succeed Mr. Idzik as CEO, the firm said. Mr. Roessner has been with E*Trade since 2007, before mortgage exposure upended the firm during the financial crisis.
Mr. Idzik couldn't immediately be reached for comment.
The firm also said it has brought back Michael Curcio, who had served as E*Trade's president before he left the company in 2013, as chief brokerage officer.
-- Daisy Maxey
---
VENTURE CAPITAL
China's Sinovation
Raises $674 Million
A Chinese venture-capital fund raised about 4.5 billion yuan, or about $674 million, in capital as the country's top venture firms build up their cash piles amid a cooling environment for funding.
Sinovation Ventures, co-founded by former Google Inc. and Microsoft Corp. executive Kai-Fu Lee, said it closed two venture-capital funds: a dollar-denominated fund of $300 million -- in which Apple Inc. supplier Foxconn Technology Group was the anchor investor -- and a yuan-denominated fund totaling the equivalent of $374 million.
It plans to invest the funds raised in startup companies involved in artificial intelligence, building enterprise software and creating entertainment content.
In recent months, Chinese venture-capital firms have reined in investing after a frantic 2015. Valuations are falling, and some startups are struggling to find investment. But top venture firms still are able to raise money because returns from other assets have been disappointing.
"We still see many good ideas and trends to invest in," Mr. Lee said. "High-quality startups won't be cheap and will require a lot of investment as they grow."
-- Li Yuan
