CUPERTINO, Calif. -- Apple Inc. unveiled new products for entertainment, financial services, news and videogames as the technology giant vies with competitors that are also moving to expand outside their core businesses.
The announcements Monday mark a strategic shift for Apple as it seeks new momentum amid softening sales in its core iPhone business. The centerpiece of the event at Apple's headquarters, capped by an appearance by Oprah Winfrey, was a new video-subscription service to carry original programming.
In a first for the company, it plans to make its TV app, which will carry that content, available on competitors' devices as well as its own -- reflecting Apple's growing ambition to go beyond selling its own gadgets.
Apple also announced Apple Card, a mainly digital credit card launched in partnership with Goldman Sachs Group Inc. that aims to challenge incumbents by offering low interest rates and eliminating both late fees and annual fees.
It unveiled Apple News+, a $9.99 monthly service that provides access to 300-plus magazines as well as newspapers, including The Wall Street Journal through an agreement with parent Dow Jones & Co. And it showed off Apple Arcade, a gaming subscription service offering access to 100-plus exclusive games for an unspecified monthly fee.
Chief Executive Tim Cook portrayed the services as an extension of Apple's mix of products. "We're excited to extend our services even further, making them even more entertaining, more useful and more informative," he said.
The initiatives are part of a broader movement by tech titans to spread into new industries, betting their combination of loyal users and troves of data can help unlock revenue opportunities. The efforts are fueling competition in new arenas between some of the world's biggest companies, as Amazon.com Inc. pushes beyond e-commerce into entertainment and finance and Alphabet Inc. goes past advertising into subscription gaming.
Apple's success in its new bets isn't guaranteed, and the company didn't disclose important details Monday that could shed more light on its odds, including pricing for the video-content and gaming services. Apple faces stiff competition in areas where it is expanding, including from entertainment and credit-card players and companies providing free news and videogames.
Apple shares closed down 1.2% on Monday. They have gained ground this year despite a sharp drop in iPhone sales at the end of last year but remain well below their record high from last October.
The new video-content plans thrust Apple into rapidly intensifying competition among technology companies and traditional cable operators for pay-TV users.
Growing disillusionment with cable companies and the rise of streaming-subscription services like Netflix Inc. is leading millions of Americans to change their pay-TV habits, allowing companies like Amazon, Sony Corp. and Hulu to elbow into a $100 billion industry long dominated by Comcast Corp., AT&T Inc.'s DirecTV and others.
Apple's revamped TV app unveiled Monday -- which will house the new video-content service -- is designed to grab a share of that splintering TV market. A May software update will turn the app into a central portal where customers can use a single password to subscribe to content from AT&T's HBO, CBS Corp.'s Showtime and others. That will put it most directly in competition with Amazon.
Apple's original-content service, called TV+, will be available in its TV app starting in the fall. The company brought out several stars to discuss their work with Apple, including Steven Spielberg, J.J. Abrams, Reese Witherspoon and Jennifer Aniston.
While streaming services are growing, it isn't clear whether the marketplace can sustain the volume of content being produced.
"There's potential in a future Apple mega-bundle, but today, their announcement was mostly about creating an offering and experience largely identical to the one Amazon has had for years," said Matthew Ball, an independent consultant and former head of strategy at Amazon Studios.
The launch of Apple Card, which customers will sign up for on their iPhones, marks a major expansion of the tech giant's foray into financial services, begun in 2014 with Apple Pay. The card uses machine-learning on Apple's devices to organize people's spending behavior into summaries. Customers can receive a physical, titanium card to use in locations where Apple Pay isn't yet accepted.
The news app, called Apple News+, is a premium version of the existing, free Apple News app. Available immediately in the U.S., it provides access to articles from magazines including Vogue, GQ and Sports Illustrated, as well as newspapers such as the Los Angeles Times and the Journal. Publishers will split revenue from the app 50/50 with Apple, according to people familiar with the agreements.

Credit: By Tripp Mickle and Joe Flint
