Newly minted M.B.A. graduates are stepping into a job market with the smallest share of companies planning to hire them in years.
Eighty-five percent of U.S. employers expect to hire M.B.A. grads this year, down from 91% in 2017, reflecting the biggest drop in business-school recruiting since the start of the recession, according to a survey by the Graduate Management Admission Council, a nonprofit that administers the GMAT admissions exam.
The data suggest shifting career paths for young professionals, as more students are starting their own businesses after B-school, or joining firms outside the traditional finance and consulting employers. School and industry officials say some companies also might be filling positions that previously required an M.B.A. with less-experienced candidates, or recruiting new hires with industry skills and experience off-campus, given the tight labor market.
GMAC conducted research with nearly 1,100 corporate recruiters and found that while most people who invest in M.B.A. education will get offered a job, it might not necessarily be the job they want.
Once considered a prerequisite for successful careers in American corporations, the flagship two-year degree is attracting fewer students across the U.S., which has strained school finances and driven officials to launch shorter, more customized programs for millennials.
Starting salaries for M.B.A. hires are also likely to drop, bucking the nationwide trend of rising median wages. Employers estimate their starting offers will hover around $105,000, a drop from $110,000 last year and only the second time in a decade the median-pay forecast has fallen, GMAC data show.
Health-care, technology and energy companies will be the biggest M.B.A. recruiters this year, according to the report, compared with a smaller share of finance and accounting firms, highlighting the broad changes in graduates' career interests. The survey includes data from 615 U.S. companies and hundreds more across the globe, identified by business-school officials as the top recruiters of their students.
World-wide, 81% of employers surveyed plan to add M.B.A.s to their workforce in 2018. In contrast, nearly all are recruiting recent college grads and 90% are seeking talent with industry experience, the data show.
Scott DeRue, dean of the University of Michigan Ross School of Business, said he has noticed a recent shift by financial-services firms to hire larger numbers of undergraduate students than M.B.A.s. "In addition, banks have increased their hiring of nonbusiness students, especially in the areas of technology and data science," Mr. DeRue said. In 2017, Ross's top recruiters of graduate students were Amazon.com Inc. and McKinsey & Co. For undergrads, they were PricewaterhouseCoopers and JPMorgan Chase & Co.
That trend reflects companies' need for different skill sets outside the corporate-finance and marketing-heavy M.B.A. curriculum, in areas such as artificial intelligence and analytics, for instance, as well as a move by many employers to try to diversify their workforces beyond a few elite universities.
Many business schools have recently launched degrees and program concentrations that sharpen skills needed for high-paying tech or health-service administration jobs. World-wide, 52% of employers expect to hire masters-in-data-analytics graduates, a jump from 35% of companies last year.
Goldman Sachs Group Inc. in 2016 replaced on-campus recruiting at many schools with a first-round video interview for the bank's summer-associate program, which is typically the first rung for a banking career. The move was an effort to deepen the pool of prospective applicants. A company website advertising the program invites those enrolled in law or medical school to apply, though a spokeswoman for Goldman said the number of M.B.A.s in the summer program for divisions such as investment banking has remained consistent.
Overall, data from GMAC's follow-up survey show companies have hired fewer M.B.A.s than planned every year since the job market returned to prerecession levels in 2014. If the trend continues, that would mean nearly one-third of the Class of 2018 will start careers at companies outside the list of typical recruiters.
Sangeet Chowfla, president of GMAC, said he isn't concerned M.B.A.s will struggle to find work. Business schools are sending students into the tightest U.S. labor market in decades, where there are more willing employers than candidates for some jobs, he said.
In a February GMAC report on business-school alumni employment, 96% of graduates from full-time M.B.A. programs were employed or working as an entrepreneur; about 4% were seeking jobs or had dropped out of the workforce. Unemployment among those over age 25 with a bachelor's degree or higher fell to 2% in May, from 2.3% a year earlier, based on the latest seasonally adjusted Labor Department data.
International students in the U.S. for business school might have a harder time, Mr. Chowfla said, as companies have become more reluctant to hire employees who don't have permanent authorization to work in the country. Less than half -- 47% -- of American employers reported plans to hire such graduates, compared with 55% of U.S. employers in 2017.

Credit: By Kelsey Gee

ERIC Subject: Careers; Business Schools; Summer Programs; Undergraduate Students; Graduates; Employers; Labor Market; Banking; Labor Force; Recruitment
