When Nick Thompson joined the Atlantic as chief executive three years ago, the magazine had a $20 million deficit and months earlier had laid off 17% of its newsroom.
Traffic was down significantly. People were starting to emerge from the Covid-19 pandemic, ditching their screens to venture outside. And Facebook again had tweaked its algorithm, sending less traffic to publishers.
Thompson was given a mandate from Laurene Powell Jobs, the Atlantic's billionaire owner: Dig the company out of its hole, and make it self-sustaining.
"I thought it was a pretty interesting challenge," Thompson said in an interview. It was also "a scary place to be."
Today, the 167-year-old publication is profitable and its newsroom is growing -- a successful turnaround that offers a glimmer of hope for the rest of the industry, which has laid off reams of journalists since the start of the year.
A core part of Thompson's strategy was to figure out how much readers would be willing to pay for a subscription. He ended up raising subscription prices by more than 50%, and made it harder for people to read stories without paying.
Meanwhile, Editor-in-Chief Jeffrey Goldberg oversaw an evolving editorial approach -- moving away from day-to-day news coverage and taking bigger swings on fewer, deeply reported stories that appeal to people from across the country and political spectrum.
"We believe as an almost ideological and idealistic notion that we make something worth buying," Goldberg said in an interview.
In the past three years, the Atlantic has won three Pulitzer prizes -- two of which came from authors who had recently joined the publication.
It also published other pieces that drove news cycles. One of them, a profile of then-CNN chief Chris Licht, prompted many high-profile anchors to lose faith in the executive, who resigned days after the story ran.
Another was a 2022 cover story by Jake Tapper about C.J. Rice, a man wrongfully convicted of attempted murder in 2011 and sentenced to up to 60 years in prison. Rice was recently exonerated.
Subscriptions now account for two-thirds of revenue, compared with a little less than half when Thompson took the helm.
Thompson said plenty of challenges remain, including finding ways to sustain subscription growth and attracting young audiences. He is most concerned about artificial intelligence's potential impact on the news business.
"It will change the way people find us, it will change all the architecture of the media business, and we've got to figure out how to continue to succeed in it," he said. "Maybe it'll be hugely beneficial, maybe it'll be hugely damaging -- we really don't know yet."
The company is building an experimental website and app with AI features, such as AI-based games and search, that will be available to a small number of readers who opt in.
The Atlantic's revenue grew by 10% last year to close to $100 million, and the publication has nearly one million total subscribers, split equally among people with digital-only and print subscriptions.
Additionally, the publication has about 100,000 users who read the magazine through Apple News+, a product that charges a discounted price for access to a number of magazines and news publishers. Thompson said the Atlantic gets roughly the same amount of revenue from everybody Apple counts as an Atlantic subscriber as it gets per direct subscriber.
Thompson's team ran experiments to determine the best way to charge more without alienating new readers. It is offering fewer stories free and no longer discounting subscriptions.
Last year, it raised prices for annual subscriptions to $80 from $60 for digital and to $90 from $70 for both print and digital. A digital subscription cost $50 at the time Thompson joined.
The kind of advertising revenue that the publication generates -- which accounts for the other third of its overall revenue -- has also drastically changed in recent years. A larger portion of it comes from direct relationships with brands and a growing events business, instead of the more-volatile programmatic advertising that relies heavily on traffic from search-engine and social-media platforms.
Goldberg said the Atlantic was once in the traffic-chasing business, following a playbook set by BuzzFeed and Vice, two publishers that have since fallen on hard times as the programmatic-ad spigot dried up. At one point, the Atlantic had a handful of breaking news and business reporters, Goldberg said.
"That worked until it didn't," Goldberg said of that strategy.
The publication shifted its focus to recruiting high-profile writers, including former New York Times staffers Michael Powell, Jennifer Senior and Caitlin Dickerson. Dickerson won the 2023 Pulitzer Prize for Explanatory Journalism for a 2022 story about children separated from parents at the southern border, and Senior won the 2022 Pulitzer Prize for Feature Writing for a cover story on the family of a victim of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
Goldberg said Powell Jobs, the widow of Apple co-founder Steve Jobs who bought a majority stake in the Atlantic in 2017, supported the addition of top-tier talent.
"She believes, and we all believe that, there's a huge untapped audience for the highest quality journalism that is still willing to pay for it," Goldberg said.
Goldberg also has put more emphasis on giving a voice to people with a range of cultural and political views. Recent pieces include a first-person essay from a former New York Times opinion staffer about a controversial op-ed he edited in 2020 from Sen. Tom Cotton (R., Ark.), and a piece by a contributing writer titled "Where the New Identity Politics Went Wrong."
"Everybody who comes to the Atlantic understands that they're going to disagree with much of what we publish," he said. "I disagree with much of what we publish."
Credit: By Alexandra Bruell
