Before OpenAI Chief Executive Sam Altman took the stage this month in Australia for the last leg of his world tour, the audience was asked how many countries he had visited in the past few weeks.
"Eight," one person called out. The crowd gasped when the real number was revealed: 22.
"I'm ready to get home," Altman said during a speech in Melbourne. "But it's been a very special experience to get to talk to so many people building on OpenAI."
The company learned plenty of lessons from the conversations that Altman had during his travels, including the need to make its products work better for non-English speakers and make it possible to determine whether content was AI-generated, according to Anna Makanju, OpenAI's head of public policy.
Since he appeared before Congress last month -- during which he called for the government to regulate the most powerful versions of the large language models that power his company's virally popular ChatGPT chatbot -- Altman has met with heads of state ranging from French President Emmanuel Macron to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi to discuss both the promise and threat of AI.
"He's trying to build relations, first and foremost because he understands that regulation is coming," Marietje Schaake, an international policy fellow at Stanford's Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence and former member of the European Parliament, said of Altman. "So by saying that the company welcomes regulation, he hopes to gain the favor of lawmakers."
During Altman's trip, the European Union's parliament voted to push forward draft legislation, called the AI Act, which is positioned to be the West's first comprehensive set of AI regulations. The draft rules include limits on facial recognition and require some AI models to make disclosures about the copyrighted material used to train their models. Australia, meanwhile, was in the midst of an eight-week consultation on AI regulation when Altman visited.
Makanju, who accompanied Altman on the tour, said she was struck by how consistently people at every stop, from Lisbon to Seoul, were primarily concerned with not having their country miss out on the economic opportunities that the AI revolution could provide, even as they wanted to protect against risks.
"People really want to make sure that whatever they do, they're able to capture the benefits for their economies," she said.
The primary risks that people mentioned were a fear of disinformation and concern about the technology's impact on the job market, as well as more existential worries about what AI's reasoning capabilities say about what it means to be human, Makanju said.
Since its release last November, ChatGPT has taken the world by storm for its ability to write emails, poems or computer code with simple conversational prompts. OpenAI upped the ante in March when it released GPT-4, its most recent version of the model behind the chatbot.
In the process, it has sparked an AI arms race between players like Alphabet's Google and Microsoft, which forged a $13 billion partnership with OpenAI. Google and Microsoft started incorporating versions of the generative AI technology into their search products. It has also prompted dire warnings about the potential for AI to harm humanity, sometimes from Altman himself.
Altman made headlines while in the U.K., where he said on the sidelines of a panel discussion that OpenAI had "a lot" of issues with the draft for the EU's AI Act, which had designated models like OpenAI's GPT-4 "high risk" and thus subject to regulation, and might have to "cease operating" in the European Union if it wasn't able to technically comply with it, as reported by Time.
He subsequently tweeted, "Very productive week of conversations in Europe about how to best regulate AI! We are excited to continue to operate here and of course have no plans to leave."
Makanju said the whole thing was just "an offhand comment that was taken out of context." In the wake of the tour, she said the company is focused on working out technically feasible ways that powerful models like the ones OpenAI produces could be governed, such as standards for evaluating safety before models are deployed.
Makanju expressed some skepticism about other provisions in the draft EU AI Act that require AI models to disclose the copyrighted content they use to train models. She said OpenAI doesn't yet have an official position on the act, because there are several versions that must be reconciled.
Credit: By Keach Hagey in New York and Mike Cherney in Melbourne
