It could eventually be a federal crime to share digitally altered nude images of real people.
Rep. Joseph Morelle (D., N.Y.) this week re-proposed the "Preventing Deepfakes of Intimate Images Act," which would outlaw the nonconsensual sharing of digitally altered intimate images.
He had previously introduced the bill but has since added Rep. Tom Kean, a Republican from New Jersey, as a co-sponsor. Kean had introduced a bill in November called the AI Labeling Act of 2023, which would require AI-generated content to have clear labeling that identifies it as such.
The bipartisan move Tuesday comes in response to an incident at Westfield High School in New Jersey. Boys there were sharing AI-generated nude images of female classmates without their consent. When the girls found out, they reported it to school administrators.
Francesca Mani, a 14-year-old student who was told by the school that her photo had been included in some of the generated images, got angry and decided to advocate for other victims. She and her mother, Dorota Mani, have spent the past two months meeting with lawmakers and were present in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday when Morelle and Kean announced the legislation.
"What happened to me and my classmates was not cool, and there's no way I'm just going to shrug and let it slide," Francesca said in a joint statement issued by Morelle's office. "I'm here, standing up and shouting for change, fighting for laws so no one else has to feel as lost and powerless as I did."
While people have been able to doctor images with Photoshop and similar software for years, new AI image-makers make it easy to produce entirely fabricated photos. There are now dozens of free or cheap face-swapping and "clothes-removing" tools that can be used to doctor real photos -- and it is hard for the human eye to tell real from fake, according to AI experts. Any image can easily be shared widely on social and messaging platforms with a few taps.
In addition to making the sharing of digitally altered intimate images a criminal offense, Morelle and Kean's proposed legislation also would allow victims to sue offenders in civil court.
Credit: By Julie Jargon
