The next frontier of at-home health tracking is flush with data: the toilet.
Researchers and companies are developing high-tech toilets designed to look out for signs of gastrointestinal disease, monitor blood pressure or tell you that you need to eat more fish.
"All of the things that have come with smartwatches and phones, you can imagine that on another scale," says Joshua Coon, a bioanalytical chemist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and Morgridge Institute for Research.
In the Covid-19 pandemic, more communities launched wastewater surveillance initiatives, enabling health officials to hunt for early signs of the virus in cities and neighborhoods.
Some researchers want to harness that wealth of information on the individual level and have come up with models to peer into the toilet bowl remotely. Some smart toilets are geared toward helping doctors monitor patients with chronic conditions or heightened risk for certain diseases, whereas other companies aim to sell the toilets -- with price tags in the hundreds or thousands of dollars -- directly to consumers.
Researchers at Stanford School of Medicine have outfitted a toilet bowl with cameras and trained a machine-learning algorithm to analyze the waste against a diagnostic chart. It is equipped with a urine test-strip similar to a pregnancy test that detects specific molecules that can provide insight into a person's health. The Stanford team has signed an agreement with Izen, a Korean toilet maker, to manufacture the toilet.
Another prototype smart toilet developed at Duke University also deploys cameras and machine learning to analyze waste after it has been flushed. It uses other sensors to capture consistency, presence of blood and specific proteins, and extracts a small vial of stool that can be shipped off to a lab for further analysis.
"[You could] get personalized alerts for having more fiber or avoiding certain foods to avoid flare-ups," says Sonia Grego, founder of the Duke Smart Toilet Lab and Coprata Inc., a startup that she and two other team members launched in 2021 to commercialize the technology.
Another plus is that it could allow for frequent measurements that can be tracked over time.
"What your blood pressure is at 2 p.m. on a Tuesday doesn't matter. To get that information with real trends behind it is super valuable," says Austin McChord, the chief executive of Casana, a startup working on a toilet seat that can measure vital signs including blood pressure or heart rate.
"If you want someone to use something, it has to be incredibly simple," says Chad Adams, president and chief executive of Medic.Life, which is working to get FDA clearance for its Medic.Lav smart toilet. "Everybody has to go to the bathroom."
Medic.Life first plans to sell its toilet to assisted living facilities, where it could help track residents' vital signs, body weight or even the sugar or sodium levels in their urine.
Google LLC has a patent for a toilet seat that doubles as a cardiovascular monitor, filed in 2015, although it isn't clear whether the company is pursuing the project. Google Health declined to comment. Toilet maker Toto is designing a toilet that could analyze people's waste and provide recommendations to improve wellness. The company anticipates launching the toilet in the next several years.
Developers will have to work out how to prepare samples for analysis and refill the chemicals needed to run the reaction, as well as make the toilet cost-effective, experts say.
Another key barrier is privacy. A 300-person survey conducted by the Stanford team found that one third of respondents were uncomfortable with the concept of a smart toilet that collects health data, with many citing privacy as a chief concern.
Credit: By Brianna Abbott
