Sure, AI is taking over the world, but that's not all bad! Here are some suggestions for braving the coming revolution.
Relish the thought that, shorn of the need to work, you'll be able to devote yourself to more pressing issues, like why country singers are always telling us where they come from.
Consider that carbon dioxide sequestration can succeed only with AI-powered risk modeling. Don't worry that this sentence is incomprehensible to non-Nobel Prize winners.
Take comfort in the fact that the drivers of self-driving cars are not talking on their phones while driving because they are phones.
Ease your anxieties about the earning potential of your artist friends because most AI-generated art looks like it was born on the side of a van.
Entertain the idea that AI robots might fall somewhere between amoral predators bent on destroying humanity and bowtie-wearing manservants with chirpy English accents.
Savor the prospect of seeing the very humans who are the least subject to morality and ethics -- politicians -- regulating AI's morality and ethics.
Contemplate the potential enchantments of a companion bot: At last, a partner who remembers that you are allergic to cilantro and Meg Ryan.
Remember that some Victorians thought that the novel was the death of literature.
Savor the fact that the snotty chess master in your daughter's sixth-grade class is about to get trounced.
Avoid obsessing over whether or not you sounded passively aggressive toward a robot.
Imagine being able to decisively end all conversations simply by glancing skyward and delivering a withering "But is it scalable?"
Relish the thought of buying your outsized, bearlike friend a T-shirt emblazoned "BIG DATA."
Compare the current anxiety about teeming, unregulated AI with our previous anxiety about teeming, unregulated drones: 15 years ago everyone worried that drones would soon be swarming like Hitchcock's birds, but mostly they have delivered hours and hours of videos of waterfalls.
Look forward to the advent of an a cappella bot group, the Algo-rhythms.
Imagine becoming so informed about AI that you have a conversation about epistemological uncertainty in which you deploy the terms "Bayesian" and "probabilistic" with the cool of Catherine Deneuve blowing a smoke ring.
Consider the possibility that, once everyone's troubles with the law are recorded in a way that is instantly accessible to strangers, scofflaws will be less likely to commit even tiny crimes, such as clipping their toenails in public.
Make peace with the idea that your grandchildren may spend their lives as slaves in the lithium mines.
Spend pleasant hours imagining that a machine, which can withstand hostile environments far better than humans, can go to your cousin's wedding for you.
Look forward to your very own chatbot assistant who, unlike Siri or Alexa, doesn't sound like she's composed of equal parts gaseous vapor and pause button.
Appreciate how fewer tedious jobs for humans will result in less character-building and more podcasts.
Relish the thought that the phrase "outside the box" will come to mean "human."
Acknowledge that the road to the Singularity will be a bumpy one, with rest stops that are named "the slightly less than Spectacularity," "the Incomprehensibility" and the "Call the IT Guy."
---
Henry Alford is a humorist and journalist and the author of "And Then We Danced: A Voyage into the Groove," among other books.
Credit: By Henry Alford
