Cybersecurity firm Darktrace PLC said it aims to go public in London, hoping to cash in on growing demand for its software, despite ongoing legal uncertainty over one of its leading backers.
The British technology company is targeting a valuation of as much as $4 billion in the initial public offering, which could raise between $350 million to $400 million, according to people familiar with the matter.
Darktrace uses artificial intelligence to detect cyberattacks on the computer networks of companies and organizations, and its customers include Coca-Cola Co., engine maker Rolls-Royce Holdings PLC and the city of Las Vegas.
Darktrace said its sales grew at a compound annual rate of 58% between 2018 and 2020 as companies sought help tackling faster and more sophisticated cyberattacks that humans were struggling to keep up with.
The company was founded in 2013 and received early investment from Mike Lynch, a British tech entrepreneur at the center of a lengthy legal dispute regarding the sale of his previous company Autonomy to Hewlett-Packard Co.
One of the challenges Darktrace faces in wooing investors is assuring them that Mr. Lynch's fight to avoid extradition to the U.S. to face fraud charges won't expose the company to legal or regulatory risk, some bankers and investors have said. Mr. Lynch denies all charges.
Ahead of the IPO, the shareholding of Invoke Capital -- Mr. Lynch's investment vehicle -- in Darktrace was restructured, some of the people familiar with the matter said.
Invoke had owned about 29% of Darktrace, but its stake has been split between its investors in a way that minimizes Mr. Lynch's influence on Darktrace, people familiar with the matter said. Under the new structure, Mr. Lynch owns about 5% of Darktrace and his wife owns about 10%.
The investors behind Invoke will have the right to nominate one board member at Darktrace, according to people familiar with the matter. A spokeswoman for Darktrace said Invoke shareholders had the same rights as other shareholders. Mr. Lynch declined to comment.
Darktrace Chief Executive Poppy Gustafsson denied that the shareholdings were restructured to minimize Mr. Lynch's influence on the company, and said the entrepreneur wasn't involved in the day-to-day running of the business. "I speak to him on an ad hoc basis, as I do with all investors," she said.
Mr. Lynch sold his previous company Autonomy to Hewlett-Packard for $11 billion in 2011. He was later accused by H-P of falsely inflating Autonomy revenues before the sale. H-P took a $8.8 billion write-down on the acquisition and sued Mr. Lynch and another Autonomy executive for $5.1 billion. The Justice Department indicted Mr. Lynch on criminal charges of wire fraud related to H-P's acquisition. A British court is set to decide in the coming months if Mr. Lynch should be extradited to the U.S. to face those charges, which Mr. Lynch denies.
Ms. Gustafsson said Darktrace would use some of the money the company hopes to raise from its IPO to expand its research and development operations in Cambridge, U.K., and to hire more software engineers.
"There's 150,000 companies that could benefit from our technology," she said. "We're just getting started."
Darktrace reported revenue of $126.5 million for the six months to Dec. 31, up from $91.1 million in the year-earlier period, partly driven by selling more products to each customer.
However, the company said its net loss widened to $48.4 million from $22.8 million over the same period.
The planned offering comes amid a surge in IPOs in Europe and globally this year, and will serve as a test of investor appetite for new technology stocks in London.
Officials in the U.K. hope to attract more technology companies to list on the London Stock Exchange but the latest high-profile offering has endured a rocky start to life as a listed company so far.
Food-delivery platform Deliveroo Holdings PLC priced its shares at the low end of its initial range and has seen its stock sink almost 37% from the IPO price since the stock started trading at the end of last month.
Credit: By Ben Dummett and Parmy Olson
