WASHINGTON -- States including Rhode Island, Kansas and New York are turning to tech companies including Amazon Web Services and Google to handle an unprecedented rise in unemployment claims triggered by the coronavirus pandemic.
More than 30 million Americans have filed for unemployment benefits since efforts to contain the virus led to widespread business shutdowns in mid-March. State labor departments across the nation have struggled with busy phone lines, website crashes and delays in unemployment payments, with some operating on decades-old technology.
Amazon.com Inc.'s technology is helping some states address these challenges. Rhode Island, formerly dependent on old computer systems and outdated call-center technology, rolled out federal programs on a quicker timeline than most other states, federal and state officials said. Massachusetts's online system has been running without outages throughout the coronavirus pandemic. Kansas's call center is able to field more calls compared with earlier in the crisis, thanks to systems recently put in place, according to state officials.
Google is working with New York and Illinois, among others, to upgrade their labor departments' decades-old computer systems, said Todd Schroeder, the director of public-sector digital strategy for Google Cloud.
Google, a unit of Alphabet Inc., is using cloud technology and artificial intelligence to upgrade the state agencies' website capacities and automate as much of the claim-filing process as possible, Mr. Schroeder said.
The Texas Workforce Commission, which oversees unemployment benefits and other services for the nation's second-most-populous state, worked with Accenture PLC to develop an artificial-intelligence system for steering inquiries using chatbots.
For Amazon, the new business from overburdened states is a bright spot in the company's bid to work with governments. Amazon is fighting the award of a more than $10 billion cloud-computing contract from the Defense Department to Microsoft Corp., arguing that criticism by President Trump of the contract process and of Amazon itself played an unfair role in the Pentagon's decision.
Rhode Island turned to Amazon Web Services for help in April when its old computer systems and outdated call center became overwhelmed by the number of individuals seeking unemployment assistance during the coronavirus pandemic.
Amazon and a Providence, R.I.-based nonprofit called Research Improving People's Lives developed an online application that accepts benefits applications from independent contractors and other employees made newly eligible by the federal stimulus bill. The changes allowed Rhode Island's labor department to be among the first states to begin rolling out the federal program.
Rhode Island also replaced call-center technology with the same system Amazon uses to handle call and internet volume during Black Friday sales events before Christmas. The cloud-based technology allowed the Rhode Island labor department to change from using 74 phone lines that left callers waiting for minutes to a system that can take 1,000 calls at the same time.
"Nobody who tried to certify in Rhode Island yesterday got a busy signal," said Scott Jensen, director of the Rhode Island labor department, after the new call system was launched in April.

Credit: By Sarah Chaney
