Robots are moving off the assembly line.
Collaborative robots that work alongside humans -- "cobots" -- are getting cheaper and easier to program. That is encouraging businesses to put them to work at new tasks in bars, restaurants and clinics.
In the Netherlands, a cobot scales a 26-foot-high bar to tap bottles of homemade gin, whiskey and limoncello so that bartenders don't need to climb ladders. In Japan, a cobot boxes takeout dumplings. In Singapore, robots give soft-tissue massages.
Cobots made up just 5% of the $14 billion industrial-robot market in 2017, according to research by Minneapolis-based venture-capital firm Loup Ventures. Loup estimates sales will jump to 27% of a $33 billion market by 2025 as demand rises. About 20 manufacturers have started selling such robots in the past decade.
Smaller businesses are using more cobots as labor costs rise. Artificial-intelligence software is making it easier to teach them repetitive tasks. The latest models are sleeker and safer than their predecessors, which were often confined in cages to protect them from injuring nearby humans.
Cobot arms brake when they touch humans, and don't have "pinch points" that could snag fingers and skin. One cobot maker, Boston-based Rethink Robotics, added smiley-face screens to its robots to make them look friendlier.
"Robots are now crossing the chasm from a niche to a mass market," said Angus Muirhead, who runs a robotics fund for Credit Suisse. He likened the current adoption of robotics to the introduction in the late 1990s of smaller handsets that launched mobile phones into wider use.
When restaurateur Patrick Beijk opened Mofongo's Distillery & Cocktail Bar in the Dutch city of Groningen in 2013, he went looking for a machine that could scale the space's jewel-colored wall of spirit bottles. When Mr. Beijk opened a wine bar last year, he bought a two-armed cobot programmed to extract wine from bottles without removing the cork.
In Singapore, AiTreat -- a startup at Nanyang Technological University -- has created robots that can give Chinese medical massages, which focus on acupressure points.
Both Mr. Beijk's and AiTreat's cobots were made in part by Universal Robots, which sold its first cobot in 2008. Last year, the company sold 8,600 units.

Credit: By Natasha Khan
