Neoliberalism -- the economic-policy mix of market capitalism coupled with sensible regulation, some redistribution via taxes and transfers, and open international trade -- appears to be falling out of favor. The replacement is a decidedly illiberal strain of populism.
Much of the ire is directed at trade. Critics on both the right and the left suggest that globalization enriches the few and immiserates the many. The truth is closer to the opposite: Open trade benefits the many (who enjoy lower prices) and harms the few (who lose their jobs). That said, the few are justified in lamenting their shabby treatment.
Yet many more jobs are lost to technological change than to trade. Opposition to innovation has ranged from the Luddites' smashing of textile-manufacturing equipment to frustration at the internet's disruption of various occupations. Now many fret over what jobs artificial intelligence might displace. What should a democratic society do about this kind of job loss?
For nearly a century, we have relied on a suite of programs known as the social safety net. The idea is straightforward: Let the market determine the rewards to capital and labor, and to high- and low-wage earners, but then allow the government to redistribute money through progressive taxation, Social Security, unemployment benefits, and other transfer payments to the needy.
If pursued vigorously, such programs could achieve what Franklin D. Roosevelt called a New Deal and Lyndon B. Johnson called a Great Society. America, however, doesn't pursue these policies vigorously enough. Instead, a subset of politicians resist benefit expansions, leaving us with a thin safety net compared with other wealthy nations.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development tracks member countries' comparative "social spending" -- defined as cash benefits, direct in-kind provision of goods and services, and tax breaks with social purposes -- as a percentage of gross domestic product. Benefits may target "low-income households, the elderly, disabled, sick, unemployed or young persons." By this measure, 22.7% of U.S gross domestic product is social spending, compared with 31.6% in France and 26.7% in Germany.
International differences are even starker in other respects. Paid parental leave is the norm in many rich nations. The U.S. is only the OECD member without such a national policy.
While the U.S. should have a stronger social safety net, most American workers want to work rather than receive handouts. Is there another path toward less inequality that might attract more political support? Maybe. Interest among economists appears to be growing in what Yale professor Jacob Hacker dubs "predistribution" policies: those that reduce inequalities in how markets dish out rewards rather than redistribute income after the fact.
The most obvious predistribution policy is the federal minimum wage, which has been stuck at a paltry $7.25 an hour since 2009. It's time Washington changed that. Polling has long shown that raising the minimum wage commands broad support.
Many economists have also come to realize that monopsony -- a market condition in which there's only one buyer -- is more common in labor markets than originally thought. In a monopsony, employers have more power to set compensation rates, leading to reduced wages. Just as we have antimonopoly policies, we should put in place antimonopsony policies.
Moving down the list of predistributive policies, how about a crackdown on wage cheating, as when firms fail to pay fully for overtime work?
The Biden administration has promulgated some good predistributive policies. It has reversed the Trump administration's approach to unions, choosing to strengthen, not undermine, them. The Federal Trade Commission's new limits on noncompete agreements, which impair workers' ability to move to better-paying jobs, will likely boost wages.
And here's an out-of-the-box idea: Perhaps top executives could narrow the gap between their compensation and that of ordinary employees -- not because the government mandates it but voluntarily, because doing so would make America better. Wishful thinking, you say, and you're probably right. But a few CEOs have done so. Some nations manage fine with smaller wage gaps -- without destroying capitalism. Maybe America could, too.
---
Mr. Blinder is a professor of economics and public affairs at Princeton. He served as vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, 1994-96.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Wealth Must Be Made Before It Is Distributed" -- WSJ June 12, 2024)
Credit: By Alan S. Blinder
