I'm pretty sure we've hit peak absurdity. I recently read about a climate author "investigating how shade can be a powerful civic resource to protect us from climate change." Shade! This from the announcement of a new "climate cohort" at a well-regarded philanthropy. It reveals a flaw in capitalism.
Not a single scientist can be found in the climate cohort -- why bother? -- but instead authors, educators, designers, a poet and, hmmm, a chef. There is a "data ecologist," but that almost sounds made up. Reading further, apparently the lack of shade is racist and a product of inequality. Of course it is.
Hey look, the wealthy can do what they like with their money -- often paradoxically amassed by delivering productivity-enhancing products. I've noted before that there are only four things you can do with your money: spend it, pay taxes, invest it or give it away. The flaw in capitalism is that only one of these helps the world in the long term.
In the short term, spending is great for the economy, but it's hard to blow a billion dollars at Costco or buy 3,000 Lamborghinis. Paying taxes funnels money to unproductive government spending and should be kept to a minimum. Even investing has turned absurd: An Oklahoma City brand designer prompted ChatGPT: "You have $100, and your goal is to turn that into as much money as possible in the shortest time possible, without doing anything illegal." ChatGPT instructed him to launch "Green Gadget Guru" and promote "eco-friendly gadgets and sustainable living." Climate is lucrative!
Anyway, of the four, philanthropy is the most misunderstood. Yes, many philanthropies do great stuff, especially on a local level. And it sure feels good for the giver. We all get that warm fuzzy feeling -- a psychic reward -- when we donate to causes. Help your fellow human. Fund schools. Gild the opera. But does that giving do any lasting good? Sadly, only sometimes.
Andrew Carnegie funded libraries. Others, like Leland Stanford, Ezra Cornell, Cornelius Vanderbilt and John D. Rockefeller, took their entrepreneurial wealth and created universities. Good for them. Books and education are the bedrock of human capital. But that was more than a century ago. What works today? Now gifts to education often enable diversity, equity and inclusion departments and squishy professors who push the anticapitalist ideologies du jour. I doubt that was the intent of Carnegie and friends.
Others, like Henry Ford, started foundations, often as a tax dodge to finesse estate taxes. The Ford Foundation's current grants are a showcase of syrupy social justice. Ted Turner gave $1 billion to the United Nations, perhaps to buy those orange "Trick or Treat for Unicef" boxes. Warren Buffett gave money, pretax, to the Gates Foundation, to minimize estate taxes. The Gates Foundation has done wonderful work trying to eradicate malaria and AIDS, but its effectiveness is debatable.
Paul David Hewson said it best during a 2012 speech at Georgetown University. Wait, who? "Aid is just a stopgap," said Mr. Hewson, whose stage name is Bono. "Commerce [and] entrepreneurial capitalism take more people out of poverty than aid. We need Africa to become an economic powerhouse." We still haven't found what he's looking for. An economic powerhouse would be able to afford mosquito nets and malaria drugs without handouts. That should be the endgame.
Jeff Bezos is spending $500 million on a yacht and has blasted himself into space. Elon Musk is trying to colonize Mars. But he's asking for volunteers rather than going himself, noting "your probability of dying on Mars is much higher than Earth. Really, the ad for going to Mars would be like Shackleton's ad for going to the Antarctic" -- reputedly "Men Wanted for Hazardous Journey." Mr. Musk was also part of the early $1 billion funding of OpenAI, the ChatGPT creator, as a nonprofit.
At its best, lots of philanthropy is very useful, but may not be sustainable over time -- a sugar high that rarely enables that "teach a man how to fish" thing. Effective altruism may be an oxymoron. And it's hard to miss that much of philanthropy is to fix government failures in education, welfare or medicine. I think that was Bono's point.
But at its shadiest, philanthropy drives the misallocation of capital, overvaluing professors, the U.N. and climate poets and undervaluing those who can productively increase societal wealth to fund solutions to the future's harder problems.
If only there were a way to use capital to provide opportunity, train workers, pay middle-class wages, help people build wealth... wait, it just came to me. How about starting new companies and investing in entrepreneurs and world-changing technology? Sure, that's "a hazardous journey," but so what? Actually, part of OpenAI is now a for-profit. Yes, it turns out the perfect cure for the flaw in capitalism is, voila, more capitalism. You may not get that warm fuzzy feeling or media adulation -- in fact, you'll likely be labeled greedy -- but you might fund future economic powerhouses. Scolds will throw shade. Ignore them.
---
Write to kessler@wsj.com
Credit: By Andy Kessler
