The Nasdaq Composite and S&P 500 closed out the week at fresh highs after new data on the labor market shored up confidence that the Federal Reserve can soon cut rates.
The gains extended a run of record closes for the two indexes, with the tech-heavy Nasdaq adding 0.9% Friday to bring its weekly advance to 3.5%. The S&P 500 rose 0.5% for the day, and 2% for the week. The Dow Jones Industrial Average edged higher, and was up 0.7% for the week.
Data Friday showed the U.S. added 206,000 jobs last month, continuing a remarkably strong stretch of hiring. But the unemployment rate ticked up to 4.1%, adding to recent signs that the job market is gradually cooling.
Investors had been on edge about the labor market after surprisingly strong hiring in May dented hopes for interest-rate cuts this year. After Friday's jobs data, traders in interest-rate futures were betting that there is a 78% chance that the Fed will cut rates at least once by its September meeting, compared with 74% on Wednesday, before the July 4 holiday, according to CME Group data.
"September is a live meeting for a rate cut," said John Lynch, chief investment officer for Comerica Wealth Management, due to the weakening trend in job creation.
The S&P 500 has rallied 17% this year, fueled by investor enthusiasm for a small group of tech giants that are focused on creating or using artificial-intelligence technology.
On Friday, technology shares continued to rally. Meta Platforms rose 5.9%, hitting a fresh all-time high. Tesla shares rose 27% for the week, their best since January 2023, extending a rally that has erased its losses for the year. Chip maker Advanced Micro Devices climbed 4.9%.
In bond markets, the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury declined to 4.272%, after settling Wednesday at 4.346%. This put yields lower for the week following two weeks of gains.
Overseas, the FTSE 100 slipped after the U.K.'s Labour Party won a landslide electoral victory. The more domestically focused FTSE 250 rallied less than 1%. The pound strengthened slightly against the dollar and the euro.
French assets wavered ahead of Sunday's second-round election. Government bonds rallied, but stocks gave up earlier gains. The far-right National Rally's chance of winning a parliamentary majority has shrunk since its opponents cooperated in recent days.
Generate image description

Credit: By Caitlin Ostroff
