Big tech companies such as Facebook Inc., Twitter Inc. and Google have benefited from enabling users to easily share pictures or videos, but they are now working to stem the spread of maliciously doctored content ahead of next year's presidential election.
So-called deepfakes are images or videos that have been manipulated through the use of sophisticated machine-learning algorithms to make it almost impossible to differentiate between what is real and what isn't. While the technology has benign applications -- Walt Disney Co. has used algorithms to insert characters in some of its "Star Wars" movies -- it can be used to create nefarious content.
The tools to concoct fake images are improving so rapidly that soon it will be very hard to detect deepfakes with technology, said Dana Rao, executive vice president and general counsel for Adobe Inc., which is best known for Photoshop image-editing software. The fight will be "an arms race," he said.
The number of deepfakes online nearly doubled from December to August, to 14,678, according to a study by cybersecurity startup Deeptrace. The rise has prompted action by tech giants.
Alphabet Inc.'s Google on Wednesday, in an update to its political advertisement policy, said it would prohibit the use of deepfakes in political and other ads.
Twitter earlier this month said it was considering identifying manipulated photos, videos and audio shared on its platform.
Facebook, Microsoft Corp. and Amazon.com Inc. are working with more than a half-dozen universities to run a Deepfake Detection Challenge starting next month. It is intended to accelerate research into new ways of detecting and preventing media manipulated to mislead others, Facebook Chief Technology Officer Mike Schroepfer wrote in a September blog post.
Interest in making deepfakes is growing fast, according to Deeptrace. Two years ago the first deepfakes appeared on Reddit, the popular chat forum. Now, at least 20 websites and online forums are devoted to discussions about how to better produce them.
Deeptrace found online services that can generate and sell custom deepfakes in as little as two days and for a cost as low as $2.99 a video, the researchers said.
"It doesn't take a lot of skill," said Matt Turek, a program manager overseeing deepfake-related research and development efforts at the Pentagon's technology incubator, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. The Pentagon is studying deepfakes out of concern that military planners could be fooled into making bad decisions if altered images aren't detected.
Several startups have emerged to work on image verification, and now big tech companies, which have been criticized for not doing more to prevent disinformation, are getting more involved in the fight.
Elsewhere, the nonprofit arm of the AI Foundation, an advocacy group for the safe use of artificial intelligence, has created a website to help election campaigns and journalists analyze photos and videos within minutes of receiving them.
"There is no one silver bullet," said Rob Meadows, the AI Foundation's founder and chief technology officer.
---
Till Daldrup contributed to this article.

Credit: By Betsy Morris
