Microsoft temporarily blocked employee access to ChatGPT on company devices, with a notice to employees citing security concerns, according to an internal blog post.
Employees who tried to go to the site on Thursday afternoon were briefly redirected to an internal notice that said the website was blocked by their organization, people familiar with the matter said. After more than an hour, access was restored, they said.
The decision to block ChatGPT, which is made by Microsoft-backed startup OpenAI, was made and communicated by the information-technology department, according to a person familiar with the matter. Management was caught by surprise by the move and later reversed the decision, the person said.
Microsoft said the brief restrictions were in error. The company said it encourages employees and customers to use services including Bing Chat Enterprise and ChatGPT Enterprise that come with greater levels of privacy and security protections.
Microsoft and ChatGPT have introduced enterprise versions of ChatGPT-based products that boast stronger data security than ones designed for consumers. These versions are built to keep the users' data restricted to company devices and not mixed in with the data available to any users.
Though temporary, the episode highlights security concerns about the services that have prompted other companies this year to restrict the use of ChatGPT and other external AI tools for some employees. Apple restricted use of the bot as it develops its own similar technology; JPMorgan Chase and Verizon are among companies that have blocked internal access to the viral chatbot.
The internal Microsoft post Thursday said that a number of artificial-intelligence tools were no longer available to employees, according to photos of the message viewed by The Wall Street Journal. Bing Chat, which uses the same technology, was on the list of blocked tools. The post also said more information would be coming soon.
Microsoft has invested $13 billion in ChatGPT's creator, OpenAI. This week, Microsoft Chief Executive Satya Nadella appeared onstage at a conference hosted by OpenAI, touting the strength of the relationship between the two.
Credit: By Meghan Bobrowsky and Tom Dotan
