Chinese investors are piling into new funds tracking Saudi Arabian equities, a sign of the robust appetite for overseas exposure at a time when home markets are flagging.
Two exchange-traded funds focused on big Saudi companies like Aramco and Saudi National Bank gained as much as 30% over their first three days of trading after launching this week, briefly achieving premiums of 20% over their net asset values, according to Chinese market-data provider Wind.
Morning trading was halted Thursday as the funds, managed separately by China Southern Asset Management and Huatai-Pinebridge Investment, issued statements for the third day running warning investors of trading risks.
"If trading blindly, investors may suffer significant losses," they each said. Both funds ended the day lower, but remained well above their Tuesday debut levels.
The enthusiasm for Saudi exposure comes as China's equities markets are struggling to draw interest, suffering from concerns about a weak domestic economy and tepid consumption, even as indexes from the U.S. to Japan have soared on the back of artificial-intelligence fervor and rising hopes for lower global interest rates, among other factors.
Shanghai's benchmark index is up 0.1% this year, while Shenzhen's has fallen 13%. China's markets briefly rallied in February, when Beijing named a new markets regulator and rolled out measures to curb short selling, but those gains have largely been unwound as an extended downturn continues in the property market and economic activity remains weak.
China's equity markets "remain gloomy amid the lack of conviction for a more sustained economic recovery" in the country, said Jun Rong Yeap, a market strategist at IG.
That gloom is making overseas investing more appealing. Earlier this year, Chinese investors flocked to a host of U.S. and Japanese ETFs during a selloff in domestic equities, causing a flurry of trading halts and warnings. Many of those have gained in the double digits this year, with at least one up more than 50%.
Part of the appeal of the ETFs is that they are one of few relatively easy ways for local investors to access overseas equities, analysts said.
"The China market is still a very closed market," said Jackie Choy, director of passive investment ratings at Morningstar. For investors "who would like to diversify away from their local assets, the channels are still limited."
The Saudi ETFs, relatively uncommon offerings in China, come amid an uptick in Beijing's business ties with the Middle East.
Bourses in Shanghai, Shenzhen and Riyadh last year signed deals to bolster the growth of capital markets in China and Saudi Arabia, while Hong Kong in May said it planned to list an ETF tracking its benchmark Hang Seng Index in the Middle East nation.
Saudi and Chinese companies announced deals worth more than $50 billion during a visit by Chinese President Xi Jinping to Riyadh in December 2022.
More recently, China's Baoshan Iron & Steel said last May it would commit $4 billion to build a factory with Aramco and the Saudi sovereign-wealth fund to manufacture steel plates, while two Chinese solar companies said this week that they would invest $3 billion alongside Saudi entities to set up production facilities in Saudi Arabia.
Those ties are helping to make Saudi investments especially attractive, given tensions between China and the U.S. in trade, technology, geopolitics and other matters, analysts said.
"Closer ties between China and Saudi Arabia may help to remove some of the geopolitical risks in those investments [that] are more prominent with the West," IG's Yeap said.
Credit: By Sherry Qin and Tracy Qu
