SOFTBANK GROUP
Japanese Firm Tags
$5 Billion for Didi
SoftBank Group Corp. is pledging to invest $5 billion in Didi Chuxing, China's leading ride-hailing firm.
The investment would come during the Japanese company's current business year, according to an earnings filing.
SoftBank Chief Executive Masayoshi Son hopes to launch a $100 billion technology fund soon, is considering investments in such areas as autonomous driving, artificial intelligence and biotechnology. The fund's investors include Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund, Abu Dhabi's Mubadala Development Co., Apple Inc. and Qualcomm Inc.
SoftBank on Friday also said it would lead a $502 million funding round for London-based startup Improbable, whose virtual-reality technology allows it to simulate real-world conditions, such as traffic flow.
-- Mayumi Negishi
---
ODEBRECHT
Construction Group
Names New CEO
Troubled Brazilian construction conglomerate Odebrecht SA named company veteran Luciano Guidolin as its new chief executive officer.
He succeeds Newton de Souza, who had been at the helm since 2015, when the company was rocked by Brazil's biggest-ever corruption scandal.
The appointment of Mr. Guidolin, who has been vice president of investments at Odebrecht, is "another step in Odebrecht's transformation process," the company said Friday.
Mr. de Souza, who will become the vice chairman of Odebrecht, stepped in following the arrest of former CEO Marcelo Odebrecht in 2015. Mr. Odebrecht was convicted and sentenced to 19 years in prison for his role in the corruption scheme at state-run oil company Petroleo Brasileiro SA, or Petrobras.
-- Luciana Magalhaes
---
ELI LILLY
Migraine Drug
Shows Promise
Eli Lilly & Co. said it would seek regulatory approval of a migraine drug this year after seeing positive results from late-stage studies, raising hopes for a new class of treatments for the debilitating headaches.
The drug, galcanezumab, met its primary endpoint in three Phase 3 studies, showing significant reductions in the number of monthly migraine headache days compared with placebo at both studied doses, the Indianapolis-based drugmaker said Friday.
Lilly plans to submit a biologics license application to the Food and Drug Administration in the latter half of this year.
Lilly is one of several companies testing a new class of drugs that target a chemical known by its initials, CGRP. Researchers have found that CGRP, which stands for calcitonin gene-related peptide, is involved in the brain's pain-signaling during migraines.
-- Anne Steele
---
FORD MOTOR
CEO Makes His Case
To Wall Street
Ford Motor Co. Chief Executive Mark Fields, under pressure from the board to sharpen the company's strategy, met Friday with Wall Street analysts who have expressed increasing frustration with its stock-price performance.
RBC Capital Markets analyst Joseph Spak said he left a meeting believing the company is aiming to improve its communication with investors to demonstrate resilience in its core automotive business and outline the payoffs for investments in future technology.
"We believe positive messaging developments lie ahead," Mr. Spak said in a note to investors.
The Wall Street meetings were confirmed by a Ford spokesman. The auto maker held its annual shareholder meeting on Thursday.
Mr. Fields told investors on an earnings call in April that Ford needed to do a better job quantifying the revenue and growth potential of the new technologies it is investing in as part of a broader plan to diversify beyond its core auto business.
Mr. Spak said one option would be breaking out those investments separately from Ford's other automotive businesses, a move that will help the market better "grade" their progress and performance.
He said this could reflect a strategy employed by Alphabet Inc., Google's parent company.
-- Christina Rogers
