Isn't it fun to go out with friends to a buzzy bar in the coolest part of town, order some drinks and pizza, and end up talking about . . . ChatGPT? Or, more precisely, about how artificial intelligence is going to make everything faster and easier but also destroy all that we hold dear? Yes, I love doing that too. I did it the other night. Good times.
A new era is upon us. The quiet mourning for the death of a world we were barely holding on to by our fingernails anyway.
I'm not talking about AI only with other oldsters, by the way, who only recently figured out how to share documents on Zoom and have made peace with the prospect of never talking to their children with a phone against their ear again. The angst is generational. Many of my Gen Z students at New York University's Stern School of Business tell me they are in an angsty love-hate relationship with AI. It does their homework but leaves them wondering if their expensively educated brains are special after all. It plans their trips to Europe after graduation, but it also is creating an economy that makes their future employers so nervous that job start dates are being delayed. Their professors -- myself included -- encourage them to be excited about the opportunities AI will bring someday. Except that the time between now and "someday" feels like a yawning chasm of chaos and uncertainty. It reminds them, they confess, of the pandemic all over again. Even if you generally find yourself annoyed with the Zoomers, you have to admit they are on to something here.
Because my business-school class is about helping students plan their life journeys, I have found myself in an unlikely corner lately, offering advice on how to process "AI grief," for lack of a better term. I've tried it out on my own boomer friends and colleagues -- as I did at that buzzy bar. On these occasions, too, the conversation brought a bit of relief. If you're grappling with your own small or large dose of "farewell to all that," some thoughts:
One of the hardest things we ever learn in life is that forever is a long time. With AI, that lesson is upon us. After my husband, Jack, died, another widow I knew called to express her condolences. Six months had passed, and my grief was still very raw. I asked her when it would get easier. She laughed, sadly: "You think the first year is bad? The second year is when you realize how long forever is."
So much in our life passes, but we can make sense of it, or even replace it with something better. We lose a job; we get another. We lose our hair and find it never really mattered. But when something, or someone, is gone permanently, the grief is dizzying on another level. It feels too big, unprocessable.
That, I say, is the weird feeling AI is stirring in your chest. There is no antidote. What saves you -- and will eventually tamp down your anxiety -- is that knowing that forever stealing things from us without end makes us better at living and loving in the present. That's a hard-won gift, but a gift nonetheless.
The second piece of advice I offer is more context than advice. I remind the mourners that evolutionary psychologists have been telling us for years that we don't live in the world our brains were designed for. We've adapted, but research, originally presented by Oxford University's Robin Dunbar suggests that people function optimally in communities of around 60 to 100 -- roughly the size, not surprisingly, of the first tribes on the African plains. That's about all the input and output we can take, in terms of talking, listening, gossiping, nurturing, managing, predicting and leading. Think for a moment about the number of people in your life who pour images, ideas, requests, demands, feelings and noise into your head daily. It's not 60; it's probably closer to a multiple of 100.
Where does this context leave us? Maybe simply with a sense of relief that our AI discomfort is, well, human. Technology will change the world in ways that take us even further away from our brain's design. No wonder it feels so overwhelming -- and maybe it should prompt us to find small communities that offer the "natural" peace the world doesn't. A church, a neighborhood, a club, a volunteer organization. They aren't the cure for what ails us but a treatment.
My ersatz grief counseling ends with a small admonishment, which someone had the audacity to use on me when, two years after my husband died, I said no to yet another invitation to join friends at an event. "The problem with a pity party," she said, "is that no one comes but you." I can assure you my reaction to this comment wasn't, "Wow, you're so right, I feel better already." But as the weeks went on and I found my persistent sadness isolating me more than ever, I realized if I wanted to move beyond mourning, I had to will it.
AI grief is like that. You might always carry your angst in your heart, but you also have to decide to embrace the future.
Forever is indeed a long time, and we are all living in a world that demands more of our brains than they can reasonably take. But don't become the person who lets AI ruin a good night out with friends. To mourn is human -- and to make sense of our mourning and move on is more human still.
---
Ms. Welch is a professor of management practice at NYU's Stern School of Business and a senior adviser at the Brunswick Group.
Credit: By Suzy Welch
