Facebook parent Meta Platforms reported its highest quarterly sales growth since 2021 as digital advertising continued to rebound, but the company also signaled that spending for its experimental metaverse unit will surge in 2024.
The social-media giant's advertising revenue grew about 12% in the quarter, a turnaround driven by improved use of AI technology that has enabled better ad targeting after Apple privacy changes in 2021 cost the company $10 billion in sales.
Meta has cut costs aggressively this year in what Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg has called a "year of efficiency." But some of those spending reductions have been offset by higher costs in its Reality Labs business, which produces headsets and content for immersive worlds that the company sees as a linchpin of the future of technology.
While some investors have urged caution in spending related to that business, Zuckerberg has steadfastly stood by his big bet, insisting that it will position the company to be a leader in what he believes will emerge as the next major computing platform.
Meta's shares surged by more than 7% in after-hours trading, a sign that investors are encouraged by improvements in digital advertising even as concerns about the metaverse remain. The company reported second-quarter revenue of $32 billion, up 11% compared with a year ago and the largest quarterly growth since the final quarter of 2021.
"Meta's year of efficiency is off to a strong start," said Debra Aho Williamson, principal analyst at Insider Intelligence. Meta "is still determined to make the metaverse a reality, and the massive losses in its Reality Labs division are adding up. The company also faces incredibly tough competition in generative AI, including from OpenAI and Google."
Meta posted a net profit of $7.8 billion for the second quarter, a 16% increase from the year-ago period and up from $5.7 billion in the January-to-March quarter.
Meta's shares have more than doubled this year as Zuckerberg has focused on cost-cutting, developing new generative AI technology and the launch of Threads, a micro-blogging app Meta launched to compete with the business formerly known as Twitter, which billionaire owner Elon Musk rebranded as X.
Built by Instagram, the app became the most successful product launch in Meta's history, reaching 100 million sign-ups within five days before seeing a more recent falloff in usage. Meta recently added new features to the app, including an option allowing users to limit what they see to those they follow and translation services.
Zuckerberg said that the number of people coming back to Threads exceeded Meta's expectations. Moving forward, Meta will focus on improving user retention and the app's basic features and then growing users. Only then will the company begin to monetize the app, Zuckerberg said. This is the same playbook that the company has run successfully in the launches of Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp, Stories and Reels, he added.
"This is as good of a start as we could've hoped for," said Zuckerberg, noting that the tight timeline Threads was built on was an example of the benefits of Meta slimming down during its "year of efficiency."
For the quarter, advertising made up 98.4% of Meta's revenue. Meta's advertising revenue grew to $31.5 billion. Meta said its average ad price fell 16% year over year. In the same quarter last year, the average price per ad decreased by 14%.
Meta's Reality Labs, the division tasked with building the hardware and software underpinning its metaverse effort, reported revenue of $276 million for the quarter, a decline of 38.9% compared with a year ago. Wall Street was expecting Meta's hardware division to report revenue of $417 million for the quarter, according to analysts surveyed by FactSet. The unit, which makes Meta's Quest virtual-reality headsets, posted an operating loss of $3.7 billion.
Meta Chief Financial Officer Susan Li attributed the drop in Reality Labs' revenue to lower Quest 2 sales. Zuckerberg said the next big thing for Reality Labs will be the launch of the Quest 3 VR headset at the company's Connect conference in late September.
The company announced the Quest 3 in June, days before Apple unveiled its Vision Pro computing headset, which will launch in 2024. TikTok parent ByteDance launched its Pico 4 headset last September and Sony released the PlayStation VR2 in February.
"It's been good to see what others in the industry have done because to some degree it gives us more confidence that we're on the right track," Zuckerberg said.
Additionally, Meta warned that it expects Reality Labs' operating losses to increase year over year in 2023 and to increase meaningfully year over year in 2024 due to the unit's continuing virtual and augmented reality product development.
Asked about Reality Labs mounting operating losses, Zuckerberg said he thinks it is important for Meta to shape what the next computing platform will look like.
"Helping to shape the next platform is going to unlock that in a profound way for decades to come," said Zuckerberg, adding that he understands investors' discomfort with Reality Labs. "I can't guarantee you that I'm going to be right about this bet. I do think that this is the direction that the world is going in."
The company said it expects its 2023 expenses to be between $88 billion and $91 billion, higher than its previous outlook of between $86 billion and $90 billion. In the past year, Meta has had multiple rounds of layoffs impacting about 21,000 jobs, or nearly one-quarter of the company's workforce.
Meta reported that Facebook's daily active user base increased to 2.06 billion users, up from 2.04 billion in the previous quarter.
Credit: By Salvador Rodriguez
