Artificial intelligence
for stock predictions?
Watch out, stock pickers. Researchers have been working on an artificial-intelligence computer program designed to mimic the way an analyst uses financial news. In simulated trading, the program beat the S&P 500, and when combined with quantitative stock-picking techniques, it saw a return on trades of more than 20%.
To make stock predictions, the program does what is known as "text mining" -- scanning large volumes of content and analyzing the words in it. Computer-aided quantitative funds already are plentiful, but they analyze numerical data rather than text. The new program is different because it attempts to simulate what has traditionally been a human activity.
"Our approach is more like the analyst approach, simulated by a program," said Hsinchun Chen, director of the University of Arizona's Artificial Intelligence Lab, in an interview with Digits. "You have an analyst reading papers, looking for clues that others have not observed."
The program, which was first reported by MIT's Technology Review, scans stock prices and financial news and buys or shorts stocks it believes will move more than 1% in the next 20 minutes. The system sells the stocks after 20 minutes.
"When you do long-term predictions, there are many variables," Dr. Chen said. "But . . . you can have an advantage if you look at five minutes, 10 minutes."
In evaluating the meaning of a single news item, "the system won't be as accurate as an individual analyst," Dr. Chen said. "The computer is maybe 80% to 85% accurate when analyzing text, but it can read maybe 100,000 times the amount of data." He said the amount of data being analyzed is one thing that would make it difficult to game the system.
The system's creators tested it using data from five weeks in the fall of 2005 -- more than 9,000 news articles and 10 million stock quotes. During that test, the system, called AZFinText, had an 8.5% return on trades, beating the S&P 500 index as well as six of the top 10 quantitative funds. When the researchers used quantitative strategies to select a portfolio and then used AZFinText to decide which trades to make, they saw a return of more than 20%.
But that test period was selected for its lack of unusual market conditions, and Dr. Chen said the evidence is still early. He expects the system to be in use in the next two to five years.
-- Jennifer Valentino-DeVries
May the Force, plus use
of goggles, be with you
Since Luke Skywalker first picked up a light saber in 1977, we've dreamed of wielding the laser sword made famous in the "Star Wars" movies -- "an elegant weapon for a more civilized age." And while the technology isn't quite there yet, we're getting closer.
For around $200, Shanghai-based WickedLasers.com will ship you its latest laser device, known as the Spyder III Pro Arctic and looking suspiciously like the beloved science-fiction weapon. Using a blue-laser diode taken from a powerful film projector, the Spyder III emits a 445-nanometer wavelength beam of up to one watt in power. Or, as the WickedLasers site explains:
"Don't let the Arctic name fool you, this laser possesses the most burning capabilities of any portable laser in existence. That's why it's also the most dangerous laser ever created."
The "most dangerous laser ever created" may sound like the perfect gift for the supervillain who has everything (though more powerful lasers exist for industrial and research purposes).
But Wicked Lasers says the Spyder III isn't to be taken, ahem, lightly, and posts photos of two surly-looking fellows arrested for pointing lasers at aircraft. The Spyder III is a Class 4 laser, meaning it's so strong that it can cause blindness and color-perception problems, including the inability to perceive the color green for four to six months. Also, at a thousand times stronger than sunlight on skin, it can burn skin and may even cause skin cancer.
So Wicked Lasers adds a safety sticker mandated by the U.S. Food & Drug Administration on the device, includes a pair of safety glasses and warns that you shouldn't make direct eye contact with the beam. Or expose it to bare skin. Or shine it at anyone. Or shine it at reflective surfaces. And don't use it near airports, highways or construction sites. Really, they say, it should be used only by "individuals who have appropriate laser safety training and product familiarity in using Class 4 lasers."
But other than that, they add, "As a general concept, owning a laser is pretty fun."
And that fun is illustrated on the site, using videos that show Wicked Lasers products doing such disparate tasks as burning holes in trash bags, popping balloons, cutting electrical tape and igniting matches. Not exactly the sort of swashbuckling space adventure we imagined.
The FDA states on its website that laser pointers should be within the first three classes of lasers, I, II and IIIa -- though the classification system the agency uses, with Roman numerals, is slightly different from the newer classification that uses modern European digits.
The agency doesn't address Class IV laser products as consumer devices, as such powerful lasers have previously been used only in laser light shows and industrial and research lasers. But regarding Class IIIb lasers, until recently the strongest level of laser pointers, the agency's site says:
"Class IIIb hand-held lasers are too dangerous for use as pointers or amusement articles. Furthermore, promotion of Class IIIb or IEC Class 3B products for pointing or amusement violates FDA requirements and United States law." Classes IIIb and IV products, the FDA says, "should be used only by individuals with proper training and in applications where there is a legitimate need for these high-powered products."
Wicked Lasers didn't return calls for comment.
-- Miguel Gonzalez Jr.
