What looks like a children's desk lamp, behaves like Amazon.com Inc.'s Alexa and comes with two surveillance cameras? The latest educational fad in China.
"Smart homework lamps" have skyrocketed in popularity since ByteDance Inc., the creator of short video app TikTok, first introduced the $120 lamps in October. Chinese parents snapped up 10,000 units within the first month. The product's popularity spurred ByteDance to increase marketing and its rivals to roll out their own versions, all while testing the Chinese public's tolerance for more cameras.
The lamps come equipped with two built-in cameras -- one facing the child and another offering a bird's-eye view from above -- letting parents remotely monitor their children when they study. There is a smartphone-size screen attached to each lamp, which applies artificial intelligence to offer guidance on math problems and difficult words. And parents can hire a human proctor to digitally monitor their children as they study.
In addition to the basic version of the lamp, a $170 upgraded model sends alerts and photos to parents when their children slouch. That version of the lamp sold out on China's largest e-commerce platforms earlier last month.
Ni Ying, a 36-year-old in Shanghai who bought the basic version of the lamp in March, paid an extra $350 for three teachers to remotely watch her daughter do homework each afternoon for two hours over the course of three months.
"It's much more efficient: My daughter gets her work done and if she needs help, the teachers are there to assist," said Ms. Ni, who said it was liberating not to have to constantly keep an eye on her 10-year-old daughter. "I've felt less agitated about her homework and the lamp has improved our relationship."
ByteDance's success with its smart lamps offers insight into the Chinese public's openness to technologies that promise a leg up in an increasingly competitive society. Surveillance, in particular, is reaching deeper into the daily lives of Chinese people than many in the West are comfortable with.
In recent years, Chinese schools have experimented with headbands that monitor children's brain-wave activity and concentration levels, student uniforms with location-tracking capabilities and kindergarten robots that take attendance, teach and analyze student behavior.
Still, the ByteDance smart lamps and remote tutoring service "is the first time we're seeing a mass market, education-related surveillance product making it into the homes and bedrooms of Chinese children," said Ted Chen, a Beijing-based entrepreneur in education technology.
ByteDance said there had been many public misunderstandings about the lamp. For example, the remote monitoring can only be activated when both the parent and the child give permission.
In March, Chinese internet titan Tencent Holdings Ltd. said it would introduce a similar AI-powered homework lamp offering the same features as ByteDance's product.
The arms race in China's educational technology industry comes as the country's tech giants, seeking new areas of growth amid a regulatory crackdown, eye opportunities to sell to increasingly affluent -- and anxious -- parents.
Wu Tong, a mother in the eastern city of Nanjing who bought the lamp for her 3-year-old daughter, said Chinese parents have always felt immense societal pressure over their children's education.
Ms. Wu, 30, said she never thought of surveillance when she purchased the lamp. Instead, she said she was drawn by its promise of a warm light that doesn't cast shadows -- good for her book-loving daughter's eyes, she said.
On Chinese social media, where the device is touted as a relief for busy parents, reviews are overwhelmingly positive -- so much so that it is hard to distinguish between paid promoters and real customers.
ByteDance, whose popular short video app thrust it into the center of the U.S.-China geopolitical frictions last year, has also launched a major marketing push. In one ByteDance advertisement, a popular Chinese actress is shown happily monitoring her son's studies while far away on a film shoot. Another marketing video depicts a Chinese migrant worker toiling at a construction site far from his family. In the advertisement, the worker's daughter uses the surveillance lamp to teach her father the English word for family.
The company has said it developed its smart lamp over months of consultation with about 2,000 Chinese parents and children.
"In Asia, parents are less obsessed about the idea of surveillance and parents often see parental oversight as a good thing," said Sunsun Lim, a professor at the Singapore University of Technology and Design whose work focuses on technology and families.
---
Qianwei Zhang and Zhao Yueling contributed to this article.
Credit: By Liza Lin
