[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Would Tesla shareholders approve Chief Executive Elon Musk's 2018 pay package, worth $51 billion at today's stock price, if they had to vote for it again?
The question is raised by Kathaleen McCormick's explosive post-trial opinion in the long-simmering Delaware legal case brought by shareholder Richard Tornetta against Musk and Tesla's board for what turned out to be a gargantuan multiyear compensation plan.
The judgment in favor of Tornetta rested partly on the conclusion that the record-breaking compensation package wasn't "entirely fair" -- the high standard required of a company's transactions with a controlling stockholder under Delaware law. Importantly, McCormick dismissed the fact that 73% of shareholders, excluding Musk and his brother Kimbal Musk, approved the deal when it was first announced.
Tesla could appeal the ruling to the Supreme Court of Delaware. Alternatively, it could feasibly take the deal back to minority shareholders with a more explicit set of disclosures regarding Musk's role in influencing it.
The company has an unusually high share of individual shareholders, many of whom are also die-hard Musk fans. Insiders and institutions own just 57% of Tesla shares, according to FactSet. Some institutional investors have said Musk's extraordinary rewards were due payment for unlikely achievements. But others have been critical, led by proxy advisers Glass Lewis and ISS.
Perhaps a compromise could be found that brings down the number of options the CEO is entitled to. This would make it easier for institutional investors and proxy advisers to support.
But that would be complicated, too. Voting with the benefit of hindsight misses the key point that Musk, at the time, seemed unlikely to earn what he is now entitled to. The CEO also seems to want all the options he can get: He said on his social-media platform, X, that he might take his artificial-intelligence ideas elsewhere if he didn't control 25% of Tesla -- roughly double his current share. The solution of giving him votes without the economic rights, for which he voiced support in last week's earnings call, is yet another governance taboo.
The judgment throws whatever new compensation plan for Musk the board was working on in the air. McCormick cited the 15-year relationship between Tesla's CEO and the chairman of its compensation committee, venture capitalist Ira Ehrenpreis, as a reason why the process leading to the approval of the 2018 pay deal was "deeply flawed." Ehrenpreis, who netted over $200 million in 2021 by exercising one-quarter of the Tesla options he had been granted, chairs the compensation committee tasked with coming up with a new plan.
If Tesla really wanted to address longstanding governance concerns, it could do so by appointing people to the board who aren't so close or financially indebted to Musk. But this probably isn't where this saga is heading, given the CEO's demands for more control. The only way to square this vicious governance circle seems to be to appeal to shareholders directly.
That brings the question back to just what level of pay for Musk a majority of Tesla minority shareholders would vote for. This year's proxy season will be hot.
Credit: By Stephen Wilmot
