The Defense Department is in trouble under the Biden administration. It surrendered to the Taliban and has been slow in responding to the challenge posed by China. Meanwhile, Pentagon leaders wasted time and resources developing a climate strategy, which they released this month.
At the root of these blunders is a failure to distinguish between strategic challenges posed by adversaries and problems such as climate change. Unless the military refocuses on deterring and winning wars, we will likely lose more conflicts.
China is an adaptive actor -- an adversary who can think and shift course. Yet the Biden administration conflates such actors with challenges like Covid-19 and climate change, lumping them together as threats. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin said few threats to national security "deserve to be [called] existential," but that climate change qualified. He ordered the Pentagon to "prioritize climate change considerations." President Biden's interim national-security guidance reiterates this point. Navy Secretary Carlos Del Toro said among the top challenges facing the U.S. Navy are China, climate change, and Covid.
This is misguided. The Chinese Communist Party, unlike climate change and Covid-19, is an opponent that makes choices to advance its goals. That is why defense experts consider China a "pacing threat." China has modernized its armed forces to deny others access to the island chain running from Japan through Taiwan down to Singapore. This makes it more difficult for the U.S. military to project power in the area. In recent months, China has sent dozens of aircraft into Taiwan's air-defense identification zone. It has developed weapons systems, such as hypersonic missiles and cyber capabilities, and is expanding its nuclear arsenal.
Climate change and Covid-19 are complex challenges with many potential consequences, including mass migration and political instability. But actors with strategic intent don't drive these outcomes -- unless the administration is willing to deem the Covid-19 outbreak a deliberate act.
The essence of strategy is competition. Good strategy must respond to actors pursuing their objectives. The military strategist Carl von Clausewitz called this a "dialectic of wills," whereby actors take actions and counteractions against each other. Similarly, modern strategist Edward Luttwak writes of "the paradoxical logic of strategy," in which successful actions can't be repeated because "the other party adapts." That's why fighting the last war is a formula for defeat: It would be unwise to repeat the same action against an adaptive adversary.
In contrast, successful approaches to complex problems should be repeatable. Lockdowns and mask mandates were deployed 100 years ago during the Spanish flu with some success. A well-designed vaccine works against its designated target.
Certainly the U.S. military can work to reduce its carbon footprint. But meaningful shifts away from fossil fuels are limited by the need to power ships and airplanes, maneuver to and across faraway theaters, and keep the lights on in its installations. All this is critical to deter adversaries. Until scalable and sustainable advances in power generation and energy storage arrive, decarbonizing the Pentagon would undermine deterrence.
Similarly, Covid-19 affects the readiness of U.S. forces. The Pentagon can contribute to solutions -- through, for instance, its scientists sharing information and its logistics capabilities. But a pandemic is not a pacing threat.
Conflating threats posed by strategic actors and those posed by operational challenges has several debilitating effects. First, it shifts Defense Department attention and resources from pressing strategic challenges. This year, senior officers called into question America's ability to deter and defeat a possible Chinese military action against Taiwan. What is the military's operational concept to defend Taiwan? How does it plan to counter the growing Chinese nuclear capability? How does the U.S. intend to build up its naval forces, despite shrinking defense budgets? While Pentagon leaders focus on strategies for climate change, they don't yet have answers to these problems.
Second, misplaced priorities can result in using the military to deal with problems best handled by others. The U.S. has several agencies dedicated to public health, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of Health, the U.S. Public Health Service, and the Food and Drug Administration. States also have public-health capabilities. Environmental regulation and energy policy are the principal responsibilities of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Energy Department. Simply put, climate change and pandemic response are not the Pentagon's problems to solve.
Third, such concerns take time and focus away from developing the skills needed to compete against adaptive actors like China. The toughest questions facing the Defense Department have little to do with Covid-19 or climate change. Pentagon planners need to speed up acquisition cycles to take advantage of new technologies. They need to manage the proliferation of artificial intelligence and harness emerging technologies such as hypersonic missiles and electronic warfare.
Militaries exist primarily to defeat strategic actors. As the Biden administration develops its National Security Strategy, it must distinguish between thinking, adaptive adversaries and the problems posed by Covid-19 and climate change. Improving the Pentagon's ability to deter or win wars against pacing threats will keep it busy enough.
---
Ms. Schadlow is a fellow at the Hoover Institution and the Hudson Institute.
(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Slogans Distract Military From Its Core Competencies" -- WSJ Oct. 28, 2021)
Credit: By Nadia Schadlow
