SHANGHAI -- The shares of U.S. tech giants have been on a tear, but nothing like China's Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. On Thursday, its stock jumped 13%, adding to spectacular gains for the year.
Alibaba finance chief Maggie Wu told investors Thursday that the company's revenue is on course to grow by nearly half in its current fiscal year. She said its e-commerce platforms -- China's most popular -- are using more-tailored shopping experiences to draw in even more users.
Alibaba is one of trio of Chinese titans, including social-media champion Tencent Holdings Ltd. and search engine Baidu Inc., that are spending billions of dollars on dozens of fronts to capture growth in the world's biggest internet market.
The country's market of 731 million internet users offers several times the number of people in the U.S. accessing the web and shopping on smartphones. Rising personal incomes increase the consumer pie for the big three internet companies. Nonetheless, they are increasingly cutting across each others' businesses, including online video streaming, cloud computing and internet finance.
With deep pockets and a powerful influence on day-to-day Chinese life, the companies have amassed a tangle of investments, becoming kingmakers for startups and contributing to a funding glut that has created more than 100 billion-dollar startups in China, surpassing the number in the U.S.
Alibaba as owner of e-commerce websites Taobao and Tmall has more sales than Amazon and eBay combined. It chronicles the spending habits of more than 450 million customers through its payments affiliate. It competes neck-and-neck with Baidu on internet mapping services in China.
Tencent, China's most valuable company by market capitalization, is a global game giant and owns China's largest social network, WeChat. The app is prevalent in the lives of its more than 900 million monthly users. In recent years, Tencent has pushed hard into mobile payments, challenging Alibaba affiliate Ant Financial, which once monopolized the industry.
Baidu's market capitalization has lagged behind that of its two rivals, whose shares have risen by more than 40% this year. But Baidu, often referred to as China's Google. dominates internet searching in China. It has bet heavily on artificial intelligence and driverless cars, a field that Tencent is entering quickly.
The frenzy to invest means the three tech giants sometimes overlap. Tencent and Alibaba are both investors in China's premier ride-hailing app, Didi Chuxing. Baidu and Tencent jointly back electric-car maker NextEV, which will start production of an electric SUV in China this year.
The latest battleground is China's lifestyle trends, with companies investing in apps that offer a variety services including food, face-lifts, child care and bike sharing.
China's internet-driven lifestyle-services industry is on course to grow to 7.8 trillion yuan by 2020 ($1.15 trillion) from almost 5 trillion yuan in 2015, according to Sanford C. Bernstein.
Alibaba has backed Koubei, a lifestyle search engine that is the newest entrant into the field. Koubei said in February that it had raised $1.1 billion from investors, giving it a valuation of $8 billion. Weeks later, Tencent-backed Meituan-Dianping said it had raised 1.5 billion yuan ($220 million) to start a venture-capital fund to help restaurant- and leisure-related merchants grow.
Those apps go further than those available elsewhere, such as Yelp Inc. Users not only can order food and make an appointment with a hairdresser, but they can also book day trips, holidays and educational classes, and hail rides.
Meituan-Dianping dominates China's industry, with 75.5% market share last year, according to Analysys. Baidu's Nuomi is second, with 24%. Koubei has yet to establish a major presence.
The competition offers another prize: a wealth of big data that companies can use to unlock more money in a market where user growth is slowing. The data those services yield give the companies more power to target consumers with tailored advertising, helping them capture a larger slice of the online-advertising pie.
Beijing-based Baidu said it is accelerating efforts to use its artificial-intelligence technologies, such as virtual-reality hotel tours, to boost merchants on its platform. Its location and search data can also advise merchants on optimal locations to open a physical store: Several consumers searching for a manicure salon in an area could indicate demand for one.
On Thursday, Alibaba Chief Executive Daniel Zhang called data collection the company's most important asset, allowing it to provide better services for customers, advertisers and businesses. "If we use one sentence to describe Alibaba," he told investors. "Alibaba is an economy, driven by big data."
---
Lilian Lin contributed to this article.
Credit: By Liza Lin
