Cruise operators, whose U.S. operations have been suspended for more than a year amid the pandemic, are betting on technology to help keep passengers safe when they finally start leaving U.S. ports this summer.
Royal Caribbean Group, MSC Cruises and Virgin Voyages are among the cruise companies looking to phone apps, wearable devices, artificial intelligence and other technologies to keep passengers distanced, which lessens the chance of airborne transmission of the virus, and to provide contact-tracing if anyone does get sick.
"All of that technology helps health and safety as we return to service," said Jay Schneider, a Royal Caribbean Group senior vice president and its chief product innovation officer.
Large cruise ships proved a ready setting for the spread of Covid-19 during the early days of the pandemic. Now, cruises will have the advantage of catering to a population with access to the vaccine, though there is no guarantee every passenger will be vaccinated.
Royal Caribbean, which owns and operates the Royal Caribbean International, Celebrity Cruises and Silversea Cruises brands, recently developed a wrist device, the "Tracelet," to help with contact-tracing. Embedded with a Bluetooth-enabled chip, the Tracelet can record when a guest is within 6 feet for 15 minutes of other individuals on a ship, the company said. Royal Caribbean's website states that all passengers and crew need to wear a Tracelet.
In the event a passenger is diagnosed with Covid-19, the ship's security crew can access device data to see a list of whom the sick person has been in contact with. The reporting and data tools that process the contacts and generate reports for tracing purposes were developed by the company.
Last week, the line said it was postponing the scheduled sailing of its Odyssey of the Seas to July 31 from July 3 after eight crew members tested positive for Covid-19.
MSC Cruises and Virgin Voyages, which plan to set sail from the U.S. in the months ahead, are repurposing some of their pre-pandemic technology to maintain social-distancing among passengers.
A wristband and accompanying app designed to help MSC Cruises passengers pay for items and book events now double as contact-tracing and social-distancing devices. Passengers seeking a bit of extra space can use the app to view the approximate crowd at a theater by seeing how many spaces are still available to reserve a show.
"We just enhanced the platform that was already there . . . with the goal of minimizing direct person-to-person contact," said Bud Darr, executive vice president of maritime policy and government affairs at parent MSC Group.
Virgin Voyages, which plans to launch its first U.S. cruises from Miami in the fall, will maintain some 3,000 Wi-Fi readers on its ships that can track people's whereabouts through Virgin's Sailor App on their smartphones. In addition to helping people book activities, order food and chat with friends, the system can be used to inform the cleaning staff when guests leave their rooms, further reducing person-to-person contact.
Credit: By John McCormick
