There are several widely accepted rules for wedding speeches: Don't talk about exes. Don't dredge up drunken antics. And whatever you do, don't wing it.
But a new etiquette question has recently emerged: Can you use AI to write them?
Couples and their loved ones are putting ChatGPT to the emotional Turing test, as they seek to give vows and toasts that are personal and eloquent but don't rely on a writerly touch. What they're finding is that AI can't beat a human on the feelings front -- phew! -- but it can perhaps help prompt memories or create structure.
Ten days before her wedding, Kelly Tenn, 35, found herself on the planning website Joy, answering prompts from its free AI speechwriting tool, which relies on OpenAI's ChatGPT technology.
"For me, there's obviously this big craze around AI tools over the past few months, and I was a bit skeptical to try to use a tool like this," said Tenn, a brand-marketing executive for a cloud-technology company in San Francisco. She doesn't find writing hard, but for vows "it takes a little bit more creativity in how you articulate something that is summarizing your relationship over many years and years to come."
Tenn used the product to create multiple versions of vows, including prose "spoken like a friend" and "Shakespearean-style verbiage." Ultimately, she scrapped the drafts, but she said using the tool helped her break out of writer's block.
The tool also eased her woes about getting up in front of a crowd on her wedding day. "Public speaking is not something I prefer to do," Tenn said. "This is one of many ways to help lower the barrier and alleviate nerves."
Ahead of their April wedding, Jeff and Allison Hood of Atlanta used Provenance's toast and vow builder, which launched in early 2023. It prompts each partner to share stories, memories and promises for their future spouse. Through the service, which costs $19.99, each partner can also view the relative length and tone of their significant others' vows without seeing the contents.
"There was really nothing that didn't sound like my authentic voice," said the 34-year-old husband, a custom clothier. Since he's "not a novelist," he was grateful that the tool presented his thoughts in a way that flowed well.
His wife, 32 and head of growth for a digital-marketing agency, kept a running list in her phone of all the things she loves about her partner. "They're just like 'I stubbed my toe and he brought me a Band-Aid and I felt so special,'" she said. "It wasn't something I could actually say on my wedding day."
Left to her own devices, she said her vows would have sounded as though they had been written by a second-grader: "Will you marry me? Check 'yes' or 'no.'" Reading what Provenance came up with, she thought, "'Wow, I would have never worded it this way and it sounds so thoughtful -- and the way that I actually feel.'"
Less than two weeks before giving a rehearsal-dinner toast for a best friend's wedding, Randi Kramer, 29, thought: How do I capture nearly a decade of friendship in just a few minutes? Another friend suggested she try ToastWiz, a paid service for crafting speeches that uses AI.
"More than anything, it was a tool that got me past writer's block," said Kramer, an associate editor at a publishing house in New York City. Thanks to prompts the form gave her -- such as asking for adjectives to describe the couple and a favorite anecdote about the bride -- Kramer was finally able "to get the juices flowing."
She paid $30 for three speech drafts. "I was able to Frankenstein it together," she said, estimating that a third of what the chatbot produced made it into her final speech.
Julia Rosenson, 25, a software engineer in New York City, used Joy's service to help write her maid-of-honor speech for her sister's coming September wedding. While she's found it to be "a fun little tool" to play with, Rosenson said it should only be used for inspiration.
Joy's CEO Vishal Joshi said the tool's invented anecdotes should be seen as placeholders for personal material. "It will make up interesting stories where it could be like, 'OK, a story quote over here would be nice,'" he said.
Kyle and Sarah Kuo, both 26, of Tempe, Ariz., used Provenance to prepare for their April 2023 wedding. The wife, a registered nurse at an outpatient family practice, especially liked the fact that you could cross-check your partner's vows to make sure you were on the same page, tone-wise.
"You don't want to put too many jokes in there if your partner is being serious and sentimental," she said.
For his part, her husband, a director of operations at a production company, was just glad to have his time back."I would have had to Google 'how to write your vows' and read through, you know, nine articles."
Credit: By Perri Ormont Blumberg
