EDMONTON, Alberta -- When Pooneh Gorji was quizzed about Arash Pourzarabi at her bachelorette party, friends say she knew how her fiance would respond to every question before her friends played the video of her fiance's answers.
The two graduate students at the University of Alberta, who had known each other since high school, had just gotten married in Iran when their plane crashed minutes after taking off from Tehran.
They were among the at least 63 Canadians who were killed when Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752 crashed, killing all 176 people on board.
Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said Thursday that Canadian officials believe the plane, which was en route to Kyiv, was shot down by a surface-to-air missile.
"This may well have been unintentional," Mr. Trudeau told reporters, reiterating his call for a thorough investigation: "I want answers."
Like many of the Canadians killed, Ms. Gorji and Mr. Pourzarabi were students. They had degrees from Iran's prestigious Sharif University of Technology in Tehran and came to Canada to study computer science in 2017.
Michael Bowling, a professor at the University of Alberta who supervised Mr. Pourzarabi's work on artificial intelligence, said in an email that Mr. Pourzarabi had planned to begin writing a paper on some recent results from his experiments.
"Arash was so bright," he wrote. "Not just smart, which you have to be to be doing a graduate degree in artificial intelligence. But he brought a brightness to each meeting . . . particularly with his smile."
Across Canada, about three dozen of the dead were students, according to their universities. Many were flying back after the winter break for the start of the semester.
The number of Iranian students in Canada has almost tripled since 2016 to 8,460 in 2019, according to Canada's statistics agency.
More international students have come to Canada in recent years, partly a result of immigration policies in the U.S. and Canada.
In 2014, Canada pledged to double foreign-student enrollment to 450,000 by 2022, arguing the move could generate tens of thousands of new jobs and add billions to the domestic economy.
It has spent millions in marketing to attract students from Asia, the Middle East and North Africa.
The Canadian government estimates that international students contributed almost $22 billion to Canada's gross domestic product in 2018, and called international education "an essential pillar of Canada's long-term competitiveness."
Ali Esnaashari, a Toronto immigration lawyer who moved from Iran to Canada with his parents in 2003, said there has been a steady increase in Iranian students moving to Canada since Mr. Trudeau was elected prime minister in 2015 and relaxed immigration rules.
"It was very hard for Iranian students to get permits before Trudeau was elected," said Mr. Esnaashari, who works with students seeking permits in Canada.
Many of the Iranian students are engineers, doctors and scientists who have fewer career prospects in a country struggling with rising unemployment, a frail currency and political uncertainty, he said. "What happened is so devastating. These students worked so hard to be accepted in Canada and when they almost make it they get shot down," he said.
Edmonton, where Ms. Gorji and Mr. Pourzarabi lived, had become home to a sizable community of Iranian-Canadians that was particularly devastated by the crash. Many of them were students and faculty at the University of Alberta, which on Thursday confirmed 10 members of its community were among those killed.
Members of Edmonton's Iranian-Canadian community have estimated that there were more than two dozen victims from the community. The Wall Street Journal has been able to confirm the identities of 12 people who were living in Edmonton and were on board the crash through flight manifests, their school and interviews with community members.
Amir Pournajib, a friend of Ms. Gorji and Mr. Pourzarabi, said most Iranians -- including the newlyweds -- come to Canada to study because they see opportunities for their future. "It's the story for all Iranian-Canadians," he said. "A better quality of life."

Credit: By Kim Mackrael
