A few years ago, subprime auto lender Prestige Financial Services Inc. found itself rejecting 25% more borrowers than usual as delinquency rates climbed for borrowers with bad credit.
"It got to the point where we, as an executive team said, 'We've got to find a way to increase our volume,'" Steve Warnick, Prestige senior vice president for risk management, said of approval rates that had fallen from a typical 40% to 30%.
Wrestling with how to boost business while maintaining underwriting standards, Prestige last year partnered with ZestFinance Inc., an artificial-intelligence software developer founded by Google's former chief information officer, and started drilling down into some 2,700 borrower characteristics instead of the couple of dozen that the lender typically had on its risk-assessment scorecard.
Prestige, owned by the family that controls NBA's Utah Jazz, is among a growing number of lenders, including Synchrony Financial and Ford Motor Credit Co., that have looked into the future and believe it could include artificial intelligence as a tool to take increasing amounts of data and find relationships between variables to determine creditworthiness.
Instead of looking simply at whether a potential borrower has ever filed for bankruptcy, for example, the machine-learning system helped Prestige consider such factors as when the bankruptcy happened, and analyze that data with other variables, including previous car-payment records and time spent living in his or her current residence.
The timing of a bankruptcy is important because individuals are restricted from repeatedly trying to wipe out their debts. So someone fresh out of bankruptcy for the first time might be a better credit risk than someone who filed, say, six years ago, said Douglas Merrill, ZestFinance CEO and founder.
Mr. Merrill joined Google in 2003 and spent five years there as CIO and engineering vice president.
"The power of AI is being able to look at more signals," he said. "If you're building an AI model you can have hundreds or thousands," of such signals, including whether people have defaulted on rent payments or cellphone bills. Additional criteria can include the number of payments that are 90 days past due, the number of months since the most recent delinquency, and how many accounts are current.
Synchrony, the credit-card business that General Electric spun off in 2015, recently said it was deploying new artificial intelligence that would ease access to credit. The company says the types and amounts of data it uses in underwriting have quadrupled in 20 years and it expects to see that grow in the coming year.
"The way credit has been done for the last 30 years or so is using credit bureaus and credit-bureau data and maybe some other things," Synchrony Chief Executive Margaret Keane said in October at Money20/20, a payments and financial technology event.
"What artificial intelligence and machine learning allow us to do is to get much broader perspective on consumers, and we're going to be able to lend more to people who were invisible" thanks to additional data shedding light on their creditworthiness, she said.
Synchrony has worked with many companies to test artificial intelligence. It ultimately decided to develop in-house a system to make better use of the rising amounts of data available on consumers.

Credit: By Becky Yerak
