If you've seen it in a movie, you might see it in reality in 2017.
In the new year, flagship phones will be (almost) all screen. Some of us will start wearing computers on our faces. And chances are good an artificial intelligence will make decisions on your behalf.
Ok, teleportation is still a ways off. But we're still in awe of what's in store for the next 12 months.
One thing that struck us about the coming year is the growing importance of software. You won't necessarily need to buy a new phone, TV, watch or speaker to bring AI advances into your home. They'll come in updates and apps, and in shiny new gadgets. This has its downside: If you haven't been hacked yet, your chances are even greater in 2017. And a handful of big companies will continue to consolidate their power over what you read and watch.
Mobile Video Goes Mainstream
Like it or not, you'll watch more video on your smartphone this year. Facebook Live. Twitter Live. Instagram Live (and Stories). With new streaming video features, all the major social networks are clamoring to become the television network in your pocket. They're also clamoring to out-Snapchat Snapchat, the soon-to-go-public picture-chat service, where upward of 10 billion videos are watched each day. Considering video is a data hoover, cellular carriers will offer heftier plans and incentives to increase our data buckets. (T-Mobile and Sprint have already shifted back to unlimited plans.) Some carriers including Verizon will begin testing 5G networks for an even faster wireless future.
Face Computers' Revenge
Four years after the flop of Google Glass, wearing a computer in your glasses is no longer so far-fetched. This fall, people lined up for hours to buy a pair of Snap Spectacles with a built-in camera. And the success of Pokemon Go taught millions about the potential of mixed or augmented reality (AR) technology, digital info layered over the real world. One big advantage over virtual reality is that AR is much less isolating.
The year ahead will bring glasses that project pictures into your view -- likely a new version of Microsoft's promising HoloLens headgear and potentially even something from Apple and the much-hyped Magic Leap.
Speakers Worth Hearing
Voice control arrived in a big way in 2016 as the Echo and Echo Dot brought Amazon's Alexa to millions of kitchens and home offices.
Expect an even bigger home invasion in 2017. Sonos will integrate with Alexa so you can benefit from a voice assistant without sacrificing great audio quality. GE and other appliance makers will add Amazon's bot to washers, dishwashers, you name it. Microsoft's Cortana virtual assistant will smarten up a speaker from Harman Kardon, and Google plans to improve its Home speaker with third-party services.
The War on Fake News
The 2016 election cycle brought criticism from the left and the right about how Facebook handled news, both real and fake. Heading into 2017, Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg is at least giving lip service to new efforts to label certain stories as false, build tools to classify misinformation and work with fact-checking groups. Facebook's war on fake news could change the information consumed by hundreds of millions, and reduce the ignorance amplification that Facebook's design facilitates.
Robots Hit the Road
This is the year the robots really start driving. It's hard to find a car maker -- be it Honda, Hyundai or BMW -- that doesn't offer 2017 models with driver-assist options like automatic braking to avoid collisions, and automatic steering to avoid lane drifting. Those features, along with Wi-Fi, navigation systems and sensors, are paving the road for our connected, driverless future.
It isn't as far off as you think: This year you may even ride in a self-driving car. Uber has begun a pilot in Pittsburgh where robotic Fords pick up passengers; Arizona is next. Don't worry: Human "drivers" ensure vehicles are operating properly.
Privacy Wake-Up Call
Yahoo declared it lost a billion logins; the U.S. government blamed hackers for upending the presidential election. Odds are good you'll get hacked in 2017, if you haven't been already.
Digital-rights activists are sounding the alarm about expanded government surveillance. Marketers are compiling more-detailed profiles of your online behavior. What can you do? Be vigilant about passwords, software updates and encrypted messaging. There is already a surge in downloads of the secure chat app Signal.
Consoles Up Their Game
The year ahead will bring a new VR-focused Microsoft Xbox and Nintendo's Switch hybrid hand-held/set-top console. Sony is likely to preview a new PlayStation.
Gaming systems used to last six to eight years, but entertainment tech is advancing faster, with more aggressive games and new display capabilities. VR gaming is more demanding on computing power, too. Unless console makers want to sell new hardware every year, they'll need systems that adopt new capabilities faster.
Screens Take Over
The iPhone 7 offered a lot of the same, minus a headphone jack.
Samsung's Galaxy Note 7 was unforgettable but for the wrong reasons. Leaps in screen technology and software will pave the biggest rethinking of the smartphone in years.
Apple is expected to go all out for its 10th-anniversary iPhone. There is talk of buttonless models with curved OLED screens. Samsung, which has pushed that look for a few generations, is likely to continue with the Galaxy S8 while giving its flagship phone new AI functionality.
Net Neutrality Reversal?
Winter is coming for net neutrality. Last year, the Federal Communications Commission prevented internet service providers like Verizon from charging services like Netflix fees to reach homes at faster speeds. But some on President-elect Donald Trump's transition team appear more sympathetic to ISPs, and Trump himself tweeted in 2014 that the FCC's policies were "a power grab" by President Obama.
An about-face could mean more power and, ultimately, more money in the hands of pipeline providers who want to lock consumers in.
AT&T is testing the rules by letting mobile subscribers stream its pay DirecTV Now service without using up their data.
AI Brings the Magic
Computers will start to learn and make decisions using brains of their own. We're not talking lifelike "Westworld" robots quite yet. But with loads of data and investments from major tech companies, a leap in the AI systems that power voice assistants, apps and social networks is likely in 2017. Google's Neural Machine Translation system translates sentences better than traditionally programmed language translators. There's evidence that it's learning the fundamentals of language itself.
Whether it's with a smartcar, virtual assistant or photo app, the relationship between human and machine changes in 2017.
Credit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler By Joanna Stern
