Instability among cybersecurity providers in the past year has rattled security chiefs, leaving some hesitant to rely too much on one supplier.
Cybersecurity is normally seen as protected from economic ups and downs because fears of large-scale hacks spur spending on cyber defenses. But corporate security executives across industries tightened their belts and applied extra scrutiny to vendor costs in 2023, adding pressure on suppliers.
Layoffs, budget cuts and hiring or promotion freezes were common, with 47% of cyber professionals reporting such cutbacks, according to a survey of 14,865 professionals by Forrester Research and trade group ISC2.
Cyber companies including Rapid7, Secureworks, HackerOne and Cybereason were among the firms that laid off workers last year. IronNet, a security vendor founded by former intelligence and defense officials, filed for bankruptcy in October.
"We saw that attacks and geopolitical instability out there intensified, and so the demand for these solutions persists, it's just harder to get through the procurement process," said Jonathan Ho, a research analyst at investment bank William Blair. The difficult economic climate means it often takes longer for cybersecurity suppliers to secure deals, he said.
Acquisitions also changed the cyber industry. Cisco's announcement in September of a $28 billion deal to buy Splunk reflected growth in the market for services that use artificial intelligence to detect and handle cyber threats, and a deepening trend of larger companies buying smaller ones to broaden their offerings. The deal is expected to close by the end of this year's third quarter.
Corporate customers say they now approach cyber vendors with caution to shield themselves from potentially losing a supplier if they go bust or are acquired. Insurance and investment management company Principal Financial often signs one-year contracts with cybersecurity companies, said Chief Information Security Officer Meg Anderson.
Doing so prompts the security team to think about potential replacements and avoid relying too much on any one vendor, she said. It helps to think about vendors in a short-term way because there is no guarantee that any supplier, big or small, will continue to offer the same services, she said.
"You want to make sure you're architecting how that vendor fits into your overall platform in such a way that you could pull that vendor out and put another pin in to satisfy that capability," she said.
Nemi George, information security officer at California-based Pacific Dental Services, which operates dental and medical offices in 24 states, said he aims to have good alternatives to any provider. George said he learned to be cautious after a cybersecurity startup abruptly folded one year after Pacific Dental started demoing its product.
Not all the upheaval has been bad, said Joe Kim, chief executive of Sumo Logic. The 13-year-old cybersecurity company was acquired by private-equity firm Francisco Partners last May, installing Kim as CEO as Sumo was delisted from the Nasdaq in the same month. He was a partner at Francisco.
Kim said Sumo's new ownership structure allows senior leaders to think in the longer term rather than quarter to quarter due to public reporting obligations. Sumo can be more flexible in areas such as investment decisions and acquisitions.
"If we have a company that we're interested in in terms of acquiring, you might not be able to do that if we have a bad quarter. From a timing perspective, you miss out, even though strategically it's a great fit," he said.
Investors also say that in some cases the news appeared worse than it actually was. Some cyber companies that laid off workers needed to make cuts as many had invested too much in sales and marketing, said Alex Doll, founder and general partner at venture-capital firm Ten Eleven Ventures.
"They're cutting to get it right-sized, not because their fundamental business is in trouble or anything along those lines," he said.
The uncertain economy helped show which cyber companies are likely to have longevity, said Steve Pugh, CISO at Intercontinental Exchange. A crowded cybersecurity market creates challenges for CISOs who might struggle to wade through a sea of pitches to determine which ones are reliable, he said.
"Some of that consolidation actually helps weed out some of the weaker vendors," Pugh said.
Credit: By Catherine Stupp and James Rundle
