NVIDIA
NVDA +9.3%
AI mania powered another blockbuster quarter for Nvidia. The chip maker at the center of the artificial-intelligence boom reported record quarterly revenue, with its sales more than tripling in the latest quarter. The company also raised its dividend and announced a 10-to-1 stock split. Big tech firms and AI startups have scrambled to snatch up Nvidia's chips, resulting in an ongoing shortage. Nvidia plans to launch a new generation of AI chips, code-named Blackwell, late this year. The chips are set to cost more than $30,000 each. Nvidia shares gained 9.3% Thursday, driving its already meteoric stock up above $1,000 a share. Nvidia's stock price has more than tripled in the past 12 months, sending its valuation above $2 trillion.
JPMORGAN CHASE
JPM -4.5%
JPMorgan Chief Executive Jamie Dimon won't be the boss forever. Dimon, who is 68 years old, on Monday told analysts he would likely leave the CEO role in less than five years, a departure from his usual boilerplate response when asked about his tenure. He also implied JPMorgan's share price had gotten so high he didn't want to buy back more shares. Later, a JPMorgan spokesman said Dimon was referring to additional repurchases beyond the current pace at which the bank is already buying back stock. JPMorgan shares fell 4.5% Monday.
TARGET
TGT -8%
Target announced a fourth straight quarter of sales declines as elevated prices strain shoppers' wallets. To halt its slide, the big-box giant said earlier in the week it is reducing prices on about 1,500 products, with thousands of more price cuts coming over the summer. Other companies, like McDonald's, have been making similar moves to boost business. The retailer expects its current quarter's comparable sales to come in flat to up 2%, which would be the first upward movement in more than a year. Target shares lost 8% Wednesday.
HIMS & HERS HEALTH
HIMS +28%
Telehealth company Hims & Hers is bringing weight-loss injectables to its platform. The company said Monday that it will add popular GLP-1 injections to its weight-loss treatment offerings. The compounded injections use the same active ingredients as popular drugs Ozempic and Wegovy, which are facing shortages that are limiting access for some patients. The price for the injections will start at $199 a month. They won't be available in all states. Hims & Hers shares soared 28% Monday.
LOWE'S
LOW -1.9%
Two big retailers delivered quarterly results Tuesday. Home-improvement chain Lowe's posted better-than-expected quarterly earnings, but its comparable sales declined. The company's do-it-yourself customers cut back on higher-priced discretionary purchases. Department store Macy's also reported declining sales. Still, earnings beat forecasts, and the company boosted its profit forecast. The results suggest Macy's turnaround is starting to take shape. Lowe's shares fell 1.9% Tuesday, while Macy's shares gained 5.1%.
LIVE NATION ENTERTAINMENT
LYV -7.8%
The U.S. government wants to break up Ticketmaster-owner Live Nation. In its lawsuit against the country's largest concert-promotion and ticketing company, the Justice Department alleges that Live Nation used its power to choke off competition, retaliate against rivals, and drive prices and fees higher for fans. More than two dozen states joined the U.S. in the suit. Live Nation said it doesn't have a monopoly in ticketing or promotion and will fight the government's case. Live Nation shares tumbled 7.8% Thursday.
BOEING
BA -7.6%
Boeing is burning through more cash than it expected. The beleaguered jet maker expects that it will run through billions of dollars more than forecast in the coming months and won't generate cash for the full year. The warning from Chief Financial Officer Brian West suggests that Boeing is struggling to contain the financial fallout from ongoing production and supply-chain issues. Boeing's troubles ramped up after the midair blowout of a door plug on an Alaska Air flight in January. Boeing shares slid 7.6% Thursday.
Credit: By Francesca Fontana
