George Jetson only works two hours a week. Jane Jetson presses a button to fix her hair. In the animated TV series' dreamy, halcyon world of 2026, basically all chores have been automated. Even Rosey, the family's robotic maid, has better things to do than laundry and dry-cleaning. Both are handled by arms that emerge from walls.
That's the future I want. I hate doing laundry. I'm terrified I'll ruin my clothes, so I wash everything on delicate. If I get rich, you better believe I am installing a laundry arm.
Though we haven't quite reached the future that "The Jetsons" promised, humankind has made many attempts to automate the steps required to do laundry. A machine called the Laundroid, for example, could passably fold clothes. Unfortunately, the startup went bankrupt in 2019.
Other advances have changed the laundry landscape, integrating AI into machines, increasing energy efficiency, even innovating ways to pop a dingy throw pillow or squalid teddy bear into a "closet" and steam-clean them to a refreshed, sanitary state. It has never been easier to do one's laundry.
Newer two-in-one washer-dryer combinations, for instance, represent a small success. Historically, these machines were too compact for full-sized loads, ran slowly and broke down frequently. A recent, $2,899 release from GE aims to solve these issues. The GE Profile Combo Washer/Dryer promises to wash and dry a load in two hours, and even accommodate king-size bedding. Of course, if you're laundering any items that must be line-dried, you need to run a wash-only cycle, remove anything that must be hung, then spin the rest through a dry-only cycle.
Then you have gadgets like the Laundry Jet, a vacuum-powered laundry chute that eliminates the need for laundry baskets and can be installed in many homes by a professional contractor. The system functions like a pneumatic bank deposit tube, quickly sucking your dirty clothes off to your laundry room. Optional: installing a return chute to send clean clothes back. Ryan Hudson-Peralta, 43, a disability advocate and designer in Detroit, said his Laundry Jet has let him stay relatively independent, since he doesn't have to carry his sundries around his house.
Don't feel bad if you haven't heard of it. Few people hold forth about their laundry-room upgrades. But innovations have been quietly entering the market. Samsung's new Bespoke line of washers and dryers, for instance, are built with artificial intelligence that promises to automatically choose the right type of wash and temperature for whatever you stuff inside, depending on how dirty it is and what fabrics it includes.
Reality checks: High-tech washing machines continue to require detergent -- although many models can now store and even dispense it for you -- and the best dryers will still shrink Spandex. And not all homes can accommodate any given machine, said Jessica Petrino Ball, editorial director of national appliance retailer AJ Madison.
But even when you narrow your search for a new machine to your laundry room's space limitations and your available hookups, you might still find a ton of options available with features to help you clean your clothes faster, better and with less energy than whatever you already have.
One such innovation: heat-pump dryers. Instead of releasing warm, humid air through a dryer vent, this style of machine recycles this air through an evaporator, letting it expel moisture without the need to release and then regenerate heat. This makes heat-pump dryers much more efficient than conventional vented dryers -- up to 85% more, according to a U.S. Department of Energy report. Petrino Ball recommends models from Beko, Speed Queen and Miele for their longevity.
Some models of GE washers include an UltraFresh Vent system -- employing a redesigned drain, antimicrobial coating and automatic post-wash spins -- to eliminate excess moisture that can collect in your washer between uses. You can also find washers with built-in water spigots, so you can prewash stained items before sending them through a rinse cycle.
Even if you don't plan to upgrade to one of these machines, you can still do your laundry better. Or at least, people like me can, say the experts. My process of cleaning everything on delicate is not optimal, said Patric Richardson, who hosts "The Laundry Guy," a Discovery+ show where he reveals how common household cleaners can dispel any kind of stain. He also operates the Laundry Evangelist, an online store that sells his favored soaps, brushes and small appliances. Richardson says most washing machines' express cycles, which usually complete their toil in less than 30 minutes, suffice to wash anything. That means I've been laundering most of my clothes for at least 15 extra, unnecessary minutes.
Like every expert I spoke with, Richardson said you should use much less detergent than the cap advises, about two tablespoons at most. When you use more, your washer will run longer, while it tries to clear out all suds. If you limit the time your clothes spend in the wash, Richardson says, they'll last longer.
That's why, in part, he covets the $999 LG Styler Steam Closet, which steam-cleans anything you hang inside. It's ideal for clothing that isn't quite dirty, but just needs a little refresh. "I keep looking to renovate, so I can put one in," he said of the appliance, which has a portable water fill container and is just over a foot wide and 6 feet tall. And with the press of a button, Petrino Ball points out, the device lets you sanitize items that are otherwise challenging to clean, like shoes, throw cushions and stuffed animals.
The biggest mistake most people make, says Richardson, is simply failing to let their machines do their thing. You don't need a brimming cap full of detergent, you don't need dryer sheets, you don't need scalding hot water. "Someone spent a lot of time and effort making that machine as effective as possible," he said.
---
All the Wrong Moves in All the Right Places
Even if you don't upgrade to a more high-tech washer or dryer, you could be doing plenty of things better. Here, six common mistakes and their fixes, courtesy of laundry experts
You're avoiding care tags like a situationship.
Every once in a while, you have to override the care tag. (Note to the discounted H&M sweater I bought in 2014: You aren't getting dry-cleaned.) But, if you like your clothes and want them to last, it's best to know what those laundry symbols are actually asking for. Such symbols are notoriously inscrutable, but a quick Google can help.
You're not getting your clothes ready for the rumble.
Your favorite pants are about to go on a Tolkienian journey. Prepare them. Zip up zippers so they don't snag, unbutton shirts, turn your clothes inside out to protect the outsides and put delicates in a lingerie bag. When you empty the washer, shake your clothes out before putting them in the dryer to help pre-empt wrinkles, rather than just tossing a crumpled-up wet ball in there and asking the machine to do its best.
You never wash the washer.
Most washers have a self-cleaning mode, but to truly remove grime from inside the spinner, run your washer with a cleaning tablet from a brand like Affresh ($13, Target.com) about once a month. When it comes to your dryer, the National Fire Prevention Association says that a failure to clean the dryer exhaust vent -- the tube going out the back of your dryer -- causes 32% of the thousand of dryer fires in the U.S. annually. Dryer vents should be cleaned out at least once a year. You can do this with a vacuum.
You're washing too much.
You don't need to wash all your clothes after every wear, unless they're stinky or stained. Laundry is hard on your clothes; save it for when you need it. Laundry guru Patric Richardson suggests washing with the express cycle. When it comes to drying, use the shortest cycle possible, or hang dry.
You're using too much detergent.
As Zach Pozniak, a fourth-generation dry-cleaner in New York with a large following on TikTok, explains, "Modern detergents are unbelievably concentrated. When you use too much detergent your washer will continue to rinse your clothing if it detects suds, which increases the cycle time, uses more water and energy and increases the risk of damaging your clothing." Imagine using a quarter of a bottle of dish soap to wash a saucepan.
You're addicted to extras.
Scent beads? Fabric softener? Dryer sheets? Quit. Using. Them. Every single expert we spoke to begged people to move away from these items that actually damage your clothing -- fabric softener in particular is like sandpaper for your clothes. Yes, the shirt is softer, but that's because it has been worn down. These products also potentially hurt your washer and dryer. (And the environment.) The only additive experts recommended is the Shout Color Catcher ($5, Walmart.com), which you add to a wash to catch any dye that might bleed from new clothes or anything highly saturated with dye. A miracle for those of us who are never going to sort our laundry.
-- S.B.
---
Laundry Care
Symbols, Ranked
From Clear to
Confounding
OBVIOUS / Do Not Iron.
I know what an iron is and I know what an X is. Not only is this symbol clear to me, it's a relief: I can happily avoid ironing anything bearing this bad boy.
SOMEWHAT CLEAR / Line Dry.
I can see how a dryer-shaped square relates to drying an item. And the additional swoop suggests a clothesline. The more-advanced "line dry in shade" symbol adds diagonal lines in the top-left corner. There is some logic here.
INSCRUTABLE / Machine Wash Hot Permanent Press.
Wait, is this what you think a washing machine looks like? Who actually gets to dial in the water temperature? And why are there so many different icons that mean the same thing? Someone needs a talking to.
ARE YOU JOKING ME? / Dry cleaning symbols.
The saving grace here, of course, is that I don't do my own dry-cleaning. But why is dry-cleaning a circle? And how are you supposed to remember that the circle with the line below it to the right means low heat and one with the line above it to the right means no steam. I feel like a fool.
-- S.B.
Credit: By Sophia Benoit
