Move over, FANG: There are new kings of the S&P 500 this year.
Shares of semiconductor companies have outperformed in 2016. The PHLX Semiconductor index of 30 chip makers has jumped 39%, and the now-$730.8 million iShares exchange-traded fund that tracks the index attracted $152.9 million in net new money in 2016 through Tuesday, according to Morningstar Inc.
The broader market has been no match for the chip makers, even as the S&P 500 is up 10% this year and the index's technology firms are up 13%.
Nvidia Corp. has risen 231% in 2016, making it the best performer in the S&P 500 so far this year. The last time an S&P 500 stock posted a higher annual gain was in 2013, when Netflix Inc. jumped 298%. Other big gainers in the semiconductor space this year include Applied Materials Inc., which is up 76%, and Micron Technology Inc., which has gained 61%.
Last year, Facebook Inc., Amazon.com Inc., Netflix, and Google owner Alphabet Inc. provided much-needed support to the market and collectively earned the acronym FANG. But their rise was no match for Nvidia's: Facebook rose 34% in 2015, Amazon gained 118%, Netflix was up 134%, and Alphabet added 47%, as the S&P 500 shed 0.7%.
Demand for semiconductors in PCs and smartphones has proved resilient, some analysts and investors say, while semiconductor usage is beginning to get more advanced in other industries, such as autos and medical devices. Having been labeled growth stocks for many years, semiconductor companies have blossomed into a more mature part of the market recently, according to William Stein, technology equity-research analyst at SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, who calls it the "industrialization of semis."
The aging of the sector has heralded a considerable amount of deals. This year was a banner year for semiconductor mergers, with $130.3 billion of announced global tie-ups, the biggest dollar total in records going back to 1995, according to data provider Dealogic. Qualcomm Inc. said in October it would pay $39 billion to buy Netherlands-based NXP Semiconductors NV in the biggest deal ever in the industry. Qualcomm shares are up 32% so far this year, and NXP has gained 17%.
That is the second year in a row in which mergers in the industry have surpassed $100 billion, with $111.5 billion worth of announced deals last year, the second-biggest on record.
The mergers have been aimed at improving profitability, "not so much from a revenue standpoint but from the cost standpoint," said Frederick Weiss, a managing director at Atlantic Trust Private Wealth Management, who owns semiconductor stocks in the midcap stock fund he manages.
Nvidia has been a pioneer in developing artificial-intelligence technologies, which has excited investors, Mr. Stein said. That has been helped along by its use of software that makes it easy to use the technology to develop applications, he said.
"Right now, it seems pretty clear [Nvidia] is taking the lead, and I think it's because of its development tool kit," Mr. Stein added.
Credit: By Ben Eisen
