On Midwestern fields and in research greenhouses, agricultural giants like Monsanto Co. and BASF SA are teaching machines how to farm.
The companies are expanding early-stage investments in artificial intelligence, joining other industries in betting that research and decision-making can be streamlined with computer programs that teach themselves by picking patterns out of information.
Corn plants chosen with the help of computers are growing in the U.S. this year, and algorithms are sifting North American weather data to anticipate crop threats such as pests and disease.
BASF, the German chemical conglomerate, is working on automated image-recognition capabilities similar to those that confirm faces on Facebook and Apple's Photos app.
The concept is to analyze farmers' photographs of suspicious spots on crop leaves and deliver early warnings for diseases such as wheat leaf rust, said Richard Trethewey, who heads bioscience digitalization for BASF.
While some farmers are skeptical of the technology, others think it could evaluate crop development and identify disease as well as or better than they can. Gunter Jochum, who grows canola, soybeans and wheat near Winnipeg, Manitoba, watched firsthand the learning curve of a computer program developed by BASF known as Maglis.
In the spring of last year, Mr. Jochum told Maglis the date he sowed canola, and his fields' coordinates.
The program "pretty accurately" guessed when the first seedlings would pop up, he said, and by harvest time it had grown smarter as it predicted when crops would be ready for harvest and how many bushels his land would yield.
"In the beginning, I was a little bit leery," said Mr. Jochum. "As the season went on, I was astonished how close it was." This summer, he said, Maglis parsed weather and field data to foretell a damaging plant fungus.
The companies, which spend billions of dollars annually to research new seeds and farm chemicals, declined to specify how much of that goes toward developing artificial intelligence.
Monsanto, the world's largest seed company, has been taking computers' advice as it matches up corn strains to produce the highest-yielding and sturdiest varieties.
Eight years ago, data scientists at the St. Louis-based company used 15 years' worth of information on corn varieties to build a self-teaching algorithm. That has helped Monsanto researchers more accurately predict how thousands of combinations of strains will perform in their first year in the field.
Michael Graham, who heads Monsanto's plant-breeding operations, said the system lets the company evaluate about five times more corn varieties than it could in the past, and save a year of research time.
Over the past year, Monsanto has sold corn seeds matched with the algorithm's input to U.S. farmers.
Self-learning software doesn't yet range freely across farm fields. Mr. Graham said the technology's shortcomings showed up one year when Goss's wilt, a disease that withers corn leaves, struck further east in the U.S. corn belt than it had in the past, catching Monsanto's corn-breeding model off guard.
At BASF, the Maglis machine-learning functions remain under human supervision, with crop specialists reviewing its analyses.

Credit: By Jacob Bunge
