BEIJING -- China's foreign minister painted the U.S. as a paranoid superpower and criticized Europe's policy toward Beijing as increasingly muddled, comments that laid bare how deep distrust persists between China and the West despite a surge of diplomacy to stabilize ties.
In a 90-minute press conference on Thursday, Foreign Minister Wang Yi also warned of the possible escalation in the war between Russia and Ukraine, celebrated the close ties between Beijing and Moscow and echoed recent comments by Russian President Vladimir Putin about the risk of a protracted conflict.
Wang, a strident diplomat known for his at-times hawkish views toward the West, saved his sharpest barbs for the U.S. After acknowledging "some progress" in improving U.S.-China ties since the November summit between President Biden and Chinese leader Xi Jinping in California, Wang said the U.S. was still failing to keep its promises.
"Where is the confidence of a great power if the U.S. grows anxious when it hears the word 'China?' " he said. "The challenge facing the U.S. lies within itself and not with China. If you're focused on suppressing China, you'll inevitably hurt yourself."
The foreign minister also nodded to the anxiety in Beijing over U.S. restrictions on high-tech exports to China, including advanced semiconductors needed for artificial intelligence.
"If the United States insists on monopolizing the high end of the value chain, and only allowing China to remain at the low end, then where is the fair competition?" Wang said.
Despite the criticism of Washington, Wang was more tempered than in previous appearances by top Chinese diplomats. This time last year, China's then-foreign minister, Qin Gang, was warning of potential conflict between the U.S. and China if Washington didn't change its ways.
For one thing, U.S. and Chinese working-level officials are now finally talking again across a range of thorny issues, renewed contacts only made possible by the Xi-Biden summit.
Additionally, as China's economy has slowed, the focus of the Chinese leadership has turned more inward as it gives priority to jump-starting economic growth.
Still, the remarks by the foreign minister on the sidelines of an annual gathering of China's largely ceremonial parliament served as a reminder of how the world has in many ways been severed in two, as the U.S., Europe and other democratic allies consolidate their partnerships while many authoritarian countries in the developing world hew closer to China.
Europe has grown leery of China over trade and human rights, despite years of attempts by Beijing to woo it as a counterbalance to U.S. pressure. The European Union has called China a partner, an economic competitor and a systematic rival.
Wang likened Europe's approach to a traffic light where the red, yellow and green lights were simultaneously illuminated. "How can the car drive through?" Wang said.
Credit: By Brian Spegele and Austin Ramzy
