A growing cadre of tech companies are stepping up to address a massive problem hiding in plain sight: the aging of trillions of dollars' worth of bridges, tunnels and factories across the U.S.
Our nation's most critical infrastructure -- from pipelines and industrial plants to ships and suspension bridges -- is slowly going to pieces, leading the American Society for Civil Engineers to give our infrastructure a C-minus on its most recent report card.
The reasons are various. Our planet is blanketed in a pitiless mixture of liquids and gases that are forever trying to disassemble everything we build. Oxygen keeps us alive, but it's also highly reactive, an eager partner for metals and most everything else we build from. Rust happens. Protective coatings oxidize. Things catch fire.
On top of that, waves, wind and the expansion and contraction that comes with the seasons erode and crack steel and concrete. This can have devastating consequences, as when a condo building collapsed in Surfside, Fla., and when a bridge buckled in Pittsburgh, just hours before President Biden was scheduled to deliver a speech in the city about the state of the country's infrastructure.
Pipes, containment vessels, I-beams, and moving parts all fail and, eventually, return to the elemental state from which they came. Climate change and the increasing number of extreme weather events are accelerating the process.
Perhaps the biggest challenge, as Kurt Vonnegut once wrote, is that "everybody wants to build and nobody wants to do maintenance."
On the east bank of the Mississippi River, 20 miles southeast of Baton Rouge, La., Shell USA has operated the Geismar chemical-manufacturing plant since 1967. There, the company makes industrial chemicals that go into things including synthetic fabrics, detergents and plastic containers.
Until very recently, when Shell needed to inspect parts of the aging plant, it had to shut down the affected section completely. Then the company would bring in workers who had to risk life and limb to scale parts of the enormous plant to check every inch of it.
These days, Shell is able to keep the plant running, and keep repair personnel at a safe distance as they operate wall-climbing robots that inspect things like steel holding tanks, says Steven Trevino, a robotics engineer at Shell. Using a variety of sensors, the robots can look for both corrosion and cracking.
The magnetic wall climbers Shell is using are made by a Pittsburgh-based startup called, appropriately, Gecko Robotics. After testing the Gecko robots at Geismar, Shell plans to expand their use to offshore facilities.
Shell's approach to keeping this corner of its vast infrastructure operating exemplifies a broader trend across maintenance of military and civil infrastructure of every kind. The entire inspection and maintenance industry is transitioning -- gradually, and sometimes begrudgingly -- from performing maintenance on a set schedule, to using a new suite of tools to figure out what needs fixing before it breaks, says Adam Middleton, a managing director at Siemens Energy.
"I think one of the fascinating things is how much of the infrastructure our world runs on is untouched by digital technology," says Adam Bry, chief executive officer of Skydio, a San Mateo, Calif.-based drone company.
Skydio recently shut down its consumer drone business to focus exclusively on enterprise customers. These customers include more than 80 utilities, transportation agencies in 35 states, and oil and gas firms -- including Shell USA. All use its drones to perform regular inspections of portions of their critical infrastructure, from substations and power lines to bridges and factories.
For drones, this type of work is all about using the same cameras that appear in our cellphones to automate visual inspections. Images can be fed to a machine-learning system -- also known as artificial intelligence -- which has been trained to look for damage.
At the same time, these drones are able to precisely map the surface of objects in three dimensions. This yields a hyper-realistic model that can be virtually "inspected" by humans from the comfort of an office, while also being fed through AI that flags anything suspicious.
When it comes to inspections, says Bry, "often the data you need is literally in plain sight, it's just hard to collect it."
Underwater, a similar evolution in robotics has been happening -- only the environment is in some ways far more challenging.
In the aquatic environment, there is no GPS, and satellite communications are impossible. So it's taken decades of research -- some of it funded by the U.S. Navy, but most of it subsidized by the biggest customer for remote vehicles, which is the offshore oil industry -- to replace all of these technologies with equivalents that work underwater.
For navigation, there's acoustic positioning relative to surface transponders. For communications, acoustic modems. For sensing cracks and corrosion, remote vehicles are able to use cameras and ultrasonic thickness sensors -- but only if the robots are powerful enough to resist powerful currents, and precise enough in their navigation to get in close. Underwater, corrosion happens at a pace that makes terrestrial environments seem tame -- where on land, inspectors are concerned if paint seems to be compromised, in the water, they are looking at the thickness of structures to determine how fast they're dissolving.
VideoRay has been building underwater robots for more than 20 years. Its latest generation of remote vehicles weigh 38 pounds and can be carried by one person. That way, it can be delivered anywhere, quickly, without a large support crew, crane and the kinds of ships once required by older robots, which could weigh several tons.
On the ground, robots like Zurich-based Anybotics' four-legged ANYmal derive their utility from being about the size of a medium-size dog, and able to go where humans go -- including up and down stairs. Using cameras, lasers, thermal sensors and even electronic "noses," they can automate the inspection of industrial facilities.
And then there's Invert Robotics, which created a robot that weighs less than 11 pounds, is the size of a large briefcase, and can stick to nearly any smooth surface using tiny suction cups, almost like those on the arms of an octopus. The result is a robot that can drive all over the insides of a reaction tank in a pharmaceutical factory, inspect the outside of an airplane, and more, conducting minute inspections for corrosion, and chemical and biological contamination.
Once a problem has been assessed, robots can also, increasingly, take on the roles humans once had in fixing it.
Greensea is one example. The company makes underwater robots that scrub the bottoms of ships, to prevent the buildup of barnacles, tube worms and other gunk -- known as fouling -- which can force them to use 20% more fuel to get where they're going. Typically, cleaning a ship requires a group of human divers -- or if it's in particularly bad shape, dry dock.
Over the past 50 years, a number of studies of the direct costs of corrosion have been conducted. The most recent was in 2013, but these studies always come up with the same figure -- between 3% and 4% of GDP. Other studies have estimated that, when you add in indirect costs, the total is roughly double that. Globally, that means corrosion is costing humanity trillions of dollars a year.
There's a lot of work for those little robots to do.
Credit: By Christopher Mims
