The Emmy Awards have been postponed until January amid a historic work stoppage in show business, with screen actors and writers on strike because of contract battles with major studios.
The show honoring achievements in prime-time television will air on Jan. 15 -- months after its originally scheduled broadcast of Sept. 18,the Television Academy and Fox said on Thursday.
The rescheduled show will fall on Martin Luther King Jr. Day. Fox will broadcast the show from Los Angeles.
The Creative Arts Emmy Awards, which was originally scheduled for Sept. 9-10, will take place Jan. 6-7 in Los Angeles.
Members of the Writers Guild of America began their strike May 2 -- just over 100 days ago. Members of the Screen Actors Guild joined them on the picket lines in July.
The unions are pushing for higher pay, increased residuals and protections against the use of artificial intelligence in the creative process.
The strike rules create a challenge for organizers of these industry awards. Writers who create the material used by hosts and presenters are forbidden under union rules from participating in the telecast during the strike. Actors are also barred by union rules from promoting the work of studios they are striking against and from accepting trophies on national television.
It is unclear when the disputes will be resolved.
Nominees for the 75th annual Primetime Emmy Awards were unveiled in July, just before the Screen Actors Guild joined striking writers on the picket line.
"Succession," which ended its fourth and final season on HBO this year, led the nominations with 27 nods, including in top categories like best drama, best actor and best actress. "The Last of Us" earned 24 nominations, "The White Lotus" received 23 and "Ted Lasso" got 21.
The delay comes after the Tony Awards aired in June during the writers strike. Playwrights convinced the Writers Guild of America that a disruption could hurt business on Broadway.
The show, hosted by Academy Award winner Ariana DeBose, aired without scripted segments.
Many presenters and winners showed solidarity with the writers.
Credit: By Jennifer Calfas
