LitLingo Technologies Inc., a startup that aims to improve online communications among co-workers, has won new investor backing as it gears up for the long-term adoption of remote work.
The Austin, Texas-based startup tapped technology investor Breyer Capital to lead its $7.5 million funding round, which was joined by former International Business Machine Corp. chief executive Sam Palmisano. This follows a $2 million seed round in January 2020 led by LiveOak Venture Partners, which participated in the new financing.
Founded by Kevin Brinig and Todd Sifleet, who previously worked at Uber Technologies Inc., LitLingo has developed an artificial intelligence technology that reviews workplace communication to curb litigation and reputational risks.
The product runs on platforms including Slack, Gmail or Zendesk and alerts employees when the language they use in internal or external conversations doesn't adhere to policies adopted by their employers. Besides suggesting a fix, the AI also tells the end-user what part of the policy is at issue.
"The best way to think about the user experience is spellcheck . . . similar to fixing a spelling correction, nobody ever knows that the mistake happened," said Mr. Sifleet, who is also the company's chief technology officer.
LitLingo can aggregate and analyze the conversations it monitors in an anonymized format, which it says shows corporate leaders how their employees are communicating.
The startup is targeting an area of compliance that it says still uses legacy processes, requiring costly and time-consuming manual screening. It sees an opportunity in finance, for example, where conversations between traders may be monitored by an army of checkers for regulatory reasons.
"There are businesses out there that have 400 or 500 people that literally read emails as a job," said Mr. Brinig, who is LitLingo's CEO.
The co-founders started LitLingo in 2019 just before the coronavirus pandemic forced businesses to move staff to a virtual setting, providing the startup with a tailwind as companies sought to avoid controversy arising from the growing volumes of online chats.
"All those conversations that used to happen at the water cooler have now moved online," Mr. Brinig said, stressing how new hires or individuals working with sensitive information are typically among categories being monitored since their risk of making missteps is higher.
He predicted that entire industries won't go back to the old office model.
Facebook Inc. and Swiss bank UBS Group AG are among companies that recently announced that they would allow employees more flexibility in choosing whether to work from home or remotely. While others are rethinking office space amid moves to hybrid or remote work.
This year, the company expects to increase revenue well above 200%, Founder and CEO of Breyer Capital Jim Breyer said.
It remains to be seen whether the dominant model in the workplace will be a hybrid one, as chief executives across the board debate on the pros and cons of adopting more flexibility. "It is still a good business but the home run opportunity is if the hybrid model continues to be with us," Mr. Breyer said.
Credit: By David Carnevali
