Emmett Shear's sudden appointment as OpenAI CEO late Sunday puts him at the center of a high-stakes drama within the company and in the world of artificial intelligence.
Shear, the co-founder of the popular videogame-live-streaming service Twitch, became OpenAI's interim chief executive after the surprising ouster of its former boss, Sam Altman, over the weekend.
Early Monday, Shear said it took him just a few hours to accept the job, calling it "a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity" in a post on X, the social-media platform formerly known as Twitter. He also plans to hire an independent investigator to review the events leading to the upheaval at OpenAI, maker of the viral chatbot ChatGPT, and would push strongly for significant governance changes if necessary.
"I have spent today drinking from the fire hose as much as possible, speaking with the board, a small number of major partners, and listening to employees," Shear said, adding that the company's partnership with Microsoft remains strong.
Shear's appointment did little to quell a dizzying weekend of uncertainty around OpenAI's leadership shake-up. More than 700 OpenAI employees have threatened to leave the company if the current board doesn't resign and reinstate Altman and former President Greg Brockman.
Shear wasn't employed when OpenAI reached out. He had previously served as Twitch's chief executive for more than a decade and had stepped down this year to spend time with his now 9-month-old son.
In choosing Shear, OpenAI is hiring a vocal critic of efforts to rush the development of new, powerful artificial-intelligence tools.
"We can't learn how to build a safe AI without experimenting, and we can't experiment without progress, but we probably shouldn't be barreling ahead at max speed either," he wrote on X in September.
Shear also said in a podcast video posted on Monday on X that he is concerned about a potential doomsday scenario resulting from AI.
OpenAI's chief scientist and fellow co-founder, Ilya Sutskever, had clashed with Altman around the safety of the company's artificial-intelligence efforts in recent weeks, but people familiar with the board's thinking said those safety disputes weren't a part of the decision to fire Altman.
Shear said as much in his blog post: "The board did not remove Sam over any specific disagreement on safety, their reasoning was completely different from that," he wrote. "I'm not crazy enough to take this job without board support for commercializing our awesome models."
Shear didn't respond to requests for comment.
Shear is well-known within Silicon Valley, having led Twitch's raising of $35 million from investors including Bessemer Venture Partners and Thrive Capital before it was acquired by Amazon in 2014 for roughly $970 million in cash. Like Altman, Shear was an early member of Y Combinator, a respected Silicon Valley accelerator program, where he worked on a digital-calendar startup after studying computer science at Yale University. He later returned to Y Combinator as an adviser.
In 2006, Shear and two friends started Justin.tv, which was spun out in 2011 as Twitch, a name that reflects the sporadic, jerking motions of playing fast-paced videogames. By the time Twitch was acquired by Amazon, the site had grown into one of the largest sources of U.S. internet traffic. Today, Twitch remains popular with live broadcasts by its users, and those streams span beyond just games, covering topics such as sports, finance and music.
"Where he failed with Twitch was in growing the business beyond where it is now," said Wedbush Securities analyst Michael Pachter.
Shear deserves credit for managing Twitch in a way that helped attract popular streamers, according to Pachter. Shear's "skill set, for a startup that has just begun to scratch the surface, is actually a pretty good match," he said. "He's golden with Open-AI because investors don't expect a payoff for years."
Twitch's former head of communications, who only goes by his first name Chase, described Shear as passionate about technology, forward-thinking and inclusive.
"He's always been very ethical about how he looks at the world," said Chase, who coordinated media interviews for Shear while at Twitch from 2013 to 2019. "If he sees a danger in some form of tech, I think it's good to have somebody like him involved."
Credit: By Sarah E. Needleman
