The battle against opioid abuse could have a new tool in its arsenal: Twitter.
Research indicates that the site provides a quick, reliable snapshot of who's using what drugs and where throughout the country. Traditional epidemiological studies, by contrast, can take years to yield information.
Experts hope that by analyzing tweets for drug-related content, they will be able to anticipate spikes in overdoses and prevent them with public-health campaigns. Such research is beginning to pick up as machine-learning algorithms get better at combing through hundreds of thousands of tweets and identifying areas at risk for an imminent increase in opioid overdose deaths.
Over the past 20 years, more than 300,000 Americans have died from opioids. About two-thirds of all drug-overdose deaths (47,600 fatalities) involved opioids in 2017, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
A study published in the journal Substance Use & Misuse last April found that the presence of Twitter chatter on 50 opioid-related topics in various states and certain counties correlated with opioid-overdose death rates in those places.
"What you get from Twitter is a deeper understanding of geographic differences in people's attitudes and usage patterns," says Lyle Ungar, a professor of computer and information science at the University of Pennsylvania and co-author of the study, funded in part by the Pennsylvania Department of Health. "If we can understand the different attitudes in different communities, we may be better able to design more effective public-health campaigns."
The Food and Drug Administration also monitors social-media platforms for conversations about specific drugs. "When a new substance emerges, we want to know as quickly as possible," says Dr. Douglas Throckmorton, deputy director for regulatory programs at the agency.
To improve monitoring, many researchers have automated the process, creating software that can figure out which messages are relevant.
Abeed Sarker, a research associate in biostatistics, epidemiology and informatics at Penn's Perelman School of Medicine, is trying to create a machine-learning system that will classify hundreds of thousands of drug-related tweets in three groups -- abusive, medical use and nonuse -- and detect changes in Twitter chatter over time. The hope is to predict future drug trends and help prevent a full-blown crisis, says Dr. Sarker, who received a $400,000 grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse to help fund his project.
Most research in this area analyzes large groups of people, at county or state levels. Tweets are public information, unless users make their accounts private. Tweets can include location, though researchers don't have access to identifying information that users haven't shared publicly. But questions about privacy arise when researchers try to do more granular research about specific individuals, who might be selling or using drugs.
Some researchers are looking at tweets to detect illicit online sellers of drugs. A team led by Timothy Mackey of the University of California, San Diego, has been studying illicit drug sales on social-media platforms. In a study published last year in the Journal of Medical Internet Research, the team looked at 117,000 tweets, and identified 692 that used words such as codeine, hydrocodone, buy, cheap and discount. Of these, 34 tweets linked to either an illicit online pharmacy, individual sellers or websites linking to affiliate sites. The researchers say their methods could be used to identify and report illegal online sales and sellers. "The way I view a drug dealer on Twitter is the same way I view a drug dealer on the street," says Dr. Mackey, who adds anyone should be able to report this activity to the authorities.
The FDA and some congressional representatives have asked tech companies to better monitor their sites for illicit sales of drugs online.
Twitter says it releases nonpublic information about its users to law-enforcement agencies only in response to a subpoena, court order or an emergency request. The company says it is using analytic technologies developed for counterterrorism to better detect tweets by illegal sellers of opioids, and says it has increased the rate at which it removes opioid-related posts, though it declines to say how many posts it has removed. The company says it usually doesn't alert regulators when it takes down a tweet about opioid sales.
Twitter says it works with researchers and recovery experts to improve communication about local support in drug-recovery services. Twitter users can also search for #TakeBackDay, linked to a Drug Enforcement Administration campaign, to find out how to safely dispose of unused prescription drugs.
"Twitter is committed to improving the health of the conversation on our platform," says public-policy manager Lauren Culbertson.
---
Ms. Ward is a writer in New Jersey. Email reports@wsj.com.

Credit: By Lisa Ward
