[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Power-hungry artificial intelligence's effect on future electricity demand is starting to feel a lot closer to reality for power-plant owners.
Forward power prices in rapidly growing data-center hubs such as Texas and the mid-Atlantic region are already starting to reflect tighter future grid conditions. Round-the-clock forward power prices for 2026 in the northern part of Texas, for example, have risen some 13% since November, Vistra said on its earnings call last week. Vistra primarily owns natural-gas, coal and nuclear-power plants in Texas and the mid-Atlantic.
Based on those higher prices, Vistra said it projects adjusted Ebitda could exceed $6 billion in 2026, some 24% higher than what analysts polled by FactSet were expecting before the call. That implies a compound annual growth rate of roughly 13% since last year, quite an acceleration from the 3.8% pace in the three-year period leading up to 2023.
NRG Energy said last week that gross profit for its Texas generation portfolio could be $420 million, or 27% higher in the future years compared with its expected 2024 number based on how much forward prices have risen. Constellation Energy, the largest U.S. owner of nuclear-power plants, reiterated its baseline expectation that adjusted operating earnings should grow about 10% a year on average through 2028 thanks to federal tax credits for nuclear energy that come with a built-in inflation adjuster.
The level of interest from data-center clients is "like nothing we've seen in 20 years," Constellation Chief Executive Joseph Dominguez said on the company's earnings call last Thursday. Demand for always-available power is high enough that some companies are open to carbon-emitting energy: Vistra said potential customers are willing to buy power from natural-gas-fired plants. NRG said one data-center customer approached the company about increasing its capacity threefold at an existing facility in the next 36 months.
Power producers' stocks rallied after their earnings results last week and are among the top five performers of the S&P 500 for the past 12 months, joining the likes of Nvidia and Super Micro Computer. Vistra's shares are up nearly 273% over the past 12 months, trouncing Nvidia's performance by roughly 60 percentage points. Constellation and NRG are up 174% and 147%, respectively.
Are their shares overheated? Not according to one metric. Evercore notes that stocks of high-quality S&P 500 companies with a record of increasing their earnings per share by an average of 10% a year trade at more than 20 times expected 2026 earnings. Wall Street expects Vistra's and Constellation's earnings per share to grow at roughly 33% and 21% annually on average from 2023 to 2026, while NRG's is expected to grow at a 7.6% pace from 2024 to 2026. (It reported a loss in 2023.) Vistra's shares fetch about 17 times 2026 expected earnings, while Constellation's trade at a 26 times multiple. NRG's is trading at a more modest 12 times multiple.
Whether their shares can gather even more momentum depends in part on how many power-purchase contracts -- and at what premium -- power producers can sign with energy-hungry companies. A nuclear-power-purchase agreement that Talen Energy agreed to with Amazon.com earlier this year was an indication that clean, always-available power can command a steep premium. Analysts at Evercore estimate that, assuming 25% of Constellation's nuclear fleet can snag contracts similar to the one that Talen Energy did with Amazon, its 2026 earnings could be 50% higher than its baseline expectations. Constellation stands out -- not only for the size of its nuclear capacity but also the fact that many of its nuclear-power plants have dual units (a natural backup), an attractive feature for data centers.
Depending on the makeup of their generation mix, power producers' future profits also hinge on the fate of rules that the Environmental Protection Agency issued last month. The stricter carbon pollution standards require costly upgrades at existing coal plants and add extra costs for new natural-gas-fired power plants, something that could make existing nuclear and natural-gas-powered generation more valuable. If the rules survive litigation, existing assets "will need to run at higher capacity factors to meet overall annual energy needs as more coal retires," Vistra CEO Jim Burke said during the company's earnings call.
Power-plant owners have a lot to be excited about. Just as with AI-exposed tech stocks, though, separating hype from reality isn't easy.
Credit: By Jinjoo Lee
