DID MAIL-IN VOTING boost Biden? The presidential-election results left the impression that mail-in voting increased turnout and propelled President Biden to victory. But the reality is that voting by mail didn't do either, Stanford researchers say in a new paper based on the latest data. That finding is notable because mail-in voting has become a controversial topic as many state legislatures debate restricting its use in future elections.
But much of the debate around voting by mail misunderstands the actual impact of the policy, according to the paper. In states where voting by mail was a new option, many voters used it. Turnout was high in 2020, but it didn't increase significantly more in states that expanded voting by mail versus other states, the researchers found.
"I think both sides are massively overestimating the effect that vote by mail has on participation," said Andrew Hall, one of the paper's authors, though it could affect unusually close races, like the presidential race in Georgia.
Some political scientists differ on how to read the results. Emory University's Alan Abramowitz concludes that the "dramatic increase" in 2020 absentee voting contributed to increased turnout, but he agrees that "increased absentee voting did not favor Joe Biden's candidacy." Republicans in more than 30 state legislatures have proposed legislation to put new restrictions on absentee voting this year, with some moving toward passage quickly in states like Georgia.
BIG TECH'S forays into consumer banking should expect more scrutiny under new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau leadership. Rohit Chopra, Biden's pick to head the CFPB, told senators Tuesday that it's "critical for the CFPB to take a hard look at how big tech companies are entering financial services," especially with regard to privacy concerns.
Senate Banking Committee Chairman Sherrod Brown pressed Chopra, a former Federal Trade Commission official, on risks to consumers from companies that offer financial products through smartphone apps or rely on new methods of underwriting using "alternative credit data or algorithms that use artificial intelligence."
THE REGULATORY FREEZE ordered by the Biden administration on its first day in office directed agencies to pause any continuing rule-making processes for a 60-day review and toss out ones that haven't been finalized. But the administration can include even more rules in its review than those covered by the current freeze, argues consumer watchdog group Public Citizen. The group says that in its haste to finalize rules and exempt them from a Biden freeze, the Trump administration failed to comply with some of the legal disclosure requirements necessary to enact a new regulation.
Public Citizen argues that some of the Trump administration's rules were published in the Federal Register but not submitted to Congress, possibly violating the Congressional Review Act.
MINOR MEMOS: BBC World Service apologizes to New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker for interviewing a man claiming to be Booker as part of a "deliberate hoax" . . . North Carolina Attorney General Josh Stein sends email with tips on avoiding coronavirus scams and includes a link to contribute to his campaign . . . Utah Sen. Mitt Romney shows up to the Capitol with a black eye; jokes that he got it at the Conservative Political Action Conference (which he didn't attend).
Credit: By Gabriel T. Rubin
