In the battle between Universal Music Group and TikTok, it may be Taylor Swift who has the most leverage.
At a recent meeting with record label executives ahead of the debut of "The Tortured Poets Department," Swift's camp shared plans to promote the new album on platforms including TikTok, according to people familiar with the matter. Label executives were surprised.
Months earlier, the label had pulled from TikTok a trove of Swift's songs such as "Cruel Summer" and "Shake It Off," as well as works by its other artists as part of a continuing dispute over what the platform pays in royalties.
Initially, Swift's team was on board and her music came down, but her fans have grown frustrated as time passed. Plus, Swift is preparing to release the new album on April 19. The star put her work back on TikTok.
The defection by the label's biggest star casts doubt on how much leverage Universal now holds in its dispute with TikTok, and whether other artists might follow Swift's lead.
TikTok and Universal are feuding over how much the platform should pay Universal to make its vast catalog of songs available to one billion-plus social-media users worldwide, as well as platform safety and AI issues. The spat is testing the value of the song snippet in the social-media age and is a showdown that will determine who has the most power as listeners increasingly find and consume music on platforms like TikTok.
"Universal can't claim they're winning a fight Taylor doesn't want a part of," said Bill Werde, director of Syracuse University's music business program. "The fact that this all-powerful artist who has this track record of fighting for artists is saying, 'No, I want to be back on the platform,' it's very damning to Universal's argument," he said.
Universal has presented its battle with TikTok as existential to artists and one that will shape the future of the music business. Several artists, industry and independent music organizations have come out in public support of Universal's stances that the social-media platform should pay more and offer assurances around its use of artificial intelligence.
Swift's departure from her label has surprised some industry observers. She is widely recognized for using her star power as leverage to advocate for the broader artist community.
In 2015, she wrote an open letter to Apple, explaining she would hold back her album "1989" from its streaming service because the company wouldn't compensate musicians and songwriters for the free three-month trial period offered to Apple Music customers. Apple reversed course and said it would pay artists.
Before going public in January with a letter telling artists it would be removing their music from TikTok, Universal made managers for some of its top acts -- including Swift -- aware of its plans, the people said. The planned TikTok campaign made it clear to Universal that Swift would be rejoining her fans on the platform.
Universal asked Swift's camp to reconsider. Over more than a week of discussions, the label reiterated its position, laying out why it was holding firm on its stance, why it felt it was important for the industry and what is at stake.
Swift's camp didn't budge. Neither did Universal. The star didn't need permission to return to TikTok. Acts of her stature have more-flexible deals, and Swift's agreement with Universal allowed her to strike a direct agreement with TikTok.
Her arrangement also gives her full ownership and control over any music she records during her contract. Swift's older recordings remain under the control of Shamrock Capital Advisors, which bought them from music executive Scooter Braun in 2020.
Since then, Swift has been rerecording the albums from her early catalog to create versions she owns. Songs from the re-recordings, as well as new albums recorded under contract with Universal -- "Lover," "Folklore," "Evermore," and "Midnights" -- are returning to TikTok.
In the weeks since Universal pulled its catalog, TikTok has made some overtures to restart negotiations, but the companies remain in a stalemate. Meanwhile, both sides have said the boycott isn't harming their business.
While TikTok has said it hasn't seen a decline in engagement or lost users due to Universal removing its catalog, before the standoff, the app was already facing stagnating user growth for the first time in its history, the Journal has reported. Universal has said streaming of its artists' music globally hasn't been affected.
---
Georgia Wells contributed to this article.
Credit: By Anne Steele
