Three years ago, International Business Machines' chief executive, Arvind Krishna, forecast that "every company will become an AI company" at some point. Today, with the explosion of interest in artificial intelligence, that seems like a surer bet than ever.
But some companies have clearly gotten a head start over their peers -- and, as our latest research shows, there looks to be a strong connection between their early investment in AI and how well-managed they are.
Our findings are based on a gauge of corporate effectiveness devised by the Drucker Institute, which is part of Claremont Graduate University. It rests on the teachings of the late management scholar Peter Drucker, who defined effectiveness as "doing the right things well."
The institute's measure serves as the foundation of the Management Top 250, an annual ranking produced in partnership with The Wall Street Journal. The2022 listwas published in December.
In all, 34 metrics were used last year to evaluate 902 large, publicly traded U.S. corporations across five categories: customer satisfaction, employee engagement and development, innovation, social responsibility and financial strength.
Companies are compared in each of these five areas, in addition to their overall effectiveness, through standardized scores with a typical range of 0 to 100 and a mean of 50. Bendable Labs, a private firm, works with the institute to perform the calculations and interpret them.
Among the indicators we collect to determine a company's level of innovation is its number of job postings in an assortment of cutting-edge fields, including AI. Recently, we investigated whether those businesses that have done the most AI-related hiring stood out in terms of how well they scored in our model.
Taking data from Lightcast, a labor-market-analytics firm, we grouped companies into quartiles reflecting how many AI postings they have made since 2020 compared with others in their industry. Of the 902 companies we ranked last year, Lightcast was able to provide information for 613 of them.
The results were eye-catching. A straight-line relationship emerged between how aggressively companies have been building up their talent around AI and their average overall-effectiveness scores, with those marks descending quartile by quartile, from 60.2 to 53.8 to 48.0 to 46.0. The same pattern held true in every individual category we cover.
What our inquiry couldn't answer, however, is the big chicken-or-egg question: Do more-effectively managed companies tend to be ahead of the game and, therefore, they have been leading the way in AI over the past three years? Or is their heavy deployment of AI helping them to become more effective in the first place?
Layla O'Kane, a research director at Lightcast, suggests that it's a bit of both, triggering a virtuous cycle. "Effective companies are good at predicting their future needs," she says. At the same time, she adds, "These companies are investing in their workforce, and that's making them effective."
Others stress that even among firms that have been at the forefront of rolling out AI, most are far from realizing its full promise. "I like the phrase, 'Overnight success typically takes an average of eight years,' " says Jesus Mantas, a global managing partner for IBM Consulting, who helped lead a study released last month on CEO decision-making in the age of AI.
Still, he says, at least some companies have begun to figure out how to use AI "to drive efficiency and productivity," with the best of them designing AI applications that employees and customers are "motivated to use, not afraid to use."
That appears to be the case at Capital One Financial, which came in at No. 61 last year in the company rankings with an overall effectiveness score of 65.7. It has had the most AI job postings in the diversified-financials industry since 2020, according to Lightcast.
"AI and machine learning are foundational to how we deliver value for our customers and to how we run our business," says Prem Natarajan, Capital One's chief scientist and head of enterprise AI.
For example, to boost the quality of service in its call centers, Capital One has built a voice-to-text speech-recognition system that uses machine learning to transcribe calls and enable downstream natural-language processing to analyze their content and customer sentiment.
It has also harnessed AI to develop a new fraud-protection platform. "We rebuilt this platform from the ground up to make complex real-time decisions, with more data, in the time it takes our customers to swipe their credit cards," Natarajan says.
Travelers Cos., which notched an overall effectiveness score of 62.1 last year to rank 107 and has led the insurance industry in AI postings since 2020, has also been leaning in. CEO Alan Schnitzerhighlighted for analyststhis month that among the ways Travelers has leveraged AI is to "assess roof and other site-related conditions," in conjunction with aerial imagery, so as to "achieve pricing that is accurately calibrated to the risk" of insuring those parcels; "facilitate targeted cross-selling, supporting our effort to sell more products to more customers"; and garner "insights that improve the customer experience."
Travelers has extended beyond traditional AI, which can analyze huge amounts of data and make predictions, and into the realm of generative AI, which can create new content. For instance, it is piloting a "Travelers claim knowledge assistant," a generative AI tool trained on a mountain of proprietary, technical source material that was previously only accessible in thousands of different documents. Its aim, Schnitzer told analysts, is for the company's claims professionals "to easily access . . . actionable information," thereby "increasing speed, accuracy and consistency" with consumers and distribution partners.
O'Kane says that most postings Lightcast is seeing reveal that companies are moving gingerly toward generative AI, presumably as they try to navigate various legal and ethical issues surrounding the technology. "There's going to be a slow adoption," O'Kane says.
Meanwhile, she says that Lightcast is thinking about how it tallies its job postings so as to make sure that they're calling for specific skills, whether it's to invent AI or implement it.
Otherwise, AI-washing may sully the data. "It's possible," says O'Kane, that companies have started to sprinkle the two magic letters liberally throughout their job listings as a way to signal "we're hip and we're cool."
---
Rick Wartzman is co-president and Kelly Tang is the chief data scientist at Bendable Labs. They are also both senior research fellows at Claremont Graduate University. They can be reached atreports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Rick Wartzman and Kelly Tang
