For a while, the pandemic looked like a turning point for the lowest-paid workers in the U.S.
As the economy reopened, workers who lack college degrees and often work in-person found themselves in high demand. Their wages benefited disproportionately from historically tight labor markets, even as corporate cutbacks targeted white-collar professionals. One study hailed a reversal of the decadeslong trend of widening wage inequality.
Now, three years on, the situation is turning out to be more nuanced. Some of that boom may have been temporary; hiring and wage growth is cooling for many blue-collar occupations. ("Blue collar" and "low income" are often used interchangeably, even though some blue-collar jobs pay quite well.) And while white-collar layoff announcements continue, the overall layoff rate is low.
Economists say that while low-income workers' fortunes aren't as likely to outperform as much as in recent years, they aren't about to start backsliding again, thanks to a solid economy, retirements, a premium for in-person work and less exposure to the job-displacing effects of artificial intelligence.
The result could be slower, more-uniform job growth across different industries, economists says. Economic growth, job creation and consumer spending are expected to retreat this year from strong levels in 2023, but economists don't foresee a recession.
"We're getting back to equilibrium," says Brad Hershbein, senior economist at the Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. Job growth has "been slowing in a lot of sectors, especially in sectors that had been overheated, things like tech," he says, adding that hiring has also cooled in some blue-collar industries, such as leisure and hospitality. That sector -- which includes restaurants, hotels and bars -- had some of the deepest cuts in the initial months of the pandemic, then the fastest jobs growth as the economy emerged from lockdowns. Hiring has ebbed as the industry approaches prepandemic employment levels.
Pay raises for leisure and hospitality workers far outpaced that for workers overall for several months in late 2021 and early 2022. But wage growth slowed across the economy during 2023, collapsing the premium these workers were receiving. As of January's jobs report, average hourly earnings were up 4.4% from a year earlier for leisure and hospitality workers, compared with 4.5% for private workers overall.
Some blue-collar industries are seeing softness. Transportation and warehousing employers have shed more than 99,000 jobs as of January's jobs report since peaking in July 2022. That was a far cry from the hot hiring streak the industry had during an e-commerce boom in the wake of the pandemic, which cooled off as Americans resumed spending on services.
But going in the opposite direction, the Federal Reserve's likely cuts to interest rates should help interest-sensitive industries with lots of blue-collar jobs such as manufacturing and construction, says Kory Kantenga, senior economist at LinkedIn.
Construction employment reached new highs last year, amid a building boom and as federal investments in infrastructure began to flow. Hiring in manufacturing was essentially flat during 2023 as the industry slumped.
What about for office-based, college-educated jobs (often grouped together as "white collar")? The consulting, finance and technology sectors have been hit with announcements of large-scale layoffs, as companies look to streamline operations, cut costs or downsize after aggressive hiring early in the pandemic. Google parent company Alphabet, Amazon.com, eBay, Salesforce and Microsoft are among the high-profile technology companies that have announced job cuts.
Still, Labor Department data show the number of monthly layoffs in the information industry, which includes software and data-processing companies, mostly declined over 2023. Kantenga says that aligns with LinkedIn figures that show churn in the sector broadly is declining.
"That adjustment has started to come down," he says. "They've sort of gotten to the point where they have recalibrated."
So what does the future hold? In a study first published last year and since updated, Arin Dube of the University of Massachusetts-Amherst and co-authors found that, between 2019 and 2023, wages adjusted for inflation had risen most for the lowest 20% of paid workers. The only quintile to see its wages decline was the top 20%. A lot of the gains at the bottom came from workers changing to better paying, higher-quality work, the authors found.
Dube says he thinks prospects for lower-income workers are still favorable over the long term.
"Going forward," he said in an email, "I think the combination of demographic change (retirement of baby boomers) as well as the possibility that AI will substitute for (as opposed to complement) skilled workers, can all point to more favorable conditions for lower-income workers. The usual caveats about uncertainty in these early days of AI should be kept in mind."
To be sure, if the economy slips into recession instead of a soft landing, lower-earning Americans could be hit harder, says Nela Richardson, chief economist at ADP. She says such workers are less likely to receive severance pay in the case of a layoff, for example.
"Lower-income workers bear the brunt of choppiness and volatility and they are the most vulnerable," Richardson says.
---
Anthony DeBarros and Greg Ip contributed to this article.
---
Amara Omeokwe is a writer in the Washington, D.C., area. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Amara Omeokwe
