Wall Street is churning out billions of dollars in complex bonds to bankroll construction of broadband fiber-optic networks, part of a nationwide push to widen high-speed internet access.
Telecom companies sold more than triple the number of so-called fiber bonds they borrowed in all of last year. That has helped pay for expanding high-speed internet into small and midsize cities where residents and businesses previously had only one choice: expensive and spotty service from cable monopolies.
Private-equity firms see money to be made. They have stakes in all of the companies issuing the bonds and have the most to gain from the borrowing boom. Leaders in the communities that are affected say the internet upgrade can't come fast enough.
"When Covid happened we found ourselves running roughly 80 buses with Wi-Fi hot spots to communities to allow kids to do remote learning," said Robert Van Geons, president of the Fayetteville Cumberland Economic Development Corp. in Fayetteville, N.C. At the time, high-speed internet was inaccessible in most areas of Fayetteville outside the city center, he said.
Now the town has a fiber-optic network built by Metronet Holdings, which is backed by private-equity firms KKR and Oak Hill Capital. The upgrade cost more than $70 million.
Artificial intelligence and driverless taxis are transforming American cities, but many small towns and rural areas lack a staple of modern life: reliable high-speed internet. Satellite and cellular-phone networks that cover remote areas can't transmit large amounts of data as reliably as fiber-optic cable, creating a digital divide across the country.
The private-equity push into broadband is part of a shift by investment firms over the past decade toward renewable energy and technology projects. Private infrastructure investments likely will hit $1.9 trillion by 2026, overtaking real-estate investments, according to research firm Preqin.
Federal funding promised by the Biden administration accelerated the land grab.
Fayetteville is part of a much bigger strategy for Metronet, which has issued $1.9 billion of fiber-backed bonds since 2022. The company is using the money to fund its expansion in 17 states including Colorado, New Mexico and Texas.
"We were rubbing up against the limit of what we could borrow in the bank loan market and this is a capital-intensive business," said Metronet Chief Financial Officer Lohn Weber. "All the money we're getting from asset-backed bonds we're actively reinvesting in the construction side of our business."
More broadband access can mean more jobs in small-town America. Craig Mento runs Triple Impact Connections, a call-center operator that employs primarily military spouses who work from home. The firm opened its second headquarters in Fayetteville, the home of the Fort Liberty Army base, in 2021. Metronet began its build-out that same year.
"We looked at the fiber footprint and the quality of the fiber," Mento said. "Sometimes our associates need to have a face-to-face call and simultaneously look at YouTube videos on how to fix a lawn mower and share it on their screens."
Broadband network providers issued about $4 billion of fiber-backed bonds so far this year, compared with $2.6 billion in all of 2021 and 2022 combined, according to data provider Finsight. Borrowers pledge revenue from existing residential and business internet contracts to pay interest and principal, an attractive feature for bond investors. That enables smaller companies with low credit ratings to issue bonds with investment-grade ratings, which translates to more borrowed money at lower interest rates.
The bond money lets them compete with telecom titans such as AT&T and Verizon Communications, which have higher credit ratings, vast networks and plenty of cash to build more.
Frontier Communications, which is minority-owned by Ares Management, raised $1.6 billion in July. The company has the capacity to issue about $9 billion more in bonds that could be used to build new networks in 15 states, a person close to the company said. The former telephone company emerged from bankruptcy in 2021 and has since pushed fiber offerings in rural and metropolitan areas including in California, Florida and Texas.
Consolidated Communications, a network operator owned in part by Searchlight Capital Partners, could be next in line to tap Wall Street with new bond sales, said Frank Louthan, a telecommunications analyst at investment bank Raymond James. Brightspeed, which private-equity titan Apollo Global Management bought last year for $7.5 billion, could follow suit once it builds a base of subscribers, he said.
"The presence of infrastructure private-equity capital has been transformational," said Katrina Niehaus, a managing director at Goldman Sachs, one of the top banks arranging the fiber bond sales. "It's not just broadband. It's data centers, it's cell towers, it's satellites."
Private-equity funds typically use debt to purchase and grow their "portfolio companies," ideally boosting returns they make when they sell out of the investments. Using debt to build fiber-optic networks has backfired in the past.
Companies such as Global Crossing, TyCom and 360 networks used junk-bond markets at the turn of the millennium to fund fiber-optic networks between continents and major cities. They went bankrupt because of overcompetition, and because internet usage was still too sparse to pay off the cost of the networks, analysts said.
Now fiber-optic operators are being more cautious about overlapping in small markets, and the new bonds give lenders far more protections than the unsecured debt that companies such as Global Crossing used, the analysts said.
Still, fiber companies are occasionally bumping elbows. Apollo's Brightspeed launched broadband internet offerings in Fayetteville last year after acquiring high-speed internet provider CenturyLink.
Some markets can support multiple providers because customers have become so dependent on high-speed internet to work from home and for entertainment, analysts said.
Credit: By Matt Wirz
