Ali Ghodsi is the co-founder and chief executive of Databricks, a San Francisco-based tech firm that rents analytics, artificial intelligence and other cloud-based software to companies. He also spends several hours a day on average on his phone. Ghodsi shared his own analytics with The Wall Street Journal to give some insight into how he operates. Here were some of his top apps, along with his weekly usage stats.
Messages
5 hours, 1 minute weekly
Ghodsi admits he's always with his phone. The only time he's not: When he's asleep. "I keep my phone by my bed," he says. He tries to wake up at 5 a.m. each day, and the first thing he turns to is his phone. He checks email and texts before doing anything else. "My first pass is in bed, half asleep."
Safari
3 hours, 16 minutes
Ghodsi uses the Safari web browser on his iPhone to read Hacker News and to use ChatGPT. "I use ChatGPT mostly to summarize articles," he says. "I ask it to summarize in one paragraph. If that is interesting, I will ask it to summarize in four paragraphs. I also am using ChatGPT to help me write memos and emails. I then massage them."
Gmail
2 hours, 58 minutes
"I'm an inbox zero guy. I get 500 to 600 emails a day, and every day I like to go to bed with inbox zero," says Ghodsi. "If something is important and you want me to think it through and give a thoughtful response, do it in an email," he says. "If it's chatty or gossipy, I say, send it to Slack," which he uses for 2 hours and one minute weekly. But for truly urgent messages, he tells people to reach out via Signal, the encrypted messaging app.
Spotify
54 minutes
Ghodsi says he listens to podcasts on Spotify each morning, including shows produced by the Journal, the Economist and computer scientist Lex Fridman. He also listens to the radio, tuning into NPR's "Morning Edition" briefing.
Nest
45 minutes
If he's traveling on the road, or even just working from the office, Ghodsi can log onto Nest and check on his two kids sleeping in their beds or playing in their living room. He has Nest cameras around the house, and typically he checks in to see what they're up to while he's away, but he's been known to say "hello" to them through the app.
Phone
43 minutes
"I like to call employees directly," says Ghodsi, whose company employs about 5,500 people. "If I have any gaps in my schedule between meetings, I will call employees. When companies get big, there tend to be prep meetings before teams meet with the CEO and then the information you get is highly filtered. I'd rather go far enough down the org chart to call the person directly. I try to be disarming and to not scare them off too much. That's how you build relationships."
Credit: By Corrie Driebusch
