My Nerdy nephew grew up on Legos and all the fun (and foot pain) they bring. Now 14, he's developed an interest in making things that do something. Enter robot kits, with machined aluminum parts, gears, circuits, sensors and intricate programming languages. These kits aren't just fun, they sate a curiosity for complex engineering better than any Erector Set.
Today's best schools push STEM -- Science, Tech, Engineering and Math -- as a basis for understanding careers of tomorrow. Makeblock, a China-based creator of robot kits, focuses on "STEAM," integrating an "A" for the arts and emphasizing creativity via experimentation rather than just following rote instructions. For those who have trouble going off book, their DIY Ultimate 2.0 robot kit ($500, makeblock.com) can be built into any of 10 iterations, including a self-balancing two-wheeled rover or smartphone surveillance droid. Holiday gift alert!
When first unpacked, the DIY kit seems daunting: hundreds of tiny aluminum shafts, plastic gears and circuit boards pour onto the carpet. But by following an illustrated manual through each bot's three stages -- the physical construction, the computer "brain" build and the software programming -- my tech-loving nephew both gained a deep understanding of what made his robot whir and was inspired to experiment like a mad scientist.
Makeblock's Robot Arm Tank kit only took us about 3 hours to build. It uses four motors: two for rolling, one to raise the robotic arm, one to open and close its firm grip. Each is wired to a processing unit connected to the robot's brain (no soldering required). A wireless receiver that we mounted to its circuit board receives commands via smartphone. The programming software, which runs on the app, is actually a cinch to learn.
Makeblock's kit is what you make of it -- we found this a mind-bending yet thrilling challenge. After we played a while to see what our little bot could do, my nephew happily tore it down so he could craft something new incorporating parts left unused in the box, including sensor modules. These help a bot "see" to avoid objects or to trigger a smartphone you've attached to snap photos. Patience and curiosity required.

Credit: By Joshua Fruhlinger
