Tesla issued a scathing rebuttal to Glass Lewis after the proxy-advisory firm days earlier advised shareholders to vote against CEO Elon Musk's multibillion-dollar pay package.
In a letter that the electric vehicle maker titled "What Glass Lewis Got Wrong About Tesla," the company said the proxy firm "omits key considerations, uses faulty logic, and relies on speculation and hypotheticals." Tesla reiterated that shareholders should vote next month for Musk's compensation package and approve the company's plan to incorporate in Texas.
"Tesla believes it should abide by its commitment to Elon as Elon delivered on this commitment to Tesla," the company said in its letter dated Wednesday. "A deal is a deal. That is the fair and ethical thing to do."
Shareholders will vote at the company's June 13 annual meeting on Musk's pay package, recently valued at $46 billion, and other proposals, including moving the company's incorporation to Texas.
Musk's compensation, originally approved by Tesla shareholders in 2018, was struck down by a Delaware court in January because of concerns about the approval process. In the ruling, the judge cited Musk's "extensive ties" with board members and agreed to rescind the package.
Glass Lewis, in a 71-page report issued over the weekend, told shareholders that Musk's proposed compensation could dilute their existing holdings in Tesla. The firm said the pay package was excessive and noted it would concentrate Musk's ownership, making him the largest shareholder "by a healthy margin."
Proxy advisers' recommendations can influence shareholder votes, as institutional shareholders look to them for advice. Glass Lewis had advised against voting for the pay package in 2018, and said most of its concerns remain for this year's version, too.
"The excessive size of the award, both on a pure dollar basis and in terms of the dilutive effect upon exercise, remains very much top of mind," the analysis said. "The company's provided rationale does little to combat these concerns given their proportionate magnitude."
For the pay package to be approved by shareholders, a majority of shares voted must support it, excluding Musk's roughly 13% stake and a much smaller stake owned by his brother.
Musk has come under scrutiny for his close relationship with members of the Tesla board. Multiple directors have deep personal and financial ties to the billionaire entrepreneur. Some shareholders have questioned the independence of the board members charged with overseeing Musk.
In the Tesla letter, the company outlined nine passages from the Glass Lewis report and offered a rebuttal to each of them. This included the proxy firm's concerns about Musk's time commitments. In addition to Tesla, he runs five other companies including social-media platform X; rocket and satellite company SpaceX; artificial-intelligence company, xAI; brain implant startup Neuralink; and his tunneling venture, The Boring Co.
"This concern simply ignores the facts," Tesla said. "Tesla created over $735 billion of market value for stockholders from 2018 to 2023 because Elon helped Tesla achieve performance targets that were regarded by many as extremely difficult or impossible."
Tesla added: "Stockholders should care enormously about value creation . . . and not about whether Elon's perceived 'focus' was strong enough."
Credit: By Steven Russolillo
