If you feel like the riptide of fast evolving technology is pulling you out to sea, let this be a life preserver.
We've pulled out a handful of tips from a year's worth of my Tech Things newsletters, so that you can feel informed and up to date without having to master all the tech that might affect you. This list can help you be safer, smarter and even a bit AI savvy. Heck, it might even make you the nerd at your New Year's Eve party!
Organize your browser tabs
The only thing more impressive than my son's Pokemon card collection? My browser tab collection. At any given moment, I have about 40 tabs open in Microsoft Edge on my laptop. But OneTab, a free extension for Chrome, Edge, Safari and Firefox, has been a great solution. Install it and add it to your extension bar. Now, every time your tab collection starts to multiply, click the little blue funnel icon. It will convert all your open tabs to a list of links on a dedicated page. Then you can click the links to open them in individual tabs again or even restore them all.
I tend to have privacy concerns about browser extensions, but OneTab says your web history is never transmitted or disclosed to the company.
Try out AirPods as hearing aids
Apple released iOS 18.1 in October. Yes, the update included the long-awaited Apple Intelligence for those with an iPhone 15 Pro or any iPhone 16 -- sorry, everyone else. Even without the newest phones, you can still turn your AirPods Pro 2 into hearing aids thanks to the update.
After you download iOS or iPadOS 18.1, head to a quiet room and open your AirPods case near your iPhone or iPad. The quiet part is crucial. I tested this with my dad, and he kept saying the dishwasher hum was throwing him off.
From there, follow the on-screen prompts for the Hearing Test. If nothing shows up, go to Settings, find your AirPods in the main menu and select Take a Hearing Test. Answer the questions, then tap the screen each time you hear a beep. It takes about five minutes per ear.
If the system detects mild to moderate hearing loss, it may recommend setting up your AirPods as hearing aids. After my dad's test, it suggested he try Media Assist, which amplifies calls, FaceTimes, videos and music.
Switch to Apple Passwords
Apple's new password manager in iOS 18 houses the codes you've been storing in your iCloud Keychain all these years. But if you have passwords stored elsewhere, you can move them over so they're all in one place.
To do that, start by exporting your passwords from the other services to what's called a CSV file.
In Chrome, for instance, click the three dots in the menu bar and then Passwords and Autofill > Google Password Manager. Select Settings on the left, then hit Download file next to where it says Export passwords. You can find similar steps for Dashlane here and 1Password here.
The catch? You can only import the CSV files into the Passwords app on a Mac running the newest MacOS, Sequoia. Open the app, go to File > Import Passwords. Choose the file you exported, then click Import.
Once those passwords are in, don't forget to delete the CSV file so you don't have your list of passwords just lying around on your computer.
Opt out of LinkedIn AI training
Here's how to opt out of LinkedIn AI training: The Microsoft subsidiary said in a post that it was tapping user data to fine-tune its generative-AI models. LinkedIn also updated its privacy policy to clarify how it's using that data to develop AI products. Sharing is on by default for users in the U.S.
If you don't want info from your profile and posts to be used, you can revoke permission. In the LinkedIn app or on the website, find Settings. Click Data privacy > Data for Generative AI Improvement and toggle it off.
This won't wipe away what the bot already learned from your info, but it will stop it from training on your posts moving forward, a spokeswoman said.
If you live in the EU, with stronger data privacy laws, the companies can't automatically turn on this sort of thing.
Clean your phone camera lens
I recently shared a photo I took with some colleagues. One of my editors said the shot looked too washed out to publish. Burn!
If you have a Google Pixel, there's a setting to alert you when your camera is dirty. Some Samsung phones have it, too.
Sadly, I have to monitor my iPhone's smudges on my own. (Hey Apple, are you reading this?)
Regardless of what phone you have, it's time to practice good phone hygiene.
All you need is a microfiber cloth. Or if you want to get real fancy, you can buy a camera-cleaning kit with special tissues or wipes. But honestly, your T-shirt will do. Just do it.
Make an AI podcast with NotebookLM
I just heard an AI podcast host explain my iPhone-buying advice to another AI host -- and it sounded insanely real.
I used Google's NotebookLM, a tool to gather files, links and notes, then use AI to generate topical FAQs, study guides -- or, yes, a podcast.
Head to notebooklm.google, and you'll be prompted to add sources.
You can paste in text, upload documents or PDFs, share links to YouTube videos, etc. Google says that it never uses your personal data to train NotebookLM, but as always, don't put sensitive information in there.
I threw in a bunch of my old iPhone reviews handy from building Joannabot, plus links to some YouTube videos.
It automatically generated a summary and suggested some questions based on the files. Under Audio Overview, I tapped Generate.
It took about seven minutes for it to generate my 22-minute "show."
"I love that. In a world obsessed with always having the latest and greatest, Joanna's out here advocating for keeping our phones for longer," the female host says.
Remember: not real people. Bananas!
iMessage for travel info
Disclaimer: The following tech travel tip doesn't change my love for Flighty, an iPhone app that I've long recommended for tracking your flights. But if you don't want to pay a subscription, there's a free way to track a flight. Just text yourself.
On an iPhone, in the Messages app, text your flight number -- say, AA2369 -- to your own number or another contact. The code automatically turns into a link. Tap it and hit Preview Flight, and you can view your plane in real time, complete with gate information, baggage claim and estimated departure and arrival times.
Android users, you're out of luck with a similar messaging-based feature, but you can always type the flight number into Google.
Turn on iPhone's theft protection
Thieves steal iPhones and passcodes. They quickly lock their victims out of their Apple accounts by changing the password and other settings. Then they go for the money, draining bank accounts, opening credit cards and more.
I even interviewed an inmate in Minnesota who was convicted of stealing hundreds of iPhones and hundreds of thousands of dollars.
In an iOS update last January, Apple released Stolen Device Protection, a security setting that protects against these thefts. When enabled, it will require your biometrics to access saved passwords and change other Apple settings when you're away from a familiar location, like home or work.
It's off by default, so you have to turn it on. Provided you're running iOS 17.3 or later, go to Settings > Face ID & Passcode and type in your passcode. Then scroll down to Stolen Device Protection and toggle it on.
Create a visual packing list in Notes app
Some people (me) use Apple's Notes app to jot down their to-do lists, thoughts and ideas. Others use it for all other kinds of wacky things.
As someone who often travels and needs precise outfits for events, using the app to create a visual packing list really spoke to me.
Start by opening a photo of a clothing item or outfit in the Photos app. Tap and hold the subject until it has the highlighted glow around it, then tap Copy. Next, open the Notes app and within a document, hold down and tap Paste.
Pro tip: To line up outfits horizontally, tap the three dots at the top right, then Attachment View > Set All to Small.
Repeat these steps, adding images of your outfits side by side. You can organize them further with headings for different days or outfit categories. For an enlarged view, just tap the image.
Use AirPods as hearing aids, cleaning your lens and other helpful hands-on advice from Joanna Stern's Tech Things newsletter ---- By Joanna Stern With Cordilia James
