Mitsubishi Motors Corp. is trying a novel approach to get more American car owners interested in sharing driving data with auto insurers: $10 off an oil change.
The Japanese car maker has introduced a game-like interface to entice its vehicle owners in the U.S. to sign up for a smartphone app that relays digital data on driving habits to insurers, starting last month with State Auto Insurance Cos. In return, drivers earn virtual "badges" for good road manners such as staying within speed limits and avoiding sudden stops over certain periods of time and miles traveled.
Those badges can be exchanged for rewards such as discounts on car accessories and oil changes. Drivers using the app also might see their insurance premiums fall -- or rise -- based on their driving practices.
The rewards-linked app is the first of its kind offered by an auto maker and marks an early attempt to create a new source of revenue using data extracted from vehicles, a potential growth area as more cars get connected to the internet with built-in wireless Wi-Fi hot spots and cellular modems.
"Almost every auto maker is actively looking at this space," said Bryan Arnett, a senior manager for product planning at Mitsubishi's U.S. subsidiary. "This could help stabilize the business if the market slips" for new car sales, he said.
McKinsey & Co. estimates monetizing data from connected cars will be worth as much as $750 billion by 2030. With most cars built after 2020 expected to come with preinstalled modems and other internet-connected devices, harvesting car data could be a significant growth opportunity for the auto industry as it grapples with changes wrought by autonomous vehicles.
The Mitsubishi app uses smartphone sensors that measure things such as acceleration, location and rotation. Insurers pay Mitsubishi for the data stream, which in turn allows them to study driving patterns and fine-tune their risk profiles. Industry experts say that one day insurers might effectively require drivers to share their driving data in real time, or face steep premium charges for failing to do so.
Such services are currently opt-in, but they have raised privacy concerns among car owners and public-interest groups. Mitsubishi says it takes privacy concerns seriously and notes users can disable the data sharing at any time with a dashboard switch.
For insurers, having access to data on the time of day, miles traveled and the frequency of lane changes is valuable because it shows how drivers behave behind the wheel.
The Mitsubishi app was developed by LexisNexis Risk Solutions, which provides insurers with driver profiles used to set policies. Traditionally, LexisNexis, a unit of RELX PLC, has used public data such as a consumer's credit rating, ZIP Code, age, gender and other information to divine driving characteristics. LexisNexis says its algorithm uses machine learning to determine whether a policyholder is actually driving, sitting in the passenger seat or riding in a bus or taxi.
Insurance rates for drivers with the app are figured after a period in which insurers build a customer risk profile. That provides a price quote less likely to change than those that provide sign-up discounts but can rise or fall sharply at renewal based on retroactive driving data, said Mike LaRocco, State Auto's chief executive.

Credit: By Chester Dawson
