In the months leading up to Election Day, pollsters placed voters under the microscope, parsing data from telephone surveys and past voting trends to determine probable outcomes. By Tuesday evening, as results veered from predictions, it was the pollsters' turn under the microscope.
There are alternative ways of assessing sentiment, though. Some technology experts say artificial intelligence, used increasingly by companies to gauge customer sentiment, could hold promise for better understanding the electorate.
"I wouldn't fire the pollsters, but I would direct them to try to leverage machine learning, data mining and AI in their work more to get better projections," said Oren Etzioni, chief executive of the Allen Institute for AI, a nonprofit research center in Seattle.
The size of this year's polling error is still unknown as the vote count continues. But polls generally predicted clear Democratic gains, not cliffhangers.
No person or algorithm can predict human behavior accurately all the time, said Heidi Messer, chairman of New York-based Collective[i], which offers AI and predictive technologies for sales teams. But the problem with traditional polls is that the designations pollsters use are based on historical classifications and averages.
Polling will need to find a data source that captures actual behavior the way tech firms such as Amazon.com Inc. do. "Amazon's algorithm doesn't care if I'm a person or a dog, it just knows that if I buy a leash, I'm likely to buy kibble," she said.
Expert.ai, an Italian software company specializing in natural-language processing, applied its technology to millions of social posts around the candidates. Its AI system, trained partly on past elections, analyzed factors such as tone and emotion and projected how that might translate into votes.
Expert.ai's system projected that Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden would win 50.2% of the popular vote and President Trump would get 47.3% of the vote, a 2.9 percentage-point margin. (Dow Jones & Co., which publishes The Wall Street Journal, is an Expert.ai customer.)
Another company, Unanimous.ai of San Luis Obispo, Calif., sells what is known as swarm-intelligence software. It uses AI models to aggregate predictions and decisions from groups of people.
Chief Executive Louis Rosenberg said his team used the software to run a live survey of 50 people in the U.S. in September, asking them to predict who they thought would win the presidential contest in 11 battleground states and by what margin.
As of Sunday afternoon, that September survey had correctly predicted the winner of the presidential vote in 10 battleground state races as called by the Associated Press. It is on track to correctly predict the final state, North Carolina. The survey also generally predicted which of the races would be tighter.
Unanimous.ai's live survey allows users to see what other participants are choosing in real time, and machine-learning algorithms assess who has the most confidence in their predictions, based on factors such as answer changes.
"Our data was 50 randomly selected voters and then the use of a swarm to amplify their intelligence; it wasn't 100,000 poll samples," Dr. Rosenberg said. "Again and again, we see that we're able to outperform really huge polls."

Credit: By Jared Council and John McCormick
