Facebook Inc. will publicly disclose the types of people targeted by Russian-backed ads during and after the 2016 presidential election, operating chief Sheryl Sandberg said.
In an interview Thursday with Axios, Ms. Sandberg acknowledged Facebook's platform was manipulated in a way it shouldn't have been during the election. She said the company was cooperating with Congress and planned to share with investigators more information about Russia-linked activity on the social network.
Facebook said last month that it had identified 470 "'inauthentic" Russian-backed accounts tied to one pro-Kremlin company that was responsible for $100,000 in ad spending on the company's platform. Those ads reached an estimated 10 million people.
The targeting information will reveal what kinds of American voters Russians aimed to reach. Facebook enables ads to be targeted by race, ethnicity, location and other characteristics.
Those who have seen the Facebook ads describe them as being intended to sow chaos. But Ms. Sandberg stressed that had the ads been purchased by legitimate accounts, Facebook would have allowed them to run. "We don't check the information people put on Facebook before they run it and I don't think anybody should want us to do that," Ms. Sandberg said.
Facebook is sharing information about its findings with other tech companies, she said. The company also is investing in machine learning to detect the kind of fake accounts that spread fake news during the election.
Congress is investigating foreign interference in the 2016 election, including efforts to back Donald Trump and oppose his Democratic rival, Hillary Clinton.
Ms. Sandberg spent back-to-back days on Capitol Hill this week addressing some of Facebook's challenges.
On Wednesday, she met with leaders of the House Intelligence Committee. On Thursday, she and a team of several Facebook executives sat down with members of the Congressional Black Caucus, a group of 49 black lawmakers.
In the Thursday meeting, Ms. Sandberg said Facebook was taking steps to increase diversity, including committing to add an African-American member to its board, according to five lawmakers who emerged from the briefing.
She also promised that Facebook would do more to combat foreign influence on the platform, according to lawmakers in the meeting.
---
Byron Tau contributed to this article.

Credit: By Deepa Seetharaman and Julie Bykowicz
