The founder of Tonal Systems Inc. is stepping down as chief executive after the at-home fitness company completed its latest funding round at a fraction of its prior valuation.
Aly Orady is leaving the role at the closely held company, effective immediately, Tonal officials told The Wall Street Journal.
He will be succeeded by Krystal Zell, Tonal's current president.
Mr. Orady will step into the role of chief technology officer, the officials said.
San Francisco-based Tonal said it raised $130 million from existing investors including private-equity firm L Catterton, bringing its total funding to $615 million since the fitness company was founded in 2015.
Tonal's valuation in the latest funding round fell to between $550 million and $600 million, down from as much as $1.6 billion in 2021, according to people familiar with the matter.
Past Tonal investors include basketball star Stephen Curry and tennis star Serena Williams, as well as Amazon.com Inc.'s Alexa Fund. It couldn't be learned whether they participated in the latest funding round.
Tonal's devices mount onto the wall and use artificial intelligence to tailor exercises using digital weights.
The machines, which retail for $3,995, also offer cardio, yoga, Pilates and other classes for members who pay monthly fees.
Consumers splurged on Peloton bikes, Tonal devices and other fitness equipment to build out their home gyms after the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic.
More recently, that appetite has cooled, eating into valuations, and Tonal has had to pare costs to better match anticipated demand. It also has raised the price of its signature machine.
"A key strategy [of ours] is around cleaning up our balance sheet," Ms. Zell said in an interview.
She said the company has a road map to achieve profitability on a basis of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization in the near term.
Tonal at one point during the pandemic was readying an initial public offering, Mr. Orady has said previously, but investor appetite for companies in the sector has dimmed, evidenced by the decline in Peloton Interactive Inc.'s share price, which currently trades at less than half its 52-week high.
Fitness companies have sought out additional avenues for growth, including by developing new products and expanding into new markets globally.
Ms. Zell said the outlook for the company's products remains strong.
"Covid brought forward a bit of demand," Ms. Zell said, "but as people have hybrid work -- as life is hectic and busy -- people still really need to have options from a health-and-wellness perspective."
Ms. Zell joined Tonal as president in July 2022, after stints at Home Depot Inc. and Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide Inc.
Credit: By Lauren Thomas
