Blair Hull believes that investors owe it to themselves to do some market timing -- if they do it analytically, not emotionally, and don't do too much of it.
Mr. Hull is the founder of Hull Tactical Asset Allocation in Chicago, which runs the $95 million Hull Tactical US ETF (HTUS). Mr. Hull used to make a living at blackjack, spending the early 1970s as a card counter (the art of expertly tracking the cards that have been dealt).
As a trader, Mr. Hull always wanted to take an approach similar to card counting -- basing his moves more on a system than a hunch. So it's no surprise that Hull Tactical Asset Allocation plays the S&P 500 index the way Mr. Hull played blackjack, using an array of data to time each market move.
He spoke with The Wall Street Journal about why market timing makes more sense in the 21st century than it did in the past, and how it should fit into an investor's portfolio. Here are edited excerpts from that interview.
WSJ: You say there are similarities between market timing and counting cards. What are they, and how do they give the investor an edge?
MR. HULL: You have 10 different indicators in a deck of cards: You have 2 through 9, and you have 10s [including face cards] and aces. That's a total of 10 numbers.
And we have 10 indicators -- or something like that, it can be a few more or less depending on the model -- for our trading programs. How do we count them? We do it with science, looking at the various indicators, which show when there is a time to be in or out of the market.
WSJ: How big of an edge can you create?
MR. HULL: I played blackjack for five years from 1971-75, getting an advantage of, at best, 51-49 [wins to losses]. If we can get a slight advantage in the market, say 55-45, and we sustain that over a long period of time, we will have the odds in our favor and will actually gain more wealth than if we just went buy-and-hold. I think that's possible.
WSJ: Your system is all about removing emotion from the market, yet one indicator you rely on in some models is Twitter. Isn't that injecting emotion?
MR. HULL: We're not making emotional decisions about Twitter, or any of the other indicators used in any of our models.
We read the Twitter feed, and we look at the sentiment that occurs on Twitter, people tweeting about the S&P 500 and whether they are bullish or bearish. If they are bullish for a certain amount of time, it's time to sell the market; if they're bearish for a certain amount of time, it's a signal to buy.
If the sentiment is sustained long enough, it becomes meaningful and we factor it in with the other indicators; there's nothing emotional about that.
WSJ: Why have you changed your mind about buy-and-hold investing?
MR. HULL: I haven't. It's still right for most people and most of their money. Timing is very hard.
Jack Bogle [founder of Vanguard Group] was correct when he said that, in the last century, buy-and-hold was the best strategy, but since 2000 we have had this explosion of data, and along with that explosion has come predictive analytics and machine-learning techniques that we really didn't have before.
Right now, you have very few academic papers saying you can't time the market. Right now, they all say it's possible, and they have a vast number of ways people are trying to do it.
A lot of those approaches aren't going to work -- they are too susceptible to fear and greed and are run by emotions -- but I think it's possible to have a systematic approach that gives you better returns for less risk, adding something to your portfolio.
WSJ: Despite that belief, you don't believe in putting most of your money at risk through market timing, do you?
MR. HULL: The strategy fits in the alternative-investment area -- essentially, it's hedge-fund performance at retail prices -- but alternative strategies should be 5% or 10% of the typical investor's portfolio. That doesn't change just because there's a market-timing approach that you believe in; people can do both, they can buy-and-hold and time the market side by side in the same portfolio.
Not having all of your eggs in one basket certainly makes a lot of sense, no matter which approach you believe in.
---
Mr. Jaffe is a writer in Boston. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
Credit: By Chuck Jaffe
