Kimmo Soramaki has seen something strange happening in U.S. house prices. The math behind his findings is fiendishly complex, but he can show the results to anyone in seconds.
Mr. Soramaki is a specialist in a kind of financial mapmaking: He takes a complex analysis of the relations between financial institutions or markets, and by weeding out some information and focusing on the most significant links, he can create simple treelike images that reveal something -- in this case, that housing prices have become increasingly correlated -- that might otherwise go unnoticed.
This type of analysis is part of a growing area of research that is changing how regulators and banks manage financial risk. Network analytics such as that used by Mr. Soramaki, as well as new modeling approaches, allow researchers to show how thousands or millions of iterations of apparently simple financial exchanges or actions together can create a far more complex and at times unstable financial system than traditional economic theory might suggest.
Already, such approaches are being used in bank stress-testing and to spot weaknesses in global markets. Some envision the technology eventually could be used to build a dashboard of the global financial system that regulators could monitor to spot crises before they hit.
Andy Haldane, chief economist at the Bank of England, fantasized in a 2014 speech about sitting in the financial equivalent of the bridge of the Starship Enterprise, from which regulators could test and watch for impending disasters, then intervene when necessary. The world isn't there yet -- and some argue it might not be desirable even if it were possible -- but the theories and computer models behind this vision already are being tested.
Mr. Soramaki's company, Financial Network Analytics, is helping the Colombian central bank build a systemic-risk tool using data on payments that flow through the financial system. Institutions such as the Bank of England and the U.S. Office of Financial Research, meanwhile, have been working to build their own network models of banks, money managers and clearinghouses to study how shocks such as a bank failure or the Swiss central bank's abandoning its currency link to the dollar propagate through the financial system. In recent years, they have begun publishing the results of this work.
Mr. Soramaki created the map of home prices to demonstrate his technology. On the map, which shifts and changes over the period from 2000 to the present, U.S. states are depicted as dots, linked to one another by lines. The shorter the line, the greater the similarity in house-price movements in those two states.
On a map showing the data for 2000, the dots are small and mostly far apart, and the "tree" appears very spread out. From roughly 2004 to 2008, as the housing bubble builds and then enters the crisis, the dots grow in size and turn from green to red, moving closer together and forming clusters, as price changes across the country become larger and more similar. As the links get shorter, so does the tree, signifying greater correlation. But what is really surprising is what has happened since the 2008 crisis: Changes in home values across states are more alike today than ever before.
"In the U.S. housing market, correlations have continued to rise even after the collapse of the bubble: The tree span has continued to shrink," says Mr. Soramaki, who worked at the Bank of Finland and the New York Federal Reserve before starting his company in 2013.
"Visual network analysis improves our answer to existing questions, but can also expose questions we didn't know we had," he says. His work can't explain why this is happening; it can simply show that it is, highlighting an unexpected risk -- in this case that everyone could start losing money on real estate at the same time -- that would likely otherwise go unnoticed.
Other researchers are working on models that could someday be used to monitor financial markets. J. Doyne Farmer, an American scientist now at Oxford University's Institute for New Economic Thinking, is helping the Bank of England develop agent-based models to better understand how markets and other complex financial systems behave.
The models simulate how agents -- people, companies, institutional investors, etc. -- act and interact in markets and financial systems. Such programs have produced outcomes that more closely resemble what happens in the real world than do the predictions of classical economics.
Prof. Farmer thinks that in five to 10 years' time, such models could be used to make market and economic forecasts in much the same way we can now predict the weather. "The economy is more difficult -- we don't know the laws of physics for the economy -- but on first principles we don't really understand clouds either," he says.
Yet with enough data from the past, meteorologists can make reliable forecasts. Similarly, enough historical data about activity in financial markets could help make better models of the future. The problem is, people can adapt and change their behavior in a way that water molecules can't. "Clouds don't think," Prof. Farmer says.
Still, he believes that a lot of what happens in markets or economics comes down to accounting rules and legal contracts that are quite mechanical, so much of it is predictable and stable.
Many of the techniques and ideas in this field have come from other disciplines, including biology and engineering. Mr. Soramaki's correlation trees, for example, are adapted from a method for mapping genomes. This cross-fertilization began in New Mexico at the Santa Fe Institute in the late 1980s, and it has led to an entire field of study known as complexity economics.
Even before the financial crisis, regulators were starting to take note. Now, private companies are investing in this research, aiming to develop products for the finance industry.
Alexander Denev, the head of quantitative research at data company IHS Markit, says there is still uncertainty about the answers that such tools produce. One problem is that there isn't enough high-quality data. Another issue is selecting which model to use and even how to define what constitutes systemic risk. In stress-testing, U.S. and U.K. regulators require banks to use more than one model as a cross-check. But Mr. Denev says they ought to be using multiple models, even thousands, to show the variety of potential outcomes under different starting assumptions.
"This is where computing power and machine learning come in," he says, and the private sector tends to have more of that than regulators and central banks.
All of this could feed into a futuristic dashboard, but that leads to questions about how much influence regulators should have. "Dashboards lead to human insights, human insights lead to decisions, but no automatic rules should be used to circumvent the human part," Mr. Denev says.
Mark Flood, a research principal at the Office of Financial Research, says regulators shouldn't be in control of the financial system. "We need a gap between the regulator and the free market," he says. "You don't want the police driving everyone's car. You want them setting the speed limits and checking for drunken drivers."
---
Mr. Davies is a London-based writer for The Wall Street Journal's Heard on the Street column. Email paul.davies@wsj.com.
Credit: By Paul J. Davies
