[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
The old saw that you have to spend money to make money is proving especially true in the age of artificial intelligence.
Tech giants like Microsoft, Google, Amazon.com and Meta Platforms are all boosting capital spending to buy more chips from Nvidia and other components needed to power generative AI services in their networks. This, in turn, means component makers have to step up their own spending to keep up with booming demand.
Micron, which makes a special type of memory that works with Nvidia's chips in AI systems, used its latest quarterly report late Wednesday to nudge up its capital-expenditure forecast to $8 billion for the fiscal year ending in August. It also said it will spend raise this spending "materially" for the coming year, to around the mid-30% range of revenue.
Based on Wall Street's consensus revenue forecasts, that suggets Micron will spend about $13 billion -- more than it has ever spent on capex and 36% above the annual average of the past five years.
That also is substantially above the $10.8 billion analysts had projected, according to consensus forecasts from FactSet. That -- plus an in-line revenue forecast for the current quarter -- threw a little cold water on Micron's red-hot stock price. Micron's 67% gain this year through Wednesday had made the stock the second-best performer on the PHLX Semiconductor Index after Nvidia. The shares slid 6.5% Thursday.
Wall Street still isn't that worried. According to FactSet, 89% of analysts rate Micron a buy compared with 63% a year ago, when the company was still deep in a memory downturn.
Tim Arcuri of UBS also noted that much of Micron's planned capex will go to "use it or lose it" projects backed by the U.S. Chips Act to build new domestic production facilities. That won't result in a near-term surge in memory supply that could drive down prices.
With other memory markets beyond AI still struggling, Micron has to be careful where it places its chips.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
