[MICHAEL CLERIZO ANSWERS YOUR TIMELY QUESTIONS]
Q: What recent innovations are shaking up the watch world?
A: Mechanical watch lovers, who can be dully conservative, often view innovation with skepticism -- but that's changing. As Felix Baumgartner, co-founder of Geneva and Zurich luxury watch brand Urwerk said, "History and tradition are best respected by innovating, and not simply imitating and repeating the past."
The advent of mechanical watches in the first place was a feat of engineering. Around 1300, the first mechanical clocks were made in Europe, but it took another 250 years to shrink their components to a portable size. Watches were an early example of the push for miniaturization that persists today and will last until humans stop thinking smaller things are cuter/better. In other words, forever.
Innovation these days mainly stems from an industry shift that's itself an innovation: the advent of expensive research and development teams at brands like Patek Philippe and Rolex, as well as at big groups like Richemont and Kering. These departments, employing watchmakers, scientists, engineers and technology experts, focus on evolving the materials and power sources that mechanical watches rely on and the way they are manufactured. A few innovations worth highlighting:
The 3-Deep End
Computer-based 3-D printing has been a boon for many industries, watchmaking among them, where it's used primarily to create prototypes for mechanical watches. It's also been used to make parts for final timepieces, such as the titanium case of the Panerai Pam 767 Lo Scienziato Luminor 1950 Tourbillon GMT Titanio, which boasts almost half the weight of a steel equivalent.
Philip Barat, Patek Philippe's head of watch development, said that computer-based 3-D design enabled the creation of the brand's 2014 Grandmaster Chime anniversary watch, which has 1,366 parts. Said Mr. Barat, "With the 3-D vision, it allowed the constructors not to build smaller pieces but to fill empty spaces, impossible to achieve in 2-D."
Mr. Robot
In 2013, Swatch announced "Sistem51," the first Swiss mechanical watch whose components were entirely assembled by robots. More than a gimmick, the Sistem51 signaled a clear move toward artificial intelligence in watchmaking.
A year later, Richemont, owner of 11 watch brands, established a new research facility in Neuchatel, a medieval lakeside town in Switzerland and in 2017 announced plans to recruit engineers specializing in micro-systems, micro-manufacturing and micro-engineering -- which will advance the robotics trend. About a 35-minute drive away, the Christophe Claret factory similarly uses a unique 16-axel robot to make its watch cases.
Silicon Valley
Since the 16th century almost all watch parts have been made of steel, brass, gold, silver or other metal alloys. But in 2001, Swiss watchmaker Ulysse Nardin introduced a watch with a silicon escapement (a mechanical device that controls the flow of energy). Patek Philippe and Breguet soon introduced silicon watch parts of their own. While the use of silicon was initially limited to luxury timepieces, it has now trickled down to more entry-level brands with models such as the Mido Baroncelli SI Calibre 80.
Silicon is light, can be mass-produced and is easily shaped into the intricate components of a watch movement. Unlike metals, silicon resists corrosion and remains stable when temperatures change. Silicon parts don't require lubrication or suffer from wear and tear, so watches that integrate it don't need to be serviced as often.
Swing Shift
Every mechanical clock and watch needs an oscillator, a device that swings between two positions -- like the pendulum of a grandfather clock. On a watch, the traditional oscillator has over 30 parts including a balance wheel and a balance spring, which contribute to a watch's accuracy through a back-and-forth rotation. Its design remained largely unchanged since its 1675 invention, until last year when LVMH subsidiary Zenith launched the Defy Lab, a watch with a one-piece silicon oscillator. While a traditional oscillator swings back and forth 18,000 to 26,000 times an hour, this new one performs the same function 108,000 times per hour, resulting in increased accuracy.
Honey, I Shrunk the Watch
A watch's tiny innards are crowded with wheels, gears and springs. Since the dawn of mechanical watchmaking (remember miniaturization?), shrinking these dynamic parts has been one way to innovate watch design.
Greubel Forsey, a small, luxury brand based in La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland, recently made a radically smaller foudroyante, the mechanical device that measures fractions of a second in a watch. Theirs is 96% smaller than the traditional version and expends 1/1800th of the energy to do the same job. When asked where this improvement might lead, the brand's co-founder Stephen Forsey replied, "We don't know yet. It's not a practical thing yet, but we can take it to prototyping and next comes a readable display. As we go along we find new openings and new avenues, but it is unknown territory."
"Unknown territory" is exactly what makes innovation exciting; it's the chance to do something entirely new. While it's hard to imagine anyone except the most devoted horology nuts getting excited about some of these innovations, they're advancing the field, bit by silicon bit. And even though horology can get a fuddy-duddy rap, as Felix Baumgartner said, "Watchmaking is alive and an ongoing process. It is about new ideas and possibilities."

Credit: By Michael Clerizo
