SAVELLETRI, Italy -- The U.S. and other Group of Seven industrialized nations vowed Friday to push back against a wave of cheap Chinese high-tech products in a coordinated attempt to counter what they consider to be unfair economic competition.
Wrapping up a summit in southern Italy, G-7 leaders said China's massive subsidies of electric vehicles, batteries, solar panels and other products were hurting other countries.
"We express our concerns about China's persistent industrial targeting and comprehensive non-market policies and practices that are leading to global spillovers, market distortions and harmful overcapacity in a growing range of sectors," the leaders said in a G-7 statement.
Liu Pengyu, a spokesman for the Chinese embassy in Washington, said "China's industrial subsidy policy strictly abides" by World Trade Organization rules, and noted the U.S. has been "a big subsidizer of its domestic industries."
Chinese leader Xi Jinping has dismissed the allegations of economic unfairness, saying "there is no so-called problem of Chinese overcapacity," and asserting that his country's manufacturers simply are creating better products than their Western rivals.
A senior Biden administration official said President Biden and other G-7 leaders discussed additional steps they can take together "to level the playing field and protect our economic security. With our partners, we are investing in our resilience, building diversified supply chains and responding to economic coercion."
The Biden administration has urged China to scale back its industrial production to avoid flooding world markets as a way to boost Chinese growth. The president in May stepped up tariffs on products from China, including on electric vehicle batteries, computer chips, steel and aluminum, to be phased in during the next three years.
China produces very few electric vehicles for sale in the U.S., but the administration has warned that low-price EVs enhanced by Chinese government subsidies could soon flood the U.S. market.
The G-7, which comprises the U.S., Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United Kingdom, also was a forum for the West to express its opposition to China's support for Russia's economy and military industries as Vladimir Putin continues to press his invasion of Ukraine.
Biden, who signed a bilateral-security agreement with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky on Thursday, said at a news conference that the two leaders discussed their concerns about China's supply of materials to Russia that support Moscow's war effort.
The Ukrainian leader said he had raised the subject directly with Xi in a phone call. "He said that he will not sell any weapon to Russia," Zelensky told reporters, adding: "If he is a respectable person, he will not, because he gave me the word."
The G-7 statement echoed those points, expressing "deep concern" about China's support to Moscow and urging China to press Russia to withdraw from Ukraine.
Artificial intelligence was also a topic of discussion at the summit. Pope Francis became the first pontiff to address a G-7 gathering. He warned of the risks of artificial intelligence and the need to preserve human dignity with the rise of the powerful technology.
"We would condemn humanity to a future without hope if we took away people's ability to make decisions about themselves and their lives, condemning them to depend on the choices of machines," the pope said. "We need to guarantee and protect a significant space for human control over the decision-making process of artificial intelligence programs: Human dignity itself is at stake."
Credit: By Ken Thomas
