Profit and revenue at International Business Machines Corp. declined, with the top line edging lower to mark its 18th consecutive fall. Still, the company saw growth in newer businesses such as cloud computing and artificial intelligence.
The Armonk, N.Y., company said Monday that third-quarter revenue was $19.23 billion, down 0.3%. The company is pushing into new lines of business as its core products have come under increasing pressure by the move to computing services delivered over the internet.
Big Blue said its profit fell 4% to $2.9 billion during the quarter ended in September amid weakness in its systems segment, which includes mainframe computer hardware and operating-system software.
"In the third quarter, we're at the back end of the mainframe [sales] cycle, so we'd expect it to be down," said Martin Schroeter, IBM senior vice president and chief financial officer in an interview.
Shares of the company fell 3.2% to $149.84 in after-hours trading.
Alongside falling revenue in some older lines of business, revenue from cloud services across all IBM business segments grew 42% in constant currency to $3.4 billion, Mr. Schroeter said. Those cloud services include SoftLayer, which sells access to computing capacity over the internet, and Bluemix, which sells access to software over the web, among other things. The cloud business during the quarter added new customers including Dixons Carphone Group, JFE Steel Co., Ltd. and Vodafone India.
Cloud computing is one of several faster-growing areas that IBM calls strategic imperatives. Those businesses, which also include artificial intelligence, data analytics and security, grew 15% in constant currency during the third quarter compared with 12% during the second quarter. They now represent 40% of IBM's overall business.
"As long as we keep seeing growth in strategic imperatives, people should be happy," said Greg McDowell, analyst at JMP Securities.
IBM has invested heavily in such businesses. It spent $5.45 billion on acquisitions during the first nine months of the year, compared with $821 million during the same period a year earlier. It has bought 12 companies to spur growth in industry-specific businesses.
Wall Street analysts had expected revenue of $19 billion for the quarter, according to Thomson Reuters.
Credit: By Rachael King
