After three years of this presidency, much of the public is either nodding off or checked out. But there may be a method in Joe Biden's distracting madness. Passing quietly in and out of the news last week was Mr. Biden's proposal that in fiscal 2025 the federal government would spend $7.3 trillion.
Seven point three trillion??!! Try to wrap your head around such a fantastic number.
Annual federal spending broke the $4 trillion barrier in the final years of Barack Obama's presidency. In 2020 under Donald Trump, bipartisan spending rocketed to $6.8 trillion, driven by what were supposed to be one-off outlays for the Covid-19 "emergency."
During the primaries, Nikki Haley repeatedly pointed out Mr. Trump's role in expanding the federal chunk. Her questions about Mr. Trump's spending plans for a second term remain largely unanswered. An implicit question raised by Gov. Haley's complaint is whether most voters care that the federal debt held by the public is more than $27 trillion, about 98% of gross domestic product, or if mainly what they feel is helplessness. The Biden Democrats are betting the nation is numb to public spending.
One can argue in hindsight about the need for the pandemic's $2 trillion injection, but with the release of this $7 trillion budget, it's clear the political operatives in the Biden administration recognized Covid as a crisis opportunity for the ages. Mr. Biden is pocketing the emergency spending level and hoping to jack it higher permanently. Think $10 trillion by 2033, the level the Biden budget forecasts. Did his dad tell him to do this?
The budget is being described as a campaign document -- in other words, an election-year effort to buy votes. Implicit in this strategy is the Democratic assumption that voters can be bought and are happy to stay bought.
Among the reasons Mr. Biden won't drop out of the race despite doom-laden poll numbers is that he thinks -- or so said Sen. Bernie Sanders -- that he can be the most progressive president since Franklin D. Roosevelt. That ambition is important to an understanding of his $7.3 trillion whopper.
FDR's New Deal program dates to 1933. They say times change, but not if you're a Biden Democrat. What Mr. Biden is proposing as the U.S. heads deeper into a century defined by artificial intelligence is policy that is 90 years old. It somehow seems appropriate.
If there is one word associated with FDR's New Deal agenda it is "projects." Everything -- housing, airports, hospitals, schools -- became a project paid for with federal spending. Back then the thing common to most of the projects was cement. Today, it's climate. The 2022 Inflation Reduction Act -- accurately described by the progressive Economic Policy Institute as "essentially a climate-change bill" -- spends nearly $400 billion on renewable-energy projects. The new budget proposes tens of billions more "to support clean energy workforce and infrastructure projects across the nation."
Housing is a party perennial, so the Biden budget would spend an astounding $258 billion to subsidize it.
Despite the voguish Democratic habit of invoking Roosevelt's memory -- how this appeals to younger, history-free voters is anyone's guess -- the party's recall of FDR ends in the 1930s.
With war spreading in Europe in 1939, Roosevelt led a big U.S. defense buildup. He repeatedly gave the American public his reasons for the commitment in speeches and statements that are stirring to this day. His 1940 message to Congress for defense appropriations warned of "disturbances abroad, and the need of putting our own house in order in the face of storm signals from across the seas."
The Biden budget proposes to increase defense spending next fiscal year by 1%, a cut after inflation. It would decline in future years. China has just announced a 7.2% increase in its defense spending.
The Biden Democrats, overwhelmingly dedicated to domestic spending only, have set a low, unbreakable ceiling on budget support for national security. That explains in part why Mr. Biden slow-walked arms support for Ukraine and is now going wobbly on Israel. America's national security is hostage to Mr. Biden's antidefense vote in six swing states.
Since the mid-1970s, a rough political consensus has kept federal spending at about 21% of GDP and taxes at just over 17%. Mr. Biden wants spending to consume 24.8% of GDP and over a decade would "pay for" this increase by pushing taxes to more than 20% of national output. By 2030, the national debt would be bigger than GDP -- as in Italy or Greece.
For nearly a century, the Democrats' policy of tax-and-spend has worked for them. But one wonders if, like their leader, this strategy has arrived at a point of exhaustion with the U.S. public. An intriguing side story to this election is figuring out what's on the minds of Gen Z, or younger voters. They are down on Mr. Biden and bleak about their economic prospects. The Biden bet is that promising to push public spending past an incomprehensible $7 trillion will make them feel better about the president and his party. Overstuffing Uncle Sam, however, may be doing exactly the opposite.
---
Write henninger@wsj.com.
Credit: By Daniel Henninger
