Amazon.com's quarterly sales rose faster than expected, driven by strong e-commerce sales during the holiday shopping season.
The e-commerce giant on Thursday also projected continued strength in the current quarter, thanks in part to interest in artificial intelligence that it said is driving healthy sales in its cloud-computing arm.
Amazon's results, amid a flurry of other solid financial reports by big tech companies, sent its shares up sharply. Amazon said that profit in the three months through December surged to $10.6 billion, its strongest level in two years -- from a meager $278 million in the same quarter the previous year. Revenue rose 14% to $170 billion. Both figures easily beat Wall Street expectations.
Amazon has rebounded from a sharp downturn that followed an explosion of business during the pandemic. It has reorganized its dominant logistics business after a period of instability while also turning its attention to innovations in AI. Strong customer demand during the holiday season benefited the retailer, which also held a special sales event during the fourth quarter that lifted its sales.
Sales in the Amazon Web Services cloud-computing arm, an important profit center for Amazon, increased 13% in the fourth quarter to $24.2 billion, matching expectations. The division's operating profit rose nearly 38%.
AWS sales had decelerated last year after years of rapid expansion. Lower enterprise demand hurt the unit, though Amazon indicated it expected growth to pick up again as businesses responded positively to the company's latest cloud offerings.
Amazon's stock rose 7% after markets closed Thursday.
Chief Executive Andy Jassy has reoriented Amazon to focus on AI innovations. The company fell behind in the AI race compared with Microsoft, Google and other peers and lately has tried to generate buzz around AI products and services in the cloud division. Amazon is a large investor in AI startup Anthropic, and the company in November introduced an AI chatbot for companies it calls Amazon Q.
On Thursday, the company announced it is launching an AI-powered shopping assistant named Rufus on its mobile app. Executives said it is designed to improve the shopping experience and enhance its existing search bar.
Jassy said on a call with analysts that AI revenue for Amazon is "still relatively small, much smaller than what it will be in the future where we really believe we're going to drive tens of billions of dollars of revenue over the next several years."
Chief Financial Officer Brian Olsavsky said that while some AWS customers are still being cautious about their spending, he expects revenue growth to continue to accelerate this year and said corporate customers have shown high interest in running their generative AI applications on AWS and building their foundation models there.
"It is still relatively early days," Olsavsky said Thursday. He declined to say what percentage of AWS sales are being driven by Amazon's AI services.
The company has continued to adjust its corporate head count after a wave of layoffs to start 2023. In recent months, it has slashed roles across its entertainment, devices and games divisions, citing shifting priorities across its businesses that include artificial intelligence. The cuts so far have been smaller than a year ago, when it laid off 27,000 employees.
Amazon's overall head count, including its army of warehouse workers, totaled 1.53 million at the end of 2023, slightly below its level a year earlier.
Amazon projected continued strong growth in the current quarter, saying revenue would grow between 8% and 13% from a year earlier, in line with analysts' expectations. It expects operating income of between $8 billion and $12 billion this quarter, suggesting a midline above the current consensus.
A year ago, Amazon warned of a period of reduced growth as it looked to control its costs and started to experience deceleration from the cloud-computing business.
Lately, the company has been more upbeat, saying in November that it had record sales during the Black Friday weekend. It has also sought new revenue streams. This week, the company began to show ads on its Prime Video platform unless customers pay more.
Amazon also said its advertising revenue grew by 27% in the fourth quarter.
Credit: By Sebastian Herrera
