Social-media company X ended the ban on searches for Taylor Swift Monday evening after blocking queries of the singer's name for several days following the spread of explicit, digitally altered pictures of her on the platform.
Asked about Swift searches, Joe Benarroch, head of business operations at X, said: "Search has been re-enabled and we will continue to be vigilant for any attempt to spread this content and will remove it if we find it."
The company put a halt on searches for the singer's full name to "prioritize safety on this issue," Benarroch had said Saturday. Still, before the full-name search came back, users could easily get around the ban by searching for just her first or last name or putting her name in quotation marks. Her last name was trending on the platform Monday morning.
Searches for Swift over the weekend generated an error message.
"Posts aren't loading right now. Try again later," an automated message said in reply to a search query of the pop star's name. A separate message said: "Something went wrong, but don't fret -- it's not your fault."
Representatives for Swift haven't responded to requests for comment.
The episode renewed concerns around deepfake images, which are manipulated but realistic-looking depictions of people often generated with artificial intelligence. Creating digitally altered nude images isn't a federal crime, though some attempts to outlaw them have sputtered in Congress. Some states -- including Minnesota, New York and Virginia -- have laws regulating such images as a form of harassment.
The fake pictures proliferated across X, where owner Elon Musk has cut many of the platform's trust and safety staff. People who create sexually explicit deepfakes often target women and girls.
Explicit digitally fabricated fake photos of the "Eras Tour" star began to proliferate on Wednesday on X. Swift fans complained that X wasn't doing enough to ban the spread, so they swarmed the site with real pictures of the singer. They also pushed X to take stronger steps to delete the phony photos.
The slogan "protect Taylor Swift" trended on X as Swifties said they were mobilizing to post real images of the singer to drown out the fakes.
By Thursday, a flurry of accounts that were flagged by users for sharing the most viral images were suspended or otherwise restricted, though the fakes were still relatively easy to find on the platform.
The White House said Friday it was alarmed by reports of the images spreading.
"While social-media companies make their own independent decisions about content management, we believe they have an important role to play in enforcing their own rules to prevent the spread of misinformation and nonconsensual intimate imagery of real people," said White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre.
X said in an online statement last week that it has a "zero-tolerance policy" on the sharing of nonconsensual graphic imagery. The statement didn't mention Swift by name.
X's policies prohibit sharing deceptively altered and harmful media as well as posting explicit images of someone without their consent.
Credit: By Ginger Adams Otis, Alexa Corse and Alyssa Lukpat
