Amazon Chief Executive Jeff Bezos recently called the conflict between privacy and security an "issue of our age." But while he says Amazon will fight government investigators who try to obtain personal information from devices made by his company, Amazon is marketing face-recognition technology to private businesses and law-enforcement agencies alike, for uses that many believe are a threat to privacy.
Face recognition is a stark example of a technology that is being deployed faster than society and the law can adopt new norms and rules. It lets governments and private enterprise track citizens anywhere there is a camera, even if they're not carrying any devices. In general, people who are in public don't have any legal expectation of privacy and can be photographed or recorded.
Because of this, the technology has the potential to be more intrusive than warrantless phone tracking, which the U.S. Supreme Court just ruled unconstitutional. There are only two states, Texas and Illinois, that limit private companies' ability to track people via their faces. No state or federal laws limit the ability of law enforcement to do so.
Amazon's user agreement for its facial-recognition platform, called Rekognition, includes few prohibitions beyond what is already illegal -- that is, very little. There's also no approval process for customers: Anyone with a credit card and an Amazon Web Services account can have at it.
High-quality, internet-connected cameras are becoming ubiquitous -- they're in everything from doorbells and automobiles to nurseries and schools. How widely is face-recognition technology being implemented in them? The full scope hasn't been reported. Companies such as FaceFirst that have sold face-recognition services for security applications for years cannot discuss their clients because non-disclosure agreements are standard in the industry, says its CEO Peter Trepp.
Beyond privacy concerns, experts have raised questions about the technology's accuracy, which may vary depending on gender and race.
Joy Buolamwini, a graduate researcher at the MIT Media Lab, has examined bias in face-recognition algorithms. She says her preliminary data on Amazon's Rekognition system found that it performs worse on women and people with dark skin than men and people with light skin, and worst of all on dark-skinned women. A surveillance system with these biases could potentially lead to more false identifications of some groups of people than others.
In materials that have since been deleted by Amazon, the company marketed Rekognition as having the potential to identify people in real time in video feeds gathered by police body cameras.
One company enabling real-time face recognition for police departments is Motorola Solutions, the Chicago-based public company that remained after the former telecom giant's mobile-phone division was split off in 2011. The company is partnering with artificial-intelligence firm Neurala to enable face recognition through police body cameras. Motorola Solutions has also used Amazon's Rekognition technology in prototypes, says a company spokeswoman.
The Orlando Police Department has conducted a pilot with Amazon using Rekognition, which was fed data from cameras owned by the department, says a spokeswoman. Amazon initiated the pilot, she adds.
Face recognition is a classic "dual use" technology -- it can be used like a password, to verify a person is who he or she claims to be in a financial transaction, or it can be used for surveillance. My Wall Street Journal colleagues in China last year published an article showing how the country's government has been the most avid adopter of face recognition, making it part of an elaborate system of social control.
Face recognition has a wide variety of potential uses, most unrelated to surveillance. Amazon's Rekognition system is used by C-SPAN to identify who is on camera at any moment. Microsoft's technology is used by Uber to verify drivers' identities. And while Google and Facebook don't sell their face-recognition abilities to developers, both companies have invested heavily in the technology.
Dozens of startups offer similar face-recognition services. One such startup, Kairos, refuses to sell its technology to governments or their contractors, says CEO Brian Brackeen. Among the contracts he says his company has refused was a request for a face-recognition system by Axon Enterprise Inc., formerly Taser International, a maker of police body cameras and electroshock weapons.
"At this point in time, we are not working on face-recognition technology to be deployed on body cameras," says an Axon spokesman. The company has formed an AI ethics board to help it decide whether it should develop technologies like face recognition of potential suspects, he adds.
Kairos also refused to build a requested system to identify people in a crowd from footage captured by drones, says Mr. Brackeen. The company does sell its technology to private firms for identity verification similar to the iPhone X's Face ID, for instance.
While face-recognition technology has existed in some form for decades, what's notable about the latest versions is their accessibility and affordability. That doesn't mean private firms will be able to easily identify people on the street, however. They generally lack access to comprehensive databases of faces and names, and the technology vendors don't provide them.
This is not a problem for law-enforcement agencies, which have access to databases of driver-license photos. "The expectation of privacy ends when you sit down and smile at the government desk," Joseph Michael, a deputy state's attorney in Washington County, Md., recently told the Journal.
Some Amazon investors are siding with the American Civil Liberties Union in an effort to pressure Amazon not to sell its face-recognition technology to law enforcement.
Microsoft ended up in hot water this past week when activists noticed marketing material from January announcing it sells cloud computing services to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. This technology includes "deep learning capabilities to accelerate facial recognition and identification." Some Microsoft employees are agitating for the company to end its relationship with ICE. Microsoft declined to comment for this column.
Alphabet Inc.'s Google recently bowed to pressure from the public and its own employees, and decided not to allow its AI technology to be used in military weapons. The leaders of Amazon, Microsoft and other tech companies may soon have to make similar tough decisions.

Credit: By Christopher Mims
