Pinterest Inc. accelerated some technology initiatives in recent weeks in response to changing user behavior in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, said Jeremy King, senior vice president of technology.
Billing itself as a "visual discovery engine," Pinterest offers a website and mobile app where users can browse through photos and post, or "pin," them to personalized digital inspiration boards. Users look to Pinterest for style, gardening and home decor tips and can shop through its mobile and desktop apps. In recent years, it made investments in making its pins shoppable, meaning users can click on an item, or a similar recommendation, and purchase it through a brand's website.
During the pandemic, Pinterest has seen user traffic and engagement grow to record highs and change because of lockdown and social-distancing measures, Mr. King said. "We were seeing people doing lots of interesting searches," he said, ranging from ideas for work-from-home setups and children's activities to meal-planning and stress relief.
Global monthly active users now exceed 367 million, up from about 300 million in September, according to the company. During the past few months, searches increased by 60% compared with last year and the number of boards created is up by the same amount.
The change in user behavior was partly why Mr. King's engineering team brought forward the launch of "Today" by several months. The feature appears as a tab on a user's Pinterest home page that shows topics and ideas curated by Pinterest employees, as well as trending pins that display content selected by the company's algorithms.
On Tuesday, the Today tab featured information for users on the Black Lives Matter movement, including organizations to consider supporting and educational resources on racism for parents.
Engineers developed the Today tab in less than a week and it was launched in late March. The effort builds on existing artificial intelligence algorithms used by Pinterest that can identify trending topics and behaviors for advertisers, Mr. King said.
Another technology-related project that was accelerated in recent months was Pinterest's verified merchant program. As bricks-and-mortar stores began to shut down in the U.S., Pinterest in late March started placing a blue check mark on profiles of retailers verified by Pinterest employees for having fair return policies and shipping rates and in-stock merchandise.
Engineers working on that project had to make sure Pinterest's AI algorithms and visual search technology could accurately identify objects in Pins and match them to the in-stock products of verified merchants, along with recommendations for other items to purchase, Mr. King said.
The Today tab could be an effort to encourage Pinterest users to make a daily habit of checking the platform, said Andrew Lipsman, principal analyst at research firm eMarketer, who said they have tended to dip in and out up to now.
"All the biggest winners in technology have been predicated on developing a really powerful consumer habit," Mr. Lipsman said.
Growing the number of daily active users, which Pinterest doesn't currently disclose, could make the platform more enticing for advertisers, he said.
While Pinterest's sales and user numbers came in above Wall Street's expectations in its latest earnings report, Pinterest also reported a slightly larger than expected net loss of $141 million and said it expected operating expenses to rise year-over-year in the second quarter.
Pinterest's use of Amazon.com Inc.'s Amazon Web Services cloud has been critical during the past few months of increased user engagement, Mr. King said.
"Overnight, we were seeing increases [in user activity] on some of our platforms of 1,000%," he said. For example, more users were searching through their own boards to find previously pinned items and creating more boards at a higher rate than ever before, Mr. King said.
The company was able to quickly add more computing capacity from AWS to prevent any outages, he said.

Credit: By Sara Castellanos
