WASHINGTON -- The Biden administration, eager to highlight a signature economic initiative as elections approach, is expected to award billions of dollars in subsidies to Intel, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. and other top semiconductor companies in coming weeks to help build new factories.
The grants are part of the $53 billion Chips Act, intended to reshore production of advanced microchips and fend off China, which is fast developing its own chip industry.
More than 170 firms have applied but just two tiny grants have been made, to makers of less-advanced chips. Industry executives familiar with negotiations said the coming announcements are in the billions of dollars, and aimed to kick-start manufacturing of advanced semiconductors that power smartphones, artificial intelligence and weapons systems.
The executives expect some announcements to come before the State of the Union address scheduled for March 7. The announcements are preliminary, to be followed by due diligence and then final agreements. Funds will be released in stages as the projects progress.
Some lawmakers and industry officials worry that, because of permitting and other delays, it could be years before the subsidized factories are churning out chips.
Among the likely recipients is Intel, which is led by CEO Pat Gelsinger and has projects under way in Arizona, Ohio, New Mexico and Oregon that will cost more than $43.5 billion. Another is TSMC, with two fabrication plants, or fabs, under construction near Phoenix for a total investment of $40 billion. Arizona and Ohio are considered battleground states in November's presidential and congressional races.
South Korea's Samsung Electronics has a $17.3 billion project near Dallas. Micron Technology, Texas Instruments and GlobalFoundries are among other top contenders, industry executives say.
"Certainly, in the early part of this year, we will be announcing major progress," said Michael Schmidt, director of the Chips Program Office.
A Commerce Department spokeswoman declined to discuss individual applications, timing or amounts, saying "awards will be entirely dependent upon which projects will advance U.S. economic and national security."
The Chips Act includes $39 billion in manufacturing grants to cover as much as 15% of the total cost of each project up to $3 billion per fab, as well as loans, loan guarantees and tax credits.
Delivering on signature economic policies -- such as the Chips Act, a 2021 infrastructure law, and the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act aimed at renewable energy -- is urgent for Biden's re-election push. The laws are individually popular: An October survey by progressive-aligned Navigator Research showed 69% of respondents expressing support for the Chips Act.
But voters overall have a dim view of Biden's economic stewardship. A December poll by The Wall Street Journal found "Bidenomics" viewed favorably by less than 30% of voters and unfavorably by more than half.
Part of the gap might lie in how long it has taken to actually implement the laws. The Chips Act's requirements on workforce and national security have complicated the funding negotiations. Shortages of skilled workers loom.
TSMC said last week that it expected to delay production at the second of its Arizona plants by one to two years, citing uncertainty over U.S. incentives. It had earlier postponed the opening of the first fab from 2024 to the first half of 2025.
"When TSMC wants to build a fab in Taiwan or in Japan, they can do so much faster than they can in the U.S.," said John VerWey, an adviser on security and technology at the federal Pacific Northwest National Laboratory who has studied regulatory hurdles for U.S. plant construction.
Administration officials say the Chips Act has already spurred private sector investments exceeding $200 billion. Some 12,000 people work daily at TSMC's Arizona site.
The most immediate threat to timely construction is the National Environmental Policy Act, which requires large federally funded projects to pass environmental review before grants are released. Full NEPA reviews took an average of 4.5 years between 2013 and 2018, according to a federal government report.
A Senate-passed bill exempting major Chips Act projects from NEPA review has failed to gain traction in the House. Some Republicans want a wider overhaul covering energy and other sectors. Some Democrats worry about diluting environmental standards.
Credit: By Yuka Hayashi
