Intel reported write-downs and other charges that led to a stunning $16.6 billion net loss in the latest quarter, as the chip maker works through a costly turnaround effort that Chief Executive Pat Gelsinger says is bearing fruit.
The net loss reported Thursday -- the largest in its 56-year history -- far exceeded than the $1.1 billion loss analysts expected in a FactSet survey. At the same time, Intel's revenue in the quarter was $13.3 billion, a 6% decline from the same period last year but slightly above Wall Street forecasts. And Intel offered guidance for sales growth in the current quarter that was above expectations.
Investors seized on the positive news, sending Intel's beleaguered shares up nearly 9% in after-hours trading.
The losses largely reflected charges related to a continuing cost-reduction plan and accelerated depreciation on some of its manufacturing assets, Intel said.
In an interview, Gelsinger characterized the accounting charges that led to the large loss as one-off moves necessary because of the company's sweeping business shake-up. Intel disclosed accounting charges totaling nearly $16 billion, some of which related to write-downs on manufacturing equipment it bought during the pandemic-era boom in chip demand for a manufacturing technology it calls Intel 7.
"In the Covid-enthused period of PC demand, our expectations for the Intel 7 products were much higher than the reality is today," Gelsinger said, adding that the equipment to make those chips couldn't be repurposed to make more advanced ones.
"These restructuring things are largely finished this quarter," he said. "That's a lot to get done and we're proud of that work."
Intel expects revenue in the current quarter to be between $13.3 billion to $14.3 billion, compared with analysts' expectations of around $13.7 billion.
Intel also clarified the size of its planned layoffs announced earlier this year, saying in a securities filing they will total 16,500, from a previous target of roughly 15,000. Intel said $2.8 billion of the charges for the latest quarter resulted from severance and other restructuring costs, with a large share of the rest coming from tax-related charges in addition to the equipment write-downs.
The latest period's shortfall dwarfs Intel's previous record loss of $2.76 billion in the first quarter of last year, and underlines the enormous challenges that its CEO is grappling with.
An Intel veteran who had been pushed out more than a decade earlier, Gelsinger took the helm in 2021 vowing to turn the company around after it fell behind in the race to make the fastest-calculating chips with the smallest transistors.
He planned aggressive efforts to close that technology gap and expand Intel's network of chip plants while also building a so-called foundry business manufacturing chips for other companies.
Gelsinger quickly hit challenges. Pandemic-era PC buying faded with the return to regular work patterns, and Intel largely missed out on a new computing revolution -- chips that power artificial intelligence. Intel makes AI chips, dubbed Gaudi, but slower-than-expected uptake meant the company wouldn't achieve a target of $500 million of revenue this year from them, Gelsinger said in a call Thursday with analysts, where he faced skepticism about his strategy for AI.
Analysts also grilled him about progress in the company's contract chip-making business, which has struggled to attract big customers for its contract chip-making business, which cycled through several leaders.
Intel also has struggled to attract big customers for its contract chip-making business, which cycled through several leaders.
To help fund its manufacturing expansion, Intel is relying on government grants of up to $11.5 billion from 2022's Chips Act. Intel is still hashing out final terms of those provisional grants with the U.S. government.
Generate image description

Credit: By Asa Fitch
