Volker Condron was recently driving an 18-wheel rig on a highway near Mount Vernon, Texas, when his truck blew a tire -- a common hazard that can add several hours to a scheduled delivery, he said.
This time, Mr. Condron used a new app to take a photo of the tire and relay his exact location, a request for parts and other critical information to the nearest mechanic -- getting him back on the road in less than an hour.
"Everything is at your fingertips now," said Mr. Condron, who works for transportation and logistics giant Hub Group Inc. and has been a trucker for over 30 years. "It speeds up the whole process."
Trucking, logistics and supply-chain operators are taking the digital tools used to automate repetitive tasks around the office and using them in the cabs of long-haul trucks.
Hub Group, which operates a fleet of more than 4,000 trucks, last month unveiled a set of artificial-intelligence-driven capabilities, promising to offer more accurate delivery times. The new capabilities leverage over 10 million data points, many of which are generated by interconnected sensors and other hardware that Hub Group has been adding to its trucks for the past two years, said Vava Dimond, the company's chief information officer. Ms. Dimond said the goal is to use as much data as possible to make deliveries more efficient and boost productivity. But the initiative is also aimed at making life easier for its truckers, she added.
For truck drivers, the cab of the vehicle is their office, she said, "and that office isn't conducive to things like paperwork, when it's raining or the wind is blowing." Hub Group's app can track and automatically fill out truckers' paperwork, including logs along their routes, proof of delivery notices and other forms. The company developed the bulk of the tools in house.
In a report last year, Boston Consulting Group singled out the road-freight industry as being "dominated by manual processes" and "overdue for change." It said incumbent companies are feeling pressure to update their systems from digital shipping and logistics startups, which have garnered more than $3.3 billion in venture-capital funding since 2012 and may be attractive acquisitions for companies with truck fleets.
The report cites startups such as Convoy, a U.S.-based online platform that connects freight shippers with carriers; U.K.-based Freightex, a virtual logistics service acquired by United Parcel Service Inc.; and EasyPost, an online logistics service backed by Google Inc. These more agile startups are looking to grab share in a highly fragmented market where "paper- and phone-based processes are still common," BCG researchers said.
That is prompting many older transportation companies to develop platforms that can integrate diverse data sets tracking orders, truck locations and other critical information in real time, while eking out efficiencies in fuel spending and scheduling.
UPS, for instance, uses a platform to calculate the most efficient delivery route for its drivers, who make an average of 120 stops a day.
Devices mounted in many truck companies' cabs plan and direct the best delivery routes, taking into account traffic and weather conditions.

Credit: By Angus Loten
