STURTEVANT, Wis. -- Microsoft said it is investing billions of dollars on artificial intelligence in Wisconsin, the latest stop in a global spending spree to build AI infrastructure and calm fears about the powerful technology.
President Biden on Wednesday joined with Microsoft President Brad Smith to announce the $3.3 billion investment in a new data center there and training programs to educate locals about AI jobs in manufacturing.
The announcement is the latest in a series of large investments Microsoft has unveiled in the U.S., Europe and Asia to expand the reach of its AI network. Microsoft said the new site would initially create 2,300 construction jobs and eventually as many as 2,000 data-center jobs.
Biden's visit to Wisconsin, a top election battleground state, represented his latest effort to showcase private and federal investments in emerging technologies, such as Intel semiconductor facilities in Arizona and Ohio.
Microsoft said it is also investing in a new AI lab at the University of Wisconsin Milwaukee campus to train workers to use AI technology.
As tech titans tout the benefits of generative AI and invest unprecedented amounts in the technology, they are facing public fears that AI will eventually destroy jobs. Since the launch of OpenAI's ChatGPT in 2022, demand for AI software and the infrastructure that powers it has exploded.
However, data centers -- many powered by expensive chips made by Nvidia -- have struggled to keep up with demand.
Microsoft, Amazon.com, Google parent Alphabet and Meta Platforms have each committed to spending tens of billions of dollars in the coming year to build out AI infrastructure. The amount of data-center space in the U.S. grew 26% last year, according to real-estate firm CBRE, and a record amount was under construction.
Smith said programs such as the manufacturing lab in Wisconsin help show workers AI is designed to assist, not replace, people.
"We have a huge responsibility to help ensure this technology serves people," Smith said. "Part of that is ensuring that it works safely and remains under human control. But another part of it is really supporting and aiding the transition of the economy."
The event Wednesday at Gateway Technical College brought Biden to Racine County, Wis., the same community where former President Donald Trump, Biden's campaign rival, once heralded a $10 billion investment by Taiwanese iPhone assembler Foxconn that largely failed to materialize.
Foxconn said in a statement that the company "continues to grow" in Wisconsin and noted that in recent years it has been the largest taxpayer in Racine County.
Credit: By Tom Dotan and Ken Thomas
