Microsoft's shares shot up $25 this week on word that the U.K.'s competition regulator intends to block its acquisition of game maker Activision. Whatever else the market reaction signifies, informed opinion finds laughable the notion that Microsoft was otherwise on its way to a luscious videogame monopoly.
Activision owns the popular "Call of Duty" franchise. British regulators say if Microsoft were to gain this prize, it would monopolize the future of online gaming. U.S. regulators oppose the deal too but say instead Microsoft would monopolize the existing console market. Two antitrust authorities, two different conclusions about the threat. But both are sure it's a threat. This tells you something about antitrust -- it has become an intellectual farce. In fact, neither charge is plausible. In the cloud-based future, Google, Facebook, Netflix, Amazon, Alibaba, Baidu, ByteDance, etc., will hardly surrender to an imaginary Microsoft steamroller. To monopolize today's console market, Microsoft would somehow have to overcome Sony's 85% market share.
Antitrust enforcers get no attention if they don't block deals -- no press, no prestige, no bump in resources. Their leaders don't get their tickets punched. Parents, let your children know: When opportunists smell advantage, opportunists will be seen diving in head first. After the Trump administration's AT&T-Time Warner folly, I speculated trustbusting would hit rock bottom when Lina Khan's Federal Trade Commission attacked Microsoft-Activision purely on big-tech animus. Rock bottom turns out to be deeper than I suspected. Ms. Khan has been caught playing footsie with the Brits to sandbag two U.S. companies because she feared U.S. law might not let her sandbag them.
Welcome to the natural end state of bureaucratic evolution, from lawful to lawless. The same is illustrated in Chicago (where else?), after courts a few weeks apart came to opposite conclusions in similar cases accusing a local company of giving residents cancer. In one courtroom, the plaintiff was allowed to dwell on an unpopular former Republican governor's connection to private equity. In the other, the jury's attention was focused on the science. Guess which jury awarded a woman $363 million for a breast cancer episode 15 years earlier?
Ethylene oxide is a naturally occurring chemical produced by plant growth and decay, industrial and natural combustion, and the human body. Its industrial uses include sterilization of half of U.S. medical supplies, 200 billion items a year. Landing on suburban Chicago's Sterigenics and other plants out of the blue were hundreds of lawsuits because the EPA's Integrated Risk Information System, or IRIS, based on no new information, decided ethylene oxide was 60 times more dangerous than previously thought.
The EPA's own Science Advisory Board criticized the finding (and was bypassed by EPA rule makers). Texas regulators conducted a review and found the result to be implausible. Evidence that ethylene oxide is even carcinogenic is based on government studies of occupational exposure between 1938 and 1986 that found a lower-than-normal cancer incidence except for a few rare cancers of questionable statistical significance. By showing just how wildly uncertain are EPA's per worker exposure estimates for most of the period in question, a 2019 study casts more doubt on the agency's recent jockeying of its risk calculus.
Understand: 93% of ethylene oxide exposure comes from natural processes; less than 1% of industrial exposure is caused by the sterilization industry, or less than 0.07% of total exposure. The new EPA IRIS "safe" limit is 1,500 times lower than the concentration in suburban air; it's 1/40th the level created inside the human body by normal metabolic processes.
None of which matters to EPA's implicit allies in the trial bar, who are eager to lay blame for every cancer within miles of a sterilization plant. A chemophobe cult inside the EPA, chemical by chemical, is deciding industries must be undetectable to their instruments or disappear from the earth. If you inhale 150 parts per trillion of ethylene oxide and half of one part per trillion is from the medical-implement sterilization industry, that industry should cease to exist. But try finding any of this in the ample press coverage that treats the EPA's risk calculation as simply beyond question.
It's a subject I will return to: how public thought and action are already sleazily algorithmic, including the output of our media and regulatory state. Maybe AI artifacts like ChatGPT, which use novel, nonhuman processes to create human-seeming word output, should frighten us less with their alienness than with their familiarity.
Credit: By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr.
