Norsk Hydro ASA's investigation of a ransomware attack it suffered in March has revealed new vulnerabilities, leading it to test using artificial intelligence to secure its industrial equipment.
The Norway-based aluminum company, whose business includes mining, smelting and renewable-energy generation, also reorganized its security team to better detect and respond to cyber incidents.
Norsk Hydro is developing an AI tool to detect hackers as they attempt to access its industrial equipment, Chief Information Officer Jo De Vliegher said in an interview. The tool looks for unusual activity that could signal hacking, such as frequent password changes on devices. It then triggers an alarm to Norsk Hydro's cybersecurity team.
"There are things that are obviously part of normal business, unless they start to happen too frequently in too many sites," Mr. De Vliegher said.
The ransomware, which Norsk Hydro identified as the LockerGoga virus, brought down some operations after gaining access to the company's corporate information-technology network. Norsk Hydro determined a few weeks ago that the situation was stable, Mr. De Vliegher said. The hackers didn't compromise industrial equipment but could have, he said: "There weren't enough proper mechanisms in place to stop the attack, had it come that far."
The attack has cost the company 550 million to 650 million kroner ($61 million to $72 million), a spokesman said.
An internal investigation revealed security holes that could have allowed the virus to infect industrial equipment, Mr. De Vliegher said. Its machines communicate with each other in ways the security team hadn't known about, which could make them vulnerable to attacks, he added.
The AI tool is designed to shore up those security gaps by identifying areas where industrial equipment might be exposed to hackers and monitoring for small changes over time. Human analysts can't assess the huge amount of internet traffic on the company's network, Mr. De Vliegher said.
His team set the tool to detect if multiple password changes are made within one week to programmable logic controllers, industrial computers that communicate with machines. Hackers often reset passwords to take over accounts.
The security team is testing the AI tool but it hasn't been rolled out yet.
Industrial companies operate in two technology spaces, combining an IT environment for email and other routine business applications with operational equipment, some of which runs constantly to process materials or perform critical functions. Industrial companies generally isolate such equipment from corporate IT networks that are used for other business operations to avoid cyber threats.
Norsk Hydro was surprised to discover that some of its programmable logic controllers were connected to its IT networks.
"We think a PLC is isolated, it can't get any commands from the IT world, but then all of a sudden we see that there is a connection," Mr. De Vliegher said.
Industrial companies are increasingly looking to AI to help them prevent cyberattacks, said Rob McNutt, chief technology officer at cybersecurity firm Forescout Technologies Inc.
AI can help protect factories, power plants and other critical infrastructure sites that often lack safeguards, such as encrypted devices, that are common in corporate networks, he said. Such companies should instead set up additional lines of defense, and AI could help them identify suspicious activity, he said.

Credit: By Catherine Stupp
