[Financial Analysis and Commentary]
Amazon needed to put on a good AI show this week. It got a little help from a surprising friend.
Amazon's AWS unit comes second only to Microsoft in the market for business-focused software and related services. But Amazon has been perceived as lagging behind its largest cloud rival in the field of generative artificial intelligence, given Microsoft's push into the technology since ChatGPT's launch almost exactly a year ago.
Hence, Amazon used its annual AWS re:Invent conference on Tuesday to lean hard into generative AI. It unveiled a chatbot called Q, which looks like a business-focused version of Microsoft's Copilot. But most notable was the appearance of Nvidia Chief Executive Jensen Huang, who joined AWS CEO Adam Selipsky on stage at the Las Vegas event to unveil an "expanded collaboration" between the companies. That will include AWS being the first cloud provider to launch services with Nvidia's new GH200 NVL32 "superchips" that will ship next year.
This was the first time Huang appeared at the annual confab for AWS, which has been a major customer of Nvidia's data-center business over the past several years. And it came as Amazon has gone further than its cloud rivals in designing its own in-house chips, while Nvidia has been pushing into offering cloud-computing services. Amazon used the same keynote to unveil the fourth version of its Graviton processor and the second version of its Trainium accelerator -- the latter of which competes with Nvidia's chips in the training of AI models.
Amazon CEO Andy Jassy bragged on its third-quarter call last month that its Trainium chips "have better price performance characteristics than the other options out there, but also the fact that you can get access to them" -- a dig at the shortage of Nvidia's chips.
The truth is that the two companies need each other. Nvidia's early moves in AI gave it a strong position that can't be fully replicated even by in-house chips from tech giants, who can custom design silicon for their networks. That has been apparent in Nvidia's recent results; its data-center sales quadrupled over the past two quarters compared with the same period last year. Nvidia credited cloud-service providers as accounting for about half those sales.
But Nvidia can't afford to alienate the biggest buyer in the market. It is facing the prospect its sales to China could take a hit because of new export controls, making a strong relationship with a big U.S. customer more important.
Credit: By Dan Gallagher
