Dear house: When I wake up, please turn on the lights, crank up the heat, play some tunes and brew my coffee.
Who hasn't dreamt of a house that can take orders? Austin Powers's bed rotates and plays bossa nova at his command. Wallace and Gromit, the animated Englishman and his dog, live in a house that can wake you, drop you into pants and spread jam on your toast -- though it never quite works as designed.
While I'm still looking for the perfect Internet-connected toaster, I feel a little like Wallace. My "smart" house has a Nest thermostat, app-controlled Philips Hue light bulbs, Dropcam streaming security camera, Sonos wireless speakers and a few other automated thingamabobs. Yet for all that, my devices don't know how to work together.
That's because I need more devices! A few companies have begun selling hardware and apps that orchestrate different devices in your home so they talk to each other and to your phone. I've been testing three of these controllers, none of which charge a monthly fee: the $299 Revolv, $99 Staples Connect and $99 SmartThings.
When I began playing around with these systems several weeks ago, I had the feeling we were on the cusp of solving the smart-home puzzle. So many startups are focusing on home automation and security, while big guns like Google (which just bought Nest) are quietly preparing their moves as well. But bringing any of the current options home will make your life unnecessarily complex. Hobbyists will enjoy tinkering with these systems, but for anybody else who cares about their marriages, children and sanity, my recommendation is to wait.
When you automate your home with a hub today, physical controls, whether a light switch or coffeepot buttons, suddenly become unusable or screw up an automated program. You and your family will have to think in terms of programming your lives. And no single hub can yet talk to all smart devices.
My house can now do some nifty tricks, like alerting my phone whenever a door opens, and turning on my porch light when I get a few blocks from home. But figuring it all out was time-consuming, expensive and occasionally screwball.
Smartening up a home begins with installing a hub. All three are about the size of a big sandwich, designed to be plugged into a home network and hidden away. The problems begin when they connect. SmartThings doesn't have Wi-Fi, so it has to be plugged into a router. That's fine if your router sits in the middle of your house, but my house is long and narrow, with the router at one end.
Revolv, wirelessly communicating from the middle of my house, seemed to do the best job sensing everything. But it couldn't even reach wireless Insteon light bulbs on both ends of my house. I had to move them closer to make my hub happy.
Sadly, that was just the beginning. When it comes to my morning routine, ideally a hub would know I was awake because my activity tracker would tell it I'm stirring. But none of the hubs yet talk to wearables like the Fitbit and the Jawbone Up. I installed three motion sensors outside my bedroom to alert my hubs.
Once I triggered a motion sensor, Revolv was the only one smart enough to complete all the tasks I asked it to do: Turn on lights, crank up my Nest thermostat, activate my Sonos speakers and turn on the power to my coffee maker. Revolv can do this in part because it has more radio transmitters than the competition.
Though Revolv tapped into my Nest unlike the others, a representative for Nest warned me that it isn't an authorized use, and any software updates could disrupt the thermostat's compatibility. For that reason, I can't recommend these hubs for Nest owners. The three hubs do work with other thermostat makers.
This brings up a core issue. Many device makers haven't opened up their systems to home controllers because of concerns over security and technology standards. Without more cooperation, hub makers are unable to fulfill the dream of a fully automated home. The Staples hub maker says it doesn't want to support unencrypted devices, and forges partnerships to ensure stability.
Getting the software right is another challenge. All three hubs let you turn on and off devices via your smartphone. But programming automatic routines requires solving logic puzzles the likes of which you see on the LSAT: If the hub senses A during B time of day, then it will do C, but only if D isn't around.
The best software of the lot, by far, was SmartThings. With it, you build commands around specific needs and moments. I used its "rise and shine" template to tell it to look for action on a sensor between 6:45 a.m. and 8 a.m., and then turn on lights, speakers and my coffeepot. Another program turns off all of those things when I -- or at least my phone -- leaves the house. But sometimes those programs would inexplicably fail -- and I couldn't tell if it was my bad programming, or something wrong with the system.
Staples Connect offered some of the same capabilities, but in an interface that was much more difficult to use and often more buggy.
Revolv may have been the hero at connecting to the most devices, but it software lacks the ability to understand conditions, like time of day. I could create a "good morning" routine to be activated by the motion sensor, but if I got up in the middle of the night, the program would kick off then, too. One Sunday night, it kicked off my morning routine over and over, with lights blazing and heater blasting. I'm sorry, Revolv, but I just unplugged you. The company, says it is working on adding conditions to the app.
My experience speaks to a broader problem. Our lives often have a rhythm, but it will require a much more sophisticated artificial intelligence to program a house around the way we live. Sometimes I want the lights off at 11; other times, people come home late. I'd like to be alerted if there's unexpected motion at home, but not if it's a cat.
It's easy to see how home automation will advance -- all of the hub makers say they're regularly rolling out updates to make their software more intuitive and compatible with more devices. But my life needs more flexibility than what today's hubs can handle.
---
Watch a video on home controllers at WSJ.com/Tech. Write to Geoffrey Fowler at geoffrey.fowler@wsj.com and on Twitter at @geoffreyfowler.
Credit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler
