Eric Schmidt spent 10 years as chief executive of Google Inc., taking the company from a rapidly growing search engine to a global behemoth that provides operating systems for mobile phones and Web-based software for consumers as well as being the synonym for finding stuff online. Mr. Schmidt, who recently handed over the CEO job to Google co-founder Larry Page, is now the company's executive chairman. He spoke with Kara Swisher and Walt Mossberg about the new platform wars, keeping information private and using technology for good and evil. Here are edited excerpts of that discussion.
MR. MOSSBERG: There's a new platform war taking place. Everyone knows about the Windows vs. Apple platform war, which Microsoft won handily in the PC era. We're in the post-PC era, and there's another platform war going on. You have this idea about the "Gang of Four." Can you talk about that?
MR. SCHMIDT: If you look at the industry as a whole, there are four companies that are exploiting platform strategies very well. One of them is Google; the other three being Apple, Amazon and Facebook. We've never had four companies growing at the scale that those four are in aggregate, in customers, cash flow, reach, partners, software development tools and so on. These are global companies with reach and economics that 10 years ago or 20 years ago, one company had -- typically, Microsoft, or before it IBM.
What's more interesting to me now is that each of them is exploiting in one way or the other a platform for creativity that people are building on top of. If you look at Facebook, you have now a set of competitors on top of Facebook who are going to exploit the identity-relationship model that Facebook has built.
MS. SWISHER: You left out Microsoft in this group because?
MR. SCHMIDT: Because Microsoft is not driving the consumer revolution in the minds of the consumers. Microsoft has done a very good job of getting itself locked into corporations and much of their profits now comes from the union of Windows server and the clients, which they do very well at.
MR. MOSSBERG: If we came back here in a couple of years, would we be down to two or one, or do you think this Gang of Four continues?
MR. SCHMIDT: It's unlikely that the number consolidates because of mergers between them, because they're all too big to get through the necessary global regulatory structures. More likely as one begins to miss the mark, a successor comes along.
MS. SWISHER: Let's talk about each of them and Google's relationship to them. It's been testy for sure with Apple.
MR. SCHMIDT: It started off very much a partnership. Now with the success of [Google's mobile-phone platform] Android, it's more rough.
MS. SWISHER: And with Facebook?
MR. SCHMIDT: We've tried very hard to partner with Facebook. Traditionally they've done deals with Microsoft, I think basically because Microsoft was willing to give them terms that we were unwilling to give them. But perhaps in the future.
Facebook's done a number of things which I admire. Facebook can be understood as a great site to spend time with your friends and photos and postings and social updates. But another way to understand it is that it's the first generally available way of disambiguating identity. And identity is incredibly useful because in the online world, you need to know who you're dealing with. Historically on the Internet, such fundamental services are not owned by a single company. They're multiple sources. I think the industry would benefit by having an alternative to that. From Google's perspective, if such an alternative existed, we would be able to use that to make our search better, to give better recommendations for YouTube, to do various things involving friends.
MR. MOSSBERG: What about the fourth one -- Amazon?
MR. SCHMIDT: Amazon has done a very good job with the cloud layer to build a set of services generally known as S3. They also have a lot of applications and they're able to actually integrate that across the e-commerce sites. They've also done a very good job with their physical platform, the distribution of goods. And they continue to grow it very rapidly.
MR. MOSSBERG: You've described Google as a company primarily about search and advertising. But you keep trying to do all these other things. You just announced a music locker service. And you had trouble coming to terms with the music industry. First of all, why do you want to be in that business? And second, why couldn't you come to terms with the music [industry]?
MR. SCHMIDT: Music is fundamental from an entertainment, from a branding, from an experiential level on all of these devices. And our competitor Apple has had a very longstanding and successful structure in iTunes. They have longstanding deals. We have been attempting to convince the music industry to support a subscription model around cloud-based services, and we've not been able to come to terms.
MS. SWISHER: You've tried for years with YouTube and other things to try to have these relationships. What has been the problem in terms of dealing with the entertainment industry?
MR. SCHMIDT: The folks on the media side have some very real problems. You have to go from a strategy where you charge a lot for a small number of copies to charging a little in various other ways for a large number of copies. I don't think we as a society have really understood the implication of that.
You also have the disintermediation that is now possible for people bypassing studios and going directly to digital rights. And you have this huge piracy issue.
MR. MOSSBERG: Should everybody be comfortable that you and the people around you know so much about us? Don't you know too much about us?
MR. SCHMIDT: Google will remain a place where you can do anonymous searches. We're very committed to having you have control over the information we have about you. So, for example, if you want to continue to use Google and don't log in, and don't tell us who you are, that will continue to be true forever.
If you wish to use our services as a logged-in user, you could use our privacy dashboard and you see what we have, and you can tell us to forget it. We tell people what we know. And we give them the choice of getting it deleted.
The rub here has to do with how long do we keep some of this information. We need to keep some of it to make our algorithms better. So, we ultimately evolved to a rule of somewhere between 12 and 18 months of retention of those logs, which is roughly what the regulators want as well.
MR. MOSSBERG: What does Android do with your location information?
MR. SCHMIDT: There's an opt-in for using that information if you use our various products that do social things. You have to explicitly choose that.
MR. MOSSBERG: What about third-party apps on your platform? You get that very scary screen in Android Market. It says this thing is going to use your phone book, it's going to use your location and all these things, even though you're downloading a game or something.
MR. SCHMIDT: What else could we do besides just inform people of what people are doing?
MR. MOSSBERG: You could curate and say, "You're a game. We don't need to use this guy's phone book."
MR. SCHMIDT: For one thing, games probably need to use phone books because that's how people do multiplayer games.
We made a decision not to curate. The Apple model produces beautiful products of a specific market size with an awful lot of very clever stuff going on, that are highly controlled by Apple. The Google model is just the inverse. That's OK. Let the market decide. It's called competition.
MR. MOSSBERG: You've been thinking about the impact of the access to information and the mobile revolution and the cloud and all these things on foreign policy, on governments. What is the impact?
MR. SCHMIDT: We've been trying to understand -- five years from now and 10 from now -- what does the world look like?
People will be empowered in enormously new ways, because everyone will have the equivalent of smartphones in their pockets. Rather than the traditional realist view of foreign policy, which is about states fighting against states, a more modern view is to look at it from the standpoint of consumers and the Internet and their adoption of these technologies.
If you imagine, for example, what the perfectly executing evil dictator would do with all this technology, complete supervision, complete tracking. And then you imagine what the dissident in that society would do using the very best encryption tools. Unfortunately, you conclude that exactly the same tools are the ones that would have been used by terrorists against an open society. These are questions that I don't think people are really ready for.
MR. MOSSBERG: Speaking as a consumer, I find my Google search results to be more and more polluted with junk that I don't want to see or that doesn't seem relevant. Is your basic algorithmic approach, which was so successful and so different from everybody else, still the right way to go?
MR. SCHMIDT: What you're seeing is because of Google's role in the world, an awful lot of people try to game the outcome. In the case of the recent algorithmic change which we announced, we actually affected 12% of the answers. On a search-engine basis, we make hundreds of improvements per quarter that you don't see.
The other thing that we're doing that's more strategic is we're trying to move from answers that are link based to answers that are algorithmically based, where we can actually compute the right answer. We now have enough artificial-intelligence technology and enough scale that we can literally compute the right answer.
MS. SWISHER: What is the Eric SchmidtGoogle era? And what do you consider the Larry Page era?
MR. SCHMIDT: I'm very proud to have been part of the rapid growth and taking Google as this amazing site and turning it into a real force in terms of information and business. Larry will add much greater product review, much greater scale, and he'll move even more quickly than I was able to do in his leadership.
MS. SWISHER: Are you still adult supervision, as you like to joke?
MR. SCHMIDT: No. It's funny that Larry and Sergey [Brin, Google's co-founder] grew up along the way. And after a decade of working together, they've seen everything that you could possibly imagine. They're perfectly capable of running this thing.
Credit: By Kara Swisher and Walt Mossberg
