RETAIL
Macy's Names C.E.O.
For Bloomingdale's
Macy's named Olivier Bron, right, the next chief executive of Bloomingdale's, the company's luxury chain, on Tuesday, the latest move in a leadership shuffle this year.
Mr. Bron was previously chief executive of Central Group's Central and Robinson Department Stores in Thailand. He will start in November, succeeding Tony Spring. Macy's announced this year that Mr. Spring would be elevated to chief executive of Macy's in February after the planned retirement of Jeff Gennette, who has led the company since 2017.
Macy's has ambitions to become more competitive in e-commerce as younger shoppers pull away from department stores. Mr. Gennette previously said Bloomingdale's had worked as a "scrappy incubator" for ideas that made their way to Macy's.
Macy's, the largest department store chain in the United States, has been feeling pressure as consumers increasingly tighten their purse strings amid stubborn inflation. In its most recent quarterly earnings report, Macy's said sales had dropped 8 percent from a year earlier. Bloomingdale's, which targets higher-earning shoppers, was less affected but still reported a 2.6 percent decline in sales.
Macy's also reported a "faster than expected" rise in credit card delinquencies.
"Over the last several quarters, we have seen the Macy's customer more aggressively pull back on spend in our discretionary categories," Mr. Gennette told analysts in an Aug. 22 earnings call. "They are not converting as easily and becoming more intentional on the allocation of their disposable income with an ongoing shift to services and experiences." J. EDWARD MORENO
TECHNOLOGY
Eight More Companies
Pledge to Make A.I. Safe
The White House said on Tuesday that eight more companies involved in artificial intelligence had pledged to voluntarily follow standards for safety, security and trust with the fast-evolving technology.
The companies include Adobe, IBM, Palantir, Nvidia and Salesforce. They joined Amazon, Anthropic, Google, Inflection AI, Microsoft and OpenAI, which initiated an industry-led effort on safeguards in an announcement with the White House in July. The companies have committed to testing and other security measures, which are not regulations and are not enforced by the government.
Grappling with A.I. has become paramount since OpenAI released the powerful ChatGPT chatbot last year. The technology has since been under scrutiny for affecting people's jobs, spreading misinformation and potentially developing its own intelligence.
On Wednesday, Elon Musk, Mark Zuckerberg of Meta, Sam Altman of OpenAI and Sundar Pichai of Google will be among a dozen tech executives meeting with lawmakers in a closed-door A.I. summit hosted by Senator Chuck Schumer, the Democratic leader from New York.
"The president has been clear: Harness the benefits of A.I., manage the risks and move fast -- very fast," the White House chief of staff, Jeff Zients, said in a statement. "And we are doing just that by partnering with the private sector and pulling every lever we have to get this done."
The companies agreed to include testing future products for security risks and using watermarks to make sure consumers can spot A.I.-generated material. They also agreed to share information about security risks across the industry and report any potential biases in their systems. CECILIA KANG
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DENIS GUIGNEBOURG/ABACA/SIPA USA, VIA A.P.)
