Wall Street's record-breaking rally kept going Wednesday after weak reports on the U.S. economy kept the door open for possible cuts to interest rates.
The S&P 500 rose 0.5 percent to set a high for a second-straight day and for the 33rd time this year. The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 23 points, or 0.1 percent, while the Nasdaq composite added 0.9 percent to its record set the day before. Trading ended early for the day ahead of the Fourth of July holiday.
Tesla again helped lift the market and rose 6.5 percent a day after reporting a milder drop in sales for the spring than analysts feared. It was one of the strongest forces pushing upward on the S&P 500, along with Nvidia. The darling of Wall Street's rush into artificial-intelligence technology, the chip company climbed 4.6 percent to bring its gain for the year so far to 159 percent.
The action was stronger in the bond market, where Treasury yields slid after a flurry of reports came in weaker than expected on both the job market and U.S. services companies. The data could keep the Federal Reserve on course to deliver this year the cuts to interest rates that Wall Street desires.
One report said activity for businesses in the real estate, retail trade and other U.S. services industries contracted in June for just the third time in 49 months. The reading was weaker than economists' forecasts, which called for just a slowing of growth. Perhaps more important for Wall Street, the report from the Institute Supply Management also said prices were increasing at a slower pace.
That followed reports from earlier in the morning showing a slowing job market. One said slightly more U.S. workers applied for unemployment benefits last week than economists expected, though the number remains low compared with history. Another from ADP indicated employers outside the government slowed their hiring last month, when economists were forecasting an acceleration.
The hope on Wall Street is that the economy will soften by just the right amount: enough to keep a lid on upward pressure on inflation, but not so much that it throws workers out of their jobs and triggers a recession. A much more anticipated report will arrive on Friday, when the U.S. government will give its comprehensive update about how many workers employers added to their payrolls during June.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury dropped to 4.36 percent from 4.44 percent late Tuesday, a notable move for the bond market, and much of the slide came after the report on U.S. services businesses. It's been generally sinking since April on hopes that inflation is slowing enough to get the Federal Reserve to lower its main interest rate from the highest level in more than two decades.
Wednesday's move erased some of a recent recovery for yields. The debate last week between President Joe Biden and former President Donald J. Trump pushed some traders to make moves in anticipation of a Republican sweep in November, which would raise the possibility of tax cuts and other policies that could cause the U.S. government's debt to swell.
The two-year Treasury yield, which more closely tracks expectations for Fed actions, fell to 4.70 percent from 4.75 percent late Tuesday. Traders are now betting on a nearly three-in-four chance that the Federal Reserve will cut its main interest rate as soon as September, according to data from CME Group.
On Wall Street, Constellation Brands sank 3.3 percent after swinging between gains and losses during the day. The company behind Modelo beer and Robert Mondavi wines reported stronger than expected profit for the latest quarter, but its revenue came up just shy of financial analysts' forecasts.
The S&P 500 rose 28.01 points to 5,537.02. The Dow dipped 23.85 to 39,308.00, and the Nasdaq composite gained 159.54 to 18,188.30.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
