This year's New York Film Festival has been notable for, among other qualities, the number of jumbo offerings, including selections weighing in at three hours or more. The embrace of the cinema of duration continues to somewhat overwhelming effect in "Views From the Avant-Garde," the festival's annual lineup of experimental work that this year includes a mind-bending, back-challenging 202 works (17 features, 185 shorts).
This current edition has been pulled together by Mark McElhatten, who was the program director at the Collective for Living Cinema, the TriBeCa exhibition space that closed in the early 1990s. (Until this year, "Views" was also organized by Gavin Smith, the editor of Film Comment who's now on the festival's selection committee.) For his inaugural solo act, Mr. McElhatten has folded some surprises into the mix -- including two features, John M. Stahl's "Only Yesterday" (1933) and Max Ophuls's "Sans Lendemain" (1939) -- as a way to, as he put it in a news release, "dissolve boundaries in the way we categorize and approach cinema of different origins and genre." Such blurring is especially laudable given the historical marginalization of avant-garde cinema in the United States.
It's unclear, though, whether cramming so much into "Views" will melt or fortify boundaries. In its first year, in 1997, "Views" had four programs with just 24 titles of mostly American work. This year's sampler, which spans Argentina to Vanuatu, includes 45 sometimes mysteriously titled programs, like "(a noisy distance of None will be returned if, and only if, the ghost is captured)." It's uncertain what viewers are to make of this garland of words, which appears to have originated in a course used to teach artificial intelligence at the University of California, Berkeley. Audiences, especially those curious if also cautious about sampling the cinematically unfamiliar, might be better served with a less obfuscating come-on.
Here is a look at some of the work available for preview.
MIGUEL GOMES AND TRAVIS WILKERSON The Portuguese filmmaker Miguel Gomes, who won admirers for his 2012 art-house favorite, "Tabu," is back with the even better "Redemption," a 26-minute conceptual coup. Divided into four sections -- one in black and white -- it melds voice-overs from filmmakers like Maren Ade with archival images to create imaginary confessions from European leaders identified only at the finale. The first, set in 1970s Portugal, opens with the trumpeting of an off-screen elephant and a boy watching the birth of a calf. The image then shifts to intimate scenes of men, women, children and animals that are set to a boy reading a letter in Portuguese addressed to his parents: "Portugal is very sad and always will be so." From there, the tenderness spreads to Italy, France and Germany.
"Redemption" is being shown once with Travis Wilkerson's "Los Angeles Red Squad: The Communist Situation in California," and once with Chris Marker's 1960 short "Description of a Struggle." "Los Angeles Red Squad" takes a restrained if outraged look at one of the police units that, beginning in the 1920s, were used against leftists and liberals. Using archival and new material and a combination of found sound and a clipped voice-over that initially, and amusingly, evokes Jack Webb's nasal oratory in the television show "Dragnet," Mr. Wilkerson explores how business interests and the police wielded power like a cudgel to prevent ordinary working people from congregating, organizing and speaking up. The opening image -- a beautiful panoramic view of downtown Los Angeles at dusk, the hazy sky painted blood red -- is a killer. (Dargis)
NATHANIEL DORSKY AND JEROME HILER Tucked into the sprawling "Views" is an oasis of quiet: three films, each around 20 minutes, grouped under the apt and lovely title "Momentary Light and Seasonal Songs." The name suggests fleeting, fungible pleasures, the transitory impressions and perishable sensations that a movie camera, in the right hands, is uniquely equipped to capture.
The hands belong to Nathaniel Dorsky and Jerome Hiler, venerable figures in experimental film. Active since the early 1960s, they can be described, somewhat paradoxically, as avant-garde traditionalists, and their new works -- "Song" and "Spring" by Mr. Dorsky, and Mr. Hiler's "Misplacement" -- have a classical respect for established materials and methods. Shot in 16-millimeter film and projected without sound, they explore the nature of perception.
On his Web site, Mr. Dorsky writes of "Spring": "I wanted to see if I could make a film that was in itself a garden, a film that like the world of plants would yearn and stretch in the oncoming light." This ambition -- to make art that not only represents the natural world but also actively emulates it -- is an ancient one, informing Romantic and Renaissance ideas about poetry and painting. Film, a mechanical art form, might seem an unlikely vehicle for horticultural aesthetics, but as Mr. Dorsky suggests, and "Spring" demonstrates, the importance of light to both film and plant life provides an organic link. His montage of flowers, swaying trees and human shadows seems to grow and change as you watch, and to affect a kind of sensory expansion. You would swear that you can hear the wind, smell the vegetation and feel the sun.
The light in "Song," shot in San Francisco in the autumn and winter of 2012, is more austere. The tones are darker and the mood more melancholy. In both films the images come and go quickly, so that efforts to analyze or interpret are subordinated to a more abstract and purer experience of seeing. "Misplacement" complicates this impulse by focusing on a social event -- it looks like a funeral -- with an implied but withheld story. The people Mr. Hiler films are a bit like the flowers in "Spring": familiar and yet elusive, animated by light and gone too soon. (Scott)
ANNE CHARLOTTE ROBERTSON In the early 1980s, the American filmmaker Anne Charlotte Robertson, who died last year, took up a humble Super-8 camera to begin what would grow into a monumental 38-hour endeavor called "Five Year Diary." Two programs in "Views" are dedicated to her work, including several selections from "Five Year Diary." Influenced by avant-garde artists like Carolee Schneemann -- and long before the exhibitionist likes of "Big Brother" and Lena Dunham -- Ms. Robertson turned her private self and preoccupations into a performance, one shaped by quotidian rituals and obsessions, her cats and crushes, and the food she bought, grew, cooked and consumed, sometimes to her unhappiness.
This is a filmmaker who, as with shorts like "The Definitions of Fat and Thin," investigated her own psyche while also working through the social construction of femininity in the most subjective fashion, by exploring the very material of her life -- food, garbage, flesh. The results are consistently engrossing, deeply personal, sometimes funny and at times unsettling, because she can seem so very alone even with other people flickering on and off screen. And while the material is fairly unpolished, at least by mainstream technical standards, its lovingly handmade quality only deepens the raw feeling her work provokes. The films in "Views" have been preserved by the Harvard Film Archive, which was entrusted with the care of Ms. Robertson's films and legacy. (Dargis)
"Views From the Avant-Garde" runs through Monday. More information is at filmlinc.com.
Photograph Highlights From "Views From the Avant-Garde" at the New York Film Festival: Left, an Image From Anne Charlotte Robertson's "Five Year Diary"; Right, Manuel Gomes's "Redemption." (Photographs From the New York Film Festival)
