U.S. stock indexes edged lower on Wednesday after drops for Eli Lilly and chip companies overshadowed a jump for Google's parent company.
The S&P 500 slipped 0.3 percent after drifting between small gains and losses several times, though it's still near its high set this month. The Dow Jones industrial average edged down by 91 points, or 0.2 percent, while the Nasdaq composite slipped 0.6 percent from its own record set the day before.
Alphabet climbed 2.8 percent after beating analysts' forecasts for profit in the latest quarter, thanks largely to the performance of its Google business. It's the latest of the highly influential group of stocks known as the "Magnificent Seven" to top high expectations for growth. They'll need to, because critics say their prices have climbed too quickly, even if artificial-intelligence technology is creating a new boom.
Computer chip companies have been some of the biggest winners of the A.I. rush, but Advanced Micro Devices helped drag down stocks across the industry after reporting profit for the latest quarter that only matched analysts' expectations. It also gave a forecast range for revenue for the end of 2024 whose midpoint was a bit below what analysts were estimating. AMD's stock sank 10.6 percent.
Nvidia, a chip giant that's rocketed to become one of Wall Street's most influential stocks, fell 1.4 percent and was one of the heaviest weights on the S&P 500.
One of the few stocks to hurt the index nearly as much was Eli Lilly, which sank 6.3 percent amid concerns about two of the drugmaker's blockbuster products: the diabetes treatment Mounjaro and its weight loss counterpart, Zepbound.
Eli Lilly reported weaker results for the latest quarter than analysts expected, as pharmaceutical wholesalers burned through inventories they had built up in previous quarters. Lilly cut its forecast for profit over the full year of 2024.
Also falling was Trump Media & Technology Group, the company behind former Donald Trump's Truth Social platform. It dropped 22.3 percent for the worst loss since taking its place on the Nasdaq stock market following a merger with another company in March. The stock is notoriously volatile, and it had been rallying strongly over the last month, up to $ 40 from roughly $ 12.
Among the biggest movers on Wall Street, Reddit soared 42 percent after the company surprised investors and analysts and reported a profit.
Super Micro Computer lost nearly a third of its value, 32.7 percent, after Ernst & Young resigned as its registered public accounting firm. A prominent investor, Hindenburg Research, published a report in August that accused the company of accounting red flags and other issues, which its chief executive, Charles Liang, later said contained false or inaccurate statements.
All told, the S&P 500 fell 19.25 points to 5,813.67. The Dow dipped 91.51 to 42,141.54, and the Nasdaq composite slipped 104.82 to 18,607.93.
In the bond market, yields edged higher after the latest readings on the U.S. economy. Growth for the overall economy slowed during the summer from the spring, according to a preliminary estimate by the U.S. government. But the performance was slightly better than economists expected.
Recent hurricanes in the United States could lead to rebuilding that causes stronger growth in the fourth quarter but "the signal through the noise will likely be one of an economy that is still slowing, not reaccelerating," according to Brian Jacobsen, chief economist at Annex Wealth Management.
A separate report on Wednesday suggested that employers outside the government accelerated their hiring this month, when economists were forecasting a slowdown. It could raise optimism for Friday's more comprehensive jobs report coming from the U.S. government.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
