Technology stocks pulled Wall Street to another record amid a mixed Monday of trading.
The S&P 500 rose 0.2 percent from its high set on Friday to post a record for the 54th time this year. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 128 points, or 0.3 percent, while the Nasdaq composite gained 1 percent.
Super Micro Computer, a stock that's been on an A.I.-driven roller coaster, soared 28.7 percent to lead the market.
Following allegations of misconduct and the resignation of its public auditor, the maker of servers used in artificial-intelligence technology said an investigation found no evidence of misconduct by its management or by the company's board. It also said that it doesn't expect to restate its past financials and that it will find a new chief financial officer, appoint a general counsel and strengthen its governance.
Big Tech stocks also helped prop up the market. Gains of 1.8 percent for Microsoft and 3.2 percent for Meta Platforms were the two strongest forces pushing upward on the S&P 500.
Intel was another propellant in the morning, but it lost an early gain to fall 0.5 percent after the chip company said its chief executive, Pat Gelsinger, has retired and stepped down from the board. Intel is looking for Mr. Gelsinger's replacement, and its chair said it's "committed to restoring investor confidence." Intel recently lost its spot in the Dow Jones industrial average to Nvidia, which has skyrocketed in the frenzy around A.I.
Stellantis, meanwhile, skidded after the announcement of its chief executive's departure. Carlos Tavares stepped down after nearly four years in the top spot of the automaker, which owns car brands like Jeep, Citroën and Ram, amid an ongoing struggle with slumping sales and an inventory backlog at dealerships. The world's fourth-largest auto maker's stock fell 6.3 percent in Milan.
The majority of stocks in the S&P 500 likewise fell.
Retailers were mixed amid what's expected to be the best Cyber Monday on record and coming off Black Friday. Target, which recently gave a forecast for the holiday season that left investors discouraged, fell 1.2 percent. Walmart, which gave a more optimistic forecast, rose 0.2 percent.
Amazon, which looks to benefit from online sales from Cyber Monday, climbed 1.4 percent.
The stock market largely took Donald J. Trump's latest threat on tariffs in stride. The president-elect on Saturday threatened 100 percent tariffs against a group of developing economies if they act to undermine the U.S. dollar. Trump said he wants the group, headlined by Brazil, Russia, India and China, to promise it won't create a new currency or otherwise try to undercut the U.S. dollar.
The dollar has been the currency of choice for global trade. Speculation has also been around a long time that other currencies could knock it off its mantel, but no contender has come close.
The U.S. dollar's value rose Monday against several other currencies, but one of its strongest moves likely had less to do with the tariff threats. The euro fell amid a political battle in Paris over the French government's budget. The euro sank 0.7 percent against the U.S. dollar and broke below $ 1.05.
In the bond market, Treasury yields gave up early gains to hold relatively steady. The yield on the 10-year Treasury climbed above 4.23 percent during the morning before falling back to 4.17 percent. That was just below its level of 4.18 percent late Friday.
A report showed the U.S. manufacturing sector contracted again last month, but not by as much as economists expected.
This week will bring the October job openings report, weekly unemployment benefits data and the November jobs report. They could steer the next moves for Federal Reserve, which recently began pulling interest rates lower to support the economy.
Economists expect Friday's headliner report to show U.S. employers accelerated their hiring in November.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
