With computers getting so much faster and better, workers, especially those without college degrees, will continue to find themselves less and less valuable in the marketplace.
One recent morning, while contemplating writing this column, I scrolled through thousands and thousands of listings for mundane microgigs on Mechanical Turk, or MTurk, a decade-old platform created by Amazon. On MTurk, which advertises paid "human intelligence tasks," I could review and correct transcriptions. I could tag images, perform a Google search, write a few sentences on a given topic, rate jokes or list items found on a receipt. For each, I would make a nickel or a quarter.
Computers are great at rote, simple tasks. This, of course, has wreaked havoc on all sorts of jobs throughout our economy. Robots have replaced countless machinists and garment workers. Kayak and Priceline, among others, have all but crowded out travel agents. Automated scanning systems are slowly phasing out the checkout clerk, while Tesla is hoping to sell its zippy plug-in cars straight to customers, eliminating the salesman.
MTurk and its competitors, like CrowdSource, are intended for the menial jobs that still require a flicker of human intelligence.
The platform has prompted consternation for being a sort of outsourcing service that drives down wages. Estimates of hourly earnings generally come out to $5 or less -- a good sum, perhaps, for workers in India who supply about half the labor on the site, but not so much for the other half. More than one commentator has described MTurk as a "digital sweatshop."
Crowdsourcing platforms are hurrying along the automation of more tasks. Erik Brynjolfsson, a co-author of the popular book "Race Against the Machine," cites image recognition as one obvious place where humans have helped robots replace them.
Many people using MTurk are actively helping to put themselves out of jobs. "Yesterday it was spam moderation," said Panos Ipeirotis, a professor of business at New York University. "And today it's transcriptions and translation. Once we help computers solve the problem of today, we move on to more challenging tasks."
This is, of course, a process that has been going on at least since the evolution of the ax and the plow: Humans invent a machine to make life easier, and then that machine reduces the need for humans' work. Ultimately, it's a virtuous cycle, because it frees people to work on higher-value tasks. But technological change can also cause huge economic dislocations. And right now, the great fear is that robots are taking over jobs faster than humans can adjust.
"At the height of its power, the photography company Kodak employed more than 140,000 people and was worth $28 billion," the computer scientist Jaron Lanier writes in "Who Owns the Future?" "But today Kodak is bankrupt, and the new face of digital photography has become Instagram. When Instagram was sold to Facebook for a billion dollars in 2012, it employed only 13 people."
White-collar jobs were once deemed mostly immune to such automation, but that is no longer true, either. Carl Benedikt Frey, an economist at Oxford University, and Michael Osborne, a professor of machine learning there, estimate that about half of American jobs -- sailors, paralegals, you name it -- are susceptible to automation.
Yet that does not necessarily mean that half of all Americans will lose their jobs to the robots. Economists refer to this fear as the "lump of labor" fallacy, the incorrect assumption that there is a finite amount of work to be done, and that the more robots do, the less there will be for us. In the past, humans have proved remarkably adept at thinking up new things to do when plows, steam trains and dishwashers arrived.
This time around there is a notable difference. With computers getting so much better and faster, there might be a rough period of transition as median wages keep falling for families. Workers -- especially those without college degrees -- will continue to find themselves less valuable in the marketplace.
"The big challenge for us as individuals, and as a society, is to race with machines, rather than racing against machines," Mr. Brynjolfsson said. "We've had some catastrophic failure of imagination, failing to think of more ways to put that vast middle class of people to work and to employ them more productively."
