'Of Earth and Heaven'
Through March 10. Sam Fogg Ltd. at Luhring Augustine, 531 West 24th Street, Manhattan; 212-206-9100, luhringaugustine.com.
Sam Fogg, the respected London dealer, has regularly staged exhibitions of medieval art in New York for around a decade, but never before in Chelsea. Unsurprisingly, this year's show begins with the thrill of simply walking into it, forsaking the neighborhood's contemporary-art babble for the otherworldly hush imposed by nearly 30 expressions of faith in painting, sculpture and whatnot from the Middle Ages. Here, the whatnot includes enamels, a silver and silver-gilt reliquary in the form of a bishop's hand; a large stained-glass window and the lavishly illustrated Carpentin Hours, by the artist known as the Master of the Dresden Prayer Book. The most secular item in this group is a two-tier cast-brass chandelier from the Southern Netherlands (1480-1520) that is remarkably like the single-tier one in Jan van Eyck's "The Arnolfini Portrait" of 1434.
The era's religious faith is especially palpable in two carved softwood sculptures from the 14th century whose colors and gilding remain nearly intact: a pale, life-size Spanish crucifix that is both daunting and slightly comic and a polychrome wood Pietà with anguished expressions and with gaping wounds whose red matches that of the Virgin's robes. The appealing emotionality of these works is countered by a marble of John the Baptist, also from the 14th century. Attributed to Robert de Lannoy of Paris, it is a study in idealization and dignified restraint -- down to the orderly rivuletlike textures of the saint's camel-hair coat.
Among many other standouts, a triptych centering on an elaborately ensconced Virgin and Child (1490-1500) reflects the influence of van Eyck's infinite realism and his banishment of the Gothic gold that is so gloriously evident elsewhere in the show, especially in "Saint Michael Vanquishing the Devil," an altarpiece panel made in Aragon around 1470.
The show's rarest inclusion may be a very tall (11 feet!) exquisitely detailed ink drawing of a proposed crossing tower for Rouen Cathedral. It was made by the architect Roulland le Roux who used two perspective points to give mass and dimension to its attenuated form and High Gothic filigree. Pierre des Aubeaux, the sculptor for the project, drew in images of the 60 figures and gargoyles intended to finish the structure, which eventually reached a height of about 260 feet. Its stunning plan glorifies God and human ingenuity with a crisp clarity later called modern.
ROBERTA SMITH
Zach Blas
Through April 21. Art in General, 145 Plymouth Street, Brooklyn; artingeneral.org.
Smart, stylish and apocalyptic, Zach Blas's "Contra-Internet" at Art in General uses sculpture and moving images to critique the internet as a tool of capitalism and oppression, and to imagine its messy demise. The centerpiece, "Jubilee 2033," is a 28-minute video featuring an animated robot from the future sent to assist humans. Actors play those champions of capitalism, Ayn Rand and Alan Greenspan, and the transgender performance artist Cassils stars as Nootropix, a fictional prophet of artificial intelligence.
"Jubilee 2033" borrows its title and opening sequence from Derek Jarman's punk-cult film "Jubilee" (1978) and is shown in a dark gallery with futuristic elements: a bright green geometric emblem projected on the floor and blown-glass orbs resting on pedestals. In the video, the promise of the internet has failed and we see cities burning -- or campy digital images of conflagration -- as well as a copy of the hippie-utopian "Whole Earth Catalog." Nootropix appears near the end of the video, its body painted silver, spouting ideas couched in queer and feminist theories of technology and science fiction and dancing to an opera aria while a petro-looking liquid shoots out of a glowing blue faux phallus.
"Contra-Internet" also includes a single-edition book titled "The End of the Internet (As We Knew It)" with a bibliography of "Works Plagiarized" from the theorists Fredric Jameson and Beatriz Preciado and the Zapatista revolutionary Subcomandante Marcos, among others. The exhibition also gains traction from its location in Art in General's space in Dumbo, one of New York's Silicon Valley-like hot spots. After leaving the show I spied a cafe nearby with the slogan "you code, we cook" printed on its window, addressed to the minions toiling for digital overlords in Dumbo's pre-post-contra-internet work spaces. I was sort of waiting for Nootropix to appear inside, specterlike, in full prophet mode.
MARTHA SCHWENDENER
'This Synthetic Moment'
Through March 10. David Nolan, 527 West 29th Street, Manhattan; 212-925-6190, davidnolangallery.com.
The three photos of his own that David Hartt included in "This Synthetic Moment," a six-photographer show he curated at David Nolan Gallery, are fraught with disembodied melancholy. "Interval XIII" shows a lone auto parked on the street, closely wrapped in what looks like a giant blue garbage bag, and in "Interval I," a few small, worse-for-wear boats list in the water. But all the other images he chose are of black women and men, and they add up to an exceptionally rich demonstration of racial identity as a continuous act of self-creation.
A large new print of an untitled self-portrait shot in 1964 by the Brooklyn-born activist and photographer Kwame Brathwaite, presented with a '68 portrait of his wife, nearly does the job alone. Goateed and handsome in a pinstripe suit jacket, Mr. Brathwaite emerges from a shadowed background with lips slightly parted, as if about to speak into his camera like a microphone. His expression has both the unfinished quality of a subject surprised and the urgent attention of a photographer striving to capture such a moment. Both, of course, are poses -- but they're authentic ones.
Liz Johnson Artur, who's been shooting black communities in Brixton, South London, for more than two decades, brings out a similar point with clothing. An extraordinarily absorbing 20-minute digital montage includes just enough dramatically monochrome uniforms to make the details of everyone else's outfits seem equally intentional. White robes, to take one example, appear on men in church; women in mosque; and with thin rainbow stripes at a gathering of Rastafarians.
WILL HEINRICH
Toyin Ojih Odutola
Through Feb. 25. Whitney Museum of American Art, Manhattan; 212-570-3600, whitney.org.
The official portraits of the Obamas were unveiled last week, demonstrating what is essentially the American version of royal portraiture. The paintings are roughly accurate likenesses but staged to amplify the grandeur and importance of their sitters. In "To Wander Determined" at the Whitney Museum's lobby gallery, her first museum show in New York, Toyin Ojih Odutola works in the same genre -- portraiture -- except her subjects are two fictional aristocratic families in her native Nigeria.
In fact, Ms. Ojih Odutola functions as much as a storyteller as a visual artist, spinning a fantastic tall tale around the images. Rather than presenting them as her own artworks, she describes them as depicting members of the UmuEze Amara, one of the oldest noble clans in Nigeria, and the Obafemi, minor aristocrats, merchants and ambassadors. The paintings, we are told, represent 200 years of collecting and are offered "in partnership" with the Whitney Museum and presented by Ms. Ojih Odutola in her role as deputy private secretary, signing off from Udoka House in Lagos, Nigeria. (It should be noted that the works on view are primarily from Jack Shainman Gallery, and the museum has acquired three of the paintings.)
Except, of course, the collection is clearly created by one artist and the works, which resemble paintings, might really be described as drawings. Executed in charcoal, pastel and pencil -- traditional drawing materials -- they are built up with richly colored surfaces, and finely detailed textiles, faces and backgrounds.
There is a "Wall of Ambassadors" (2017) and a young girl tucked into bed on her "First Night at Boarding School" (2017). Portraits of young men "Surveying the Family Seat" (2017) and their "Unclaimed Estates" (2017) suggest a kind of "Downton Abbey" in Nigeria. Or, in the same way the Obamas represented the success of the African diaspora, Ms. Ojih Odutola imagines two clans with longevity, prosperity and regal bearing.
MARTHA SCHWENDENER
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph "The Virgin and Child," by a German or Southern Netherlandish master, circa 1480, at the Sam Fogg Ltd. show at Luhring Augustine gallery. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LUHRING AUGUSTINE)
