Generate image description After OpenAI released ChatGPT, Google researchers and engineers discussed tapping other user data to develop A.products, people with knowledge of the discussions said. (Jason Henry/The New York Times)
SAN FRANCISCO — In late 2021, OpenAI faced a supply problem.
The artificial intelligence lab had exhausted every reservoir of reputable English-language text on the internet as it developed its latest AI system. It needed more data to train the next version of its technology — lots more.
So OpenAI researchers created a speech recognition tool called Whisper. It could transcribe the audio from YouTube videos, yielding new conversational text that would make an AI system smarter.
Some OpenAI employees discussed how such a move might go against YouTube’s rules, three people with knowledge of the conversations said. YouTube, which is owned by Google, prohibits use of its videos for applications that are “independent” of the video platform.
Ultimately, an OpenAI team transcribed more than 1 million hours of YouTube videos, the people said. The team included Greg Brockman, OpenAI’s president, who personally helped collect the videos, two of the people said. The texts were then fed into a system called GPT-4, which was widely considered one of the world’s most powerful AI models and was the basis of the latest version of the ChatGPT chatbot.
The race to lead AI has become a desperate hunt for the digital data needed to advance the technology. To obtain that data, tech companies including OpenAI, Google and Meta have cut corners, ignored corporate policies and debated bending the law, according to an examination by The New York Times.
At Meta, which owns Facebook and Instagram, managers, lawyers and engineers last year discussed buying the publishing house Simon & Schuster to procure long works, according to recordings of internal meetings obtained by the Times. They also conferred on gathering copyrighted data from across the internet, even if that meant facing lawsuits. Negotiating licenses with publishers, artists, musicians and the news industry would take too long, they said.
Like OpenAI, Google transcribed YouTube videos to harvest text for its AI models, five people with knowledge of the company’s practices said. That potentially violated the copyrights to the videos, which belong to their creators.
Last year, Google also broadened its terms of service. One motivation for the change, according to members of the company’s privacy team and an internal message viewed by the Times, was to allow Google to be able to tap publicly available Google Docs, restaurant reviews on Google Maps and other online material for more of its AI products.
The companies’ actions illustrate how online information — news stories, fictional works, message board posts, Wikipedia articles, computer programs, photos, podcasts and movie clips — has increasingly become the lifeblood of the booming AI industry. Creating innovative systems depends on having enough data to teach the technologies to instantly produce text, images, sounds and videos that resemble what a human creates.
The volume of data is crucial. Leading chatbot systems have learned from pools of digital text spanning as many as 3 trillion words, or roughly twice the number of words stored in Oxford University’s Bodleian Library, which has collected manuscripts since 1602. The most prized data, AI researchers said, is high-quality information, such as published books and articles, which have been carefully written and edited by professionals.
For years, the internet — with sites like Wikipedia and Reddit — was a seemingly endless source of data. But as AI advanced, tech companies sought more repositories. Google and Meta, which have billions of users who produce search queries and social media posts every day, were largely limited by privacy laws and their own policies from drawing on much of that content for AI.
Their situation is urgent. Tech companies could run through the high-quality data on the internet as soon as 2026, according to Epoch, a research institute. The companies are using the data faster than it is being produced.
“The only practical way for these tools to exist is if they can be trained on massive amounts of data without having to license that data,” Sy Damle, a lawyer who represents Andreessen Horowitz, a Silicon Valley venture capital firm, said of AI models last year in a public discussion about copyright law. “The data needed is so massive that even collective licensing really can’t work.”
Tech companies are so hungry for new data that some are developing “synthetic” information. This is not organic data created by humans, but text, images and code that AI models produce — in other words, the systems learn from what they themselves generate.
OpenAI said each of its AI models “has a unique data set that we curate to help their understanding of the world and remain globally competitive in research.” Google said that its AI models “are trained on some YouTube content,” which was allowed under agreements with YouTube creators, and that the company did not use data from office apps outside of an experimental program. Meta said it had “made aggressive investments” to integrate AI into its services and had billions of publicly shared images and videos from Instagram and Facebook for training its models.
For creators, the growing use of their works by AI companies has prompted lawsuits over copyright and licensing. The Times sued OpenAI and Microsoft last year for using copyrighted news articles without permission to train AI chatbots. OpenAI and Microsoft have said using the articles was “fair use,” or allowed under copyright law, because they transformed the works for a different purpose.
Transcribing YouTube
In May, Sam Altman, the CEO of OpenAI, acknowledged that AI companies would use up all viable data on the internet.
“That will run out,” he said in a speech at a tech conference.
Altman had seen the phenomenon up close. At OpenAI, researchers had gathered data for years, cleaned it and fed it into a vast pool of text to train the company’s language models. They had mined the computer code repository GitHub, vacuumed up databases of chess moves and drawn on data describing high school tests and homework assignments from the website Quizlet.
By late 2021, those supplies were depleted, said eight people with knowledge of the company, who were not authorized to speak publicly.
OpenAI was desperate for more data to develop its next-generation AI model, GPT-4. So employees discussed transcribing podcasts, audiobooks and YouTube videos, the people said. They talked about creating data from scratch with AI systems. They also considered buying startups that had collected large amounts of digital data.
OpenAI eventually made Whisper, the speech recognition tool, to transcribe YouTube videos and podcasts, six people said. But YouTube prohibits people from not only using its videos for “independent” applications, but also accessing its videos by “any automated means (such as robots, botnets or scrapers).”
OpenAI employees knew they were wading into a legal gray area, the people said, but believed that training AI with the videos was fair use. Brockman, OpenAI’s president, was listed in a research paper as a creator of Whisper. He personally helped gather YouTube videos and fed them into the technology, two people said.
Brockman referred requests for comment to OpenAI, which said it uses “numerous sources” of data.
Last year, OpenAI released GPT-4, which drew on the more than 1 million hours of YouTube videos that Whisper had transcribed. Brockman led the team that developed GPT-4.
Some Google employees were aware that OpenAI had harvested YouTube videos for data, two people with knowledge of the companies said. But they didn’t stop OpenAI because Google had also used transcripts of YouTube videos to train its AI models, the people said. That practice may have violated the copyrights of YouTube creators. So if Google made a fuss about OpenAI, there might be a public outcry against its own methods, the people said.
Matt Bryant, a Google spokesperson, said the company had no knowledge of OpenAI’s practices and prohibited “unauthorized scraping or downloading of YouTube content.” Google takes action when it has a clear legal or technical basis to do so, he said.
In late 2022, after OpenAI released ChatGPT and set off an industrywide race to catch up, Google researchers and engineers discussed tapping other user data. Billions of words sat in people’s Google Docs and other free Google apps. But the company’s privacy restrictions limited how they could use the data, three people with knowledge of Google’s practices said.
In June, Google’s legal department asked the privacy team to draft language to broaden what the company could use consumer data for, according to two members of the privacy team and an internal message viewed by the Times.
The privacy team wrote new terms so Google could tap the data for its “AI models and build products and features like Google Translate, Bard and Cloud AI capabilities,” which was a wider collection of AI technologies.
Bryant said that the privacy policy changes had been made for clarity and that Google did not use information from Google Docs or related apps to train language models “without explicit permission” from users, referring to a voluntary program that allows users to test experimental features.
“We did not start training on additional types of data based on this language change,” he said.
The Debate at Meta
Mark Zuckerberg, Meta’s CEO, had invested in AI for years — but suddenly found himself behind when OpenAI released ChatGPT in 2022. He immediately pushed to match and exceed ChatGPT, calling executives and engineers at all hours of the night to push them to develop a rival chatbot, said three current and former employees, who were not authorized to discuss confidential conversations.
But by early last year, Meta had hit the same hurdle as its rivals: not enough data.
Ahmad Al-Dahle, Meta’s vice president of generative AI, told executives that his team had used almost every available English-language book, essay, poem and news article on the internet to develop a model, according to recordings of internal meetings, which were shared by an employee.
Meta could not match ChatGPT unless it got more data, Al-Dahle told colleagues. In March and April 2023, some of the company’s business development leaders, engineers and lawyers met nearly daily to tackle the problem.
Some debated paying $10 a book for the full licensing rights to new titles. They discussed buying Simon & Schuster, which publishes authors such as Stephen King, according to the recordings.
They also talked about how they had summarized books, essays and other works from the internet without permission and discussed sucking up more, even if that meant facing lawsuits. One lawyer warned of “ethical” concerns around taking intellectual property from artists but was met with silence, according to the recordings.
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
Generate image description A security gate at the OpenAI offices in San Francisco on Sunday, Nov. 19, 2023. (Jason Henry/The New York Times)
Generate image description The OpenAI offices in San Francisco on Sunday, Nov. 19, 2023. (Jason Henry/The New York Times)
Generate image description Mark Zuckerberg, Meta’s chief executive, pushed his company to catch up in generative A.I. after OpenAI released ChatGPT. (Jason Andrew/The New York Times)
