Can computers make sense of art? Might they even be able to find connections between works that humans can't see? Computer scientists at Rutgers University recently published two papers that explore how artificial intelligence could aid -- or, some might fear, eventually replace -- art historians by classifying works with a high degree of accuracy and rating them in terms of creative impact.
In the first paper, Ahmed Elgammal and his graduate student, Babak Saleh, of Rutgers's Art and Artificial Intelligence Lab devised an algorithm that was about 60 percent accurate in identifying the artist and genre of an unknown painting and 45 percent accurate in determining its style. The algorithm not only automatically classified images from a database of 80,000 works, but also allowed the researchers to find connections among them.
In one example, they picked a selection of paintings and asked the program to identify the "closest match" among works in other styles. The results -- which found uncanny similarities between examples of Russian Romanticism and French Impressionism, between Pop Art and the Northern Renaissance -- recall the juxtapositions one sees at museums like the Barnes Collection in Philadelphia, where paintings are grouped not by period but because they possess some kind of stylistic kinship.
In the second paper, the researchers posed a more ambitious, and controversial, question: Can the creativity of an artwork be quantified? The experimental program they developed analyzed more than 60,000 paintings over six centuries, breaking down the visual information contained in each work into categories based on subject matter, brush strokes, color palette and 2,000 other defining attributes termed "classemes." Those techniques enabled them to measure the originality of a painting (how unique it was from earlier works in the sample) and its influence (how similar it was to later works) to assess overall creativity.
Many paintings regarded as milestones in art history received very high marks, including Picasso's "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon" and Edvard Munch's "The Scream." Not only that, the researchers were able to test their findings with so-called time-machine experiments. When they assigned, for example, Impressionist or Cubist paintings an artificially earlier date, the algorithm generated a significantly higher creativity score.
Mr. Saleh, a doctoral candidate at Rutgers, says some art historians who have caught wind of his research are disquieted by its implications. "Art historians are worried that we're going to replace them, but they should think of machine learning as a tool that can help them," he said. "In the future we're going to have databases of millions of paintings and we need to have artificial intelligence to help humans analyze all these artworks."
