The downside of high expectations thumped Wall Street on Thursday, and Microsoft and Meta Platforms dragged stock indexes lower despite delivering strong profits for the summer.
The S&P 500 fell 1.9 percent Thursday, its worst day in eight weeks. The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 0.9 percent, and the Nasdaq composite tumbled 2.8 percent.
Both Microsoft and Meta delivered better profit than forecast for the latest quarter, but investors were expecting even more from them. Other influential Big Tech stocks also fell and were among the market's heaviest weights, including Nvidia, Amazon and Apple. Treasury yields wavered in the bond market following some mixed reports on the economy.
Microsoft's profit and revenue topped forecasts, but its stock nevertheless sank 5.3 percent as investors and analysts scrutinized for possible disappointments. Many centered on Microsoft's estimate for upcoming growth in its Azure cloud-computing business, which fell short of some analysts' expectations.
The parent company of Facebook likewise served up a better-than-expected profit report. As with Microsoft, though, that wasn't enough for the stock to rise. Investors focused on Meta Platforms' warning that it expects a "significant acceleration" in spending next year as it continues to pour money into developing artificial intelligence. It fell 4.4 percent.
Both Microsoft and Meta Platforms have soared in recent years amid a frenzy around A.I., and they're entrenched among Wall Street's most influential stocks. But such stellar performances have critics saying their stock prices have simply climbed too fast, leaving them too expensive. It's difficult to meet everyone's expectations when they're so high, and Microsoft and Meta were both among Thursday's heaviest weights on the S&P 500.
Amazon and Apple also helped drag the market lower, with Amazon falling 3.4 percent and Apple dropping 2 percent before they released their profit reports after trading ended for the day.
Nvidia will report its results later this earnings season, and its 4.6 percent drop was Thursday's heaviest weight on the market after Microsoft.
The tumble for big tech on the last day of October wiped out the S&P 500's gain for the month. The index fell 1 percent for its first down month in the last six, even though it set a record high during the middle of it.
Such a big move might have been due following an unusually long and placid run, according to Jonathan Krinsky at BTIG.
He pointed out that the S&P 500 had failed to move by 1 percent in either direction, without accounting for rounding, for the longest stretch in nearly three years.
Still, Thursday wasn't a complete washout on Wall Street thanks in part to cruise ships and cigarettes.
Norwegian Cruise Line Holding moved 7.2 percent higher after delivering stronger profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected.
The cruise ship operator said it was seeing strong demand from customers across its brands and itineraries, and it raised its profit forecast for the full year of 2024.
Altria Group rose 8.4 percent for another one of the S&P 500's bigger gains after it also beat analysts' profit expectations.
Billy Gifford, the chief executive, credited resilience for its Marlboro brand, among other things, and announced a cost-cutting program.
Oil and gas companies also generally rose after the price of a barrel of U.S. crude gained 0.9 percent to recoup some of its losses for the week and for the year so far. ConocoPhillips jumped 7 percent, and Exxon Mobil gained 0.3 percent.
After a mixed set of reports on the U.S. economy, the yield on the 10-year Treasury edged up to 4.28 percent from 4.26 percent late Wednesday.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
