The technology for weather apps for iPhones and Android phones is evolving quickly. But not all apps are created equal.
Weather can be a great equalizer. It can also be a way to make conversation with just about everyone.
No wonder, then, that the weather forecast is one of the pieces of information many of us crave when starting each day -- and that weather apps are among the most frequently used programs on smartphones.
Weather apps aren't all created equal, though. The built-in apps on iPhones and Android phones are perfectly serviceable, offering glanceable forecasts for as many cities as you want, and they're tied into the phones' virtual assistants. But weather technology -- both the creation and presentation of forecasts -- is evolving quickly.
The built-in weather apps in both Google and iOS are fine if you want a quick look at the weather and something that's integrated with the voice assistant in your device. If you'd like prettier backdrops, Yahoo Weather is hands down the most gorgeous app out there. Weather Underground is the app to use for budding meteorologists, and Dark Sky's mesmerizing globe of animated weather patterns is a great party trick.
In the end, though, finding an app you like is a matter of personal taste in the interface design, how much information you want about the weather and, crucially, how much you trust the forecast.
Weather apps are often powered by one of a few sources of information, including the Weather Channel and Weather Underground (both of which are owned by the Weather Company), and Weatherbug and AccuWeather.
The forecasts coming from those services combine data from the National Weather Service, weather balloons, satellites, NASA and local stations, as well as various other sensors. All of that raw information forms a rough picture of what's happening in the atmosphere at any given time.
Then, a meteorologist usually comes in to interpret and analyze the data and, based on a mix of experience and education, chooses the information on which to base a forecast.
The data and forecasts created in that way power many weather apps. The Weather Channel provides Apple's built-in forecasts, for example, while Weather Underground provides data for Google's weather and powers Yahoo Weather.
Those data and forecast providers all have their own apps as well. The Weather Channel app, for example, offers information like airport conditions and flu outbreak updates by region, while Weather Underground has the richest (and geekiest) information. For my taste, Weatherbug is the best app offered by the main providers, because it offers niceties like the ability to sort your forecast by whether it's a good day for golf or one that is likely to cause dry skin.
But the folks behind Dark Sky, a visually stunning app, are doing things a bit differently. The company formed about three years ago to create a new kind of forecast that would use radar data to predict whether it was going to rain -- or stop raining -- in an immediate location within the next hour.
No one was really doing that, said Adam Grossman, a co-creator of the Dark Sky app. So the company had to build its own computer programs for figuring out radar data for that one example: Is it going to be raining an hour from now in this one, specific spot?
That work led to a separate product called Forecast. Mr. Grossman said the weather predictions all come from computers; no meteorologists are involved.
"We get a lot of flak from meteorologists who say computers can't do it and you always need a human in there to call the shots," Mr. Grossman said. "But humans are really bad at forecasting. When it comes to weather forecasting, it's best to leave it to the computers."
It's a bit like "Moneyball" meets weather prediction -- the idea that statistical models can, in the long run, offer better forecasts than a mix of information and gut instinct. But the folks at the Weather Channel say there are plenty of computers involved in their forecasting -- and humans who know how to make the most of the data, too.
"We're an organization that employs hundreds of meteorologists, plus the computational science required to produce the forecast and then deploy it," said Kevin Doerr, who manages consumer digital products at the Weather Channel. "That ends up being kind of our secret sauce. There's a big difference between whether you're just taking the data and pushing it out and improving or augmenting the data."
The Forecast model for longer-term predictions is new, and still evolving. But so far, the secret sauce scores higher, at least according to ForecastWatch, an organization that tracks the accuracy of weather forecast providers.
ForecastWatch runs ForecastAdvisor, a site that lets you plug in your ZIP code and track the accuracy of forecasts from major weather services. Based on ForecastAdvisor, the most accurate forecasts for Midtown Manhattan over the last month came from AccuWeather (whose app is straightforward but lacks extras and can be hard to read at times). It was right 85 percent of the time. Dark Sky was next, with 84 percent accuracy. Weather Underground was third for the month. Over the course of a year, top honors go to MeteoGroup, a weather forecaster based in Europe.
Perhaps my favorite new weather app is TheVane, which gives the forecast along with wardrobe suggestions (women's only, for now). It will suggest outfits for travel based on location and long-term forecast, and even generate a packing list.
Now that is how you add a human touch to the weather.
