They've been giant and deadly; they've been chatty and contemplative; they've been acrobatic and futuristic. Robots in movies have served all kinds of functions in becoming an important part of the cinema landscape. So when filmmakers place a robot at the center of their work, the way it looks and behaves compared with those that have come before must be considered.
That was the case for Alex Garland, the British novelist ("The Beach") turned screenwriter ("28 Days Later"), who is making his directing debut with the science-fiction film "Ex Machina," due April 10. His addition to the robot canon is Ava (Alicia Vikander, above), a sleek, very humanlike artificial intelligence created by a reclusive Internet mogul (Oscar Isaac). Ava is the subject of an experiment to test how well she conveys human qualities.
As Mr. Garland wrote "Ex Machina," he mulled what Ava's design needed to get across. "She had to look, in a completely unambiguous way, like a machine," he said by telephone from London. "If she looked like she might be a human in a robot suit, then it would introduce into the film the idea that she may or may not be a machine."
Below is a look at Ava's design, with commentary by Mr. Garland and Andrew Whitehurst, the film's visual effects supervisor.
Old Ideas Are Left Out
To develop Ava, Mr. Garland called upon the comic book artist and illustrator Mark Simpson, known as Jock, whom he collaborated with on the science-fiction film "Dredd." Jock made sketches -- like the one here -- that gave a sense of how he thought Ava's design could go. The sketches began to give Ava shape and influenced her final look, but they also raised an important issue. "The thing we realized was that inadvertently we were referencing or just too close to previous film robots," Mr. Garland said. They didn't want to make her arms or breast area metallic, because it would feel too much like the robot from "Metropolis." They avoided the color gold, so she wouldn't be compared with C-3PO. And they aimed to minimize white plastic, so she wouldn't resemble the robot in female form at the center of Chris Cunningham's music video for Björk's song "All Is Full of Love." Mr. Garland, whose father is a cartoonist, also contributed sketches and worked with Jock to create and more solidly refine Ava. Using mesh was a breakthrough, as was creating transparent elements for her torso and arms.
Even Cooler on the Inside
To take Ava's design from concept to workable cinematic reality, Mr. Garland and his team used the visual effects firm Double Negative. "We thought it was very important that Ava had a physical believability," Mr. Whitehurst said by phone from London. In developing Ava, rather than looking at other robots, he and his team were inspired by the sculptures of Constantin Brancusi and the industrial design of Dieter Rams (which has a less-is-better approach). They wanted Ava to be sleek, somewhat simple, structurally beautiful, but mechanically plausible. Mr. Whitehurst said that when building parts of Ava in the computer, it would be easy to cheat on some of the specifics of her functionality. But he said the team worked hard not to do that. "So when the audience sees her, everything does work," he said. "The muscles contract. The joints bend in the right place."
Because of the decision to make parts of Ava transparent, the design of her inner workings was important, and highly considered. "We had some ideas of things we thought the robot would need," Mr. Whitehurst said. "From a practical standpoint, she would need some way of cooling herself, and she would need some way of getting power to the other parts of her system. So we put fans in, and within her abdomen we put in cooling fluid. We made this transparent sack that would have the fluid that would get pumped around to cool her. We put it in the area where the kidneys would be in a human. And because it's this transparent bag, it refracts light in a very interesting way."
Photograph (Photograph by A24)
