RAILROADS
Norfolk Southern Sees Chance in Earnings Data
Norfolk Southern's first-quarter earnings report Wednesday gave the railroad the opportunity to publicly defend the strategy of its chief executive, Alan Shaw, before investors decide on May 9 whether to back him. Since the railroad already preannounced its disappointing results earlier this month when it disclosed a $ 600 million settlement over the disastrous February 2023 Ohio derailment, there were few surprises in Wednesday's numbers.
Norfolk Southern confirmed the $ 53 million, or 23 cents per share, that it earned in the first quarter. Without the settlement and some other one-time costs, the railroad said it would have made $ 2.39 per share while Wall Street was predicting earnings of $ 2.60 per share. The Atlanta-based railroad's profit dropped from $ 466 million, or $ 2.04 per share, a year ago even though the railroad delivered 4 percent more shipments during the quarter.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
TOYS
Hasbro's Quarterly ProfitSurpasses Estimates
Hasbro reported a smaller-than-expected drop in first-quarter sales and handily beat profit estimates on Wednesday, helped by leaner inventories and steady digital gaming revenue, sending its shares up 12 percent in early trading.
The Play-Doh maker has taken steps to reduce expenses and more than halved its inventory over the past year to control costs amid uncertain demand. Those efforts, coupled with cost efficiencies, helped its operating margin expand to 15.3 percent, from 1.8 percent last year.
"We made solid progress in our turnaround efforts in the first quarter," Hasbro's chief financial officer, Gina Goetter, said.
Inventory levels remained "healthy both at retail and at Hasbro," the company said, adding it would restock going into the second quarter to support product innovation and retail shelf visibility.
REUTERS
TECHNOLOGY
Cisco Joins Vatican PledgeFor Ethical Use of A.I.
The tech giant Cisco Systems on Wednesday joined Microsoft and IBM in signing onto a Vatican-sponsored pledge to ensure artificial intelligence is developed and used ethically and to benefit the common good.
The Cisco Systems chief executive, Chuck Robbins, signed the document, known as the Rome Call, and met privately with Pope Francis, the Vatican said.
The pledge outlines key pillars of ethical and responsible use of AI. It emphasizes that A.I. systems must be designed, used and regulated to serve and protect the dignity of all human beings, without discrimination, and their environments. It highlights principles of transparency, inclusion, responsibility, impartiality and security as necessary to guide all A.I. developments.
The document was unveiled and signed at a Vatican conference in 2020 by Microsoft's Brad Smith and IBM's John Kelly III.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
