Check out Jim Gaffigan before Pop-Tarts and bourbon propelled him to super stardom, or catch up with the award-winning Japanese director Ryusuke Hamaguchi before his new film comes out.
Comedy
Jim Gaffigan
April 25-28 at Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, Manhattan; msg.com/beacon-theatre.
Jim Gaffigan's comedy career took off in 2006 because of a series of jokes about Hot Pockets, but he might find even more success thanks to Pop-Tarts and bourbon.
The upcoming Netflix film "Unfrosted," starring a hilarious host of comedians including Gaffigan and Jerry Seinfeld, who also directs, goes back to the 1960s to reimagine the invention of the Pop-Tart. In real life, Gaffigan debuted his own specialty brand of bourbon, Fathertime, earlier this month. He is also still regularly delivering commentary for "CBS News Sunday Morning," which won him a Daytime Emmy in 2016, and last weekend, he filmed the Boston stops on his "Barely Alive Tour" for what will be his 11th stand-up special.
That tour is coming to the Beacon Theater, with shows at 8 p.m. on Thursday and Friday, at 5 and 8 p.m. on Saturday and at 4 and 7 p.m. on Sunday. Tickets are available for varying prices on Ticketmaster. SEAN L. McCARTHY
Music
Oneohtrix Point Never
April 26 at 7 p.m. at the Brooklyn Paramount, 385 Flatbush Avenue Extension; brooklynparamount.com.
Few devoutly experimental musicians have reached so far into mainstream culture as Daniel Lopatin. Recording under the name Oneohtrix Point Never, he garnered a niche but rabid following in the late 2000s and early 2010s with warped electronic compositions that mashed together bits of cultural detritus, often intentionally tacky relics of the 1980s. More widely known are his recent contributions to pop: Lopatin has produced for FKA twigs and Charli XCX, and scored films for the Safdie brothers. He also partnered with the Weeknd on "Dawn FM," the commercial kingpin's 2022 album, which brims with the ultra-synthetic music of decades past that fascinates Lopatin.
On his own, Lopatin continues to look both backward and forward: His latest solo release, "Again," takes inspiration from '90s alt rock and experiments with artificial intelligence. Known for immersive multimedia performances, Lopatin is currently touring the album with a highly choreographed production involving projection and puppetry, art-directed by the French artist Freeka Tet.
Lopatin's show at the Paramount this weekend is sold out, but tickets can be found on secondary markets, and a handful will be available at the door. OLIVIA HORN
'HOME(land)'
April 27 at 7:30 p.m. at the 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, Manhattan; 92ny.org.
On Saturday, the mezzo-soprano Fleur Barron and the pianist Myra Huang will present a diverse program centered on the ideas of home and homeland and encompassing the feelings of comfort, longing and alienation. Barron will reflect on her own upbringing -- the singer is Singaporean and British, but grew up in Hong Kong -- by mixing works by Chinese and Chinese diaspora composers such as Huang Ruo and Chen Yi with pieces by Charles Ives, Alban Berg and Johannes Brahms.
In the latter half of the performance, Barron will trade off between songs by Toru Takemitsu and ones by Charles Trenet for an unexpectedly jazzy set. Of particular interest might be the United States premiere of Alex Ho's "Four Miniatures for Our Little Selves," which considers a childhood caught between cultures, and Zubaida Azezi and Edo Frenkel's "Ananurhan," based on a Uyghur folk melody. That piece applies throat singing to classical vocals and suggests the notion of finding a home with one's own body, especially in the face of displacement and discrimination.
Tickets start at $ 30 on 92NY's website. The concert will also be livestreamed for $ 25. GABRIELLE FERRARI
Kids
'Common Ground'
Through May 11 at TADA! Youth Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan; tadatheater.com.
Amid the controversy over border policies, it's sometimes forgotten that immigrants are distinct individuals and not mere statistics. In its first two-act musical, TADA! Youth Theater gives the humanity of newly arrived adolescents center stage.
Based on real teenagers -- Lisa Diana Shapiro, author of the show's book and lyrics, used to teach in a refugee program -- the characters in "Common Ground" include a boy who's fled poverty in Ivory Coast and girls escaping their abusive father in Honduras. But it focuses on Ysabella, a proud newcomer from Colombia and budding social media star.
With a score by Julia Jordan Kamanda and additional music by Georgia Stitt, the production at first explores the high school experiences of Ysabella and her brother, and Ysabella's complicated friendship with Emma, a bullied yet resourceful middle-class American. But the show takes a darker turn when U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement detains Ysabella and her family, and her peers learn what they can -- and cannot -- do to help.
Directed and choreographed by Alex Sanchez and performed with heartfelt conviction by its diverse young cast, "Common Ground" plays Thursdays and Fridays at 7 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 7 p.m., and Sundays at 2 p.m.
Tickets start at $ 15. LAUREL GRAEBER
Film
Hamaguchi I & II
April 26-30 at Film at Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street, Manhattan; filmlinc.org.
Riding a surge of recent acclaim, the Japanese director Ryusuke Hamaguchi, the subject of this retrospective, has continuously played with conventions of cinematic structure, length and even exhibition. His Oscar-winning "Drive My Car" (showing on Friday and Saturday) situates its opening titles well into its three-hour running time. "Happy Hour" (on Sunday) spends more than five hours observing the small interactions that cause people to fall in and out of love. "Asako I & II" (on Saturday and Monday), which gives the program its title, borrows its narrative template from "Vertigo."
The series is a prelude to the release of Hamaguchi's latest feature, "Evil Does Not Exist," on May 3. That release itself will be preceded by three performances of a companion piece, "Gift," on May 1 and 2. Shot in tandem with "Evil," "Gift" consists of silent footage that will be accompanied live by the musician Eiko Ishibashi, who collaborated with Hamaguchi on both works (and wrote the score for "Drive My Car"). The three "Gift" showings are currently standby-only. BEN KENIGSBERG
Photograph Daniel Lopatin performing as Oneohtrix Point Never in London this month. He will be at the Brooklyn Paramount on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CASPAR STEVENS); The mezzo-soprano Fleur Barron, above, will appear with the pianist Myra Huang. (PHOTOGRAPH BY VICTORIA CADISCH); "Common Ground," a musical about teenage immigrants, is at TADA! Youth Theater through May 11. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CEANNA BRYANT)
