COMPANIES
xAI Funding Talks Could Value It at $ 40 Billion
Elon Musk's artificial intelligence start-up, xAI, is in talks to raise new financing that could value it at as much as $ 40 billion, up from $ 24 billion five months ago, three people with knowledge of the discussions said.
The talks are in the early stages, two of the people said, and the start-up's valuation could fall into the mid- $ 30 billion range if the talks continue. Investors have discussed putting another $ 5 billion into the company, two of the people said, a figure that could also change as the talks progress.
The talks follow a huge fund-raising effort by OpenAI, the San Francisco start-up that makes ChatGPT, which said last month that it had closed on financing that valued it at a whopping $ 157 billion. OpenAI launched the A.I. boom in late 2022 with ChatGPT's release, spurring a funding surge for other A.I. companies, including xAI.
Enthusiasm among investors for A.I. companies has cooled in recent months, as several high-profile start-ups have essentially been folded into tech giants like Google and Amazon. But xAI and OpenAI are among the few that continue to seek billions in funding to build the leading A.I. technologies.
In May, xAI raised $ 6 billion, while rival Anthropic raised hundreds of millions of dollars in 2023 and in recent months has floated the idea of more funding with investors.
Mr. Musk did not respond to a request for comment about xAI. Details of the talks were earlier reported by The Wall Street Journal and The Information.
MIKE ISAAC and CADE METZ
TECHNOLOGY
OpenAI Search Engine Folded Into ChatGPT
OpenAI has folded a search engine into its ChatGPT chatbot.
On Thursday, the A.I. start-up unveiled what it called "ChatGPT search." OpenAI said the latest version of its online chatbot could retrieve and deliver information from across the internet in real time, including news, stock prices and sports scores.
Other tech companies, including giants like Google and Microsoft, as well as start-ups like the San Francisco-based Perplexity, have offered similar technologies. These services augment traditional internet search engines with chatbot technology that generates text as a way of answering questions and summarizing online information.
OpenAI said this summer that it was testing a system that combined search engine technology with ChatGPT, which launched the A.I. boom when it was released in November 2022. The chatbot now has over 250 million active monthly users, according to the company.
The new search engine was available beginning Thursday for people who use ChatGPT Plus, which is available for a $ 20 a month subscription fee. OpenAI will roll out the new technology to those using the free version of the chatbot "over the coming months."
OpenAI said its new technology would respond to questions with up-to-date information from the web while also providing links to relevant sources. For instance, if someone asks the result of the last World Series game and ChatGPT provides the final score, it might link to a news article. CADE METZ
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DADO RUVIC/REUTERS)
