Collaborative online albums allow people to submit photos and share photos, and they can generally be shared among only those you want to share with.
Modern-day vacation scenes unfolded this summer on a trip to Tuscany.
Parents whipped out their phones to snap photos of their children. Other vacationers pulled out large DSLR cameras, the sort that have big lenses, to capture artistic images of thousand-year-old walled cities, sunsets and thin-crust pizza.
And then one person said: "We're all taking such great pictures. I wish there was a way for us all to put pictures into one online album so we can look at them later."
There is a way -- more than one, actually -- to create collaborative photo albums online.
Even if you came home with hundreds of photos, there are probably nice pictures you missed. Collaborative online albums, which allow multiple people to submit photos, help fill in the holes. And in most cases, they can easily be shared among only the people you want to share them with -- maybe only those who were actually there.
A good place to start with one of these albums is with some of the cloud or social media services you probably already use. Google, Apple and Facebook all offer collaborative album options, of varying degrees of difficulty. (Flickr does not offer collaborative albums, oddly enough, even though it is one of the more popular online photo services.)
For events that involved a lot of people taking pictures on their iPhones, iCloud Photo Sharing is probably the service for you.
With this option, you can create shared albums on an Apple mobile device, directly from the photo gallery -- which is great if all your photos are on your phone. Just choose multiple photos, tap the sharing button, and select iCloud. Or, in the photo gallery, tap the shared cloud icon at the bottom of the screen, and create a new shared stream.
You can invite iPhone users with a phone number. Others can be invited with an email address.
If you start the album, you can decide whether subscribers to the album can post to it, and you can "like" and comment on photos posted by your friends. Shared albums can hold up to 5,000 photos, and they don't count against your personal storage limit on iCloud, Apple's cloud storage system.
The service is delightfully simple to use -- once you make it through setup on multiple devices. If you're not already using iCloud, you'll have to enable it on your Apple mobile device, under Settings, and on your Mac, under System Preferences, and make sure photo sharing is also enabled. Windows users must download a free program called the iCloud Control Panel, and they must also set up an iCloud account.
By default, people can view shared albums only on iOS devices or iPhoto, or in an iCloud albums folder on Windows. But you can also choose to turn the album into a website, which generates a link to share with your collaborators.
Facebook's shared albums is a better option for people using different types of devices. Any photo album you create on Facebook, or even albums you have already created, can be turned into a shared album.
On the web, just open an album and click "change to shared album." In the Facebook app on iPhone, navigate to the album, tap Edit and choose "allow contributors." You can also create a new album on your iPhone and then choose the option to allow contributors. Neither option is available on the Android version of the app, although Facebook says it is coming soon. However, anyone can upload photos to the shared album from any mobile device or computer.
If this all sounds somewhat simpler than iCloud sharing, that is because it is. But everyone sharing photos will need to be a member of Facebook, and the service requires a few extra steps on mobile devices.
The options from Apple and Facebook are better than Google's, which lets you share using Picasa Web Albums. Picasa is the photo upload and storage site that is owned, and often seems neglected, by Google.
Picasa's collaborative sharing is far too complicated for most people to bother with. For example: It's not the same thing as Google Plus, Google's social media network, although if you are logged into a Google Plus account, you'll be redirected to your photos there when you type in picasaweb .google.com.
Google Plus doesn't feature collaborative photo albums. So if you get redirected to Google Plus, you must choose the option that says "Click here to go back to Picasa Web Albums."
When in Picasa, click the Share button at the top of the page of an album. To add contributors, scroll down past all the Google Plus sharing options and click the link that says "Share via email only." On the next screen, you can add people by email address and check the box that allows those you share with to contribute photos.
This method of collaborating is limited, however. There is no stand-alone Picasa mobile app, just third-party album viewers. And you can't upload photos to a shared Picasa album using the Google Plus app. In addition, any photos uploaded by your friends count against your overall Google Drive storage.
My friends and I used a site called Eversnap, which lets you set up an account with just a username and password, and lets groups with fewer than 20 collaborators upload unlimited photos and video. There are paid options for big events like weddings.
Eversnap was easy to use, although it has some issues: It does not work properly in some browsers, like Chrome and Firefox, for example, which is a pretty major downside.
Still, I find that it's easiest to get people to embrace a service they already use, instead of asking them to sign up for something new.
So despite its initial complexity, Apple's iCloud Photo Sharing is my favorite, because most of my friends use iPhones. I just wish it were easier to use on other devices, too. But it won me over with quick, easy uploading and real-time notifications when friends joined my shared album.
The service also has the ability to show off photos on television easily using Apple TV -- the modern-day version of forcing your friends to watch slide shows of your summer vacation. Some traditions will never die.
