BEHIND THE BYLINE Kevin Roose
A Tech Columnist on How He Avoids Twitter Trolls and Finds Screen-Free Escapes
Interview by Lara Takenaga
______
The Reader Center has a new interview series, Behind the Byline , to introduce you to Times journalists. Is there a reporter, photographer or editor whom you would like to get to know? Tell us in the form below.
Ever since the summer of 2017, when Kevin Roose started writing The Shift, a column that delves into business, technology and culture, a torrent of big tech industry news has given him plenty of fodder, from privacy scandals to the rise of misinformation on social media.
But sometimes Kevin turns the lens lightheartedly on himself, writing about his indoctrination into the Instant Pot cult and his conversion to e-scooter enthusiast.
[Read Kevin's article about the making of a YouTube radical.]
Here, he talks about the future of technology, the anxiety of publishing a huge story and his newest hobby (no screens involved).
Your most popular column was about the lessons you learned from ditching your phone. In what other ways has your reporting influenced how you think about and use technology in your personal life?
I've written a lot about the attention economy -- everything on the internet that is trying to grab our ears and eyeballs for profit, including the big social media platforms -- and it's made me really aware of where I put my own attention, and the ways I'm being manipulated in the background. I've gotten really protective of my attention, and I get self-conscious when I catch myself in a YouTube spiral, or find myself mindlessly swiping through Instagram stories.
I've also become less of a gadget nerd than I once was. I used to buy all the newest phones and accessories, deck out my house in connected devices and try all the latest apps. But I've seen so many buggy launches that now I usually wait for version 2.0, and I've watched enough tech trends come and go that it's become hard to put too much faith in any one thing.
What are you most excited for and worried about in the world of technology right now?
On the positive side, I'm excited that technology is getting the attention it deserves, and that after years of operating with cheerful impunity, big tech companies are finally being scrutinized by regulators, the media and their own employees.
But I'm also excited about a lot of smaller, less headline-grabbing developments. For the last two years, I've given out "Good Tech Awards" to tech projects that are actually making the world a better place -- the 2018 edition featured blood-delivering drones, decarceration start-ups, and researchers calling out racial and gender bias in artificial intelligence systems, among other things. It's one of my favorite pieces to write, and reminds me that lots of technologists are still out there doing good.
On the worry side, it's a cliché, but I'm nervous about A.I. and automation. I'm not worried about the machines themselves -- at least not in the Terminator, killer-robot sense. I'm worried about the political and economic system into which we're deploying this new, world-changing technology, and whether it's too late to rejigger things so we don't end up with a truly dystopian outcome.
What is the best news tip you've ever received?
I'm not sure about "best," but the most random tip I've ever gotten was probably the Sony Pictures Entertainment hack. It came to me as an unsolicited email from someone (whom we now know was likely a North Korean hacker) who called himself "the boss of G.O.P." and included a link to a trove of documents. It looked like spam, but I opened it on a whim and was shocked to find 26 folders of internal Sony Pictures documents inside, including spreadsheets containing the salaries of all their executives.
How does it feel after you publish a big story? What do you do?
Hmm, let's see. After I publish a big story, I usually step out onto my terrace, draw a few deep, contented breaths, crack open a bottle of Château Margaux and spend the rest of the day basking in the satisfaction of a job well done.
I'm kidding. Obviously, I spend the hour after a story is published frantically refreshing Twitter, looking for affirmation from complete strangers and measuring my self-worth by their instantaneous judgments. I'm not a lunatic.
Actually, it usually feels equal parts great and awful to publish a big story. Great because you're done, which is nice, but then you wait in agony as the world absorbs and digests what you've written and tells you that your entire thesis is wrong, or you've mixed up 4chan and 8chan, or you wrote that the concept of a "non-playable character" came from video games when it really originated in tabletop role-playing games such as Dungeons & Dragons. (I got dozens of emails about that one.) On the rare occasions when the reception to a piece is overwhelmingly positive, I allow myself to bask in it, although I sometimes suspect there's been some sort of glitch -- maybe the experts are all on vacation this week?
I'm lucky to write for an intelligent and attentive audience, and I do get a lot of great and genuinely helpful feedback. I also write a lot about horrible parts of the internet, so once in a while my inbox and Twitter feed get flooded with trolls and bigots calling me a "fake news moron from the New York Slimes" (or worse). On those occasions, I try to take a few hours off from the internet and let the cycle run its course.
How do you spend your time when you're off duty?
My newest extracurricular is ceramics. Earlier this year, I started taking pottery classes, and it's been -- as Gwyneth Paltrow as this sounds -- totally healing and restorative. Making something with your hands is incredibly satisfying, and forcing yourself to get away from screens and learn a new skill is something I wish I'd done years ago.
Other than pottery, I like cooking, music, walking my dog in Prospect Park in Brooklyn, doing the crossword puzzle and reading the New Yorkers that pile up on my kitchen table. I used to play a lot of video games, but I had to kick that habit -- it was turning my brain into pudding.
______
A note to readers who are not subscribers: This article from the Reader Center does not count toward your monthly free article limit.
Follow the @ReaderCenter on Twitter for more coverage highlighting your perspectives and experiences and for insight into how we work.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Illustration DRAWING (DRAWING BY LUIS MAZÓNE)
