Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. A special section in this Sunday's New York Times is unusual. It does not concern the news, nor does it have many words to read, and readers will not all get the same thing. It is a one-time section devoted to maps of nearly every structure in the United States.
The section features nine black-and-white maps showing, for the most part, where there are buildings and where there are none. They range in perspective from the entire United States, to one section of Washington, D.C. Together, they tell a story about the things that shape the way we build and, in turn, how we live.
"It's always been really interesting to me how these kind of structures and processes and things that surround us as we go through life really affect how we live our lives and affect how people relate to one another," said Derek Watkins, one of the two Times graphics editors who made the maps. "But so many of them are difficult to see."
The other editor was Tim Wallace (who recently left the paper to work for a start-up). The maps were drawn using a huge database of building footprints that Microsoft released to the public this summer. The company compiled the data using artificial intelligence to identify the outlines of buildings in satellite images.
When the data was released, people on the Times graphics desk took notice. Mr. Wallace said they knew it would be useful as a reporting tool, but they also wanted to do something fun with it. He considered a few ideas, but the thing that most compelled him was simply looking at a visual representation of the data, seeing the lakes of Minnesota outlined by the structures people have built around them, for instance. He and Mr. Watkins thought readers would find it compelling, too, and their editors agreed.
So he and Mr. Watkins -- who have graduate degrees in geography -- wrote a script to turn the data into graphics, where buildings were black and open space was white. Then they spent some time poring over them, letting their eyes catch on whatever stuck out to them and sharing their insights with each other along the way.
For the final maps, they highlighted six areas that were both visually interesting and demonstrative of how things like geography, history and culture can shape the way we build. They include squiggly suburbs in Mesa, Ariz.; buildings sprinkled among the Appalachian Mountains, built where they could be; and "long lots" branching off a Louisiana bayou, a style of development leftover from the area's cultural history under France.
Mr. Wallace also sent some of what had jumped out at them to Fred Bierman, director of news design for The Times's print operation and the section's designer. Mr. Bierman had long wanted to find a map from graphics to print as a panoramic, a massive 48-inch sheet of paper as big as four pages of the newspaper side by side, which is a relatively new capability for the Times. (Todd Socia, who oversees print production and distribution, said he understands The Times to be the only newspaper in North America with the equipment to print a panoramic.)
The maps made from the building footprint data were a perfect candidate. Mr. Bierman also had the idea to zone the section, meaning they could make maps of different regions of the country and deliver them to readers who live in those regions. Mr. Wallace jumped on the idea, and they settled on six versions, each of a different city or region: New York, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco Bay and Dallas/Fort Worth. Online, Mr. Watkins created an interactive map that allows users to search the building maps by city or ZIP code.
The cover of the section gives a broad view of the region it was printed for, with heavy splotches of black fading to gray farther from city centers. Then the first two-page spread just inside holds the same maps in every version: a map of the entire United States and the six development patterns that Mr. Watkins identified.
"The idea was hopefully those six things will prime people's imaginations so that when they open the really big spread, they are kind of already thinking about the types of things you can see in this data," Mr. Watkins said.
Unfurling the pages all the way brings readers to a close-up of each city, sprawled across four pages. Cities, neighborhoods, and notable structures are labeled, but most of the map is left to be identified. Where buildings are packed close together, the lines and blocks on the map are darker, more solid, while open areas jump off the page as breaths of white space.
John Schwartz, a climate reporter for The Times, wrote the introduction for the section and a few blurbs inside guiding the reader's eye here and there, according to observations from Times reporters around the country who cover those regions. But gazing at the huge centerfold is the time to recall a simple instruction that Mr. Schwartz offers on the cover page: Look.
Mr. Watkins and Mr. Wallace's wishes for how they want readers to interact with this oddity that arrives on a Sunday are just as gentle: Find something familiar, puzzle over something unfamiliar.
"I would just hope that people explore," Mr. Wallace said.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
A Special Section in Today's Times Features Maps Showing Nearly Every Structure in the Country. (Photograph by Tony Cenicola/the New York Times)
