SAN FRANCISCO -- The founders of Silicon Valley's technology companies, many of whom have amassed huge fortunes at a young age, tend to look at their philanthropic giving much as they do their companies: They study a problem, explore a number of ways to attack it and eventually invest heavily to scale up the ideas they think will be winners.
Dustin Moskovitz, a Facebook co-founder, and his wife, Cari Tuna, are models of the approach, hoping to help others become better philanthropists by opening up their process of giving away most of their estimated $13 billion fortune. The couple publicly shares details of their donations, their thought processes and their research into causes on the website of their foundation, Good Ventures.
The couple is guided by effective altruism, a philosophy popular with West Coast philanthropists that says donors should choose projects that deliver the greatest social benefits as efficiently as possible.
"The thing we focus on is expected value," said Ms. Tuna, a former journalist who runs their foundation while her husband focuses on running his current tech start-up, Asana. "It's all part of doing as much good as we can with the resources we have."
Soon after they began their philanthropy five years ago, the couple partnered with a charity research organization, GiveWell, that identifies projects that it says provide outsize human benefits for the dollars invested.
The couple eventually made substantial donations to programs identified by GiveWell, including nearly $30 million to the Against Malaria Foundation, which distributes mosquito nets to reduce malaria infections among children in Africa, and more than $47 million to GiveDirectly, a program that gives cash directly to extremely poor people in Kenya and Uganda.
More recently, Ms. Tuna and Mr. Moskovitz have chosen to fund projects intended to mitigate potential global catastrophes, like an epidemic of a deadly disease, biological warfare and the threats posed by advanced artificial intelligence.
Those risks receive little attention from other philanthropists, Ms. Tuna said, which is one reason Good Ventures decided to focus on them.
"We think internally about worldview diversification," she said.
Many of the projects funded by Good Ventures will not succeed, but she and her husband are comfortable with that. "I actually expect that most of our work will fail to have an impact, and that is part of doing high-risk philanthropy well," Ms. Tuna said.
This methodical approach is characteristic of tech-industry philanthropists, said Emmett D. Carson, chief executive of the Silicon Valley Community Foundation, which has advised about 2,000 donors in the region on their giving.
"They talk to people themselves. They read the material themselves," he said. "And they are willing to make very big bets on very big ideas, provided that they learn something."
Amir Pasic, dean of the Lilly Family School of Philanthropy at Indiana University, said that in analyzing the philanthropic approaches of big donors, it helped to consider how they made their money. "Wealthy folks tend to use their experience and say, 'How can I apply that to solve the world's problems?"' he said.
Data on different donation styles is scarce, but some general trends are apparent, according to those who study philanthropy.
East Coast donors whose wealth comes from venerable industries like finance tend to support traditional institutions, Dr. Pasic said. As examples, he cited the $100 million gift that the Blackstone Group chief executive Stephen A. Schwarzman made to the New York Public Library in 2008 and the $400 million donation that the hedge fund manager John A. Paulson made to Harvard University's engineering school last year.
"Tech people tend to be interested in more early-stage start-ups," said William Foster, head of consulting at the Bridgespan Group, which works with nonprofits and philanthropists on high-impact social change projects. These philanthropists typically support disruptive new ideas, get more directly involved in their giving and show a willingness to move quickly to another approach when one fails.
Take, for example, September's announcement by the Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg and Priscilla Chan, his wife who is a doctor, that they would spend $3 billion of their fortune over 10 years on seeking to end the ravages of disease within their infant daughter's lifetime.
The couple, who made the pledge after years of conversations with scientists and other philanthropists, did not donate the money to a leading medical institution or university. Instead, they said they intended to invest the funds in efforts to build basic tools to help the whole scientific community make breakthroughs in research.
Initially, about $600 million will go to create a new nonprofit research institute in San Francisco, the Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, whose first projects include creating a map of all cells in the body and setting up a rapid strike force of researchers to tackle outbreaks of infectious diseases like those caused by the Ebola and Zika viruses.
Some of the $3 billion will be spent advocating for more public and private money to attack disease. As they have done with their education initiatives, the couple is also likely to take ownership stakes in for-profit companies that are doing promising work.
The multipronged approach taken by Mr. Zuckerberg and Dr. Chan -- classic gifts to nonprofit organizations, venture capital-style investments in businesses with social missions, and policy advocacy -- is deliberate, allowing the couple maximum flexibility as they carry out their plan to give away 99 percent of their Facebook fortune, currently worth about $54 billion.
An early pioneer of the concept was the Omidyar Network, created in 2004 by Pierre Omidyar, the founder of the eBay online auction and retail site, and his wife, Pam.
The Omidyar organization's efforts to bring financial services to underserved populations, for example, include all three types of contributions. Early on, Omidyar financed BRAC, a nonprofit that makes microloans in Africa, Asia and Haiti. It has also invested in for-profit companies like Prosper, a peer-to-peer lender, and MicroEnsure, which provides insurance to low-income people in emerging markets.
And Omidyar participates in the Better Than Cash Alliance, an advocacy group that partners with governments and others to encourage the distribution of money digitally instead of through cash handouts.
"We have a motto here: Problem first, tool second," said Matt Bannick, a former eBay executive who is managing partner of the Omidyar Network. The approach appeals to Silicon Valley's pragmatism and has since been widely adopted by the region's philanthropists.
The Omidyar Network, which focuses on early-stage projects, also takes board seats and provides networking opportunities and training to the organizations it finances. "Half of the organizations report that our nonmonetary assistance to them was as valuable as our monetary assistance," Mr. Bannick said.
Measuring the precise impact of any particular gift or investment is more difficult. You can count the number of solar lanterns distributed or the number of mosquito nets handed out, but how do you measure the impact of those on a child's life?
"There are a lot of people who have tried to figure out whether you can boil down impact to a number," Mr. Bannick said. "It's a bit of a fool's errand."
Still, principles like focusing on underfunded yet highly effective charities can be helpful for any donor, no matter how small.
"The biggest piece of advice I would give any donor is to be proactive," Ms. Tuna said. "Find the best charity for your values. The charities that are the most aggressive and best at marketing aren't necessarily the ones doing the most good."
Photograph Cari Tuna, President of the Foundation Good Ventures (Photograph by Marvin Joseph/the Washington Post, Via Getty Images); Matt Bannick, Managing Partner of the Omidyar Network (Photograph by Damien Maloney for the New York Times); Emmett D. Carson, Chief Executive of the Silicon Valley Community Foundation (Photograph by Jason Henry for the New York Times)
