EARNINGS
Micron's Booming Quarter
Sends Its Stock Higher
Shares of Micron Technology surged more than 14 percent on Thursday, after its first-quarter revenue forecast indicated strong demand and pricing for the high-bandwidth memory chips used to support generative artificial intelligence technology.
The company was on track to add more than $ 14 billion to its market capitalization.
Micron delivered its best quarterly revenue growth in a decade in the fourth quarter ended Aug. 29 and its forecast for the current period came in widely above Wall Street estimates.
"If Micron, one of the higher-cost memory providers, is bullish on the market, it bodes well for all of A.I. and tech," said Ryan Detrick, chief market strategist at Carson Group.
The company's expectations for first-quarter adjusted gross margin were above estimates. It also saw a big improvement in adjusted gross margin in the fourth quarter, to 36.5 percent. REUTERS
EARNINGS
Accenture's A.I. Business Outdoes Its Other Units
Accenture unveiled a $ 4 billion share buyback on Thursday and beat quarterly earnings expectations thanks to strong demand for its services that help businesses adopt generative A.I. technology.
Accenture's generative A.I. business has been outpacing the growth in its other core businesses as organizations look to automation to curtail costs and improve efficiency.
Generative A.I. revenue stood at $ 900 million for the fiscal year, compared with $ 100 million last year. Bookings have shown robust quarter-on-quarter acceleration for the last four quarters, reaching a total of $ 3 billion for the year.
"We are seeing the continued trend of trying to save money on I.T. to free up the spending on areas of generative A.I.," Accenture's chief executive, Julie Sweet, above, said in a post-earnings call. REUTERS
COMPANIES
Guardian Pharmacy I.P.O. Raises $ 112 Million
Guardian Pharmacy's shares rose 3.3 percent in their market debut on Thursday, giving the health care firm a market valuation of about $ 880 million, as investors remained selective about new listings.
Shares of the Atlanta, Ga.-based firm debuted at $ 14.46, compared with their initial public offering price of $ 14.
Founded in 2004, Guardian Pharmacy joins a slew of companies going public after two years of dismal I.P.O. activity, as the Federal Reserve continues to ease interest rates. Investors, however, have been cautious about their bets, with those burning cash seen as least favored.
The company, which offers a suite of technology-enabled services to help residents of long-term health care facilities, raised $ 112 million on Wednesday by selling 8 million shares of Class A common stock at the low end of its targeted range of $ 14- $ 16 each. It operates 50 pharmacies serving about 174,000 residents. REUTERS
Credit: By Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAUL LOEB/A.F.P.-- GETTY IMAGES)
