The 2022 Atlantic hurricane season, which ended this week, was one of the most destructive on record.
Hurricane season in the Atlantic Ocean ended this week as one of the most destructive on record. Hurricane Ian, which hit the southeastern U.S. in September, was the season's worst storm and among the country's deadliest hurricanes in recent decades. It was also among the costliest in American history, causing an estimated $ 67 billion in privately insured property damage across five states.
Ian is part of a trend. Hurricanes tend to be among the most damaging forms of extreme weather, the costs of which are greatly rising. Hurricanes that caused more than $ 1 billion in damage have roughly doubled since the 1980s. During the same period, the total costs in damage, adjusted for inflation, have increased by a much greater amount -- more than elevenfold:
Climate change has increased the likelihood of severe hurricanes and, in some cases, their destructiveness. But there is a bigger culprit behind rising damage costs, experts said: Americans flocking to coastal areas. This migration has added to the number of homes, businesses and other buildings in harm's way.
As our colleague Christopher Flavelle, who covers climate, put it: "Stronger storms plus more development in coastal areas equals more damage." Today's newsletter will focus on how the development piece of that equation contributes to expensive hurricanes.
More people, more damage
Stephen Strader, who studies the geography of disasters at Villanova University, calls the increased development in areas vulnerable to hurricanes the "expanding bull's-eye effect." As the target -- the number of people, homes and businesses in a vulnerable area -- grows, the potential for storms to cause costly damage increases. "There's more things in the path of these hurricanes than there's ever been," he said.
Consider how many homes are in southwestern Florida, where Hurricane Ian made landfall this year. These maps show the housing density increasing as the population rose between 1980 and 2020:
The Houston area shows a similar trend. The region added nearly 1.3 million homes between 1980 and 2020, as these maps show:
In 2017, Hurricane Harvey lingered over the Houston area for days, dropping more than 50 inches of rain in some places. The storm ultimately cost an estimated $ 149 billion -- more, in inflation-adjusted dollars, than any other hurricane since 1980 besides Katrina in 2005.
This ongoing property development in the parts of the U.S. that are most at risk of hurricane damage also created an additional risk, destroying the natural barriers that would otherwise help protect coastal areas from the storms. In Florida, "hardened" waterfront properties have replaced "spongelike" wetlands and mangroves that were more able to absorb storm surges and rainfall, as Strader has explained.
What's next
Easing the problem of billion-dollar extreme weather events would require tackling both pieces of Christopher's storm damage equation. Reducing carbon emissions and slowing global warming could decrease the likelihood of severe hurricanes and other costly climate disasters like wildfires and droughts.
One option to reduce property damage, experts said, is to strengthen building codes. Florida did so after Hurricane Andrew wreaked havoc in 1992, requiring that new structures be built to better resist high winds. Infrastructure upgrades -- like sea walls to block storm surges or pumps to remove rainwater more quickly -- could also help against hurricanes, but only so much.
Some experts have proposed a contentious goal: getting people to live elsewhere. The most aggressive effort to persuade Americans to leave hurricane-threatened areas may be a new program that prices federal flood insurance according to climate risk, dramatically increasing costs for people living in vulnerable places.
But relocation is a tough sell. Americans have flocked to Florida's picturesque coast, despite its risks. "People like living somewhere pretty," Christopher said.
There are also political challenges. Florida cities and towns rely heavily on property tax revenues, which leaves state and local officials reluctant to reduce density or to encourage relocation. They can also count on the federal government to fund recovery efforts, giving them less incentive to mitigate future damages.
"There's growing awareness that the current system of basically allowing and subsidizing construction in risky areas doesn't make sense anymore," Christopher said. "The government is still struggling, though, to turn that focus into policy changes that will make much of a difference."
Related: Wirecutter has tips for how to make your home more resistant to flooding.
THE LATEST NEWS
Politics
The Senate passed a bill to avert a nationwide rail strike, sending it to President Biden, and rejected a measure to give rail workers seven days of paid sick leave.
An appeals court shut down the special master review of government documents seized from Donald Trump's Mar-a-Lago home.
Biden and President Emmanuel Macron of France dined on lobster and shored up diplomatic relations at the first state dinner of Biden's presidency.
The Supreme Court agreed to hear a case challenging Biden's student debt forgiveness plan.
Biden and the Democratic National Committee proposed reordering the presidential primaries for 2024, with South Carolina first.
International
Some Chinese cities eased Covid restrictions, signaling a willingness by the government to address the cause of nationwide protests. But China's low vaccine rates leave it particularly vulnerable.
Biden said he was open to meeting with Vladimir Putin, but only if Putin showed a willingness to end the war in Ukraine.
The Justice Department is taking steps to seize a 324-foot luxury yacht in Dubai that's linked to a Russian oligarch.
Other Big Stories
A California panel is considering reparations for Black citizens.
New York City is hiring an official to manage its rat problem. The job posting seeks someone with the "killer instinct needed to fight the real enemy."
Elon Musk suspended Kanye West from Twitter after the rapper posted an image of a swastika.
A man fell from a cruise ship in the Gulf of Mexico and treaded water for hours, through rain and waves, before being rescued.
Opinions
Americans are forgetting what a world war looks like. That makes another one more likely, Stephen Wertheim argues.
Oral exams test college students' intellectual agility, normalize nerves and foster freer discussions. It's time to bring them back, Molly Worthen argues.
MORNING READS
The Magentaverse: Artificial intelligence helped select Pantone's color of the year.
True story: A bear really did go on a cocaine binge in the '80s.
Modern Love: A family obsessed with costs learns what's really priceless.
Advice from Wirecutter: Gifts for $ 25 or less.
Lives Lived: Gaylord Perry was a Hall of Fame pitcher who won 314 games and recorded 3,500 strikeouts. He was known for spitballs that infuriated batters. He died at 84.
SPORTS NEWS FROM THE ATHLETIC
Bills beat Patriots: The quarterback Josh Allen bolstered his M.V.P. case last night with 223 yards passing and two touchdowns in Buffalo's 24-10 win.
Michigan star: The Wolverines running back Blake Corum needs knee surgery and will miss the remainder of the season. It's a huge blow for a team with title aspirations.
WORLD CUP
Moving on: Japan finished atop its group with a 2-1 victory over Spain, continuing what has been the country's greatest World Cup ever. Spain also advanced despite the loss.
Going home: Belgium exited the tournament after a scoreless draw with Croatia, and Japan's win knocked out Germany.
Accessory trend: Head scarves are hot at the World Cup, but should fans be wearing them? Locals say they don't object.
Today's matches: On the final day of group play, Serbia plays Switzerland, with both vying for a slot in the round of 16.
ARTS AND IDEAS
Film's new all-time great
An esteemed, once-a-decade poll has a new pick for the greatest movie of all time: "Jeanne Dielman, 23, Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles," a 1975 film directed by Chantal Akerman.
The British magazine Sight and Sound surveys critics, academics, curators and others every 10 years, and the resulting list is widely respected. "Citizen Kane" sat atop it for five decades, before Alfred Hitchcock's "Vertigo" supplanted it in 2012.
Now Akerman has toppled Hitchcock, becoming the first female director to top the list. Her film is an exemplar of "slow cinema," the Times critic Manohla Dargis wrote in 2015. It follows a widow as she performs household tasks, often in real time across prolonged scenes. Far from dull, Dargis wrote, the film "grips you with its blunt compositions" and a "creeping sense of dread."
PLAY, WATCH, EAT
What to Cook
Sip Parmesan-laced tomato soup from a mug.
Where to Go
Visit the island of St. Lucia like a local.
What to Read
"Empire of Ice and Stone" tells the terrifying story of a 1913 expedition gone wrong.
Late Night
Stephen Colbert joked about Mike Lindell, the chief executive of MyPillow.
Now Time to Play
The pangrams from yesterday's Spelling Bee were accruing and uncaring. Here is today's puzzle.
Here's today's Mini Crossword, and a clue: Pizazz (five letters).
And here's today's Wordle.
Thanks for spending part of your morning with The Times. See you tomorrow.
P.S. Chris Buckley, a Times correspondent who was expelled from Beijing in 2020, will cover Taiwan next.
Here's today's front page.
"The Daily" is about climate change.
Matthew Cullen, Lauren Hard, Lauren Jackson and Tom Wright-Piersanti contributed to The Morning. You can reach the team at themorning@nytimes.com .
Photograph Hurricane Ian left destruction behind in Fort Myers Beach, Fla., as the 2022 season's worst storm and among the country's most expensive in history.; Betty Reynolds said she watched from the top of her stairs as the water from Hurricane Ian rose inside. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOHNNY MILANO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
