1. Which 2024 presidential candidate did the conservative political network founded by the Koch brothers endorse this week?
Joe Biden
Ron DeSantis
Nikki Haley
Tim Scott
Donald J. Trump
2. On Nov. 17, the artificial intelligence company OpenAI fired its chief executive, Sam Altman. On Nov. 21, whom did it hire as its leader?
Sam Altman
Marc Andreessen
Marissa Mayer
Elon Musk
David Sacks
3. Henry Kissinger, both celebrated and reviled as the most powerful secretary of state in the post-World War II era, died this week at 100. Under which two presidents did he serve in that role?
Lyndon B. Johnson
Richard Nixon
Gerald Ford
Jimmy Carter
Ronald Reagan
4. Dolly Parton's new album, "Rockstar," became the highest-charting album of her career this week. What is unique about it?
It's a blues album
It's a geology-themed concept album
It's an instrumental work without words
It comprises covers of rock songs
It features various rocks as instruments
5. Paris Hilton recently welcomed a baby, her second child born via surrogacy. What is the new baby's name?
Athens
London
Manila
Sydney
Rio
6. A memorial service and funeral were held this week for Rosalynn Carter (above), the former first lady who died last month at 96. Which three are true of her?
As first lady, she pushed to improve mental health care
She and Jimmy Carter were married for 45 years before her death
She was a co-founder of the Carter Center, an aid group
She served as first lady for eight years
She died in Plains, Ga., where she was also born
7. Rescuers saved 41 workers this week from a collapsed tunnel in which mountain range?
The Alps
The Andes
The Appalachians
The Himalayas
The Rockies
8. Pope Francis announced a plan to punish his most vocal critic inside the Catholic Church, the conservative American cardinal Raymond Burke, according to multiple reports. What did Francis say he would do?
Declassify a Vatican report on Cardinal Burke's past
Demote Cardinal Burke to deacon
Evict Cardinal Burke from his Vatican apartment
Excommunicate Cardinal Burke
Order the Swiss Guard to arrest Cardinal Burke
9. The billionaire Mark Cuban agreed to sell his majority ownership stake in which N.B.A. franchise?
Dallas Mavericks
Los Angeles Lakers
Miami Heat
Milwaukee Bucks
New York Knicks
10. The racketeering and gang conspiracy trial of an influential Atlanta rapper began this week in Georgia. What's the name of the rapper in question?
Jack Harlow
Young Baby
Young Gunna
Young Rico
Young Thug
The News Quiz is published on Fridays in the Morning newsletter. To sign up, visit nytimes.com/themorning. Solutions: 1. C; 2. A; 3. B and C; 4. D; 5. B; 6. A, C and E; 7. D; 8. C; 9. A; 10. E.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DIANA WALKER/GETTY IMAGES)
