It's gadget season in the tech world. Think of it like New York Fashion Week, untucked white-man edition. Every fall, the world's largest technology companies put on elaborate press events to show off their latest wonders. This year's gatherings have been particularly glitzy. Ten years after the debut of the iPhone, Apple invited reporters to the office park it's been building for the past six years -- the monumental spaceship building that Steve Jobs unveiled in his last public address. Amazon, in the meantime, asked reporters to visit its Seattle headquarters, where it is building a humidity-controlled set of glass spheres that will one day function as a kind of indoor nature walk for employees. The new gadgets -- Apple's completely redesigned iPhone, Amazon's bedside clock talking computer -- were also kind of fun.
But despite the baubles and billion-dollar office parks, I'm really not feeling it this year. The technology industry is still exciting; it still packs the capacity for surprise. But where the surprise once felt like Christmas morning, it's now like the entering-the-darkened-basement scene of a horror movie.
Technology has crossed over to the dark side. It's coming for you; it's coming for us all, and we may not survive its advance.
I've been covering tech for nearly 20 years; for the past three, since I inherited the State of the Art column from David Pogue, I've explored for The New York Times how the latest tech ideas are shaping the future.
Not only am I lucky enough to have my dream job, but it's perfectly timed, too. In the years that I've written the column, the technology business has swallowed the world, becoming by far the largest and most consequential industry on the globe. Silicon Valley today is like Wall Street in the 1980s, or the defense industry in the 1950s: enjoying gargantuan growth and shaping much of the rest of the rest of the economy, not to mention art, culture, politics, education and healthcare.
So why am I feeling so bad about tech?
Well, who isn't, right? Look around you. It's difficult to get jazzed about smartphones and social networks when smartphones and social networks might be ruining the world. The technologies we were most excited about 10 years ago are now implicated in just about every catastrophe of the day. (See how Russian propagandists used Facebook and Twitter to inject false narratives into the news media last year.)
The industry is spawning groundbreaking new services, like artificial intelligence or augmented reality, that may well improve much about our lives -- self-driving cars, for instance, could save tens of thousands of lives a year. But A.I. may also put millions of people out of work, and some worry that it could wreak global havoc. (Seriously; Elon Musk worries A.I. could spark World War III.)
More immediately, there's the threat of ever-growing corporate control over much of what we do. Over the next few weeks, starting today, I'm writing a series of columns about the group I like to call the Frightful Five: Apple, Amazon, Google, Facebook and Microsoft, which make up half of the top 10 most valuable companies on the American stock market, and which collectively influence just about everything else that happens in tech, as well as the rest of the global economy.
These companies are not evil; they're all led and staffed by smart, well-meaning people who believe that technology can radically improve the world. But as I argue in the series, we have not, as a society, come to grips with the scope of their control over our lives. And we don't have many good ways to limit it, if we decided that's what we'd like to do.
A lot of these worries aren't new. Though Silicon Valley runs on heedless optimism, much of The Times's coverage has long been properly skeptical and critical of the implications of new tech. Consider the evil of "revenge porn," or the rise in accidents caused by drivers looking at their phones. I've shared other fears: In 2008, I wrote a book predicting that the internet would lead us into a "post-fact" world.
Still, until this year, the problems caused by tech felt manageable -- bumps on the road to a better tomorrow that we'd eventually figure out. I managed to retain the capacity to be viscerally excited by tech, to instantly fall for its potential and possibilities. And I bought into it personally. You should see my house: I've outfitted it with every kind of doodad you can imagine, including cameras that record everything we do, lights that switch on by voice, a toilet you have to plug in and, once, an electronic trashcan. (Manual is better, trust me.) There's a lot about it I now can't live without; every time I want to snap a picture of my kids, which is maybe five times an hour, I'm grateful for the smartphone.
And yet now it all comes freighted with worry. That's what's different. In 2007, when Mr. Jobs unveiled the iPhone, just about everyone greeted the new device as an unalloyed good. I was one of them. Here was a genuinely new thing that would Make Your Life Better, we all thought: It would be convenient, it would be fun, it wasn't serious or dangerous or globe-shattering. That's no longer true.
The State of the Art, today, is a bag of mixed emotions. Tech might improve everything. And it's probably also terrible in ways we're only just starting to understand.
Follow Times Insider on Twitter.
Drawing (Drawing by Daniel Stolle)
