AVIATION
EasyJet Says Cyberattack
Stole Data of 9 Million
EasyJet, the low-cost airline based in England, said on Tuesday that it was the target of a "highly sophisticated" cyberattack that exposed the email addresses and personal travel plans of about nine million customers, and that some had their credit card details stolen.
The airline said in a statement that as soon as it became aware of the attack, it took steps to manage and investigate it, and closed off the breach. The company said the investigation showed that the credit card details of 2,208 customers were breached.
Customers whose personal information is at risk would be contacted by May 26, the airline said.
"We take the cybersecurity of our systems very seriously and have robust security measures in place to protect our customers' personal information," easyJet's chief executive officer, Johan Lundgren, said. "However, this is an evolving threat as cyberattackers get ever more sophisticated." CHRISTINE HAUSER
CONSTRUCTION
Homebuilding In U.S.

Tumbles Amid Lockdown
Homebuilding in the United States dropped a record 30.2 percent in April and permits for future construction tumbled, underlining fears that the coronavirus crisis would lead to the deepest economic contraction in the second quarter since the Great Depression.
The report from the Commerce Department on Tuesday added to dismal data this month showing a staggering loss of 20.5 million jobs.
"This is an unprecedented recession in that it happened over just two months and this is making it harder for companies and consumers to get their bearings and figure out what to do next," said Chris Rupkey, chief economist at MUFG in New York.
The fall in housing starts to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 891,000 units last month, the lowest level since early 2015. The percentage decline was the biggest since the government started tracking the series in 1959. Starts dropped 18.6 percent in March. REUTERS
TECHNOLOGY
Google Won't Build A.I.
To Extract Oil and Gas
Google says it will no longer build custom artificial intelligence tools for speeding up oil and gas extraction, separating itself from cloud computing rivals Microsoft and Amazon.
A statement from the company on Tuesday followed a Greenpeace report that documents how the three tech giants are using A.I. and computing power to help oil companies find and access oil and gas deposits.
The group says Amazon, Microsoft and Google have been undermining their own climate change pledges by partnering with major oil companies including Shell, BP, Chevron and ExxonMobil.
But the group applauded Google on Tuesday for taking a step away from those deals, saying, "We welcome this indication from Google that it will no longer build custom solutions for upstream oil and gas extraction."
Google said it would honor all existing contracts with its customers. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Christine Hauser, Reuters and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY FREDERIC J. BROWN/AFP -- GETTY IMAGES)
