When FTX, the cryptocurrency exchange run by Sam Bankman-Fried, imploded at the end of 2022, many of its customers feared they might never again see the $ 8 billion in assets they had invested -- which disappeared virtually overnight.
The company filed for bankruptcy, and representatives for FTX quickly dispensed with any hope of recouping the funds. Most of the money missing or stolen, James Bromley, a partner at the law firm Sullivan & Cromwell, said at the time.
But in a surprising twist, the company's bankruptcy lawyers said in a court filing on Tuesday that customers would recover all of it, plus interest. The lawyers had pulled together the funds by tapping into digital currencies that FTX owned when it filed for bankruptcy and company assets like shares in start-ups.
John J. Ray III, who took over control of FTX after Mr. Bankman-Fried stepped down, helped out, too. Some of the money that will be returned to customers is the result of Mr. Ray's decision to sell two-thirds of FTX's stake in Anthropic, an artificial intelligence company in which Mr. Bankman-Fried invested $ 500 million years ago. The A.I. industry took off in the intervening years, amounting to a payout of $ 884 million.
Relieved customers will still have to consider some caveats, though. The amount they will recover is based on the value of their holdings at the time of FTX's bankruptcy and will have nothing to do with the record-high price that Bitcoin recently reached after a surge in crypto markets. And customers probably won't see the money for months -- though even that is much speedier than most bankruptcy cases.
"You want to be on the golf course like, 'Hey, I own some SpaceX."'
Jeff Parks, chief executive of Stack Capital, which gives investors access to shares of hot start-ups like SpaceX and Stripe.
"We missed the mark with this video, and we're sorry."
Tor Myhren, the vice president of marketing communications at Apple, which released a commercial for its latest iPad Pro that showed an industrial compressor crushing traditional tools for art and music.
"The world cannot absorb China's surplus production."
Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission president, cautioning Beijing against flooding Western markets with state-subsidized exports, like cars and heavy metals.
