The mass-market introduction of Kinect, with its almost magical gesture and voice-recognition technology, stands as Microsoft's most ambitious, risky and innovative move in years.
Tim Nichols measures fun.
A slim, 32-year-old psychologist, he spends his days behind a one-way mirror at Microsoft's video games research center here, watching people play the company's Xbox systems. He looks for smiles, listens for ecstatic squawks and logs triumphant gyrations. When a game is good, it elicits all the above and gets a "fun score" high enough for Microsoft to consider selling it.
And, of late, the fun quotient has skyrocketed.
The company's blend of game developers, interface wizards and artificial-intelligence experts has built Kinect, a $150 add-on for the popular Xbox 360 console that goes on sale next month. With its squat, rectangular shape and three unevenly spaced eyes, this black device looks like a genetically underserved creature from "Star Wars."
In fact, Kinect arrives with a healthy dose of science fiction trappings. Microsoft has one-upped Sony and Nintendo by eliminating game controllers and their often nightmarish bounty of buttons. Kinect peers out into a room, locks onto people and follows their motions. Players activate it with a wave of a hand, navigate menus with an arm swoosh and then run, jump, swing, duck, lunge, lean and dance to direct their onscreen avatars in each game.
"I can't tell you how many times I have seen people try and do the moonwalk," said Mr. Nichols, as he recalled their first, curious encounters with their virtual mimics.
Kinect also understands voice commands. People can bark orders to change games, mute the volume or fire up offerings like on-demand movies and real-time chatting during television shows that flow through the Xbox Live entertainment service.
The mass-market introduction of Kinect -- with its almost magical technology for gesture and voice recognition -- stands as Microsoft's most ambitious, risky and innovative move in years. Company executives say they hope that Kinect will carry the Xbox beyond gamers to entire families. But on a grander note, the technology could erase a string of Microsoft's embarrassing failures with mobile phones, music players, tablets and even Windows from consumers' minds and provide a redemptive beat for the company.
"For me, it is a big, big deal," said Steven A. Ballmer, Microsoft's chief executive. "There's nothing like it on the market."
Where Apple popularized touch-screen technology, Microsoft intends to bombard the consumer market with its gesture and voice offerings. Kinect technology is intended to start in the living room, then creep over time throughout the home, office and garage into devices made by Microsoft and others. People will be able to wave at their computer and tell it to start a videoconference with Grandma or ask for a specific song on the home stereo.
"I think this is the first thing out of the consumer side of Microsoft in a long, long time where they are in front of everyone else," said Joel Johnson, an editor at large at Gizmodo, a gadget Web site. "I want a Kinect in every room of my house, watching me and listening to what I am saying. It's so sci-fi and next level that it would be amazing."
The on-time arrival of amazing has become a rare occurrence at Microsoft, a fact not lost on investors or Microsoft's directors.
The company continues to rely on its Windows, Office and business software franchises for the bulk of its $62.5 billion in annual revenue. In high-growth areas like phones and tablets, Microsoft has long sold software but has watched Apple come out of nowhere to gobble up the most profits. With such successes, Apple overtook Microsoft in May as the world's most valuable technology company and has since swelled that lead to more than $60 billion.
Microsoft's board gave Mr. Ballmer the fiscal equivalent of a timeout by docking his bonus over the last fiscal year, pointing to lackluster mobile technology and a dearth of innovation. And whether Kinect can revamp Microsoft's image as an innovator remains a big question.
Critics knock Kinect games as too easy and say the gesture technology still has annoying kinks. They also say Microsoft has had a nasty habit of gumming up its creative engines through bureaucracy.
"They often got lost in fights between all their divisions," Mr. Johnson said. "Anytime something becomes high-profile, middle management slows it down."
But with Xbox, Microsoft has so far done right by consumers and has barreled ahead. It has sold 42 million Xbox 360 consoles and has 25 million people signed up for Xbox Live. In September alone, people spent a billion hours using Xbox systems.
Microsoft has long salivated over the notion of controlling the living room and becoming a major entertainment force. Kinect may well stand as its best bet yet for turning that vision into a reality. "This is an incredibly amazing, wonderful first step toward making interactivity in the living room available to everybody," Mr. Ballmer said, while cautioning that Microsoft still had "a lot of work to do."
Making such complex technology so easy to use bordered on the impossible three years ago, when a small group of Microsoft employees gathered to plot Kinect's future. Plenty of companies have spent decades refining gesture- and voice-recognition technology. Typically, however, it works best in controlled environments. Cameras and sensors that perceive movements often need steady, abundant light, while voice technology tends to hinge on the assumption that a microphone is near a user's mouth.
Microsoft's engineers knew they would not have the luxury of fixed settings with Kinect. They had to build a product that could work just as well in a small Japanese living room as in a spacious Texas-size den. And it would have to adjust for varying light conditions and the raucous commotion of people at different distances from its sensor.
"No one had tried to solve these problems in the consumer space and put all of this together," said Don Mattrick, the president of Microsoft's interactive entertainment business.
For Kinect's eyes, Microsoft turned to PrimeSense, based in Tel Aviv. It links a standard Web camera with a pair of sensors to offer depth perception. One sensor emits light near the infrared range, giving Kinect its own light source impervious to ambient conditions. The other sensor monitors users' distance from the device.
The eyes were nice, but if only Kinect had a brain.
Adding the smarts required Microsoft's artificial-intelligence experts and thousands of test subjects. Microsoft found people of varying shapes and sizes and recorded how they moved by monitoring 48 joints in their bodies. Over time, the algorithms that digested those data became better and better, allowing the system to work with pregnant women and children in baggy clothes as well as with average-size adults in T-shirts and shorts.
For voice commands, the device relies on four microphones in an asymmetrical configuration that helps home in on the person giving commands and separate out the chatter of other people on the sofa. Kinect also knows when sound comes from the television or from a game and can block the extra noise from interfering with the voice commands.
"If we are serious about shifting the entire computing industry to this world where the devices understand you, then the technology needs to be robust," said Alex Kipman, incubation director for Xbox 360. "Otherwise, it's just a gimmick."
