Several years ago I was in a department store, frazzled and running late, looking for things I couldn't find. As I was hastening along an aisle, a woman came toward me. She was quite a bit older than I was, and in a state of substantial disarray. As I drew closer I saw her shirt was wrongly buttoned. I put up a hand to prevent her bumping into me, and she put up a hand as well. I stopped. She stopped. We stared at each other with a kind of pity. And with a sudden rush of mortification, I understood that I was looking at myself in a mirror. Was I that tired and shambolic? Was I that old?
Scrolling through social media this week, it seemed all the world was actually seeking out a version of this experience. The viral app FaceApp uses artificial intelligence to "age" a user's photo and offer a disorienting glimpse into decades from now. More than a hundred million people have downloaded FaceApp (despite concerns that it was created by Russian developers looking to harvest user data). Everywhere I looked online were images of my friends' and acquaintances' future selves.
Simone de Beauvoir observed in "Old Age" that the old tend to say "them" rather than "us." The person in the mirror is a shock, wearing the face of someone we never thought we'd become, gazing at us from a future that has arrived before we are ready for it. FaceApp proves that we cannot resist the temptation to peek at our decline, and yet we view these images as speculative fiction, not realized and therefore unreal.
What is it about getting older that I resist or don't entirely believe? I don't try to look younger than I am. I don't disguise my wrinkles (though I do buy anti-aging cream, despite knowing it doesn't work). Most of the time, I like it that my face is marked by experience. I would never have cosmetic surgery. I've long ago gotten used to the fact that my children now walk faster than me, swim faster, think faster. As I grow older, I often experience invisibility as a gift, not an insult. Yet when a young man stands up for me on the train, it still seems like a category error.
We suffer from "temporal vertigo," absorbing all the ages we have ever been. We identify ourselves as young, because in one sense we still are. The older, current self is a newcomer, still something of a stranger. The heart takes time to catch up with a change that feels like a cinematic jump cut.
For many of us, with aging comes the responsibility of caregiving. To "accompany" someone on their journey into loss and into darkness: Can we ever really do this? "It's a killer," a friend who cares for her husband says to me. "It's savage."
For many caregivers, the days are marked by gradual losses, until the loved one no longer remembers what happened yesterday or that morning; he can't recall things they did together; their relationship is no longer one of reciprocity. Then she is talking to him very patiently, as if he is a child, or loudly and crossly, as if he is a very naughty child; she is feeding him as if he were a baby; then she is washing him; then she is wiping his bottom. She is clearing up the mess and trying not to feel disgust for this body she once desired.
FaceApp may help prepare us for wrinkles and graying temples; it does not prepare us for this.
My father, who loved to sing and dance and painted watercolors and swift sketches in charcoal, suffered from dementia in his final years. Dementia has become the illness many of us most fear. This is a special way of being afraid, not just Philip Larkin's furnace-fear of death but also fear of a living death, of a nightmarish incarceration within the decaying body and mind.
In my father's last terrible months we often read poems to him: the same ones each time, the ones he had read to us many years previously. "The Owl and the Pussycat," Ogden Nash fragments, "The Highwayman," "I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud" -- all the golden oldies.
One time, my husband and our four children all read to him -- chanted, really, raggedly in unison -- "I must go down to the seas again, to the lonely sea and the sky." And he, who could no longer speak, joined in. He remembered phrases and little fragments, the ends of lines, the words that rhymed: "the lonely sea and the sky," "steer her by," "sweet dream when the long trick's over." In that tangled-up, snarled-up, muddled-up mind, the memory of words he had loved long ago still delicately chimed. Moments like this were a gift -- to him, and to us as well.
I don't know if this was happy or sad. It makes me want to howl. But I do know that art can find a person who had seemed quite lost. A golden thread weaving its way through the razed civilization, the rubble and chaos and shattered meanings.
One of my favorite jokes goes like this: How do you make God laugh? Tell him your plans. And yet as I get older, I can't help but trawl through the advice on how to prevent dementia. There's a lot of it, some precise and some general, some feasible and some not. Eat raw fruit and vegetables. Exercise. Get a hearing aid. Learn a new language. Stop smoking. Lose weight. Don't be lonely. Connect. Only connect.
After my father's death, I made myself a list of the things that I would do should I discover that I had dementia: Put my financial affairs in order; update my will; write letters to my husband and children; throw away things I don't want people to find; do the things I've always promised myself I would do, one day, when I had the time and space to do them. I would read more poetry, have more fun, stop hurtling through life, make peace with myself.
I should do most of these things anyway, of course. We shouldn't have to wait for a diagnosis before we attempt to lead a better life. We shouldn't have to face the likeness of our final years in a social media app in order to accept that we'll live through them. Life is finite from the start -- and a finite life is a precious one.
Nicci Gerrard is the author of the forthcoming book "The Last Ocean: A Journey Through Memory and Forgetting."
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .
Illustration DRAWING (DRAWING BY LILLI CARRÉ)
