One suspect in the Boston Marathon bombings was dead and the second suspect was taken into custody Friday evening.
The capture
WATERTOWN
Friday evening, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev is taken into custody after a standoff with the authorities in a residential area in Watertown. After a day of door-to-door searches, officers swoop down on a residential block, focusing their attention on a boat in the backyard of a home there. Several blasts are heard around 7:50 p.m.
Campus police officer shot
STATA CENTER, M.I.T.
About 10:20 p.m. Thursday, the police respond to reports of shots being fired on the M.I.T. campus. At 10:30, a campus police officer is found in his patrol car, near the Stata Center for computer science and artificial intelligence, with multiple gunshot wounds. He is taken to Massachusetts General Hospital, where he is pronounced dead.
Armed carjacking
CAMBRIDGE
A short time later, the police receive reports of an armed carjacking of a black Mercedes S.U.V. by two men in Cambridge. The carjacking victim is held in the vehicle for about 30 minutes. He is later released, unharmed, at a Shell gas station on Memorial Drive.
Suspect at A.T.M.
WATERTOWN
The police release surveillance photos that show one of the suspects, Dzhokhar A. Tsarnaev, at the Bank of America in Watertown Square at 11:18 p.m.
Car chase and shootout
WATERTOWN
The police pursue the Mercedes into Watertown. During the chase, explosives are thrown from the vehicle. About 200 rounds and explosives are later found at the scene. Suspects and officers exchange gunfire. A Watertown resident, Andrew Kitzenberg, 29, later says he saw two men engaged in "constant gunfire" with police officers. A police S.U.V. "drove towards the shooters," he says, and was shot at until it was severely damaged. Mr. Kitzenberg says he saw the shooters throw a bomb at the police, but it "went 20 yards at most." One of the men, Tamerlan Tsarnaev, 26, is critically injured in the confrontation and later dies at a hospital, while the other man, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, his 19-year-old brother, abandons the vehicle and flees on foot.
Photograph The Boat in Watertown, Covered by a Tarp, Where the Suspect Was Found. (Photograph by Eric Thayer for the New York Times); an M.I.T. Police Officer Was Shot Near This Building On Campus. (Photograph by Evan Mcglinn for the New York Times); One of the Suspects, in a Security Video at a Shell Gas Station. (Photograph by Reuters); Surveillance Photo of One of the Suspects at a Bank of America A.T.M. (Photograph by City of Boston) Maps (Sources: Massachusetts State Police; Middlesex District Attorney's Office; Federal Bureau of Investigation)
