Sound stages are quiet, studio lots empty. The machinery in Hollywood is grinding to a halt as SAG-AFTRA, the union representing 160,000 television and movie actors, began a strike on Friday.
The three-year contract between the actors' union and Hollywood's studios expired at 11:59 p.m. on Wednesday, after an extension from June 30 to allow for continued talks. The Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, which represents the Hollywood companies, said the union had "decided to walk away" from the bargaining table. Fran Drescher, the union's president, said the companies had "stonewalled" negotiations.
On Thursday, the union's members -- including some of the industry's biggest stars -- voted to walk off the job.
SAG-AFTRA's members join thousands of screenwriters, represented by the Writers Guild, who have been on strike for around 70 days, making for more star-studded picket lines. The last time both the writers and actors went on strike was 1960 -- 63 years ago.
The two groups share many demands: Both unions are fighting for higher wages, increased residuals -- a type of royalty payments -- and new protections against encroaching artificial intelligence.
Hollywood's scripted industry had already been 80 percent shut down by the writers' strike.
Viewers -- already going without new episodes of late-night television shows -- may begin to notice other big changes starting in the fall, when unscripted reality and competition shows like "Celebrity Wheel of Fortune" and "Dancing With the Stars" will replace "Grey's Anatomy" or "Abbott Elementary." The longer the strike goes on, the more likely blockbuster films will be delayed, too.
"The pieces of the puzzle are starting to come together. But it's just one report, and the Fed has been burned by inflation before."
Laura Rosner-Warburton, senior economist and founding partner at MacroPolicy Perspectives, about the latest inflation report, which showed cooling price increases.
"This isn't just an app that young people use for fun, but there is a whole lot of research happening with and through the site as well as a whole lot of teaching."
Jacqueline Vickery, an associate professor at the University of North Texas and digital media scholar, who says she was forced to suspend her research because of a TikTok ban in the state.
"If you rip off ordinary investors to line your own pockets, we will hold you accountable."
Damian Williams, the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York in Manhattan, after the arrest of Alex Mashinsky, the founder of the cryptocurrency firm Celsius.
