Very little is known about the New York Police Department’s use of facial recognition technology. What kind of facial recognition is in place? Which databases are being used? How many people have been scanned, and why? How long is their data retained? Are the police sharing facial recognition data with federal agencies like Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or even private corporations?
What little we know is largely thanks to a lawsuit that has dragged on for two years, after the Police Department turned over only one document in response to a public records request for information about its use of facial recognition. The lawsuit, brought by Georgetown Law’s Center on Privacy and Technology, subsequently produced more than 3,700 pages of documents. The center issued a scathing report on Thursday on the police practices those documents revealed — including celebrity photographs being used as stand-ins when culprits caught on camera were too blurry to run through the database.
Advances in artificial intelligence along with the cheap manufacture of cameras and other devices introduce new forms of surveillance every week. Facial recognition is not just the cutting edge of police surveillance — it’s the newest battleground for civil liberties. Yesterday’s fight was over the cellphone trackers known as Stingrays; tomorrow’s war may be over automatic license plate readers.
For that reason, a number of cities have mandated civilian oversight of new forms of police surveillance. Seattle and California’s Oakland, Berkeley and Davis have all barred municipal police from deploying new surveillance technology without approval from the local government. On Tuesday, San Francisco joined their ranks, and even went a step further, becoming the first city to ban the use of facial recognition technology by the police and other city agencies.
Meanwhile, New York City’s own bill to regulate the use of this technology languishes in committee.
That legislation, the Public Oversight of Surveillance Technology Act, was first introduced in 2017. It was introduced again last year with the backing of 17 out of 51 council members. Unlike the ordinances in San Francisco and Oakland, the New York City bill requires only that the police disclose basic information about the technology that is being deployed. It does not condition the use of new surveillance technology on the approval of the City Council.
In 2017 Mayor Bill de Blasio criticized the disclosure requirement, saying it would provide a “road map for the bad guys.” But the sky has not fallen in Oakland, Berkeley or Davis. And now other cities are poised to ban facial recognition outright, while New Yorkers are not guaranteed even a measure of transparency into how they are being policed.
San Francisco’s ordinance is not perfect — although it binds local government entities, it does nothing to protect people from facial recognition deployed by private entities. It wouldn’t deal, for example, with cases like the landlord in New York City who wanted to install facial recognition systems in its rent-stabilized buildings. At least the police — who are charged with serving and protecting — have ostensibly legitimate reasons to use surveillance to further public safety.
Still, New York should know from its own history of using stop-and-frisk that dragnets become tools aimed at minority populations. Technology has only made the dragnet cheaper to deploy. Every new form of surveillance coming down the pipeline has the potential to become the next legal showdown. Caution and public scrutiny are merited — and all the more so in the case of facial recognition.
When the American Civil Liberties Union tested the Amazon facial recognition tool against members of Congress, 28 legislators were falsely matched with people in a mug shot database. People of color — including six members of the Congressional Black Caucus — were disproportionately represented among the 28. Whether that was a result of a bias in policing or a bias in the technology itself is a tossup. Just as studies have found a systemic racial bias in the justice system, it’s also been shown that facial recognition is particularly prone to error when used on people of color.
But even if facial recognition worked without bias, New Yorkers deserve to know basic details about what the N.Y.P.D. is doing with it. Councilman Brad Lander, a sponsor of the legislation pending in New York, says one of his biggest concerns is that facial recognition will be used to identify and deport undocumented residents, despite the sanctuary city policy. The New York legislation doesn’t foreclose that possibility — but it does require the Police Department to disclose whether it is sharing facial recognition data with ICE.
It’s time for the City Council speaker, Corey Johnson, to move the POST Act forward. Transparency is the least that New Yorkers deserve. This bill would help provide it.
Crédito: By The Editorial Board
