Some of Silicon Valley's smartest and wealthiest have embraced the Singularity, a time when a superior intelligence will dominate and life will take on an altered form that we cannot predict.
On a Tuesday evening this spring, Sergey Brin, the co-founder of Google, became part man and part machine. About 40 people, all gathered here at a NASA campus for a nine-day, $15,000 course at Singularity University, saw it happen.
While the flesh-and-blood version of Mr. Brin sat miles away at a computer capable of remotely steering a robot, the gizmo rolling around here consisted of a printer-size base with wheels attached to a boxy, head-height screen glowing with an image of Mr. Brin's face. The BrinBot obeyed its human commander and sputtered around from group to group, talking to people attending about Google and other topics via a videoconferencing system.
The BrinBot was hardly something out of "Star Trek." It had a rudimentary, no-frills design and was a hodgepodge of loosely integrated technologies. Yet it also smacked of a future that the Singularity University founders hold dear and often discuss with a techno-utopian bravado: the arrival of the Singularity -- a time, possibly just a couple decades from now, when a superior intelligence will dominate and life will take on an altered form that we cannot predict or comprehend in our current, limited state.
At that point, the Singularity holds, human beings and machines will so effortlessly and elegantly merge that poor health, the ravages of old age and even death itself will all be things of the past.
Some of Silicon Valley's smartest and wealthiest people have embraced the Singularity. They believe that technology may be the only way to solve the world's ills, while also allowing people to seize control of the evolutionary process. For those who have not noticed, the Valley's most celebrated company -- Google -- works daily on building a giant brain that harnesses the thinking power of humans to surpass the thinking power of humans.
Larry Page, Google's other co-founder, helped set up Singularity University in 2008, and the company has supported it with more than $250,000 in donations.
Some of Google's earliest employees are, thanks to personal donations of $100,000 each, among the university's "founding circle." (Mr. Page did not respond to interview requests.)
The university represents the more concrete side of the Singularity, and focuses on introducing entrepreneurs to promising technologies. Hundreds of students worldwide apply to snare one of 80 available spots in a separate 10-week "graduate" course that costs $25,000. Chief executives, inventors, doctors and investors jockey for admission to the more intimate, nine-day courses called executive programs.
Both courses include face time with leading thinkers in the areas of nanotechnology, artificial intelligence, energy, biotechnology, robotics and computing.
On a more millennialist and provocative note, the Singularity also offers a modern, quasi-religious answer to the Fountain of Youth by affirming the notion that, yes indeed, humans -- or at least something derived from them -- can have it all.
"We will transcend all of the limitations of our biology," said Raymond Kurzweil, the inventor and businessman who is the Singularity's most ubiquitous spokesman. He says that he intends to live for hundreds of years and resurrect the dead, including his own father. "That is what it means to be human -- to extend who we are."
But, of course, one person's utopia is another person's dystopia.
There are camps of environmentalists who decry efforts to manipulate nature and challenges from religious groups that see the Singularity as a version of "Frankenstein" in which people play at being gods. And some technologists fear a runaway artificial intelligence that subjugates humans.
Some of the Singularity's adherents portray a future in which humans break off into two species: the Haves, who have superior intelligence and can live for hundreds of years, and the Have-Nots, who are hampered by antiquated, corporeal forms and beliefs.
Of course, some people will choose inadequacy, while others will have inadequacy thrust upon them. Critics find such possibilities unnerving because the keys to the next phase of evolution may be beyond the grasp of most people.
"The Singularity is not the great vision for society that Lenin had or Milton Friedman might have," said Andrew Orlowski, a British journalist who has written extensively on techno-utopianism. "It is rich people building a lifeboat and getting off the ship."
'Transcendent Man'
In late August, Mr. Kurzweil will begin a cross-country multimedia road show to promote "Transcendent Man," a documentary about his life and beliefs. Another of his projects, "The Singularity Is Near: A True Story About the Future," has also started to make its way around the film festival circuit.
Mr. Kurzweil is the writer, producer and co-director of "The Singularity Is Near," the tale of Ramona, a virtual being he builds that gradually becomes more human, battles hordes of microscopic robots and taps the lawyer Alan M. Dershowitz for legal advice and the motivational guru Tony Robbins for guidance on personal interactions.
With his glasses, receding hairline and lecturer's ease, Mr. Kurzweil, 62, seems more professor than thespian. His films are just another facet of the Kurzweil franchise, which includes best-selling books, lucrative speaking engagements, blockbuster inventions and a line of health supplements called Ray & Terry's (developed with the physician Terry Grossman).
He began his march toward the Singularity around 1980, when he started plotting things like the speed of chips and memory capacity inside computers and realized that some elements of information technology improved at predictable -- and exponential -- rates.
"With 30 linear steps, you get to 30," he often says in speeches. "With 30 steps exponentially, you get to one billion. The price-performance of computers has improved one billion times since I was a student. In 25 years, a computer as powerful as today's smartphones will be the size of a blood cell."
His fascination with exponential trends eventually led him to construct an elaborate philosophy, illustrated in charts, that provided an analytical backbone for the Singularity and other ideas that had been floating around science-fiction circles for decades.
In "The Singularity Is Near," Mr. Kurzweil posits that technological progress in this century will be 1,000 times greater than that of the past century. He writes about humans trumping biology by filling their bodies with nanoscale creatures that can repair cells and by allowing their minds to tap into super-intelligent computers.
The underlying premise of the Singularity responds to people's insecurity about the speed of social and technological change in the computer era. Mr. Kurzweil posits that the computer and the Internet have changed society much faster than electricity, phones or television and that the next great leap will occur when industries like medicine and energy start moving at the same exponential pace as information technology.
He believes that this latter stage will occur when we learn to manipulate DNA more effectively, arrange atoms and have readily available computers that surpass the human brain.
By the 2030s, most people will be able to achieve mental immortality by backing up their brains, Mr. Kurzweil predicts, as the Singularity starts to come into full flower.
Despite such optimism, some Singularitarians are not all that fond of Mr. Kurzweil.
"I think he's a genius and has certainly brought a lot of these ideas into the public discourse," said James J. Hughes, the executive director of the Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies, a nonprofit organization that studies the implications of advancing technology. "But there are plenty of people that say he has hijacked the Singularity term."
Mr. Kurzweil says that he is simply trying to put analytical clothing on the concept so that people can think more clearly about the future. And regardless of any debate about his intentions, if you are encountering the Singularity in the business world and elsewhere today, it is most likely his take.
Bursts of Innovation
Peter H. Diamandis, 49, is a small man with a wide, bright smile and a thick mound of dark hair. He routinely holds meetings by cellphone and can usually be found typing away on his laptop. He went to medical school to make his mother happy but has always dreamed of heading to outer space.
He is also a firm believer in the Singularity and is a technocelebrity in his own right, primarily through his role in commercializing space travel. At a recent Singularity University lunch, he hopped up to make a speech peppered with passion and conviction.
"My target is to live 700 years," he declared.
The students chuckled.
"I say that seriously," he retorted.
The NASA site, the Ames Research Center, houses an odd collection of unusual buildings, including a giant wind tunnel, a huge supercomputing center and a flight simulator facility with equipment capable throwing people 60 feet, or 18 meters, into the air.
Today, the government operates NASA Ames as a bustling, public-sector-meets-private-sector technology bazaar. Start-ups, universities and companies have set up shop, and Google plans to build a new campus over the next few years that will include housing for workers.
A nondescript structure, Building 20, is the Singularity University headquarters, and most students stay in nearby apartments on the NASA land. Mr. Kurzweil set up the school with Mr. Diamandis, who, as chief executive of the X Prize Foundation, doled out $10 million in 2004 to a team that sent a private spacecraft 100 kilometers, or 62 miles, above the earth. Google has offered $30 million in rewards for an X Prize project intended to inspire a private team to send a robot to the moon. And a $10 million prize will go to the first team that can sequence 100 human genomes in 10 days at a cost of $10,000 or less each -- which, in theory, would turn an expensive, complex lab exercise into an ordinary affair.
Mr. Diamandis champions the idea that large prizes inspire rapid bursts of innovation and may pave a path to that 700-year lifetime.
For the most part, Mr. Kurzweil serves as a figurehead of Singularity University, while Mr. Diamandis steers the institution.
Mr. Diamandis hopes that the university can create an unrivaled network of graduates and bold thinkers -- a Harvard Business School for the future -- who can put its ideas into action. Along with that goal, he is considering creating a venture capital fund to help turn the university's big ideas into big businesses. As some of their favored student creations, school leaders point to a rapid disaster alert-and-response system and a venture that lets individuals rent their cars to other people via cellphone.
People attending the spring session included John Mauldin, a best-selling author who writes an investment newsletter; Stephen Long, a research director at the U.S. Defense Department; Fernando A. de la Viesca, chief executive of the Argentinean investment firm TPCG Financial; Eitan Eliram, the new-media director for the prime minister's office in Israel; and Guy Fraker, the director of trends and foresight at State Farm Insurance.
Preparing to Evolve
Richard A. Clarke, former head of counterterrorism at the U.S. National Security Council, has followed Mr. Kurzweil's work and written a science-fiction thriller, "Breakpoint," in which a group of terrorists try to halt the advance of technology. He sees major conflicts coming as the government and citizens try to wrap their heads around technology that is just beginning to appear.
"There are enormous social and political issues that will arise," Mr. Clarke said. "There are vast groups of people in society who believe the earth is 5,000 years old. If they want to slow down progress and prevent the world from changing around them and they engaged in political action or violence, then there will have to be some sort of decision point."
Mr. Clarke says the government has a contingency plan for just about everything -- including an attack by Canada -- but has yet to think through the implications of techno-philosophies like the Singularity.
Mr. Kurzweil himself acknowledges the possibility of grim outcomes from rapidly advancing technology but prefers to think positively. "Technological evolution is a continuation of biological evolution," he said. "That is very much a natural process."
Despite all of the zeal behind the movement, there are those who look askance at its promises and prospects.
Jonathan Huebner, for example, is often held up as Mr. Kurzweil's foil. A physicist who works at the Naval Air Warfare Center as a weapons designer, he, like Mr. Kurzweil, has compiled his own cathedral of graphs and lists of important inventions. He is unimpressed with the state of progress and, in 2005, published in a scientific journal a paper called "A Possible Declining Trend for Worldwide Innovation."
Measuring the number of innovations divided by the size of the worldwide population, Dr. Huebner contends that the rate of innovation peaked in 1873. Or, based on the number of patents in the United States weighed against the population, he found a peak around 1916.
"The amount of advance in this century will not compare well at all to the last century," Dr. Huebner said, before criticizing tenets of the Singularity. "I don't believe that something like artificial intelligence, as they describe it, will ever appear."
