TECHNOLOGY
In Global 5G Race, E.U.
Is Told to Step Up Pace
As the United States grapples with the 5G rollout affecting airlines, a European Union watchdog warned on Monday the E.U. faces much bigger economic and security threats unless member countries step up cooperation.
The alarm bells are included in a special report on the bloc's preparations for 5G, the next generation of wireless technology.
The study by the European Court of Auditors said Europe is falling behind North America and Asia in the rollout of 5G networks and needs to prepare to counter accompanying risks.
"There are considerable delays in the member states' deployment of 5G networks and further efforts are necessary to address security issues in 5G deployment," the Luxembourg-based E.C.A. said in its 69-page evaluation.
In the U.S., the start of 5G telecommunication services has prompted airlines to complain about possible interference with planes' navigation instruments. ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
Facebook Parent Meta Makes A.I. Supercomputer
Facebook's parent company Meta on Monday said it has created what it believes is among the fastest artificial intelligence supercomputers running today.
The social media giant said it hopes the machine will help lay the groundwork for its building of the metaverse, a virtual reality construct intended to supplant the internet as we know it today.
Facebook said it believes the computer will be the fastest in the world once it is fully built around the middle of the year.
Supercomputers are extremely fast and powerful machines built to do complex calculations not possible with a regular home computer. Meta did not disclose where the computer is located.
The computer, which is up and running but still being built, is called A.I. Research SuperCluster. Meta says it will help its researchers build "new and better" A.I. models that can learn from "trillions" of examples and work across hundreds of different languages simultaneously and analyze text, images and video together. ASSOCIATED PRESS
COMPANIES
IBM Earnings Surprise
As New Strategy Succeeds
IBM beat Wall Street estimates for fourth-quarter revenue on Monday, bolstered by the company's exit from its slow-growing businesses to focus on its cloud services as enterprises worldwide digitize operations.
Shares of Big Blue rose 6.3 percent in trading after the bell, as the company also reiterated its forecast for mid-single-digit revenue growth in 2022, compared with 3.9 percent last year.
The 110-year-old company has doubled down on the high-growth software and consulting businesses after shedding its former managed infrastructure unit in November following years of growth and margin pressures.
"This will be the first quarter where you'll see what today's IBM looks like, and that is a higher revenue growth company," James Kavanaugh, chief financial officer, told Reuters.
IBM's cloud revenue rose 16 percent to $ 6.2 billion during the quarter. REUTERS
Credit: By Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY AFP/GETTY IMAGES)
