PALO ALTO, Calif. -- "Something is happening here but you don't know what it is, do you, Mister Jones?"
Of course Bob Dylan deserved the Nobel Prize for Literature. We're all Mister Jones now. It's the wildest political season in the history of the United States.
Just to make his pedigree clear, Donald Trump is now suggesting that Hillary Clinton "meets in secret with international banks to plot the destruction of U.S. sovereignty, in order to enrich these global financial powers, her special interest friends, and her donors."
What was it the Nazis called the Jews? Oh, yes, "rootless parasites," that's it. For Stalin they were rootless cosmopolitans.
Just saying.
Societies slide into dictatorship more often than they lurch, one barrier falling at a time. "Just a buffoon," people say, "and vulgar." And then it's too late.
I've been reminded in recent weeks of the passage in Fred Uhlman's remarkable novella, "Reunion," in which a proud German Jewish physician, twice wounded in World War I, and convinced the Nazis are a "temporary illness," lambasts a Zionist for trying to raise funds for a Jewish homeland:
"Do you really believe the compatriots of Goethe and Schiller, Kant and Beethoven will fall for this rubbish? How dare you insult the memory of twelve thousand Jews who died for our country?"
Germans fell for the rubbish. The Republican Party fell for the garbage.
Today, millions of Americans who plan to vote for Trump are apparently countenancing violence against their neighbors, people who might be different from them, perhaps Muslim or Latino. It's easy to inject the virus of hatred: just point a gun.
That Trump traffics in violence is irrefutable. His movement wants action -- deportations, arrests, assassination and torture have been mooted. The most worrying thing is not that Trump likes Vladimir Putin, the butcher of Aleppo, but that he apes Vladimir Putin.
Speaking of Latinos, here's what happened the other day to Veronica Zuleta, who was born in El Salvador and became an American citizen more than a decade ago. She was in the upscale Draeger's Market in Menlo Park when the man next to her said:
"You should go to Safeway. This store is for white people."
Zuleta was shocked. Never had she encountered a comment like that about her brown skin. But even the Democratic bastion of Silicon Valley is not immune to the Trump effect: Once unsayable things can now be said the world over. "Go back to where you came from" is the phrase du jour.
In the three months after the Brexit vote in Britain, homophobic attacks rose 147 percent compared to the same period a year earlier. It's open season for bigots.
Financial and emotional pressures have been mounting on Zuleta. She lives in what the visionaries of Google, Facebook and the like consider the center of the universe. Where else, after all, are people thinking seriously about attaining immortality; or life on Mars; or new floating cities atop the oceans; or a universal basic income for everyone once the inevitable happens and artificial intelligence renders much of humanity redundant?
Y Combinator, a big start-up incubator, has announced it will conduct a basic income experiment with 100 families in Oakland, giving them between $1,000 and $2,000 a month for up to a year. Just to see what people do when they have nothing more to do. Oh, Brave New World.
Back in the present, prices for real estate have soared. Zuleta lives in a modest rented place on what used to be the wrong side of the tracks, in East Menlo Park, east of Route 101 that runs down the Valley. As it happens, her home is now a couple of blocks from Facebook's sprawling headquarters designed by Frank Gehry that opened last year. She asked about a job in the kitchen, to no avail. She struggles to make ends meet.
Facebook, she told me, "is intimidating for people like me. It's like, get out of here if you don't know anything about technology."
For its part, Facebook says it cares about and invests in the local community -- $350,000 in grants donated to local nonprofits this year and last, new thermal imaging cameras for the local fire district, and so on. Its revenue in 2015 was $17.9 billion.
Zuleta works from 6:30 in the morning until midnight, cleaning homes, driving children to school and activities, running errands for wealthy families (like shopping for them at Draeger's), and cleaning offices at night. In between she tries to care for her two young children. The other day, she was in the kitchen, collapsed and found herself in the hospital.
"The doctor said I need to sleep and relax," she told me. "But I can't!"
Life is like that these days for many Americans: implacable and disorienting. As a Latina, Zuleta said she would never vote for Trump, but she feels overwhelmed.
Something is happening here but you don't know what it is, do you, Mister Jones?
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
AuthorAffiliation ROGER COHEN You can follow me on Twitter or join me on Facebook.
