Stocks climbed Thursday after a seesaw day on Wall Street to break out of their longest losing streak since December.
The S&P 500 rose 0.5 percent for its first gain in five days. The Dow Jones industrial average gained 0.3 percent, while the Nasdaq composite added 0.7 percent.
Tech stocks helped lead the way after Nvidia reported better results for the latest quarter than expected. Its shares jumped 14 percent after it also gave a forecast for upcoming revenue that topped some analysts' expectations. It cited recovering strength in video gaming and demand for artificial intelligence products.
It's a turnaround for tech and high-growth stocks, which have struggled recently because of worries about rising interest rates. They are seen as some of the most vulnerable as the Federal Reserve pushes rates higher in hopes of stamping out inflation.
High rates hurt prices for investments, particularly those seen as the riskiest, most expensive or whose big growth is furthest out in the future. They also raise the risk of a recession because they slow the economy.
After leaping in January, stocks broadly have slammed into a wall this month on worries that inflation isn't cooling as quickly or as smoothly as hoped. A lengthening list of reports has shown the economy is in stronger shape than expected.
While that has raised hopes about avoiding a recession in the near term, it has also forced Wall Street to raise its forecasts for how high the Fed will take interest rates and how long it will keep them there.
The latest economic data released on Thursday also suggested an economy with enough strength to encourage the Fed to press on with its "higher for longer" campaign on rates. The fear is that a strong economy could feed into upward pressure on inflation.
Fewer workers than expected applied for unemployment benefits last week, another indication that the job market remained resilient despite the fastest increase in rates in decades.
A separate report said the economy's growth was likely a touch weaker in the last three months of 2022 than earlier estimated. But it still grew at a 2.7 percent annual rate.
Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at CFRA Research, said stronger economic data going back to the jobs report at the start of the month pushed him to add one more rate increase to his forecast before the Fed takes a pause. He also expanded how long he expected the S&P 500 to take to get to his target level of 4,575, to 12 months from now instead of the end of this year.
"The bond market has been pretty pessimistic right from the start, assuming that inflation would be higher for longer, that we do have the likelihood of a recession," Mr. Stovall said.
Wall Street's heightened expectations for rates and the Fed have been most evident in the bond market, where Treasury yields have shot higher this month. They eased a bit on Thursday to take some of the pressure off stocks.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury, which helps set rates for mortgages and other important loans, dipped to 3.88 percent from 3.93 percent late Wednesday.
On the losing end of Wall Street was Moderna, whose shares slid 6.7 percent after it reported its fourth-quarter profit tumbled 70 percent as coronavirus vaccine sales fell and the drugmaker caught up on a royalty payment.
Domino's Pizza dropped 11.7 percent despite reporting stronger profit than expected. Its revenue fell short of forecasts, and it lowered the top and bottom ends of its forecast range for global sales growth in the next two to three years.
Lordstown Motors tumbled 11.4 percent to $ 1.09 after it said it would temporarily halt production and deliveries of its Endurance electric pickup because of performance and quality issues with certain components.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
