Watson, the I.B.M. computer that beat two human contestants on "Jeopardy!," showed itself to be imperfect, but researchers are already developing more practical uses for its abilities.
CORRECTION APPENDED
In the end, the humans on the U.S. game show "Jeopardy!" surrendered meekly.
Facing certain defeat at the hands of a room-size I.B.M. computer Wednesday evening, Ken Jennings, famous for winning 74 games in a row on the TV quiz program, acknowledged the obvious. "I, for one, welcome our new computer overlords," he wrote on his video screen, borrowing a line from a "Simpsons" episode.
From now on, if the answer is "the computer champion on "Jeopardy!," the question will be, "What is Watson?" (The show presents clues in the form of answers, which must be responded to in question form.)
For I.B.M., the showdown was not merely a well-publicized stunt that resulted in a $1 million prize, but proof that the company had taken a big step toward a world in which intelligent machines will understand and respond to humans, and perhaps inevitably, replace some of them.
Watson, specifically, is a "question answering machine" of a type that artificial intelligence researchers have struggled with for decades -- a computer akin to the one on "Star Trek" that can understand questions posed in natural language and answer them.
Watson showed itself to be imperfect, but researchers at I.B.M. and other companies are already developing uses for Watson's technologies that could have a significant effect on the way doctors practice and consumers buy products.
"Cast your mind back 20 years, and who would have thought this was possible?" said Edward A. Feigenbaum, a computer scientist at Stanford University in California and a pioneer in the field.
In its "Jeopardy!" project, I.B.M. researchers were tackling a game that required not only encyclopedic recall but also the ability to untangle convoluted and often opaque statements, a modicum of luck, and quick, strategic button pressing.
The contest, which was taped in January at the company's T.J. Watson Research Laboratory in Yorktown Heights before an audience of I.B.M. executives and company clients, played out in three televised episodes that concluded Wednesday. At the end of the first day, Watson was in a tie with Brad Rutter, another ace human player, at $5,000 each, with Mr. Jennings trailing with $2,000.
But on the second day, Watson went on a tear. By the end of the night, Watson had a commanding lead, with a total of $35,734, compared with Mr. Rutter's $10,400 and Mr. Jennings's $4,800.
The final tally was $77,147 for Watson to Mr. Jennings's $24,000 and Mr. Rutter's $21,600.
More than anything, the contest was a vindication for the academic field of computer science, which began with great promise in the 1960s with the vision of creating a thinking machine and which became the laughingstock of Silicon Valley in the 1980s, when a series of heavily financed start-up companies went bankrupt.
Despite its intellectual prowess, Watson was by no means omniscient. On Tuesday evening during Final Jeopardy, the category was U.S. Cities and the clue was: "Its largest airport is named for a World War II hero; its second largest for a World War II battle."
Watson drew guffaws from many in the television audience when it responded, "What is Toronto?????"
The string of question marks indicated that the system had very low confidence in its response, I.B.M. researchers said, but because it was Final Jeopardy, the rules required it to give a response. The machine did not suffer much damage. It had wagered just $947 on its result.
"We failed to deeply understand what was going on there," said David Ferrucci, an I.B.M. researcher who led the development of Watson. "The reality is that there's lots of data where the title is U.S. cities and the answers are countries, European cities, people, mayors. Even though it says U.S. cities, we had very little confidence that that's the distinguishing feature."
The researchers also acknowledged that the machine had benefited from the "buzzer factor."
Both Mr. Jennings and Mr. Rutter are accomplished at anticipating the light that signals it is possible to "buzz in," and can sometimes get in with virtually zero lag time. The danger is in buzzing too early, in which case the contestant is penalized and "locked out" for about a quarter of a second.
In the second round, Watson beat the human players to the buzzer in 24 out of 30 Double Jeopardy questions. Both human players said that Watson's button pushing skill was not necessarily an unfair advantage. "I beat Watson a couple of times," Mr. Rutter said.
The coup de grace came with the answer "William Wilkenson's 'An Account of the Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia' inspired this author's most famous novel." Mr. Jennings wrote, correctly, Bram Stoker, but realized he could not catch up with Watson's winnings and wrote out his surrender.
Both players took the contest and its outcome philosophically.
"I had a great time, and I would do it again in a heartbeat," said Mr. Jennings. "It's not about the results. This is about being part of the future."
For I.B.M., the future will happen very quickly, company executives said. On Thursday, it planned to announce that it would collaborate with Columbia University in New York and the University of Maryland to create a physician's assistant service that would allow doctors to query a cybernetic assistant. The company also plans to work with Nuance Communications to add voice recognition to the physician's assistant, possibly making the service available in as little as 18 months.
"I have been in medical education for 40 years, and we're still a very memory-based curriculum," said Dr. Herbert Chase, a professor of clinical medicine at Columbia who is working with I.B.M. on the physician's assistant. "The power of Watson-like tools will cause us to reconsider what it is we want students to do."
I.B.M. executives also said they were in discussions with a major consumer electronics retailer to develop a version of Watson, named after I.B.M.'s founder, Thomas J. Watson, that would be able to interact with consumers on a variety of subjects like buying decisions and technical support.
Dr. Ferrucci sees none of the fears that have been expressed by theorists and science fiction writers about the potential of computers to usurp humans.
"People ask me if this is HAL," he said, referring to the computer in the film "2001: A Space Odyssey." "HAL's not the focus, the focus is on the computer on 'Star Trek,' where you have this intelligent information-seek dialog, where you can ask follow-up questions and the computer can look at all the evidence and tries to ask follow-up questions. That's very cool."
CORRECTION:
As published in the International Herald Tribune
An article on Feb. 18 about the I.B.M. computer Watson misidentified the academic field vindicated by Watson's besting of two human opponents on "Jeopardy!" It is artificial intelligence -- not computer science, a broader field that includes artificial intelligence.
Friday, February 25, 2011
