Accepting the nomination, the vice president completed a whirlwind ascent -- and sought to finally supplant Donald Trump at the center of America's political drama.
There were a lot of big names at the Democratic National Convention. Night 1 had the unprecedented send-off of a sitting president. Night 2 had not one but two Obamas (plus a raucous roll call of states feat. Lil Jon). Night 3: You get Oprah! And you get Oprah!
There were whispers and reports all day on Thursday that the biggest, most special secret guest of all would appear at the climax. Was it Beyoncé? Taylor Swift? Mitt Romney?
At the end of the night, after a typical program of endorsements and character witnesses, Roy Cooper, the governor of North Carolina, wrapped up and yielded the stage to ...
Kamala Harris?
The rumors, it turned out, were just that. Ms. Harris was the surprise star of her own show.
But in a way, that had been the theme of the entire convention. As a TV production, the event was designed to build on the Kamalanomenon and magnify it. It expressed not a platform but a vibe.
Ms. Harris's ascent was of course politically extraordinary, a whirlwind of less than a month from replacing President Biden to the convention. But it was also unprecedented as a media phenomenon -- at least in politics, where images are usually built over years.
Vice presidents are the spare tires of American politics; you know they're there but don't need to think about them except in an emergency. This meant that Ms. Harris could be reinvented through digital media. Her goofy quotes and hearty laugh were edited to soundtrack TikTok videos, with a boost from the coveted Charli XCX "Brat" endorsement. Excited, relieved Democrats packed venues for her as they hadn't for Mr. Biden.
The crowds at the convention jammed and danced. Dissension, especially over the war in Gaza, stayed mostly off-camera. With its wire-to-wire jubilance -- or "joy," to use the word of the week -- the convention signaled to viewers that this was not just a party but a par-tay. (For its part, former President Donald Trump's fervent convention, coming after the attempt to assassinate him, aimed to convey a divinely predestined inevitability.)
Conventions always seek to build enthusiasm, but they can also be a show of force. In 2008, Barack Obama moved his acceptance speech to Denver's Mile High Stadium. This wasn't just a gesture to make room for his fans; it told Republicans -- who dismissed him as a "celebrity" -- that they were about to get hit by a locomotive.
Ms. Harris's staging likewise showed off her turbocharged campaign. In an audacious move on Tuesday, she and her running mate, Gov. Tim Walz of Minnesota, held a rally in Milwaukee and beamed in by video to a similarly packed and roaring crowd in Chicago. (The Milwaukee rally was in the same venue as Mr. Trump's convention, a troll lost on no one.)
It was an image of ubiquity and relentlessness, and politics is often the hope that images can make reality.
Or unmake it: Mr. Trump speciously claimed earlier this month that Ms. Harris's crowd images were generated by artificial intelligence, then shared A.I. images that falsely implied that Ms. Swift had endorsed him. Thursday in Chicago, Representative Ted Lieu of California joked, "I am so impressed with how large this A.I.-generated crowd looks tonight."
Ms. Harris ended this unusual convention with a fairly typical speech. She began sharing stories of her childhood and her immigrant mother -- the most important lines may have been her laughs -- then grew forceful as she segued, through her career as a prosecutor, to positioning herself as a protector.
Her legal training showed in her closing-arguments bearing; her seeming new political confidence, in her pitches straight to the camera. Not for nothing, the speech was also brief, in contrast with the sometimes overstuffed earlier nights, as well as the extended jam-band solo of a speech her opponent ended his convention with.
There were, of course, attacks on her opponent. ("Simply put, they are out of their minds," she said, characterizing the Trump campaign's positions on reproductive health.) But she was also running to do what even Mr. Biden didn't manage: to replace Mr. Trump as the protagonist of the American political drama.
In 2016, Mr. Trump swamped Hillary Clinton in media coverage. Mr. Biden beat him, but Mr. Trump never really got offstage. With his legal troubles, his influence on his party and eventually his political comeback, he remained the person that everyone else reacted to.
Catapulting to the head of her party, Ms. Harris didn't just become an electoral hope. She became the first politician since Barack Obama who has been able, at least temporarily, to push the reality-TV showboat down the cultural call sheet. She was the one watched, memed, speculated on, iconized or demonized. She was, for now, the main character.
Mr. Trump, of course, is not one to cede the spotlight. After the speech, he called in to Fox News with a scattershot rebuttal, sounding irritated when Martha MacCallum asked how he planned to counter Ms. Harris's recent momentum. "She's not having success," he said. "I'm having success." The hosts eventually cut him off.
It was always going to be a tough fight for the presidency. But Mr. Trump's response suggests that there is something even bigger at stake between him and Kamala Harris: stardom.
Illustration
