U.S. stocks rallied as voters headed to the polls on the last day of the presidential election and as more data piled up showing the economy remains solid.
The S&P 500 rose 1.2 percent to pull closer to its record set last month. The Dow Jones industrial average climbed 427 points, or 1 percent, while the Nasdaq composite gained 1.4 percent.
The market got a lift from a report showing growth accelerated last month for retailers, transportation companies and other businesses in the U.S. services industries. That was despite economists' expectations for a slowdown, and the Institute for Supply Management said it was the strongest growth in more than two years.
The report offered more hope that the U.S. economy will remain solid and avoid a long-feared recession after the worst inflation in generations.
Excitement about the artificial-intelligence boom also helped lift the stock market, as it has for much of the last year. Software company Palantir Technologies jumped 23.5 percent after delivering bigger profit and revenue than analysts expected for the latest quarter. It's an industry known for thinking and talking big, and the chief executive, Alexander Karp, said, "We absolutely eviscerated this quarter, driven by unrelenting A.I. demand that won't slow down."
It helped offset a 5.2 percent drop for NXP Semiconductors. The Dutch company fell to one of the largest losses in the S&P 500 after warning that the weakness it saw in the industrial and other markets during the latest quarter is spreading to Europe and the Americas.
All told, the S&P 500 rose 70.07 points to 5,782.76. The Dow gained 427.28 to 42,221.88, and the Nasdaq composite rallied 259.19 to 18,439.17.
The market's main event on Tuesday was the election, even if the result may not be known for days or weeks as officials count all the votes. Such uncertainty could upset markets, along with a meeting by the Federal Reserve on interest rates later this week. The widespread expectation is for it to cut its main interest rate for a second straight time.
Despite all the uncertainty heading into the final day of voting, many professional investors suggest keeping the focus on the long term. The broad U.S. stock market has historically tended to rise regardless of which party wins the White House, even if each party's policies can help and hurt different industries' profits.
Since 1945, the S&P 500 has risen in 73 percent of the years where a Democrat was president and 70 percent of the years when a Republican was the nation's chief executive, according to Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at CFRA.
The U.S. stock market has risen more in magnitude when Democrats have been president, in part because a loss under George W. Bush's term hurt the Republicans' average. Bush took over as the dot-com bubble was deflating and exited office when the 2008 global financial crisis and Great Recession were devastating markets.
Besides who will be president, other questions hanging over the market include whether the White House will be working with a unified Congress or one split by political parties, as well as whether the results will be contested.
The general hope among investors is often for split control of the U.S. government because that's more likely to keep the status quo and avoid big changes that could drive the nation's debt much, much higher.
Investors have already made moves in anticipation of a win by either former President Donald J. Trump or Vice President Kamala Harris. But Paul Christopher, head of global investment strategy at Wells Fargo Investment Institute, suggests not getting caught up in such pre-election moves, or even those immediately after the polls close, "which we believe will face inevitable tempering, if not outright reversals, either before or after Inauguration Day."
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
