Looking for something to do in New York? Catch Drake and 21 Savage as their tour rolls through town, or fan the flames of your desire with a sexy flick at the IFC.
Comedy
Courtney Pauroso
July 21-22 at 7:30 p.m. at Union Hall, 702 Union Street, Brooklyn; unionhallny.com.
One of several refreshingly original performers emerging from a Los Angeles clown collective nurtured by Philip Burgers (a.k.a. Dr. Brown), Courtney Pauroso has made some ripples on the small screen, appearing in 2019 on Dr. Brown's "Two Pink Doors," part of the anthology series "Cake" on FXX/Hulu; and more recently on ABC's new series "The Prank Panel."
But onstage is where Pauroso is really shaking things up: When she brought her show "Gutterplum" to Union Hall in 2019, Jason Zinoman wrote in The New York Times that she had "a certain raucous aesthetic that proves that modern clowning can be not only scary and funny, but also disarmingly sexual." With her latest one-hander, "Vanessa 5000," which is at Union Hall this weekend, Pauroso takes that sensuality to an even more irreverent yet relevant level, playing a sex robot whose artificial intelligence makes her question her own existence.
Tickets are $ 15 and available through Eventbrite. SEAN L. McCARTHY
Music
Drake and 21 Savage
July 20-21 at 8 p.m. at Barclays Center, 620 Atlantic Avenue, Brooklyn; ticketmaster.com.
The fans flocking to see Drake this weekend may already have their Instagram captions selected -- after all, the Canadian megastar has spent a career channeling the millennial mood into highly memeable one-liners. Over the years, his influence has reached beyond the social media zeitgeist into the sound of pop music in general. Its increasing genre fluidity and evaporating distinctions between rapping and singing reflect Drake's own melodicism and tendency to zigzag between regional styles.
Since he last toured in 2019, Drake has released a handful of albums and mixtapes, including last year's breezy, club-inspired "Honestly, Nevermind" and "Her Loss," a prickly collaboration with the Atlanta rapper 21 Savage. The two artists have teamed up on a tour that is at Barclays on Thursday and Friday, and then at Madison Square Garden on Sunday, Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 p.m.
Prices vary for resale tickets, which are available from Ticketmaster. OLIVIA HORN
Benefit Concert for Creative Music Studio
July 22 at 8 p.m. at Roulette, 509 Atlantic Avenue, Brooklyn; roulette.org.
Billed as an "evening of improvisation," this benefit concert for the Creative Music Studio offers more than a dozen of the most storied make-it-up-as-they-go artists from the jazz, avant-garde and creative music scenes, coming together in impromptu performances. John Zorn, that locus of independent artistry and collaboration, organized the show with the drummer Billy Martin and the violinist Gabby Fluke-Mogul, members of the C.M.S., an organization founded in 1971 by the musicians Karl Berger, Ingrid Sertso and Ornette Coleman.
The vibes player Patricia Brennan, one of the many ringers on the benefit's lineup, called the C.M.S. "indispensable for the development of improvisers and artists."Brennan will be joined by the likes of the guitarists Wendy Eisenberg and Mary Halvorson, and Kenny Wollesen, Cyro Baptista and Ches Smith on percussion, under the "curation" of Zorn. Expect unexpected configurations of musicians -- and also beauty, cacophony and marvels of spontaneous collective composition.
Tickets are $ 30 in advance at Roulette's website, $ 35 at the door, and $ 25 for students and seniors. ALAN SCHERSTUHL
Kids
Moth Night
July 22, 8:30-10 p.m., at the Staten Island Museum, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Building A; statenislandmuseum.org.
Poor moths. Even though they belong to the same biological order as butterflies -- lepidoptera -- they tend to be regarded less as pretty pollinators than as wardrobe-destroying pests.
But not at the Staten Island Museum's annual Moth Night, an ecological celebration at which young visitors can design their own wings and antennas and join the staff of the Staten Island Children's Museum for face painting and moth making. Families can also learn about conserving monarch butterflies from Cooper Keane, a 17-year-old citizen scientist who operates a mobile monarch museum.
The Freshkills Park Alliance will present activities like Bat & Moth, in which children will portray these animals, learning how bats use echolocation to detect prey. Little guests can play other wildlife roles in games that show how forest species rely on their senses of hearing and smell.
The Staten Island Museum will display its moth specimens, but it also invites aspiring naturalists to bring flashlights for a live viewing: The evening's highlight is a walk to observe creatures like owlet moths, June beetles and fireflies.
Tickets start at $ 5; registration is recommended. LAUREL GRAEBER
Film
When the Lights Go Down: The Sex Scene
July 21-Aug. 3 at IFC Center, 323 Sixth Avenue, Manhattan; ifccenter.com.
With a title that nods to Pauline Kael, this two-week program consists of movies notable for their depictions of sex. It's a tie-in with the Aug. 4 release of "Passages," an acclaimed love-triangle drama from the director Ira Sachs -- not that IFC Center needed an excuse.
The sex isn't necessarily explicit (much of "Brokeback Mountain," showing on Friday, Sunday and July 28 and 29, involves passion deferred). It can motivate the action (a tryst reinforces the trust between Gina Gershon and Jennifer Tilly's characters in the Wachowskis' "Bound," on Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Aug. 3) or be central to it. Focusing on an enclave of people who find themselves unfathomably, erotically drawn to vehicular accidents, David Cronenberg's unsettling "Crash" (on Friday, Saturday and July 30 and 31) considers the attraction of spectacle, the impulse to lose control and the relationship between humanity and technology.
The theater is offering a "ménage à trois" ticket special, which gives moviegoers a discount to see three films in the series or take two companions to one. BEN KENIGSBERG
Photograph Drake, onstage in March, is sharing a bill with the Atlanta rapper 21 Savage. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARCELO HERNANDEZ/GETTY IMAGES); Patricia Brennan will be performing on Saturday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NOEL BRENNAN); "Bound," starring Jennifer Tilly, left, and Gina Gershon, is in a series at IFC Center. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RANDY TEPPER/GRAMERCY PICTURES)
