Two bills are being introduced less than a year after the giant search engine company acknowledged that it was developing cars that could be safely driven without human intervention.
Google, a pioneer of driverless cars, is quietly lobbying for legislation that would make Nevada the first U.S. state where they could be legally operated on public roads.
And yes, the proposed legislation would include an exemption from the ban on distracted driving to allow occupants to send text messages while sitting behind the wheel.
The two bills, which have received little attention outside Nevada's Capitol, are being introduced less than a year after the giant search engine company acknowledged that it was developing cars that could be safely driven without human intervention.
Last year, in response to a reporter's query about its then-secret research and development program, Google said it had test-driven robotic hybrid vehicles more than 140,000 miles, or 225,000 kilometers, on California roads -- including Highway 1 between Los Angeles and San Francisco.
More than 1,000 miles had been driven entirely autonomously at that point; one of the company's engineers was testing some of the car's autonomous features on his 50-mile commute from Berkeley to Google's headquarters in Mountain View.
At the time, Google gave little indication what its commercial intent might be. The company confirmed Tuesday that it had lobbied on behalf of the legislation, though executives declined to say why they wanted the robotic cars' maiden state to be Nevada. Jay Nancarrow, a company spokesman, said the project was still very much in the testing phase.
Google hired David Goldwater, a lobbyist based in Las Vegas, to promote the two measures, which are expected to come to a vote before the legislative session ends in June.
One is an amendment to an electric-vehicle bill providing for the licensing and testing of autonomous vehicles, and the other is the exemption that would permit texting.
In testimony before the State Assembly on April 7, Mr. Goldwater argued that the autonomous technology would be safer than human drivers, offer more fuel-efficient cars and promote economic development.
Although safety systems based on artificial intelligence are rapidly making their way into cars, completely autonomous systems raise thorny questions about safety and liability.
Policy makers and regulators have warned that the technology is now advancing so quickly that it is in danger of outstripping existing law, some of which dates to the era of horse-drawn carriages. New laws will be required, they argue, if autonomous vehicles are to become a reality.
Policy analysts say Nevada is the first state to consider the commercial deployment of a generation of vehicles that may park themselves, perform automatic deliveries or even act as automated taxis on the Las Vegas casino strip.
"In some respects this is a great template and a great model," said Ryan Calo, a legal scholar at the Center for Internet and Society at Stanford Law School in California. "It recognizes a need to create a process to test these vehicles and set aside an area of Nevada where testing can take place."
Google's fleet of six autonomous Toyota Priuses and an Audi TT are easily identifiable by distinctive laser range finders mounted on the roofs. Each car also has a variety of radar and camera sensors and a trunkful of computer equipment.
In the testing program, each vehicle is overseen by a driver and a second Google employee who monitors the equipment from the passenger seat. Because of the human oversight, the company has avoided legal action against reckless -- or, in this case, driverless -- driving.
The project is being guided by the artificial-intelligence researcher Sebastian Thrun. As a professor at Stanford University in 2005, Dr. Thrun led a team of students and engineers that designed the first winning entry in an autonomous vehicle contest organized by the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
Since then, Dr. Thrun has focused more of his activities at Google, giving up tenure at Stanford and hiring a growing array of experts to help with the development project.
In frequent public statements, he has said robotic vehicles would increase energy efficiency while reducing road injuries and deaths.
And Dr. Thrun has called for sophisticated systems for car sharing that, he says, could cut the number of cars in the United States in half.
"What if I could take out my phone and say, 'Zipcar, come here,"' he asked an industry conference last year, using the name of a U.S. car-sharing company, "and a moment later the Zipcar came around the corner?"
Google's autonomous vehicle ambitions hint at an emerging vehicle-industrial complex in Silicon Valley.
Mercedes, Volkswagen and other carmakers have operated laboratories in the region, and I.B.M. has a battery development initiative.
The Nummi plant in Fremont, once a joint venture of General Motors and Toyota, has been reopened by Tesla Motors.
