ShondaLand presents its latest guilty pleasure and hardheaded heroine in "The Catch," on ABC. And in the intimate film "James White," Christopher Abbott stars as a young man struggling to reckon with the realities of adulthood.
What's on TV
THE CATCH 10 p.m. on ABC. If last week's season finale of "How to Get Away With Murder" left you wanting more ShondaLand, its time slot has been filled by this latest offering from Shonda Rhimes's production company. It's the story of a top private investigator, Alice Vaughan, who has been conned out of millions by her husband and sets out on a thrilling private mission for revenge. (She's played by Mireille Enos of "The Killing.") The show, Neil Genzlinger wrote in The New York Times, "is defined merely by slickness, and it might have made a decent 'Ocean's Eleven'-style caper movie." He added, "That, though, is quite different from asking people to return week after week." Elsewhere in ShondaLand, Dr. Meredith Grey considers dating again in "Grey's Anatomy" at 8 p.m. And in "Scandal," at 9 p.m., Olivia Pope is back at putting out fires when Mellie makes a very public faux pas. (Image: Ms. Enos and Peter Krause in "The Catch")
>
A. I. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (2001) 7:30 p.m. on Cinemax. This heartbreaking science-fiction fairy tale, directed by Steven Spielberg from an unfinished project of Stanley Kubrick's, tells the familiar story of a fake boy -- in this case a sentient robot played by Haley Joel Osment -- who just wants to be real. After he is abandoned in the woods, he follows his wish and unconditional love for his mother quite literally to the end of the world. The movie, A. O. Scott wrote in The Times, provides a happy ending with a caveat. "Refusing to cuddle us or lull us into easy sleep, Mr. Spielberg locates the unspoken moral of all our fairy tales," he wrote. "To be real is to be mortal; to be human is to love, to dream and to perish." (Image: Mr. Osment, left, and Jude Law)
BASKETS 10 p.m. on FX. Zach Galifianakis stars as both the aspiring clown Chip Baskets and his twin, Dale, in the this series he created with Louis C. K. and Jonathan Krisel. In the season finale, Dale learns that cactuses require little watering, and Chip hits rock bottom.
SISTERS IN LAW 10 p.m. on WE. This new reality series follows a close-knit group of female lawyers as they aim for that timeless goal of having it all: family, career success and enjoying the demanding Los Angeles social scene.
What's Streaming
JAMES WHITE (2015) on iTunes. Growing up can be tough for anyone; it's especially difficult for this film's title character, played by a brooding, expressive Christopher Abbott. He is self-hating and unmotivated, but he does help to take care of his ailing mother (Cynthia Nixon). James meanders through and eventually leaves New York, only to return when her health takes a turn for the worse. The film, Stephen Holden wrote in The Times, "doesn't soften its message: You can only avoid facing reality for so long, until it catches up with you. Then it grabs you by the throat." (Image: Ms. Nixon and Mr. Abbott)
Photograph (Photographs by Richard Cartwright/Abc; David James/Warner Bros. Pictures and Dreamworks Pictures; Film Arcade)
