Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
Ulet Ifansasti had hoisted himself halfway into a jungle canopy when I called out to ask how he was feeling.
"I can't feel my hands!" he yelled back.
For his sake, I didn't mention that he was only halfway to his destination -- or that his arms were trembling like Jell-O.
Weeks earlier, when I proposed an article about a start-up based in California that uses treetop artificial intelligence software to track illegal logging, an editor on The Times's Climate desk said the project would require a good photographer.
So a Times photo editor assigned Mr. Ifansasti, a talented photojournalist, to join me and my colleague Muktita Suhartono on a reporting trip to the Indonesian island of Sumatra. The idea was to follow Topher White, the founder of the start-up, Rainforest Connection, on an excursion to install treetop monitoring software outside four remote villages.
I would fly from Hong Kong, Ms. Suhartono from Bangkok and Mr. Ifansasti from the Indonesian city of Yogyakarta, where he lives.
"So I have to climb a tree?" the photographer asked. The answer was yes, and Mr. Ifansasti, 36, assumed that would be easy enough.
But the tree in question -- a Seussian-looking hardwood with a giant trunk -- turned out to be far bigger than he had expected.
Climbing the tree was important because the article's primary subject was Mr. White, a technologist based in San Francisco who installs the surveillance systems in jungles across Asia, Africa and Latin America. My editors wanted a picture of him doing just that.
Mr. White, 37, typically hoists himself into treetops using rock climbing equipment. He showed Mr. Ifansasti how to use the gear, and the plan was for the two men to climb together on tandem ropes, rendezvousing at a tree limb overlooking the jungle canopy. After that, Mr. White would install a solar-powered surveillance system that continuously uploads audio data online, where A.I. software listens for the sounds of chain saws and other telltale audio signatures of illegal activity.
Before they set off, Ms. Suhartono and I joked that if Mr. Ifansasti got stuck on the limb, he could always drop his memory card. But the joke assumed he would make it that far, and after watching him climb for a few minutes, I wasn't sure that he could.
(I had declined Mr. White's invitation to join the climb above the jungle canopy, ostensibly because I didn't want to prevent a local forest patroller from having the opportunity -- and also, if I'm honest, because the idea sounded more terrifying than exciting.)
From the ground, I noticed that Mr. Ifansasti was relying too much on his arms, instead of his legs, to pull himself up, and at turns letting go of the rope entirely and flailing around like a pinwheel as he dangled from his harness. Ms. Suhartono said it looked as though he were practicing kung fu in midair.
Soon, howls of fatigue and frustration were filtering down through layers of jungle vines. Mr. Ifansasti was clearly in pain and trying to muster his last reserves of strength to carry on.
Also, the late-afternoon sunlight -- a key ingredient for what photographers call the "golden hour" of shooting -- was fading fast.
"Ulet is still dangling," Ms. Suhartono said at one point. "Where's Topher gone?" It turned out that Mr. White had already reached the tree limb, nearly 200 feet above the ground, but that Mr. Ifansasti's arms had given out entirely.
He was stranded.
"Topher, I'm sorry," the photographer told the technologist. "I can't move."
So Mr. White, who has a rock climber's upper-body strength, backtracked and ratcheted both himself and Mr. Ifansasti into position on the tree limb. From a distance, the maneuver looked like a two-man circus act.
Above the tree canopy, Mr. Ifansasti's cellphone, which had been out of range on the forest floor, began to ring.
"Are you back from the forest yet?" his wife asked when he picked up.
"No, I'm in the tree," he said.
Mr. Ifansasti's wife told him to hang up and focus on his job, which he did. And the portrait he took of Mr. White a few moments later -- framed by the tree, the tropical foliage and the hazy outlines of Sumatran mountains -- would become our article's lead image.
When Mr. Ifansasti finally returned, it was nearly dark and he was beaming with satisfaction. What were the specific difficulties, I asked, of shooting a portrait at the roof of a jungle?
"Difficulties?" he said with a laugh. "It was all difficult!"
______
Follow the @ReaderCenter on Twitter for more coverage highlighting your perspectives and experiences and for insight into how we work.
Photograph Ulet Ifansasti, right, in the trees of Sumatra to photograph the technology of Topher White, left. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ULET IFANSASTI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
