In the hours after the El Paso shooting last weekend, Fredrick Brennan, the founder of the online message board 8chan -- the site that had hosted the racist manifestoes of the men responsible for the El Paso, Christchurch and Poway synagogue shootings -- called for the site to be shut down. In an interview with The Times, he said, "It's a complete negative to everybody except the users that are there. And you know what? It's a negative to them, too. They just don't realize it."
After the El Paso massacre, the 8chan website briefly went offline when Cloudflare, the network provider, banned it. But it was only a matter of time before someone else agreed to support the site: By Tuesday morning, 8chan was back online, spewing a toxic mix of hatred, violence and QAnon conspiracies. Message boards like 8chan aren't the only place where these things are spread: In March, when there were two mass shootings at mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, the shootings were live-streamed on Facebook and then viewed millions of times on YouTube.
Though it may seem that there is little that platforms and politicians can do to stop the spread of online hatred, a great deal could be accomplished with one simple tweak to the existing Communications Decency Act: revise the safe harbor provisions of the law.
A safe harbor provision of a statute or a regulation specifies that certain conduct will be deemed not to violate a given rule. For social media platforms like 8chan, Facebook and YouTube, the most important of these is Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, which states, "No provider or user of an interactive computer service shall be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information content provider."
When Johnson & Johnson removed all the Tylenol from American stores in the wake of a poisoning scandal, it did so because of the liability it would face if anyone got hurt. But 8chan, Reddit, Facebook and YouTube are totally protected from being sued for content on their networks because of this unique set of laws created at the beginning of the internet.
The safe harbor laws were created for what is known as passive (or neutral) intermediaries. Verizon, for example, is a passive intermediary platform: It makes no attempt to edit or alter the bits flowing through its fiber optic cables. Facebook and YouTube, however, are active intermediaries; they present you with content different from what they present to me. They filter pornography and jihadist videos off their networks using artificial intelligence. As such, they should not be shielded from liability by safe harbor laws in the same way that Verizon is shielded.
Even though Facebook was able to use A.I. to block 90 percent of the Christchurch streams after it identified the video, last year Mark Zuckerberg testified to Congress that it might take five to 10 years to perfect these tools. But society cannot wait five to 10 years -- we need to stop these videos now, and banning toxic content must become the highest priority at 8chan, Reddit, Facebook and YouTube.
Some may argue that deciding what counts as toxic video content is a slippery slope toward censorship. However, for the past 75 years, since the first television broadcasts, the Federal Communications Commission has been able to regulate offensive content on television. I believe we can all agree that mass murder, faked videos and pornography should not be broadcast -- not by cable news providers, and certainly not by Facebook and YouTube. Since broadcasters do not have the protection of "safe harbor," they engage in a certain level of self-regulation, to avoid being sued. The Federal Communications Commission rarely has to intervene. And there is no reason to believe that the largest corporations in the world -- Google, Apple, Facebook and Amazon -- would behave differently from CBS, Fox, NBC or ABC.
In the past, Google and Facebook have shown that they can pivot quickly and that they already have the technology to keep certain content off their platforms. There is almost no pornography on Facebook or YouTube because of sophisticated tools that search for and prevent such uploads. And since 2017, both companies have actively removed jihadist videos. But it took the right incentives to get them to do both of those things.
In 2015, when I started researching my book on how Facebook and Google undermined democracy, there were over 40,000 jihadist videos on YouTube. At the time, YouTube seemed to be ignoring the problem. However, after Procter & Gamble -- one of YouTube's largest advertisers -- found one of its ads on an Islamic State propaganda video, YouTube started to clean up its act. In the same way that it used artificial intelligence to keep pornography off its network, it started to block the upload of Islamic State videos.
Changing the safe harbor laws so that social media platforms are held accountable for the content their users post would incentivize Facebook and YouTube to take things like the deep-fake video of Nancy Pelosi and the Christchurch shooting videos more seriously. Congress must revisit the Safe Harbor statutes so that active intermediaries are held legally responsible for the content on their sites.
In the wake of the Christchurch shootings, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand remarked about the social networks: "They are the publisher, not the postman. There cannot be a case of all profit and no responsibility."
Jonathan Taplin is the director emeritus of the Annenberg Innovation Lab at the University of Southern California and the author of "Move Fast and Break Things: How Facebook, Google and Amazon Cornered Culture and Undermined Democracy."
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .
