In an address about the kind of economy he hopes to build for the 21st century, the former president harked back to the end of another century: the 19th.
The titans of finance who gathered on Thursday at the Economic Club of New York may have hoped to hear how former President Donald J. Trump would take the nation into the era of artificial intelligence, private space travel and self-driving electric cars.
Instead, they were treated to an extended discourse on the glories of William McKinley and the power of tariffs to cure all that ails what Mr. Trump called a nation nearing economic collapse. Rather than new policies for the 21st century, the former president often harked back to the end of another century, the 19th.
"In the words of a great but highly underrated president, William McKinley, highly underrated, the protective tariff policy of the Republicans has been made -- and made -- the lives of our countrymen sweeter and brighter," he said on Thursday during a rambling speech billed as a major economic address.
Mr. Trump seemed aware that his prescriptions for import tariffs on every product made abroad and a preferential 15 percent corporate tax rate for domestic manufacturers might not resonate in the high temple of global finance.
"You can call it what you want; some might say it's economic nationalism," he said after name-checking some of Wall Street's richest men, such as Stephen A. Schwarzman, the chief executive of the Blackstone Group, Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, and John Paulson, the famed hedge fund manager. "I call it common sense. I call it America First. This is the policy that built this country, and this is the policy that will save our country."
His solution for the deficit? Tariffs. The crisis for middle-class families struggling with child care? The economic growth he said would be spurred by things like tariffs. A complicated international supply chain that has the wings of military aircraft manufactured in one country and the tail in another? Tariffs.
The promised growth would even finance the creation of a sovereign wealth fund, a government-run investment entity common in countries like Saudi Arabia and Norway awash in petrodollars, not in a nation like the United States, where the federal deficit reached $ 1.7 trillion last fiscal year.
(The other answer is harsh immigration policies, he said: cutting off all assistance to undocumented immigrants to lower the deficit, followed by their mass deportation, which would open up homes and lower housing costs.)
If the economic minds of Wall Street looked askance at these ideas, they did not immediately say it. Vice President Kamala Harris tried to come their way on Wednesday by lowering her prescribed top capital gains tax rate for the wealthy to 28 percent, rather than the 39.6 percent rate that President Biden wanted, which would have taxed investment income at the same rate as earned income.
But Mr. Trump was promising them even lower taxes: a full extension of the tax cuts he won in 2017 that heavily favored the rich -- and even more, such as the ability to write business investment fully off the corporate balance sheet. That has been good enough to keep some of the wealthiest Americans in Mr. Trump's camp.
After the speech, Mr. Paulson applauded the former president's ideas. "What Trump would like to do is restore American manufacturing again, make America a manufacturing powerhouse, and that would benefit our economy," he said in an interview. "That would give us strategic value and benefit workers -- and tariffs are a tool to achieve that."
More traditional economists -- and Democrats -- are not so sanguine. Lawrence Summers, a Treasury secretary in the Clinton administration, has said that Mr. Trump's policies would stifle international competition, raise consumer costs and increase corporate profits at the expense of falling inflation-adjusted wages in the American work force.
Jared Bernstein, the chairman of President Biden's White House Council of Economic Advisers, said after the speech, "Virtually every economist has come to the same conclusion: Trump's proposed huge increase in tariffs will constitute a massive new sales tax on the middle class and will reverse the significant progress we've made against inflation."
Mr. Trump took time in the speech to take aim at Ms. Harris, saying at one point that "as everyone knows, she is a Marxist."
But not all Marxism is bad in his telling, apparently: "China was built on doing exactly what we're going to be doing," he said.
If China had five-year plans and the Great Leap Forward, Mr. Trump had prescriptions that were a little more vague. At one point, he did nod to the future -- "A.I., controversial," he said, "but we got to be the top of it."
Yet he spent more time on the wonders of the past, without acknowledging how much has changed since 1890, when McKinley, as a U.S. Representative, drafted the law that raised import tariffs by 50 percent to protect American industry, and 1901, when McKinley, as president, was assassinated.
"Teddy Roosevelt became a great president, spending the money that was made by McKinley," Mr. Trump said.
Mr. Trump did marvel at one technology, nuclear power, as he talked of John Trump, his uncle who was a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
"We used to talk about it," Mr. Trump said, "and I'd say, 'Uncle John, there's no way.' He was telling me about this incredible power that was being unleashed potentially. And I'd say, 'Uncle John, you could never."'
Needless to say, Mr. Trump would like a lot more nuclear power.
Illustration
