TECHNOLOGY
Nvidia Outbids Rival Intel To Buy Israel's Mellanox
American chip supplier Nvidia has agreed to buy Israeli chip designer Mellanox Technologies for $6.8 billion, beating rival Intel in a deal that would help the firm boost its data center and artificial intelligence business.
The all-cash offer of $125 per share represents a premium of 14 percent to Mellanox's closing price on Friday. Mellanox shares rose 8.2 percent to $118.35, and Nvidia shares gained 7 percent to $161.23 on Monday.
Nvidia, once known as a provider of gaming chips, now also provides chips to speed up artificial intelligence tasks such as teaching servers to recognize images. Mellanox makes chips that connect those servers together inside the data center.
Nvidia bought Mellanox to help stitch those servers together into one giant computer, Nvidia's chief executive, Jensen Huang, told Reuters in an interview.
"We want to double down on data centers," he said. Reuters
COMPANIES
Barrick Ends Hostile Bid And Forms Joint Venture
Barrick Gold on Monday pulled its $18 billion offer for Newmont Mining and agreed to form a joint venture in Nevada with its rival, ending a hostile takeover bid that sought to unite the world's two largest gold producers.
By combining their operations in the southwestern state, which is home to one of the world's largest gold-producing areas, Barrick and Newmont hope to save more than $5 billion over the next 20 years.
Toronto-based Barrick will control 61.5 percent of the venture, giving it slightly less oversight than it initially wanted even as it gains full operational control over mines that produce more than 4 million ounces of gold annually.
The agreement comes amid a pickup in deals across the gold industry, which has struggled with a loss of investor confidence and financing constraints in recent years.
"This is one of those rare transactions that really does create demonstrable value for everyone involved," said Barrick's chief executive, Mark Bristow. Reuters
ECONOMY
Drop in Inflation Outlook Supports Fed's Rate Easing
American consumers expect prices to rise more slowly, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, a decline in inflation expectations in February that likely reinforces policymakers' reluctance to hike rates.
The survey of consumer expectations, published on Monday, is one of the Fed's price gauges as it weighs the need for raising rates. It showed one- and three-year-ahead inflation expectations were down 0.2 percentage points to 2.8 percent last month, with sharp declines in expected medical expenses. Both the one- and three-year gauges had been roughly unchanged since April 2018.
Stable and low inflation is one of the main reasons that the central bank, having raised interest rates four times last year, is now taking a wait-and-see approach to any more tightening in 2019.
Fed officials last raised their target policy rate in December to 2.25 to 2.50 percent but signaled after that point that they would be "patient" before deciding future moves. Reuters
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUGLAS C. PIZAC/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
