The prose produced by a computer program could revolutionize journalism and artificial intelligence.
The sports story read like this: "Wisconsin appears to be in the driver's seat en route to a win, as it leads 51-10 after the third quarter. Wisconsin added to its lead when Russell Wilson found Jacob Pedersen for an eight-yard touchdown to make the score 44-3."
Those words, written within 60 seconds during a football game earlier this month between the University of Wisconsin-Madison and the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, may not seem to stand out. But they were the prose of a computer.
The code that produced them is the handiwork of Narrative Science, a start-up in Evanston, Illinois, that offers proof of the progress of artificial intelligence: the ability of computers to mimic human reasoning.
The company's software takes data, like sports statistics, company financial reports and housing starts and sales and turns them into articles.
For years, programmers have experimented with software that has written such articles, typically for sports events, but these efforts had a formulaic, fill-in-the-blank style. They read as if a machine had written them.
But Narrative Science is based on more than a decade of research, led by two of the company's founders, Kristian J. Hammond and Larry Birnbaum, co-directors of the Intelligent Information Laboratory at Northwestern University in Evanston. And the articles produced by Narrative Science are different.
"I thought it was magic," said Roger Lee, a general partner of Battery Ventures, which invested $6 million earlier this year in the company. "It's as if a human wrote it."
Experts in artificial intelligence and language are also impressed, if less enthralled. "The quality of the narrative produced was quite good," said Oren Etzioni, a computer scientist at the University of Washington -- as if it were written by a human, if not by an accomplished wordsmith.
Narrative Science, Mr. Etzioni said, points to a larger trend in computing of "the increasing sophistication in automatic language understanding and, now, language generation."
The innovative work at Narrative Science raises, however, the broader issue of whether such applications of artificial intelligence would mainly assist human workers or replace them. Technology is already undermining the economics of traditional journalism. Online advertising, while on the rise, has not offset the decline in print advertising. But will "robot journalists" replace flesh-and-blood reporters in newsrooms?
The leaders of Narrative Science emphasized that their technology would be primarily a low-cost tool for publications to expand and enrich coverage when editorial budgets are under pressure. The company, founded last year, has 20 customers so far. Several are still experimenting with the technology, and Stuart Frankel, the chief executive of Narrative Science, did not want to name them. They include newspaper chains seeking to offer automated summary articles for more extensive coverage of local youth sports and to generate articles about the quarterly financial results of local public companies.
"Mostly, we're doing things that are not being done otherwise," Mr. Frankel said.
The Narrative Science customers interviewed do fit that model. The Big Ten Network, a joint venture of the Big Ten Conference, a grouping of university sports teams in the United States, and Fox Networks, began using the technology in spring 2010 for short summaries of baseball and softball games.
They are posted on the network's Web site within a minute or two of the end of each game; box scores and play-by-play data are used to generate the brief articles.
The network previously relied on online summaries provided by university sports offices.
As the spring sports season progressed, the computer-generated articles improved, helped by suggestions from editors on the network's staff, said Michael Calderon, vice president for digital and interactive media at the Big Ten Network.
The Narrative Science software can make inferences based on historical data it collects and the sequence and outcomes of past games. To generate story "angles," Mr. Hammond said, the software learns concepts for articles like "individual effort," "team effort," "come from behind," "back and forth," "season high," "player's streak" and "rankings for team." Then the software decides what element is most important for that game, and it becomes the lead of the article, he said. The data also determine vocabulary selection. A lopsided score may well be termed a "rout" rather than a "win."
"Composition is the key concept," Mr. Hammond said. "This is not just taking data and spilling it over into text."
Last fall, the Big Ten Network began using Narrative Science for updates of football and basketball games. Those reports helped drive a surge in referrals to its Web site from Google's search algorithm, which gives new content on popular subjects high ranking, Mr. Calderon said. The network's Web traffic for football games last season was 40 percent higher than in 2009.
Hanley Wood, a trade publisher for the construction industry, began using the program in August to provide monthly reports on more than 350 local housing markets, posted on its site, builderonline.com.
The company had long collected the data, but hiring people to write trend articles would have been too costly, said Andrew Reid, president of Hanley Wood's digital media and market intelligence unit.
Mr. Reid said Hanley Wood had worked with Narrative Science for months to fine-tune the software. A former executive at Thomson Reuters, he said he was struck by the high quality of the articles. "They got over a big linguistic hurdle," he said. "The stories are not duplicates, by any means."
He was also impressed by the cost. Hanley Wood pays Narrative Science less than $10 for each article of about 500 words -- and the price is likely to decline over time.
Even at $10, the cost is far less, by industry estimates, than the average cost per article of local online news ventures like Patch, a network of local news Web sites run by AOL.
Narrative Science's ambitions include moving further up the ladder of quality. Both Mr. Birnbaum and Mr. Hammond are professors of journalism as well as computer science. The company itself is an outgrowth of collaboration between the two schools. "This kind of technology can deepen journalism," said John Lavine, dean of the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern, which holds a stake in Narrative Science.
Mr. Hammond said the combination of advances in its writing engine and data mining may open new horizons for computer journalism, exploring "correlations that you did not expect."
Mr. Hammond begged to differ with a prediction that in 20 years a computer program might win the Pulitzer Prize in journalism. It was not the idea, but the timing that irked him.
"In five years," he said, "a computer program will win a Pulitzer Prize -- and I'll be damned if it's not our technology."
