Songkick offers personalized news about live shows and an extensive Web home where fans can share their concert memories.
Film buffs have the Internet Movie Database. Music video aficionados have YouTube and Vevo. But what is the go-to Web site for live music?
The touring market is the fastest-growing sector of the music industry, yet when it comes to big-tent sites that represent the experience as a whole -- and do more than just sell tickets -- there are few contenders. One young company called Songkick is trying to change that by feeding its users personalized news about live shows and by creating an extensive Web home where fans can share their concert memories.
After users sign up to track their favorite bands, the Songkick service sends e-mail notifications when those acts will perform nearby, drawing from a database of more than 100,000 concert listings around the world.
"We want to make it as easy to go to a concert as it is to go to the movies on a Friday night," said Ian Hogarth, chief executive of the company.
Songkick, which was founded in 2007 and is based in London, has also begun to make noise within the concert industry.
According to some counts, as many as 40 percent of all concert tickets go unsold. But Songkick's model helps sell more tickets, said Sarah McGoldrick, marketing manager for C3 Presents, an independent concert promoter in Austin, Texas, that supplies listings data to Songkick.
"They have the right idea," Ms. McGoldrick said. "They've gotten people engaged with the Web site, and that means that when they get e-mail they see it as relevant, and not as spam. And the most crucial step in any live entertainment marketing is, if you're not relevant then you're wasting your breath."
With a string of deals to syndicate its data around the Internet, Songkick has also emerged as one of the most ambitious listings Web sites.
Over the past year, it has started working with YouTube, Yahoo and the BBC, and it recently signed a deal with Warner Music Group to manage the dissemination of its artists' tour dates on the Web. A mobile application is expected soon, and the company recently made a prominent hire by selecting Dan Crow, a veteran of Apple, Google and start-ups like Blurb, as its chief technology officer.
For fans accustomed to laboriously scouring blogs, MySpace pages, bands' official sites, nightclubs' Web sites and e-mails for concert listings, Songkick's personalized system can simplify the hunt and turn up news that people might have missed.
"It does the heavy lifting for me," said Joe Zadeh, a 29-year-old in San Francisco who has been using the service for a year. "If it wasn't for Songkick, I just wouldn't go to as many concerts, because it's just too much information, too much noise to keep up with."
Songkick is not the only music listings site available. Pollstar, the concert industry trade publication, has an extensive online database, and other services like JamBase and Bandsintown allow users to track their favorite bands.
But Songkick has emerged as the leader. According to comScore, a company that measures Internet traffic, Songkick has surpassed all of its competitors except Ticketmaster and Live Nation. Those two companies, which merged last year, maintain separate Web sites and operate as separate divisions within Live Nation Entertainment.
Chris LaRosa, music product manager at YouTube, said that integrating concert information had become more important as sites like YouTube had become one of the first stops music fans made to discover new groups.
"If you look at a live concert, it's really a content purchase," Mr. LaRosa said. "People come to YouTube to preview what concert they want to go to."
Songkick makes a commission from purchases made via its links, but the company wants to do more than just sell concert tickets. Over fried chicken before a concert in New York recently, Mr. Hogarth, 29, argued that by focusing on regional markets and doing little to retain customers, the concert industry had left open a huge opportunity: a big, overarching Web site dedicated to the experiences of fans.
Using sites like the Internet Movie Database as a model, Songkick has built an archive of two million concerts going back to the 1950s. Each concert record has an "I was there" tag for users, who can add posters, photos and links to reviews. Eventually, Mr. Hogarth said, the company could sell memorabilia or live recordings through the archive. So far, the site does not have advertising.
"There's a need for a consumer brand that represents live music fans online," Mr. Hogarth said. "Not focused on the venue or the particular ticketing system, but focused on the fan. And we believe that can be a huge company, similar to the way Yelp represents restaurants online, or Netflix represents movies online."
He added: "If people are going to think of one brand when they think of live music, we'd like that to be us."
Born in London, Mr. Hogarth studied artificial intelligence at Cambridge University and formed Songkick with two friends who, like him, were irritated by the difficulty of finding concert information. Listings were scattered across the Internet, and ticketing companies' impersonal e-mail blasts did not help much.
After developing the basic idea for Songkick, Mr. Hogarth and his founding partners, Michelle You and Pete Smith, had a quick rise: The company received seed money and guidance from Y Combinator, an elite technology incubator in Boston. Among its investors are Index Ventures, whose media bets have included Skype and Last.fm.
But the company has already stepped on some toes. Songkick gets listings information from promoters and ticket services, but also uses its computers to trawl the Web. Last year, Pollstar planted some dummy listings and saw them turn up on Songkick. Gary Bongiovanni, editor of Pollstar, said his company had not taken action, but noted that it had sued another service, Gigmania, in 2000 for doing something similar and had won a default judgment.
"I have no respect for anyone who tries to build a business off of other people's hard work," Mr. Bongiovanni said.
In response, Mr. Hogarth said that Songkick no longer used Pollstar data.
To stay focused on fans, Mr. Hogarth said, the company forbids its 20 employees from accepting free tickets. Instead, each employee gets a monthly allowance of about $40 to attend concerts.
"As soon as we are on the list, the guest of the promoter, we'll forget about the pain of not getting your ticket at 9 a.m. when the on-sale starts," Mr. Hogarth said. "We'll lose sight of what it means to be a fan."
