Julie Garetto Shafer and Jeffrey Eric Davitz were married June 1. Paul Bass, a Universal Life minister and lifelong friend of the groom, officiated in the New York apartment of Lesley and Evan Heller.
Mrs. Davitz, 56, is the head of strategic philanthropy and purpose investment, in New York, at BNP Paribas/Bank of the West. She graduated from the University of California, Davis, and received a master's degree in marriage, family and child counseling from the University of San Francisco.
She is the daughter of Geri Garetto of Napa, Calif., and the late Paul Garetto. Her father was a regional manager, in Napa, for Pacific Gas & Electric, the California utility.
Mr. Davitz, 58, is the chief executive of Reperio, a company in San Francisco concerned with artificial intelligence applied to training and education. He graduated from the University of Chicago and received a doctoral degree in statistics from Columbia University.
He is a son of Lois Leiderman Davitz of New York and the late Joel R. Davitz. The groom's mother retired as a lecturer in psychology at Columbia University's Teachers College. His father retired as a professor of psychology, also at Teachers College.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the groom's.
About five years ago, Ms. Shafer, who had recently moved to New York from San Francisco, was shopping at a grocery store on Broadway when she unexpectedly made a friend.
"This elderly woman sort of smiled at me, standing in front of the spice rack, and said, 'I'm looking for spices to make gazpacho,"' Ms. Shafer said.
The two began chatting, and soon found that they had much in common: They had both lived in San Francisco, each spent a great deal of time traveling, and it turned out they now lived just a block and half apart.
"So we became friends," Ms. Shafer said.
The woman was Lois Davitz, Mr. Davitz's mother.
One day, when they were visiting, her new friend showed Ms. Shafer a picture of her two sons. She said she would love to introduce Ms. Shafer to the younger one, Jeffrey, but unfortunately he was in a relationship.
"Story of my life," Ms. Shafer said. "I haven't had a date in years. Everyone's taken."
Nonetheless, the incident left her not unaffected.
"I distinctly remember seeing Jeffrey's picture and thinking, Wow! I'd really like to meet that person," she said. "But I thought it would never happen."
In late 2014 or early 2015, Ms. Shafer bumped into Ms. Davitz and her husband, on the street and they told her that they were moving to San Francisco because their younger son had been diagnosed with terminal brain cancer, and they wanted to be there with him.
Then, last fall, Ms. Shafer got an email from Mrs. Davitz saying that while her son had had a miraculous recovery from his cancer, her husband had died and she was moving back to New York.
She also said that her son was single again, if Ms. Shafer might still be interested in an introduction.
Ms. Shafer and Mr. Davitz began emailing and soon proceeded to telephone calls that grew longer and longer.
"It was an incredible connection," Mr. Davitz said. "She is an incredibly kind and sensitive and thoughtful person."
"I knew before I met him," Ms. Shafer said. "I thought, this is something really serious."
The couple had their first date -- and their first kiss -- in December, when Ms. Shafer flew out to San Francisco for work, for her older son's birthday and, of course, to meet Mr. Davitz. Six weeks later, he asked her to marry him.
Mr. Davitz's cancer -- a brainstem glioblastoma multiforme in an advanced stage -- is now inactive. "I'm not out of the woods, and it's not a clean bill of health or anything remotely like that, but I'm a functional person," he said. "I play squash. I work. I travel."
At the party following their wedding, gazpacho, the tomato-and-cucumber concoction that started the whole romance, was served. (And there are no spices in the soup. Just salt and pepper.)
Photograph Julie Shafer, Jeffrey Davitz (PHOTOGRAPH BY LISA BERG)
