REGULATION
Amazon Challenges
Digital Standards in E.U.
Amazon is disputing its status as a big online platform that needs to face stricter scrutiny under European Union digital rules taking effect next month, the first Silicon Valley tech giant to push back on the pioneering new standards.
The online retailer filed a legal challenge with a top European Union court, arguing it's being treated unfairly by being designated a "very large online platform" under the 27-nation bloc's sweeping Digital Services Act.
The Digital Services Act imposes new obligations on the biggest tech companies to keep users safe from illegal content and questionable products, with violations punishable by heavy fines or even a ban on operating in the E.U.
Seattle-based Amazon is one of 19 companies classed as the largest online platforms and search engines under the DSA, which means they will have to better police their services to protect European users from hate speech, disinformation and other harmful online content. ASSOCIATED PRESS
AUTOMOBILES
Daimler Truck Is Rosy
On Its Future Revenue
Daimler Truck expects revenues to grow as much as 60 percent between 2025 and 2030, top management of the truck and bus maker told investors on Tuesday.
The company's optimistic outlook, presented at a capital markets day in Boston, comes a year after Daimler Truck became an independently listed company in a spinoff from Mercedes-Benz passenger cars, and as it focuses on building autonomous trucks.
Daimler Truck shares rose 2.5 percent.
Easing supply chain constraints and stronger demand in its core markets and the after-sales business prompted the company late on Monday to raise its profit and revenue guidance for 2023.
"We are sold out for 2023," C.E.O. Martin Daum said on Tuesday. In Europe, the company is seeing strong orders for the first quarter of 2024, he said.
Mr. Daum said he would soon announce a partnership with a battery cell producer in the United States, in response to government incentives. REUTERS
TECHNOLOGY
O.E.C.D. Says A.I. Puts27 Percent of Jobs at Risk
More than a quarter of jobs in the 38-nation Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development rely on skills that could be easily automated in the coming artificial intelligence revolution, and workers fear they could lose their jobs to A.I., the O.E.C.D. said on Tuesday.
There is little evidence the emergence of A.I. is having a significant impact on jobs so far, but that may be because the revolution is in its early stages, the O.E.C.D. said.
Jobs with the highest risk of being automated make up 27 percent of the labor force on average in O.E.C.D. countries, with eastern European countries most exposed, the organization said in its 2023 Employment Outlook.
Three out of five workers fear they could lose their job to A.I. over the next 10 years, the O.E.C.D. found in a survey last year before the explosive emergence of generative A.I. like ChatGPT. REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY CONSTANTIN ZINN/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)
