Declaring "I am a capitalist" in a speech in Pittsburgh, Kamala Harris promised not to be "constrained by ideology" even as she said she would fiercely defend unions and the middle class.
Vice President Kamala Harris laid out a broad vision of her economic plan on Wednesday as she sought to bridge the political divide between the progressive senator who ran for president in 2019 and the pragmatic, pro-business candidate she is presenting herself as now.
During a speech in Pittsburgh in which she declared "I am a capitalist," Ms. Harris promised to protect and expand U.S. manufacturing as she tried to convince voters that she will defend and lift up the middle class.
"From our earliest days, America's economic strength has been tied to our industrial strength," she said. "The same is true today. So I will recommit the nation to global leadership in the sectors that will define the next century."
Speaking not with the trappings of a raucous campaign rally but in front of the sober signage of the Economic Club of Pittsburgh, Ms. Harris delivered remarks seemingly tailored to voters sitting in wood-paneled offices reading the print edition of The Wall Street Journal. Such voters may have supported John McCain and Mitt Romney, and might believe the economy was better four years ago, but the Harris campaign appears to be hoping that many will now have trouble stomaching the idea of voting for former President Donald J. Trump.
Ms. Harris revealed little new about her economic plans in her 39-minute speech, but she reiterated many of the populist themes of her economic agenda. She promised tax increases on the largest corporations while pledging tax breaks for small businesses and homebuilders.
She also pledged to invest in what she described as some of the most promising industries of the 21st century: bio-manufacturing, aerospace, artificial intelligence, blockchain technology and clean energy.
The goal, she said, should be that "the next generation of breakthroughs -- from advanced batteries to geothermal to advanced nuclear -- are not just invented but built here in America by American workers."
Ms. Harris made her pitch in a Democratic stronghold that was once a capital of American industry, in a top battleground state that could determine the winner of the presidential election. She has previously given economic addresses on her plans to lower costs and to help small businesses. Her emphasis on manufacturing on Wednesday was a return to a more traditional Democratic talking point, one often highlighted by President Biden before he dropped out of the race in July.
Her speech tried to weave her economic themes together into a broader vision. She said she was "not constrained by ideology," an apparent response to polls that show some voters consider her too liberal. And she quoted the words of the investor Warren E. Buffett as the billionaire Mark Cuban, a Pittsburgh native and Harris supporter, listened from the fifth row of the audience. But she also pointed to her efforts as attorney general of California to hold corporate bad actors accountable.
Ms. Harris suggested that she would join a continuum of presidents who left legacies of major infrastructure improvements for the nation. She invoked Abraham Lincoln and the transcontinental railroad, Franklin D. Roosevelt and "bold persistent experimentation," Dwight D. Eisenhower and the interstate highway system, and John F. Kennedy and the space program.
She did not once mention Mr. Biden.
Along with the recitation of her economic agenda, Ms. Harris delivered a searing critique of Mr. Trump's policies. She said tariffs he has proposed would cost an average American family nearly $ 4,000 a year -- an estimate that Mr. Cuban, who went from endorsing Nikki Haley in the Republican primary race to becoming a Harris campaign surrogate in the general election, repeated on MSNBC shortly after Ms. Harris concluded her remarks, pronouncing her "better for business" than Mr. Trump.
Ms. Harris also called Mr. Trump "one of the biggest losers ever on manufacturing," said he had been "played by China" and accused him of allowing American manufacturing jobs to be moved to other countries.
And she tried out a new line in her long-running effort to define her opponent as a friend of billionaires and giant corporations, not the working class.
"For Donald Trump, our economy works best if it works for those who own the big skyscrapers," she said. "Not those who actually build them. Not those who wire them. Not those who mop the floors."
The Trump campaign was not impressed. It called her remarks "full of lies."
"Every time Kamala speaks, it becomes increasingly clear that only President Trump will make America wealthy again," said Karoline Leavitt, a spokeswoman for the former president's campaign.
Mr. Trump has eaten into Democrats' support among union members in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, long known as the party's blue wall of crucial Northern presidential battlegrounds. Many voters say they trust Mr. Trump more than Ms. Harris to handle the economy, after several years of high inflation under the Biden administration, although some polls show a shrinking gap between the two candidates on the issue. Americans typically rank the economy as their top priority in this election.
At one point on Wednesday, Ms. Harris shouted out both the rank-and-file labor movement members who traditionally back her party and the city where she spoke. As president, she promised to offer tax credits for "expanding good union jobs in steel and iron and manufacturing communities like here in Mon Valley," short for the Monongahela Valley, an industrial region south of Pittsburgh that has suffered as American industry declined.
And she said she would "always be a strong supporter of workers and unions," adding that corporations needed to "respect the rights of workers and unions" or else face the threat of consequences from a Harris White House.
The Pittsburgh remarks were the third time since Ms. Harris became the Democratic presidential nominee that she has given what her campaign advertised as a major speech on the economy. Last month in North Carolina, she framed the campaign as a choice between what she cast as her forward-looking vision and Mr. Trump's backward-looking one, a theme she returned to in Pittsburgh.
"The best way to predict the future," she said on Wednesday, "is to invent it."
Illustration
