A herculean effort to map the "connectome," or neural pathways of the human brain, involves thousands of people playing a kind of game that collects information.
In 2005, Sebastian Seung suffered the academic equivalent of an existential crisis. More than a decade earlier, with a Ph.D. in theoretical physics from Harvard, Seung made a dramatic career switch into neuroscience, a gamble that seemed to be paying off. He had earned tenure from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology a year faster than the norm and was immediately named a full professor. His lab was underwritten with generous funding by the elite Howard Hughes Medical Institute. He was a popular teacher who traveled the world delivering lectures on his mathematical theories of how neurons might be wired together to form the engines of thought.
Yet Seung was growing increasingly depressed. He and his colleagues spent their days arguing over how the brain might function, but science offered no way to scan it for the answers. "It seemed like decades could go by," Seung told me recently, "and you would never know one way or another whether any of the theories were correct."
That November, Seung sought the advice of David Tank, a mentor he met at Bell Laboratories who was attending the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience, in Washington. Over lunch in the dining room of a nearby hotel, Tank advised a radical cure. A former colleague in Heidelberg, Germany, had just built a device that imaged brain tissue with enough resolution to make out the connections between individual neurons. But drawing even a tiny wiring diagram required herculean efforts, as people traced the course of neurons through thousands of blurry black-and-white images. What the field needed, Tank said, was a computer program that could trace them automatically -- a way to map the brain's connections by the millions, opening a new area of scientific discovery. For Seung to tackle the problem, though, it would mean abandoning the work that had propelled him to the top of his discipline.
Back in Cambridge, Seung spoke with two of his graduate students, who, like everyone else in the lab, thought the idea was terrible. Over the next few weeks, as the three of them talked and argued, Seung became convinced that the Heidelberg project was bound to be more interesting, and ultimately less risky, than continuing with the theoretical work he had lost faith in. "Make sure your passports are ready," he said finally. "We are going to Germany next month."
Seung and his two students spent a good part of January 2006 in Germany, learning the finicky ways of high-resolution brain-image analysis from Winfried Denk, the scientist who built the device. The three returned to M.I.T. invigorated, but Seung's decision looked, for quite a while, like an act of career suicide. Colleagues at M.I.T. whispered that Seung had gone off the rails. In 2010, the Hughes institute pulled the money that funded his lab, and he had to scramble. When his wife went into labor with their daughter in the middle of the night, he was working on a grant application. As the years passed, the advances out of the Seung lab were met with indifference.
Last spring, eight years after he and his students headed to Heidelberg, Seung published a paper in the prestigious journal Nature, demonstrating how the brain's neural connections can be mapped -- and discoveries made -- using an ingenious mix of artificial intelligence and a competitive online game. Seung has also become the leading proponent of a plan, which he described in a 2012 book, to create a wiring diagram of all 100 trillion connections between the neurons of the human brain, an unimaginably complex network known as the connectome.
The race to map the connectome has hardly left the starting line, with only modest funding from the federal government and initial experiments confined to the brains of laboratory animals like mice. But it's an endeavor heavy with moral and philosophical implications, because to map a human connectome would be, Seung has argued, to capture a person's very essence: every memory, every passion. If science were to gain the power to record and store connectomes, then it would be natural to speculate, as Seung and others have, that technology might someday enable a recording to play again, thereby reanimating a human consciousness.
Last year, Seung was lured away from M.I.T. to join the Princeton Neuroscience Institute and Princeton's Bezos Center for Neural Circuit Dynamics. These days, Seung, who is 48, has an office down the hall from his mentor Tank at the institute. With connectome mapping, Seung explained last month, it is possible to start answering questions that he and other scientists have puzzled over for decades. Seung is planning, among other things, to prove that he can find a specific memory in the brain of a mouse and show how neural connections sustain it. "I am going back to settle old scores," he said.
Technological progress has always brought novel ways of seeing the natural world and thus new ways of mapping it. The telescope, for example, allowed Galileo to sketch, in his book "The Starry Messenger," a first map of Jupiter's largest moons.
What has made the early 21st century a particularly giddy moment for scientific mapmakers, though, is the precipitous rise of information technology. Advances in computers have provided a cheap means to collect and analyze huge volumes of data, and Moore's Law, which predicts regular doublings in computing power, has shown little sign of flagging. Just as important is the fact that machines can now do the grunt work of research automatically, handling samples and recording data. Set up a robotic system, feed the data to the cloud and the map will practically draw itself.
The ur-map of this big science is the one produced by the Human Genome Project, a stem-to-stern accounting of the DNA that provides every cell's genetic instructions. The Brain Initiative, the United States government's 12-year, $4.5 billion brain-mapping effort, is a conscious echo of the genome project, but neuroscientists find themselves in a far more tenuous position at the outset. The brain might be mapped in a host of ways, and the initiative is pursuing many at once. In fact, Seung and his colleagues, who are receiving some of the funding, are working at the margins of contemporary neuroscience. Much of the field's most exciting new technology has sought to track the brain's activity -- like functional MRI, with its images of parts of the brain "lighting up" -- while the connectome would map the brain's physical structure.
Scientists believe that every thought, every sensation, is a set of tiny electrical impulses coursing through the brain's interconnected neurons. But when a little girl learns a word, for example, her brain makes a record by altering the connections themselves. When she learns to ride a bike or sing "Happy Birthday," a new constellation of connections takes shape. As she grows, every memory is recorded this way. Taken together, these connections constitute her connectome, the brain's permanent record of her personality, intelligence, memories: the sum of all that constitutes her "self."
A typical human neuron has thousands of connections; a neuron can be as narrow as 1 ten-thousandth of a millimeter and yet stretch from one side of the head to the other. Only once have scientists ever managed to map the complete wiring diagram of an animal -- a transparent worm called C. elegans, 1 millimeter long with just 302 neurons. Beginning in 1970 and led by the South African Nobel laureate Sydney Brenner, it involved painstakingly slicing the worm into thousands of sections, each one-thousandth the width of a human hair, to be photographed under an electron microscope.
That was the easy part. To pull a wiring diagram from the stack of images required identifying each neuron and then following it through the sections, a task akin to tracing the full length of every strand of pasta in a bowl of spaghetti and meatballs, using pens and thousands of blurry black-and-white photos. For C. elegans, this process alone consumed more than a dozen years. When Seung started, he estimated that it would take a single tracer roughly a million years to finish a cubic millimeter of human cortex -- meaning that tracing an entire human brain would consume roughly one trillion years of labor. He would need a little help.
In 2012, Seung started EyeWire, an online game that challenges the public to trace neuronal wiring in the retina of a mouse's eye. Seung's artificial-intelligence algorithms process the raw images, then players earn points as they mark, paint-by-numbers style, the branches of a neuron through a three-dimensional cube. The game has attracted 165,000 players in 164 countries. Computers do what they can and then leave the rest to what remains the most potent pattern-recognition technology ever discovered: the human brain.
Ultimately, Seung still hopes that artificial intelligence will be able to handle the entire job. But in the meantime, he is working to recruit more help. In August, South Korea's largest telecom company announced a partnership with EyeWire, running nationwide ads to bring in more players. In the next few years, Seung hopes to go bigger by enticing a company to turn EyeWire into a game with characters and a story line that people play purely for fun. "Think of what we could do," Seung said, "if we could capture even a small fraction of the mental effort that goes into Angry Birds."
The Janelia Research Campus features a serpentine "landscape building" constructed into the side of a hill northwest of Washington. The facility, funded by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, is nearly 1,000 feet long, and most of the exterior walls are glass.
Over the summer, I went to Janelia to meet Seung. He was there to talk about possible collaborations and learn about the technology that others in the field are developing. Inside, he introduced me to Harald Hess, an acknowledged genius at creating new scientific tools. Hess led us down a wide service corridor. He unlocked a door and then ushered Seung into a room with white plastic curtains hanging from the 20-foot ceilings. He parted one with a "kshreeek" of releasing Velcro and said, "This is our 'act of God'-proof room."
The room contained a pair of hulking beige devices, labeled "MERLIN" in black letters -- each part of a new brain-imaging system. The system combines slicing and imaging: An electron microscope takes a picture of the brain sample from above, then a beam of ions moves across the top, vaporizing material and revealing the next layer of brain tissue for the microscope. It is, however, a "temperature-sensitive beast," said Shan Xu, a scientist at Janelia. If the room warms by even a fraction of a degree, the metal can expand imperceptibly, skewing the ion beam, wrecking the sample and forcing the team to start over.
Here at Janelia, connectome science will face its most demanding test. Gerry Rubin, Janelia's director, said his team hopes to have a complete catalog of high-resolution images of the fruit fly brain in a year or two and a completely traced wiring diagram within a decade. Rubin is a veteran of genome mapping and saw how technological advances enabled a project that critics originally derided as prohibitively difficult. He is betting that the story of the connectome will follow the same arc. Denk, Seung's longtime collaborator, is working on a new device to slice and image a mouse's entire brain. Seung, meanwhile, is improving his tracing software and setting up new experiments to find memories in the connectome. Still, Rubin admitted, "if we can't do the fly in 10 years, there is no prayer for the field."
In September, at a Brain Initiative conference in the Eisenhower building on the White House grounds, it was announced that Google had started its own connectome project. Tom Dean, a Google research scientist and the former chairman of the Brown University computer-science department, told me he has been assembling a team to improve the artificial intelligence: four engineers in Mountain View, Calif., and a group based in Seattle. To begin, Dean said, Google will be working most closely with the Allen Institute for Brain Science, which is trying to understand how the brain of a mouse processes images from the eye. Yet Dean said they also want to serve as a clearinghouse for Seung and others, applying different variations of artificial intelligence to brain imagery coming out of different labs, to see what works best. Eventually, Dean said, he hopes for a Google Earth of the brain, weaving together many different kinds of maps, across many scales.
It's possible now to see a virtuous cycle that could one day build the connectome. The artificial intelligence used at Google, and in EyeWire, is known as deep learning because it takes its central principles from the way networks of neurons function. Over the last few years, deep learning has become a precious commercial tool, bringing unexpected leaps in image and voice recognition, and now it is being deployed to map the brain. This could, in the coming decades, lead to more insights about neural networks, improving deep learning itself.
However, Eve Marder, a prominent neuroscientist at Brandeis University, cautions against expecting too much from the connectome. She studies neurons that control the stomachs of crabs and lobsters. In these relatively simple systems of 30 or so neurons, she has shown that neuromodulators -- signaling chemicals that wash across regions of the brain, omitted from Seung's static map -- can fundamentally change how a circuit functions. If this is true for the stomach of a crustacean, the mind reels to consider what may be happening in the brain of a human.
The history of science is a narrative full of characters convinced that they had found the path to understanding everything, only to have the universe unveil a Sisyphean twist. Physicists sought matter's basic building blocks and discovered atoms, but then found that atoms had their own building blocks, which had their own pieces, which has brought us, today, to string theory. Critics of Seung's vision therefore see it as naive, a faith that he can crest the mountain in front of him and not find more imposing peaks beyond. "If we want to understand the brain," Marder says, "the connectome is absolutely necessary and completely insufficient."
Seung agrees but has never seen that as an argument for abandoning the enterprise. Science progresses when its practitioners find answers, but also when they make something that future generations rely on, even if they take it for granted. That, for Seung, would be more than good enough. "Necessary," he said, "is still a pretty strong word, right?"
