Our critics and writers have selected noteworthy cultural events to experience virtually and in person in New York City.
Juilliard Shows Off
A well-rounded contemporary dancer must embrace a range of techniques and styles, which the rigorous training at the Juilliard School provides, cultivating flexibility of both body and mind. In the school's annual Spring Dances concert, which continues through Saturday, second-, third- and fourth-year students showcase their artistic scope through an appealing assortment of choreography.
The program includes "Set and Reset/Reset," a bespoke response to Trisha Brown's seminal 1983 postmodernist work; "Shelter," a 1988 piece examining the physical and emotional toll of homelessness, by Jawole Willa Jo Zollar, the founder of Urban Bush Women; and "return to patience," a large ensemble work created by Aszure Barton for Juilliard dancers in 2015 and set to music by the Pulitzer Prize-winning composer Caroline Shaw, a Juilliard creative associate.
Spring Dances takes place at the Peter Jay Sharp Theater at Juilliard on Thursday and Friday at 7:30 p.m. and Saturday at 2 and 7:30 p.m. (Saturday performances will also be livestreamed.) Tickets are $ 30 and available at juilliard.edu.
BRIAN SCHAEFER
Finding Forever
The past two years have been sobering reminders that life can be abruptly cut short. But would human experience be better if existence were endless?
That question lies at the heart of "Tuck Everlasting," Natalie Babbitt's acclaimed novel for children. Although a 2016 musical adaptation proved far from deathless on Broadway, it was a New York Times critic's pick. Now Theater for Young Audiences at the 92nd Street Y is presenting an hourlong version that demonstrates that this show doesn't need a multimillion-dollar production to be resonant and uplifting.
Written by Claudia Shear and Tim Federle, with music by Chris Miller and lyrics by Nathan Tysen, "Tuck Everlasting" centers on Winnie Foster, an 11-year-old who in 1893 discovers the Tucks. Decades ago, this unusual family unwittingly drank from a hidden spring that grants eternal life.
Megan Doyle has directed and choreographed the musical, which gains dramatic tension from the growing closeness between Winnie (Colby Kipnes and Anika Lore Hatch alternate in the role) and the teenage Jesse Tuck (Miles Ward). Should she drink the water, too?
You have until April 10 -- the show runs on Sundays; tickets start at $ 15 -- to watch Winnie decide.
LAUREL GRAEBER
Fresh Sounds for Spring
The composer Eric Wubbels may have moved from New York City to western Massachusetts, where his new home can accommodate a grand piano, but that doesn't mean he no longer plays in town.
On Sunday at the Tenri Cultural Institute, Wubbels will be on hand with his fellow collaborators in the Wet Ink Ensemble for "Air Concerts 03: Spring Premieres." The program features the latest iteration of his piece, "modules/relationships," a flexible work that is adapted for each new performance.
Other composers on the bill include Rick Burkhardt, Peter Evans and Katherine Young -- as well as the cellist Mariel Roberts, another member of Wet Ink. She will debut a revised edition of her composition "Or we don't need light," an earlier version of which was performed at last year's Time Spans festival.
"Air Concerts 03" starts at 5 p.m. Tickets are $ 10; admission for students is free.
SETH COLTER WALLS
Digital Drudgery, Up Close
The Builders Association, a theatrical troupe best known for the marvelous ways it has combined performance with technology, is back with the production "I Agree to the Terms," an interactive experience that starts livestreaming on Friday.
To construct this adventure, the troupe collaborated with a community of microworkers, also known as Mechanical Turk, or MTurk, workers. For a pittance, they perform menial, repetitive tasks that artificial intelligence can't (e.g., call phone numbers to ensure they're still working or digitize handwritten text captured in images) in order to optimize algorithms.
The result of the collaboration is something like a game show in which audience members receive training from actual MTurk workers and then compete for jobs, which pay in virtual Builders Coins.
This Brechtian competition will be broadcast on Zoom from MITU580, an art space in Brooklyn, every Friday, Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 5 p.m. through April 3. Tickets to access the livestream are $ 15 and available at nyuskirball.org. Space is limited.
JOSE SOLÍS
Sighs of Love
When she began releasing music in the late 2000s, the Swedish singer then known as Sheri aimed for pop stardom with fizzy, hook-forward singles that gained modest traction in her home country. But a subsequent reinvention has served her well. Now performing as Snoh Aalegra, she has settled into a mellower R&B sound better suited to her voice -- a smudgy, reserved yet emotive alto that Prince, who mentored her, praised for its "analog" appeal.
On last year's "Temporary Highs in the Violet Skies," the third album she has released under her current stage name, Aalegra's understated vocals resemble a protracted sigh, befitting her lyrical reflections on romantic disappointment. Loose, expansive electronic production by the Neptunes, No I.D., Tyler, the Creator and others provides ample ground for her to search for that moment when love went awry. With a set list drawing from "Temporary Highs" as well as her previous record, "Ugh, Those Feels Again," Aalegra will bring her songs -- and her feels -- to Radio City Music Hall on Saturday and Tuesday. The shows begin at 8 p.m.; tickets start at $ 55 and are available at msg.com.
OLIVIA HORN
Photograph Eric Wubbels at his home in Greenfield, Mass. He will be at the Tenri Cultural Institute on Sunday for "Air Concerts 03: Spring Premieres." (PHOTOGRAPH BY TONY LUONG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Anika Lore Hatch, center, one of the two young actresses playing Winnie Foster in "Tuck Everlasting" at 92nd Street Y. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MEGAN DOYLE); Snoh Aalegra will bring the feels when she performs at Radio City Musical Hall on Saturday and Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GERMAN VIZCARRA)
