HOME SECURITY
Google to Buy Stake
In ADT for $ 450 Million
Google is paying $ 450 million for a nearly 7% stake in longtime home and business security provider ADT Inc., a deal that will open new opportunities for one of the internet's most powerful companies to extend the reach of its Nest cameras and voice-activated voice assistant.
As part of the partnership announced Monday, ADT will use Nest's internet-connected cameras, as well as another device called the Nest Home Hub that comes with an internet-connected camera, as part of its customers' security systems.
Both the Nest cameras and Home Hub can be operated through voice commands processed by the Google digital assistant that competes against Amazon's Alexa and Amazon's Siri in a key area of artificial intelligence.
The alliance could serve as a springboard for a home management product line that Google has been developing since paying $ 3.2 billion in 2014 to buy Nest, a start-up launched by Tony Fadell, who helped create the iPhone while he was at Apple. ASSOCIATED PRESS
EARNINGS
Video Games Help Lift
Sony's Quarterly Profit
Sony Corp. said Tuesday that its April-June profit jumped 53 percent as its video game and other online businesses thrived with people staying home during the coronavirus pandemic.
Sony, based in Tokyo, reported a profit for the last quarter of a 233 billion yen, or $ 2.2 billion, up from 152 billion yen the year before.
Sony warned that its movies division would likely suffer for two or three years because of delays in film projects and limits to theater seating caused by the pandemic.
Consumer demand for electronics products has also plunged, including sales of digital cameras, TVs and other gadgets, according to Sony.
Some factories in China and Malaysia were temporarily shut down and an inability for some employees to travel also was a hindrance, the company said.
Sony's quarterly sales edged up 2 percent to 1.97 trillion yen, or $ 18.6 billion.
The company is projecting a 510 billion yen profit for the fiscal year that ends in March 2021, down 12 percent from the previous fiscal year. ASSOCIATED PRESS
ENVIRONMENT
Rare Flower Threatens
To Halt Lithium Mine
A botanist hired by a company planning to mine one of the most promising deposits of lithium in the world believes a rare desert wildflower at the mining site in Nevada should be protected under the Endangered Species Act, a move that could jeopardize the project, new documents show.
The unusually candid disclosure is included in more than 500 pages of emails obtained by conservationists and reviewed by The Associated Press regarding Ioneer Ltd.'s plans to dig near the only population of Tiehm's buckwheat known to exist on earth.
Ioneer has spent millions at the site 200 miles southeast of Reno, which is rich with lithium needed to manufacture such things as batteries for electric cars.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service recently announced it has received enough scientific information to warrant a full-year review of the buckwheat's status to determine whether it should be federally protected. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Davey Alba, Brian X. Chen and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEFF CHIU/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
