Each week, technology reporters and columnists from The New York Times review the week's news , offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here .
Hello, everyone. I'm Natasha Singer, your data privacy correspondent. I devote most of my waking hours to delving into the consequences of digital technologies for society and democracy. I even spent my summer vacation teaching a tech-innovation ethics course for high schoolers attending the School of The New York Times, our precollege program.
So it was quite something for me just trying to keep up with all the developments of the week.
To recap: Microsoft said Monday that it had found and shut down fraudulent sites that were imitating those of two conservative American think tanks that promote democracy. The phony sites, which were created by hackers linked to a Russian military intelligence unit, indicated that the Kremlin was widening its attacks beyond deceiving voters, my colleagues David E. Sanger and Sheera Frenkel wrote.
Then on Tuesday, Facebook said it had identified and purged 652 fraudulent accounts, pages and groups that were trying to spread disinformation. This time the campaigns were aimed at tricking people not just in the United States, but also in Britain, Latin America and the Middle East. And in addition to Russia, there was a new misinformation culprit on Facebook's radar: Iran.
My colleagues Kate Conger and Sheera reported that Facebook had been tipped off to the Iranian fraud by FireEye, a cybersecurity firm. In a riveting article, they described how cybersecurity companies are expanding their focus from trying to thwart more traditional hacking of people's accounts to policing social media networks for pernicious influence campaigns.
On Wednesday, Alex Stamos, Facebook's former security chief, also weighed in with a post on the Lawfare blog calling on the American government to step up its cybersecurity efforts and curb foreign election meddling.
"America's adversaries," he wrote, "believe that it is still both safe and effective to attack U.S. democracy using American technologies and the freedoms we cherish."
This is the argument that Facebook has made all along: that "bad actors," as Facebook's chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, termed them, have weaponized our well-intentioned technologies against us.
But Facebook and other social networks are inherently designed for virality. And that has enabled domestic political campaigns -- not just foreign evildoers -- to use Facebook to sow division and spread disinformation with astonishing scale and speed.
Consider Vote Leave, the campaign to persuade voters in Britain to leave the European Union in 2016. That campaign spent $2 million on Facebook ads that were seen millions of times, helping it to win the referendum. Some of the campaign's ads seemed clearly designed to foster xenophobia, according to the Facebook ads recently released by the British Parliament. Other messages -- like one claiming that Turkey was joining the European Union, posted on Twitter by Carole Cadwalladr of The Guardian as an example of fear-mongering -- were patently false.
From where I sit, Facebook's trying to weed out foreign election meddling -- without remaking the underlying infrastructure that enables influence campaigns in the first place -- seems akin to trying to quell an Ebola epidemic by handing out Kleenex.
Or, as my colleague Adam Satariano wrote of his interview with a former British national security official, David Balson: "He said Facebook had to find more sustainable solutions to fighting misinformation than suspending accounts, and argued that many groups would continue their work, but under new names. Each new disclosure, Mr. Balson said, made him wonder what other campaigns were being waged on the social network."
In the week's other tech news:
In an opinion piece titled "Trump Knows Digital Ads Work. Why Don't Democrats?" Kendall Collins, the former chief marketing officer of Salesforce, warned Democrats that they were failing to use digital tools to reach and sway voters. "Anyone skilled in marketing," Mr. Collins wrote, "knows the precision, targeting and cost-effectiveness of online strategies to reach buyers, influencers and, in this case, voters."
A new study that analyzed every anti-refugee attack over a two-year period in Germany found that higher-than-average use of Facebook in a town correlated with more attacks on refugees. My colleagues Amanda Taub and Max Fisher traveled to German towns to investigate.
Google took the moral high ground on freedom of expression online when it pulled its search engine out of China in 2010 after four years of trying to operate a censored version there. But now Google may be changing its mind -- about China as well as its own reputation, my colleague Farhad Manjoo wrote. The company has been testing a censored version of its search engine for the Chinese market, Farhad said, and deploying it would threaten Google's self-image as a virtuous place to work.
In this zinger critique in Real Life magazine, Frank Pasquale, a technology law professor, examined how tech industry influence is skewing priorities in artificial intelligence research and ethics. "Energy that could be put into better public transit systems is instead diverted to perfect the coding of self-driving cars," he wrote. "Anti-surveillance activism transmogrifies into proposals to improve facial recognition systems to better recognize all faces."
And lastly: Universities around the United States are collaborating on the creation of a new academic discipline, called "public interest technology." In a piece in Wired, a Harvard Law professor, Susan Crawford, described how the new field will include "designing public policy and laws with an awareness of how technology actually works, as well as ensuring that technology is being used to serve public values of fairness and equity."
I admit I'm biased since this overlaps with what I taught the high school students, but I'm rooting for it.
Interested in All Things Tech? Get the Bits newsletter delivered to your inbox weekly for the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
