Earnings
Domino's Loyalty Program Bolsters Quarterly Results
Domino's Pizza beat Wall Street targets for quarterly results on Monday as a relaunch of its loyalty program and promotional offers prompted more Americans to order its pizzas and chicken wings.
The company also plans to raise prices in the low-single-digits percentage range in the U.S. this year, C.F.O. Sandeep Reddy said, in a bid to shield margins from the impact of the wage raises set to take effect in California in April.
After struggling with a sales slowdown in early 2023, Domino's rolled out multiple initiatives in recent months to help turn the ride. Its delivery partnership with Uber Eats helped attract new customers as well and is expected to boost sales throughout 2024, ramping up after the first quarter.
"Uber Eats and Domino's loyalty program revamp are paying immediate dividends," said Zak Stambor, senior analyst at Insider Intelligence.
The rewards program added 3 million members in 2023, with more than 2 million of them joining since the revamp. It was also driving additional profit at franchisees, C.E.O. Russell Weiner said on a post-earnings call.
Domino's Emergency Pizza deal, which offered a redeemable coupon on the rewards app for a free pizza, also boosted order counts.
"Clearly, customers want value, and we are driving it profitably," Weiner said.
Domino's, which lifted its quarterly dividend by 25 percent and announced an additional $ 1 billion share buyback plan, posted a quarterly per-share profit of $ 4.48, above estimates of $ 4.38. REUTERS
Technology
Microsoft Strikes a Deal
With a French Startup
Microsoft announced an artificial intelligence partnership Monday with the French startup Mistral AI that could lessen the software giant's reliance on ChatGPT-maker OpenAI for supplying the next wave of chatbots and other generative AI products.
Mistral AI emerged less than a year ago but is what Microsoft described Monday as an "innovator and trailblazer" at the vanguard of building more efficient and cost-effective AI systems.
Microsoft and Mistral didn't disclose the financial terms of the deal, though Microsoft said it involves a small investment in the Paris-based startup. That suggests it is far smaller than Microsoft's investment of billions of dollars into OpenAI, a years-long relationship that has attracted the scrutiny of antitrust regulators.
Mistral also on Monday released a public test version of its own chatbot, called Le Chat, that apparently was flooded with so much interest that a company executive said it was temporarily unavailable for part of Monday.
The company also announced its newest large language model, Mistral Large, which it claims is in the same league as competitors such as OpenAI's GPT-4, Anthropic's Claude 2 and Google's Gemini Pro and will be available on Microsoft's Azure cloud computing platform. Mistral has also previously said it is teaming up with other big cloud providers including Amazon and Google.
Mistral's "open-source" approach means it publicly releases key components of its models, in contrast to companies such as OpenAI that closely guard them. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Rebecca Carballo and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY CARLO ALLEGRI/REUTERS)
