"Life of Pi" and Laura Linney on Broadway, Lise Davidsen at the Met Opera, SZA on tour: Here's what we're looking forward to this season.
Broadway | Off Broadway | Dance | Classical | Pop
Broadway
'PARADE' It doesn't exactly scream out for the big splashy Broadway musical treatment, does it, this disturbing tale of Leo Frank, accused of the rape and murder of a teenage girl and lynched by an antisemitic mob in Georgia in 1915? And yet, the original 1998 production grabbed Tony Awards for the book, by Alfred Uhry, and the score, by Jason Robert Brown. Almost 25 years later, Michael Arden directed a well-received production at New York City Center, starring Ben Platt, that had a blink-and-you-miss-it short run. Thankfully the production is headed to Broadway, again featuring Platt as Frank and Micaela Diamond as his wife, Lucille.
In previews; opens March 16 at the Bernard B. Jacobs Theater, Manhattan.
'SHUCKED' When the crop starts to fail in the small town of Cob County, an expert "corn doctor" arrives to help, but is he really a huckster? That's the kernel of this cornpone musical comedy, anyway. Well-received in a premiere run at the Pioneer Theater Company, it promises earworm songs and many laughs -- sounds amaizing. The book is by the Tony Award winning "Tootsie" writer Robert Horn, with songs by Brandy Clark and Shane McAnally. The ubiquitous Jack O'Brien directs.
Previews begin March 8; opens April 4 at the Nederlander Theater, Manhattan.
'LIFE OF PI' The long, tense standoff between a 16-year-old boy and a Bengal tiger stuck on a lifeboat is a tale of hope and survival first told in Yann Martel's award-winning 2002 novel. A decade later, it became an Oscar-winning film directed by Ang Lee, and most recently has been adapted for the stage by Lolita Chakrabarti -- the 2021 West End production won five Olivier Awards. The kid keeps surviving, so a stop on Broadway seems like a good next step. Hiran Abeysekera, who starred in London, will reprise the role of Pi, with Max Webster directing. No, no actual tigers will be among the cast; the puppetry and movement direction is by Finn Caldwell, with puppet design by Caldwell and Nick Barnes.
Previews begin March 9; opens March 30 at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater, Manhattan.
'PETER PAN GOES WRONG' What's the worst that could happen? When the Mischief Theater Company, which staged "The Play That Goes Wrong," takes on the J.M. Barrie classic about a boy who won't grow up, a few flying mishaps are sure to happen. This farce, which premiered in the West End in 2015, arrives to Broadway this spring, with Adam Meggido directing the chaos.
Previews begin March 17; opens April 19 at the Barrymore Theater, Manhattan.
'THE THANKSGIVING PLAY' You can't please everyone ... but you can try! A troupe of super progressive artists creates a culturally sensitive elementary school pageant that embraces both Thanksgiving and Native American Heritage month (without the participation of any actual Native Americans) in this satirical comedy by Larissa FastHorse. After a well-received premiere at Playwrights Horizons in 2018, the show arrives on Broadway, with Rachel Chavkin ("Hadestown") directing.
Previews begin March 25; opens April 20 at the Helen Hayes Theater, Manhattan.
'NEW YORK, NEW YORK' What's old is new when Broadway hosts a new musical inspired by a 1977 film about young artists with big dreams in the big city after World War II. It ain't easy, but if they can make it here, they can make it anywhere (or so we're told). The musical includes classics like the title number, as well as new songs -- and a huge cast. The score is by Kander and Ebb, with an original story by David Thompson with  Sharon Washington and additional lyrics by Lin-Manuel Miranda. Susan Stroman directs.
Previews begin March 24; opens April 26 at the St. James Theater, Manhattan.
'ROOM' Like "Life of Pi," also opening this spring, "Room" has gone from best-selling novel to award-winning film and now to a Broadway production. The play, adapted by Emma Donoghue from her 2010 novel about a mother and son held captive in a shed for years, has songs and some theatricalized aspects, like an older alter ego for young Jack. The essence of the story, though, about hope, imagination and resilience, remains the same. The songs are by the Scottish artists Kathryn Joseph and Cora Bissett, and Bissett ("Roadkill") directs.
Previews begin April 3; opens April 17 at the James Earl Jones Theater, Manhattan.
'SUMMER, 1976' The casting alone, with Laura Linney and Jessica Hecht, ought to get you to the box office. Set in Ohio in the year of the bicentennial, David Auburn's latest is about the budding friendship between Diana (Linney), an artist and single mother, and Alice (Hecht), a naïve housewife. As the nation celebrates independence, the women grapple with motherhood, ambition and intimacy and aim for their own sense of freedom. Daniel Sullivan directs.
Previews begin April 4; opens April 25 at the Samuel J. Friedman Theater, Manhattan.
'GOOD NIGHT, OSCAR' Sean Hayes plays the impossible-to-describe pianist, performer and incomparable wit Oscar Levant in this new play by Doug Wright. Levant famously did a number of television interviews with Jack Paar when Levant talked openly and perhaps a bit scandalously about his battles with depression and mental illness. The play premiered last year at the Goodman Theater in Chicago to raves like this one from The Chicago Tribune: "It's a stunner of a lead performance: moving, empathetic, deeply emotional and slightly terrifying." Anticipation is in the air. Lisa Peterson directs.
Previews begin April 7; opens April 24 at the Belasco Theater, Manhattan.
'PRIMA FACIE' On "Killing Eve," Jodie Comer proved to be transfixing, so this riveting solo show will certainly be a highlight of the spring season. The play comes with trigger warnings -- Comer plays a lawyer who ruthlessly defends men accused of sexual assault, but then she suddenly finds herself on the witness stand. Comer won the 2022 Evening Standard Award for best actress for her West End performance in the role. The play, by Suzie Miller, is directed by Justin Martin. STEVEN McELROY
Previews begin April 11; opens April 23 at the Golden Theater, Manhattan.
Off Broadway
BEDLAM THEATER Those of us who grew up in New England all thought Lizzie Borden did it -- she gave her mother 40 whacks with an ax, and when that was done, she gave her father 41. Or so went the story of the infamous Borden, who was actually acquitted in the murder trial of her father and stepmother in Fall River, Mass., in 1893. Bedlam Theater takes an irreverent look at the story in "Fall River Fishing," an absurdist dark comedy about unrequited love, self-loathing and disappointment.
In previews; opens Feb. 26 at the Connelly Theater, Manhattan.
Following that play, Bedlam will stage "The Good John Proctor," by Talene Monahon, a prequel of sorts to Arthur Miller's "The Crucible," focusing on the young Salem women in the time leading up to the infamous witch trials.
Opens March 11 at the Connelly Theater.
'BLACK ODYSSEY' The playwright Marcus Gardley knows his classics and has created imaginative riffs on Molière's "Tartuffe," and Federico García Lorca's "The House of Bernarda Alba." Now he's going back a wee bit further to Homer's Odysseus saga, about a warrior who faces daunting challenges in finding his way home. Gardley places us in contemporary Harlem, where the soldier Ulysses Lincoln relies on his ancestors and family history to help him on his journey to reunite with his family. Stevie Walker-Webb ("Ain't No Mo"') directs.
In previews; opens Feb. 26 at Classic Stage Company, Manhattan.
'HOW TO DEFEND YOURSELF' After a sorority sister is raped, some college students start their own self-defense class. And as they create a space to release their pent-up rage, they struggle with how best to respond -- seek systemic change, or learn to land a palm strike? Or both? The play by Liliana Padilla was developed at the Victory Gardens Theater in Chicago and won the 2019 Yale Drama Series Prize. The Off Broadway production will be directed by Padilla, Rachel Chavkin and Steph Paul.
In previews; opens March 13 at New York Theater Workshop, Manhattan.
'THE COAST STARLIGHT' This title refers to the Amtrak daily route that runs between Los Angeles and Seattle, with unbelievable scenery along the way. Keith Bunin's play -- which premiered at La Jolla Playhouse in 2019 -- ponders what might be going on inside the minds of several people traveling solo on this train and fantasizes the encounters they might have with one another in a different reality. At least one of them holds a dangerous secret. Tyne Rafaeli directs.
In previews; opens March 13 at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, Manhattan.
'THE STRANGE UNDOING OF PRUDENCIA HART' It's hard to believe it's been 12 years since I was first captivated by this National Theater of Scotland production at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe. This wild tale of a stuffy academic who attends a conference in a Scottish border town and somehow, surrealistically, finds herself dancing with the devil is told with an immersive approach that can be intoxicating for an audience member. You can take that literally -- the show is being presented at the McKittrick Hotel in a pub environment, as it was in Edinburgh and at the hotel in 2016-17. The writer, David Greig ("The Events"), has a knack for yearning and fantasy, and "Prudencia" is unlikely to get old anytime soon.
Previews begin March 8; opens March 13 at the McKittrick Hotel, Manhattan.
'WHITE GIRL IN DANGER' Tired of being a "Blackground player" in the soap opera town of Allwhite, Keesha Gibbs is determined to take center stage in this new musical comedy with book, music and lyrics by the Tony and Pulitzer Prize winner Michael R. Jackson ("A Strange Loop"). And as you might surmise from the title, there is indeed a killer on the loose in Jackson's mash-up of soaps and melodramatic movies. Lileana Blain-Cruz directs.
Previews begin March 15; opens April 10 at Second Stage's Tony Kiser Theater, Manhattan.
'DÍA Y NOCHE' This coming-of-age story, set in El Paso, Texas, in 1984, is about racism and class struggle experienced through the unlikely friendship between a Chicano punk-rock kid and a Black upper-middle-class nerd who is gay and closeted. Carlos Armesto directs the LAByrinth Theater Company production, written by LAB actor/playwright David Anzuelo.
Previews begin March 18; opens March 26 at 59E59 Theaters, Manhattan.
RED BULL THEATER Even we Elizabethan geeks might not be familiar with "Arden of Faversham," a 16th-century thriller from the quill of an anonymous playwright (Shakespeare? Marlowe? Thomas Kyd?). A wife is having an affair and, with her lover, plots the murder of her wealthy husband; naturally, things get complicated. Jesse Berger directs the adaptation by Jeffrey Hatcher and Kathryn Walat for Red Bull Theater.
Previews begin March 6; opens March 16 at the Lucille Lortel Theater, Manhattan.
For 20 years, Red Bull has, thankfully, continued to keep many great classic plays alive for contemporary audiences -- they'll also stage Francis Beaumont's hilarious comedy "The Knight of the Burning Pestle," directed by Noah Brody and Emily Young this spring.
Previews begin April 17; opens April 27 at the Lucille Lortel Theater.
'KING JAMES' The timing could hardly be better for this show, arriving onstage just a few months after LeBron James broke the all time NBA scoring record. This play by Rajiv Joseph ("Bengal Tiger at the Baghdad Zoo"), which follows two LeBron super fans who forge an unlikely bond during the basketball player's days with the Cleveland Cavaliers, is a study of the important place sports can hold in some of our lives. I don't even like basketball (I'm too short), and I still can't wait! Glenn Davis and Chris Perfetti will revisit the roles they played at Steppenwolf Theater Company, where the play had its world premiere last year. Kenny Leon directs.
Previews begin May 2; opens May 16 at Manhattan Theater Club.
'DAYS OF WINE AND ROSES' This world premiere musical brings together the composer and lyricist Adam Guettel ("Floyd Collins") and the playwright Craig Lucas ("An American in Paris") for the first time since their musical "The Light in the Piazza." Adapted from J.P. Miller's 1962 film and 1958 teleplay, the story about a couple's yearslong battle with alcoholism doesn't sound super uplifting, but the creative team has quite a track record. Michael Greif ("Dear Evan Hansen") directs the Atlantic Theater Company production. STEVEN McELROY
Opens May 5 at the Linda Gross Theater, Manhattan.
Dance
'COPPELIA' In "Coppelia" (1870) the old toymaker Dr. Coppelius is obsessed with creating a female doll so realistic that she can be -- and is -- mistaken for a human girl. But that's not enough: Through magic spells, he tries to bring her to life. In 2023, our magic is artificial intelligence, and in Morgann Runacre-Temple and Jessica Wright's ingenious "Coppelia," which Scottish Ballet brings to Sadler's Wells theater in London, Dr. Coppelius is a charismatic Steve Jobs figure in a black turtleneck, dominating technicians and androids as he attempts to create the perfect woman. The heroine, Swanhilda, is a journalist investigating Coppelius's NuLife laboratory; her boyfriend Franz comes along and, just as in the 19th-century original, falls for the nonhuman Coppelia. The ballet won rave reviews after its debut at the Edinburgh Festival last year. ROSLYN SULCAS
March 2-5, Sadler's Wells, London.
JORDAN DEMETRIUS LLOYD Like so many dance artists, the choreographer and dancer Jordan Demetrius Lloyd has spent the past few years resourcefully creating work outside of theaters. In 2020, he directed the stirring, contemplative short film "The Last Moon in Mellowland," a poem in images. Last summer, his site-specific "Jerome" drew crowds of dance lovers and curious passers-by to a schoolyard in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. With his latest project -- his first evening-length commission -- Lloyd returns to the theater, both embracing its familiarity and testing out new directions, as he finds himself "on not the other side but another side of the pandemic," he said in a phone interview. In "Blackbare in the Basement," at Danspace Project, he and seven dancers extend on ideas from "JEROME" while considering the particularities of this hallowed downtown performance space and the history of the artists who have moved through it. SIOBHAN BURKE
March 9-11, Danspace Project, Manhattan.
KEELY GARFIELD As a choreographer and performer, Keely Garfield has long blurred the lines between irony and sincerity, the absurd and the profound. Her unpredictable works, unafraid of kitsch, are costume pageants with room for prayer, feats of endurance and bravery that don't disguise awkwardness and vulnerability. Garfield is also a yoga teacher, an urban Zen integrated therapist and a hospital chaplain. Her newest piece, "The Invisible Project," is her first to explore explicitly the crossover between her work as a choreographer and her work in wellness, experimenting with how endurance, patience, healing and catharsis can be danced. If compassionate presence is an aim, the cast is ideal: Opal Ingle, Angie Pittman, Paul Hamilton and Molly Lieber. BRIAN SEIBERT
March 10-12 at N.Y.U. Skirball, Manhattan.
TRISHA BROWN DANCE COMPANY The question of how to stay current, relevant, haunts every dance company built on the vision of a single choreographer. What happens when that person is no longer here? Six years after the death of the postmodern trailblazer Trisha Brown, her company has, for the first time, commissioned a new dance from another artist: the Cuban-born Judith Sánchez Ruíz, a member of the Brown company from 2006 to 2009. Now living in Berlin, Ruíz combines a visceral understanding of Brown's work with her own daring, intensely physical approach to movement invention. In addition to Ruíz's "Let's talk about bleeding," with a score by the Cuban composer Adonis Gonzalez, the company's Joyce Theater season features two of Brown's collaborations with the sound artist Alvin Curran, "For M.G.: The Movie" (1991) and "Rogues" (2011). And Ruíz is not the only fresh voice on the program: Five of the troupe's eight dancers are new. BURKE
May 2-7, Joyce Theater, Manhattan.
NRITYAGRAM DANCE ENSEMBLE About a decade ago, Nrityagram -- unsurpassed exponents of the Indian classical form Odissi -- came to the Joyce Theater with surprise guests. They were members of Chitrasena Dance Company from Sri Lanka, experts in that nation's Kandyan tradition. A collaboration among the dancers, all female, brought out both the shared ancient roots of the two styles and their differences: the more sinuous refinement of Odissi, the folksier verve of Kandyan. They danced to different drummers and found a new harmony. The two companies return together to the Joyce with a new program, "Ahuti," or "Offering." One change is the presence of men, who come from the Chitrasena side -- bare-chested, virile, spinning end-over-end through the air. They are a novelty in Nrityagram performance, introducing a complementary energy and adding to a larger-than-usual cast, a more populous party. SEIBERT
May 9-14, Joyce Theater, Manhattan.
Classical
CARNEGIE HALL Last year, the Vienna Philharmonic's Carnegie visit was upturned by Russia's invasion of Ukraine and the last-minute dumping of its guest conductor, the Putin-affiliated Valery Gergiev. Things should be much calmer when the orchestra returns for three days of works by Schoenberg, Strauss, Mendelssohn, Brahms and Bruckner -- all led by Christian Thielemann, a master of this repertoire (March 3-5). Another Carnegie staple, the English Concert, brings Handel's oratorio "Solomon" (March 12); later, its fellow period ensemble Les Arts Florissants, led by the essential William Christie, comes with an all-Charpentier program for Holy Week (April 26).
Among visiting pianists are the gracefully intelligent Alexandre Tharaud, playing works including his transcription of the Adagietto from Mahler's Fifth Symphony (March 26); Seong-Jin Cho, who heroically flew in to salvage those Vienna concerts last February (April 12); and the mighty Beatrice Rana, taking on Beethoven's "Hammerklavier" Sonata (April 20). Other recitals include the cellist Alisa Weilerstein's multimedia Bach show "Fragments" (April 1); the continuation of the Danish String Quartet's Schubert-inspired "Doppelgänger" project, with a premiere by Anna Thorvaldsdottir (April 20), who has also written the latest installment of the flutist Claire Chase's sprawling, multi-decade initiative "Density 2036" (May 25). Chase appears as well as the soloist in Kaija Saariaho's "Aile du songe," with Susanna Mälkki and the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra (May 9).
Other ensembles are bringing local premieres to Carnegie: the Philadelphia Orchestra, presenting John Luther Adams's "Vespers of the Blessed Earth" with the vocal group the Crossing (March 31); and the Boston Symphony Orchestra, which over two evenings is performing Thierry Escaich's Cello Concerto, with Gautier Capuçon, and Thomas Adès "Air," for violin and orchestra, with Anne-Sophie Mutter (April 24 and 25). The Met Orchestra continues its tradition of postseason Carnegie appearances, led by Yannick Nézet-Séguin, in Brahms's "Ein deutsches Requiem" and a program that includes Renée Fleming and Russell Thomas in Act IV of Verdi's "Otello," as well as the world premiere of Matthew Aucoin's "Lear Sketches" (June 15 and 22).
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC The conductor Michael Tilson Thomas, whose career continues to thrive in the face of a terminal brain cancer diagnosis, returns to the Philharmonic podium to lead the local premiere of his "Meditations on Rilke" and Schubert's "Great" Symphony (March 9-12). Then, the orchestra's music director, Jaap van Zweden, leads Messiaen's immense "Turangalîla-symphonie," featuring Jean-Yves Thibaudet as the piano soloist (March 17-19), followed by Bach's similarly expansive "St. Matthew Passion," with vocalists including Nicholas Phan, Davóne Tines, Paul Appleby, Tamara Mumford and Philippe Sly (March 23-25).
More firsts come in the New York premiere of Felipe Lara's Double Concerto, featuring Claire Chase on flute and Esperanza Spalding on bass and led by Susanna Mälkki (March 29-31); the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition winner Yunchan Lim's Philharmonic debut in Rachmaninoff's Third Piano Concerto with James Gaffigan (May 10-12); the U.S. premiere of Chick Corea's Trombone Concerto, led by Marin Alsop and featuring the orchestra's principal trombone, Joseph Alessi (May 25-27); the world premiere of Julia Wolfe's large-scale "unEarth" (June 1-3); and the New York premiere of John Luther Adams's "Become Desert" (June 8-10).
METROPOLITAN OPERA Earlier this season, the Met announced that it would devote more resources and calendar time to contemporary works and, inevitably, new productions. But revivals are still the bread and butter of a repertory house, and many this spring have something to look forward to. When Robert Carsen's elegant production of "Falstaff" returns (March 12-April 1), it will feature as the decadent title character the German baritone Michael Volle -- a solemn presence known for embodying Wagner heroes like Wotan and Hans Sachs -- in his first Verdi role. Carsen's similarly clean, and sobering, "Der Rosenkavalier" (March 27-April 20) will be a vehicle for the soprano Lise Davidsen, the Met's reigning diva, who is making her role debut as the Marschallin.
Yannick Nézet-Séguin, the company's music director, has been largely absent so far this season, but will take the podium for Puccini's "La Bohème" (April 21-28, then May 2-14). And the conductor Thomas Guggeis, turning 30 this year and on a rapid rise abroad, as the general music director of Frankfurt Opera and a substitute for Daniel Barenboim in a high-profile Berlin "Ring" cycle last fall, makes his Met debut leading another Wagner work: "Der Fliegende Holländer," in the first revival of François Girard's obtuse 2020 staging (May 30-June 10).
PARK AVENUE ARMORY Recital spaces are preciously rare in New York, and few can compare with the Armory's intimate and acoustically rich Board of Officers Room. There, the French baritone Stéphane Degout, with the pianist Cédric Tiberghien, will present an evening of art songs from composers including Fauré, Schubert, Debussy and Lili Boulanger (April 3 and 5). The tenor Allan Clayton -- revered abroad and recently celebrated locally in the title roles of "Hamlet" and "Peter Grimes" at the Metropolitan Opera -- comes next with the pianist James Baillieu for a program of works by Schumann and Nico Muhly, as well as Clayton's countrymen Henry Purcell, Michael Tippett and Benjamin Britten (April 27 and 29). Later, the young pianist Pavel Kolesnikov brings his account of Bach's "Goldberg" Variations, which he has performed alongside the choreographer Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker, as well as an eclectic mix of works inspired by Joseph Cornell's "Celestial Navigation" (May 22 and 24). JOSHUA BARONE
Pop
WEYES BLOOD The clarion-voiced Natalie Mering, under the name Weyes Blood, makes intricately wrought Laurel Canyon folk-pop updated for an era of millennial unease. She wrote many of the songs on her stirring 2022 album "And in the Darkness, Hearts Aglow," as hymns to the collective epidemic of loneliness brought on by the pandemic. Mering's music is intimate but sweeping; she uses her own personal experiences to access larger and more generalized undercurrents of emotion. It will be heartening to hear a song like the anthemic single "It's Not Just Me, It's Everybody" performed live, with a venue full of voices proving the communal sentiment of its title. LINDSAY ZOLADZ
March 3 and 4 at Brooklyn Steel.
SZA In the details of a song and in the shape of her career, SZA's timing has been utterly her own. To sing about relationships and ambitions that unfold as messily as everyday life, SZA -- Solána Imani Rowe -- writes melodies and lyrics that seem to be spilling out spontaneously: crooning, pausing, suddenly racing, then curling neatly into a hook. Her recordings have arrived with the same kind of unpredictability. She released her debut album, "Ctrl" in 2017; five years later, in 2022, she expanded it to a deluxe version that was half again as long, then went on to release an entire new album, "SOS." In the meantime, an ever-expanding audience found their own lives in her songs: in their desires, jealousy, doubts, seductions, setbacks and triumphs, and in their leisurely grooves. SZA is touring arenas this year, and singalongs will likely join her, phrase for eccentric phrase. JON PARELES
March 4 and 5 at Madison Square Garden, Manhattan.
YO LA TENGO Since forming nearly four decades ago, the Hoboken indie-rock legends Yo La Tengo have been staggeringly consistent: The trio of Ira Kaplan, Georgia Hubley and James McNew never seems to tire in its search of eclectic new elements to bring into its ever-expanding sonic universe. Still, the band sounds particularly inspired on its latest (and 17th!) album, the richly enveloping "This Stupid World," which flickers from despair to hard-won hope and moves fluidly between jammy abstractions ("Sinatra Drive Breakdown") and succinctly rendered indie-pop ("Fallout," "Aselestine"). Both of those sides of "This Stupid World" are likely to translate well live, but the new album probably won't be the set list's only focus -- naturally, their back catalog runs pretty deep. ZOLADZ
March 18 at Brooklyn Steel.
SOLANGE Futuristic R&B, righteous jazz, gospel, performance art, poetry, sculpture, film and opera are all part of a generation-spanning seven-event series at the Brooklyn Academy of Music curated by Solange Knowles for Saint Heron, her project to preserve and celebrate Black culture. Named "Eldorado Ballroom" after a historic Black music hall in Houston, the series begins March 30 with a concert headlined by the ambitious, electronics-loving songwriter Kelela, along with the adventurous R&B songwriters Res and KeiyaA. On April 7, the long-running gospel group Twinkie Clark and the Clark Sisters are paired with a program of spiritual choral compositions by Mary Lou Williams. And on April 8, the pioneering free-jazz saxophonist Archie Shepp shares a bill with the poet Claudia Rankine and the avant-garde vocalist Linda Sharrock, in her first New York City concert since the 1970s. The whole series offers deep, promising connections. PARELES
Begins March 30 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
