A new show at the Barbican Center in London explores the evolution of digital media.
Nolan Bushnell had only recently graduated in electrical engineering from the University of Utah when he came up with the idea for a computer game that batted a table-tennis ball across a screen.
That game, Pong, proved so successful that it helped to popularize computer games during the 1970s. So influential has it become, that Pong was chosen as the starting point for "Digital Revolution," an exhibition that opened on Wednesday at the Barbican Center in London. The show explores the evolution of digital media, from Pong's debut in 1972 to recent experiments by designers, artists, musicians, computer coders and filmmakers with augmented reality, artificial intelligence, robotics and other technologies.
As well as tracing the history of digital media -- including the development of early home computers, digital artworks and websites -- "Digital Revolution" examines the technology's influence on movies, fashion, music, gaming, communication and architecture. "I don't think an exhibition has brought all of these digital forms together before," said Conrad Bodman, the show's curator. "We want to show the astonishing breadth of digital creativity, and the connectivity between different forms."
The Barbican exhibition coincides with a surge of interest in digital media among cultural institutions worldwide. The Museum of Modern Art in New York recently acquired the first digital typefaces and the first downloadable app, Bjork's "Biophilia," for its collection. The Victoria & Albert Museum in London is expanding the digital component of its collection too; and the New Museum in New York is set to open a dedicated space in September for its recently established Incubator for Art, Design and Technology.
Analyzing the effect of digital technology on contemporary life is an increasingly important theme in contemporary art with some of the younger artists featured in "The Encyclopedic Palace," the official exhibition at last year's Venice Art Biennale in the forefront. Among them are Ed Atkins, a Briton whose work is currently exhibited at the Serpentine Sackler Gallery in London through Aug. 25 and at Palais de Tokyo in Paris until Sept. 7, and the French artist Camille Henrot, who recently opened a show at Kunsthal Charlottenborg in Copenhagen, which runs through Aug. 17.
The Barbican was an early institutional adopter of digital culture, having presented "Game On," one of the first video-game exhibitions, also curated by Mr. Bodman, in 2002. More recently, it has commissioned ambitious digital environments, such as Rain Room, designed by Random International as a space enclosing a rainstorm that stops suddenly when sensors detect anyone approaching. Geographically, the Barbican is ideally located thanks to its proximity to the thriving digital industry in the area of East London officially known as "Tech City," and unofficially as "Silicon Roundabout" in honor of the traffic junction at its heart.
One of the challenges that arises in exhibiting a history of digital media is that many technologies from the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s are now so outdated that it is difficult to display them in their original forms. Mr. Bodman and several dozen technicians have been preparing for the opening by testing the riskier technologies off-site for several months. Initially, they hoped to show the vintage exhibits, like Pong, on their original hardware, but have had to improvise in some cases. "Sometimes the hardware was impossible to get hold of, or it was too expensive," Mr. Bodman recalled. "Often it isn't robust enough to run in a public space. Although we have also had the problem that a lot of early software won't run on contemporary browsers."
The technical glitches have largely been solved, and the Barbican's curatorial team has tracked down most of the chosen exhibits, often on online forums or auctions, though some have proved elusive. "We really wanted to include Nolan Bushnell's Computer Space, but it is too rare and too fragile," said Mr. Bodman, of the Pong designer's first game. "Though we have also had lucky breaks like the guy who called up to say that he'd worked on the Sinclair ZX80 computer and had some prototypes. Would we like to show them? Yes, please."
"Digital Revolution" also features work by women artists and designers whose contributions to digital culture are often overlooked. They include Lillian F. Schwartz, a pioneer of computer art since the 1960s, and Susan Kare, who designed key elements of Apple's digital interfaces, the onscreen symbols most of us still use to operate computers, during the 1980s.
Intriguing though the potted history of digital culture is, much of the show consists of recent work. One section is devoted to the dynamic subculture of independent video-game developers. Another deconstructs the elaborate movie visual effects created by Oscar-winning design studios, including Double Negative's work for 2010's "Inception" and Framestore's for 2013's "Gravity."
Specially commissioned projects, exhibited throughout the labyrinthine Barbican, also explore the creative possibilities of recent technological advances. At the entrance, visitors can draw on tablet computers to contribute to a giant crowd-sourced animation, which is relayed across a cluster of 24 screens and was devised by the British design group Universal Everything. In the Pit theater, Usman Haque and Dot Samsen, who work together at the Silicon Roundabout-based design studio Umbrellium, have created a three-dimensional light field where people use lasers to "sculpt" light into what appear to be physical structures.
The exhibition ends with glimpses of the future in recently developed works, including 3D-printed clothing by the Dutch fashion designer Iris van Herpen and a robotic group of digital pets designed by the London- and New York-based architecture group Minimaforms. Using artificial intelligence, the pets have been programmed to shy away from large groups and to approach smaller ones.
"There's so much happening in this field, but we're only 50 years into it," Mr. Bodman said. "People say we're in a golden age of digital media, though we're just at the beginning."
