Tech nerds see the current moment for artificial intelligence as similar to the time when the Netscape browser was released, stirring innovation.
/nĕt-scāpe mō-mĕnt/
A term used to describe when an under-the-hood technology that was being developed for many years is suddenly seen and recognized as disruptive and potentially revolutionary.
As Silicon Valley has been gripped by a frenzy over artificial intelligence, some techies have been trying to put this latest tech boom into perspective. One way to think about it is as A.I.'s "Netscape moment."
Here's what that means.
Essentially, there are parallels between today's fervor for A.I.-powered chatbots like ChatGPT and Bard and the excitement over the Netscape browser from the 1990s. Both allowed people to recognize the possibilities around an existing technology, leading to new innovation.
The Netscape browser was one of the first tools that helped people easily surf the World Wide Web. While the internet had been around since the 1960s, in its early days it was used mostly by academics, and it was difficult for anyone else to gain access to it.
But Netscape Navigator, developed by Marc Andreessen and released in 1994, let the general public see and smoothly browse web pages -- quickly leading to the understanding that the internet could be used by us all. That spawned the late-1990s dot-com boom, with the establishment of websites like eBay and Amazon, eventually giving rise to the internet we know today.
Chatbots have similarly made people realize the power of A.I., a technology that has been in development for decades, in fits and starts. When ChatGPT debuted last year and people tapped it to generate business plans, screenplays, poems and more, many began comprehending how A.I. could apply to their daily lives -- and also disrupt what they were doing.
Arvind Krishna, the chief executive of IBM, explained it at a speaking series last month at Duke's Fuqua School of Business.
"I kind of think of ChatGPT as doing the Netscape moment," he said. He also said that it may seem like chatbots were "overnight wonders, but there has been 30 years of hard, grinding work."
In the past few months, Microsoft, Google, Meta and others have pushed harder into the A.I. race. Venture capitalists are pouring money into A.I. start-ups. And companies, universities and schools have realized they must adjust how they do things because of this A.I. wave.
Some techies have likened the A.I. boom to an "iPhone moment," referring to how the Apple device, which was introduced in 2007, led to an avalanche of mobile apps. But to nerds like me, that's not quite right because the iPhone was a hardware trigger, rather than an under-the-hood technology like a browser or chatbot. That's why a "Netscape moment" seems a more apt analogy.
Shop Talk explores idioms of the business world. Want to nominate a word or term for the column? Email shoptalk@nytimes.com.
Illustration
