That downturn in streaming content that you've been hearing about? Not here yet.
There is a sea change coming to your TV screens, as shifting economics in the television and streaming video industries lead to a sudden decrease in the number of series competing for your limited attention and dollars. (Hold your applause.)
But not yet! This winter, the flood continues. The volume of notable shows is such that I didn't find room in this preview to list new seasons of series I enjoy like "Servant" (Apple TV+, Jan. 13), "Godfather of Harlem" (MGM+, Jan. 15), "Miracle Workers" (TBS, Jan. 16), "You" (Netflix, Feb. 9), "Star Trek: Picard" (Paramount+, Feb. 16) and "The Mandalorian" (Disney+, March 1). Here are the 24 new and returning shows that caught my eye, in chronological order; as always, dates are subject to change.
'Trigun Stampede'
The 1998 outer-space western "Trigun," which occasionally pops up on all-time-best anime lists, is reimagined by Orange, the studio behind the popular "Beastars" series on Netflix. The frenetic, peace-loving hero Vash of the desert planet No Man's Land returns along with his frenemy Meryl Stryfe, who's now a cub reporter. (Crunchyroll, Saturday. Another highly anticipated anime premiere: Season 2 of "Vinland Saga," Monday on Crunchyroll and Netflix.)
'Anne Rice's Mayfair Witches'
Wasting no time after the October premiere of "Anne Rice's Interview With the Vampire," AMC offers a second series based on Rice's supernatural tales. Alexandra Daddario plays a neurosurgeon unaware of her roots in New Orleans magic and debauchery. (AMC, Sunday)
'Detectorists'
Talk about a holiday gift: Five years after it ended its run, we get a bonus episode of Mackenzie Crook's melancholy comedy about friendship, disappointment, stubborn pride and the solace of walking around large empty fields wielding metal detectors. The 75-minute one-off catches up with Andy (Crook), Lance (the great Toby Jones) and the other members of the Danebury Metal Detecting Club, a small world where the stakes can get very high. (Acorn TV, Monday)
'Velma'
The non-canine protagonists of "Scooby-Doo" are reimagined in a highly self-referential prequel series centered on the brainy Velma Dinkley, voiced by Mindy Kaling. (HBO Max, Thursday)
'The Last of Us'
The conversation around this series from Craig Mazin ("Chernobyl") and the video game developer Neil Druckmann is about proving whether a really good live-action show can be made from a video game. (Apparently "Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?" didn't count.) Another question, of course, is how badly we need another series set after a zombie apocalypse. Pedro Pascal of "The Mandalorian" and Bella Ramsey of "Game of Thrones" star. (HBO, Jan. 15)
'Stonehouse'
What is it with British men and their painfully ill-fated attempts to fake their own deaths? Last year gave us "The Thief, His Wife and the Canoe" with Eddie Marsan as an angry prole who chose to paddle away from society. Now we have another estimable British actor, Matthew Macfadyen, as John Stonehouse, a member of Parliament who -- honey-trapped by the Czech secret service and an epic failure as a businessman -- assumed the identity of a dead constituent and absconded to Australia. (BritBox, Jan. 17)
'Zora Neale Hurston: Claiming a Space'
"American Experience" profiles a towering figure in 20th-century American literature and social science, in a documentary by Tracy Heather Strain ("Lorraine Hansberry: Sighted Eyes/Feeling Heart"). (PBS, Jan. 17)
'Night Court' and 'That '90s Show'
These revivals will be greeted with much good will, though what they might need is liniment. John Larroquette returns at 75 in "Night Court," with Melissa Rauch as the judge, who is the daughter of Harry Anderson's character from the original. Debra Jo Rupp and Kurtwood Smith, 71 and 79, return in "That '90s Show" as the grandparents of the lead, a teenager played by Callie Haverda who's the daughter of the characters played by Laura Prepon and Topher Grace in "That '70s Show." (NBC, Jan. 17; Netflix, Jan. 19)
'Fauda'
The fourth season of the Israeli shoot-em-up thriller, which was shown in Israel this past summer, comes to the rest of the world. Wildly popular in some quarters for its orchestration of tension and mayhem, and condemned in others for its portrayal of Palestinians in the occupied territories, the show shifts much of its action in the new season to Brussels's Muslim district. (Netflix, Jan. 20)
'Extraordinary'
In her first series, the Northern Irish writer Emma Moran upends the superhero equation: Everyone has a power except her young heroine, Jen (Máiréad Tyers). Jen's angst is the focus, but the comic backdrop is the radical democratization of special abilities. Flight? A good way to escape an awkward date. Contacting the dead? Useful in probate court. (Hulu, Jan. 25)
'The 1619 Project'
The New York Times Magazine's examination of the centrality of slavery in American history has been adapted into a six-part documentary; Nikole Hannah-Jones, who won a 2020 Pulitzer Prize for the project, is the host. (The Times is a producer of the series.) (Hulu, Jan. 26)
'Poker Face'
Natasha Lyonne plays a roving do-gooder with a possibly supernatural ability to tell when people are lying in this retro crime-caper-drama-comedy-whatsit created by Rian Johnson of the "Knives Out" movies. The show is being compared, in advance, to "Columbo"; "Route 66" may also come to mind, and the first episode includes prominent nods to "Pulp Fiction" and "Burn Notice." (Peacock, Jan. 26)
'Wolf Pack'
Jeff Davis has had a TV career whose output is in inverse proportion to its success: He's been responsible for just two shows, the grisly CBS cash cow "Criminal Minds" and the stylish MTV supernatural drama "Teen Wolf." Both had intensely devoted followings, which probably barely overlapped. For his third series, he returns to teenage werewolves in California, in a young-skewing drama with Sarah Michelle Gellar and Rodrigo Santoro as the responsible adults. "Wolf Pack" is not connected to "Teen Wolf," which is likely to cause endless confusion, especially because Paramount+ is debuting the new series and Davis's "Teen Wolf: The Movie" on the same night. (Paramount+, Jan. 26.)
'The Upshaws'
In the wide Sargasso Sea of traditional family sitcoms, "The Upshaws," returning for its third season, is one of the funnier and more touching landfalls. Wanda Sykes, Mike Epps and Kim Fields play the putative authority figures in a fractious Indianapolis clan with an understated polish that doesn't slide over into the usual slickness. (Netflix, Feb. 16)
'Hello Tomorrow!'
Billy Crudup, Hank Azaria, Haneefah Wood and Dewshane Williams star as a crew selling timeshares on the moon -- "Glengarry Glen Ross" through a Ray Bradbury lens. This satirical sci-fi fantasy created by Amit Bhalla and Lucas Jansen ("Bloodline") is set in a retro-styled suburban future maintained by ungainly, hovering robots. (Apple TV+, Feb. 17)
'The Company You Keep'
Milo Ventimiglia segues from glossy soap opera in "This Is Us" to glossy crime drama, playing a high-class con man who hooks up with a C.I.A. agent (Catherine Haena Kim). One of the showrunners, Phil Klemmer, has a track record with shows that veer from the network norm: "Legends of Tomorrow," "Chuck" and "Veronica Mars." (ABC, Feb. 19)
'Snowfall'
This rabidly entertaining series, originally positioned as an exposé of government involvement in the crack-cocaine epidemic, has grown into a dark, operatic family drama. Its sixth and final season opens with Franklin (Damson Idris) pitted against his Aunt Louie (Angela Lewis) and Uncle Jerome (Amin Joseph) for survival in the South Central drug trade. (FX, Feb. 22)
'The Consultant'
Tony Basgallop, the creator of "Servant" on Apple TV+, goes creepy-comic again in this tech thriller set at a gaming company with a new boss (Christoph Waltz) whose management style redefines predatory capitalism. Brittany O'Grady from the first season of "The White Lotus" plays a personal assistant who's trying to figure out what he's up to. (Amazon, Feb. 24)
'Party Down'
The reboots of "Night Court" and "That '70s Show" are largely populated by new actors, but this critics' darling from 2009-10 is bringing back most of its cast for a third season that feels continuous despite the 13-year gap. Adam Scott, Ken Marino, Jane Lynch, Ryan Hansen, Megan Mullally and Martin Starr return; most of the characters no longer moonlight with the Hollywood catering company Party Down (at least at first), but they can't escape its orbit. (Starz, Feb. 24)
'Perry Mason'
Season 1 went through a strenuous, not entirely successful effort to complicate and darken the character from Erle Stanley Gardner's pulp novels; Mason was introduced as a cynical, alcoholic private eye before beginning to morph into the shrewd lawyer Gardner created. The 1930s Hollywood-noir atmosphere and Matthew Rhys's presence as Mason, though, argue for giving the second season a chance. (HBO, March 6)
'Shadow & Bone'
As dark (but not too dark) young-adult fantasy adventures go, this series, set in a martial world that blends elements of imperial Russia and Victorian England, is more than tolerable. The British actress Jessie Mei Li is appealing as the heroine, a cartographer who learns she has magical ability on an epic scale, which she is still trying to control in Season 2. (Netflix, March 16)
'Mrs. Davis'
Betty Gilpin of "Glow" joins forces with the writer and producer Damon Lindelof of "Watchmen," playing a nun doing battle with an omniscient artificial intelligence in a thriller written by Lindelof and Tara Hernandez ("The Big Bang Theory"). The nun is Simone; the A.I. is Mrs. Davis. (Peacock, April 20)
'Tom Jones'
Gwyneth Hughes, who has already adapted "The Mystery of Edwin Drood" and "Vanity Fair" for TV, takes on Henry Fielding's galloping, randy satire of 18th-century English values. A pair of newcomers star in the four-part series: Solly McLeod as the foundling Tom, and Sophie Wilde as his true love, Sophia, who's now an Anglo-Caribbean immigrant. (PBS, April 30)
Photograph Clockwise from top: Melissa Rauch, left, and Lacretta in "Night Court"; Tyler Gray, left, Chloe Robertson, Armani Jackson and Bella Shepard in "Wolf Pack"; Pedro Pascal in "The Last of Us"; Tyrel Jackson Williams, left, Ryan Hansen, Zoë Chao, Martin Starr, Adam Scott and Ken Marino in "Party Down"; Nikole HannahJones of "The 1619 Project"; Vash of "Trigun Stampede"; Alexandra Daddario in "Mayfair Witches. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JORDIN ALTHAUS/NBC; STEVE DIETL/PARAMOUNT+; LIANE HENTSCHER/HBO; STARZ; AMC)
