Gracelee Lawrence at Postmasters; Katinka Bock at 303 Gallery; Ellie Ga at Bureau; and Lydia Ourahmane at SculptureCenter.
Summer hours vary at galleries. Visitors should check in advance.
Gracelee Lawrence
Through July 23. Postmasters, 54 Franklin Street, Manhattan, 212-727-3323, postmastersart.com.
The Plastic Sublime dominates Gracelee Lawrence's second New York solo show. The sculptures in her 2019 debut were often enlarged, distorted or hybrid vegetal forms in pale single colors produced on 3-D printers, which use plastic thread.
Now, in "Heat Sync" at Postmasters, Lawrence is going mostly for shine and bright, artificial colors, used singly or in multiples, thanks to variegated threads. The resulting pieces seem enveloped in shiny gift-wrap ribbon. They can be mouthwatering.
The artist's thinking expands throughout the show. The often covetable, earlier works from 2020-21 are small, rounded pieces of fruit, with weird additions; take the fat, icing-like scrawls atop the two orbs of "Desiccated Poignancy."
In larger, more ambitious works from 2022, female torsos arch out from the walls, and the fruits and vegetables repeat, replace or obscure various body parts in sexually provocative or devotional ways. "Think All-Softly" suggests an idol whose body has simply absorbed the edibles left on her altar, creating a gorgeous Rubik's-Cube-like aggregate of blues and silvers. "Eternal Audience of One" is a series of luminous green and gray bands, running horizontally and vertically. In both pieces, Lawrence ingeniously exploits her small 3-D printers; her larger sculptures must be produced in blocks and then seamlessly pieced together.
There are other kinds of works here, including a possible update on the "Winged Victory" painted in small Tiepolesque patches of pastel colors that is both odd and promising.
This is a great show, to which my initial reaction was, for some reason, "Take that, Jeff Koons." ROBERTA SMITH
Katinka Bock
Through July 29. 303 Gallery, 555 West 21st Street; 212-255-1121, 303gallery.com.
What is happening in Katinka Bock's photographs? Games are played and objects are dispassionately displayed, but an uncanny sensation runs through the Paris-based German artist's exhibition "Logbook for Some and Any."
There is good reason for feeling perplexed. The small, unidentified marble shapes in "Some and Any Fleeting, 1" and "Some and Any Fleeting, 2" (2022) are actually game pieces from ancient Egypt, made around 3100 B.C.E. The pointy objects propped on human fingers in "Some and Any Fleeting, 4" and "Some and Any Fleeting, 5" (2022) are sixth-century B.C.E. Etruscan bronze deer hooves, probably used as vessel supports. Other photographs feature a tiny silver snake from ancient Greece and human eyes and ears taken from an Egyptian limestone sculpture. Elsewhere, the sculptural installation "FYEO III" (2016) has a clay cylinder in which a flower bouquet was wrapped and fired in a kiln.
The familiar-unfamiliar aspect of Bock's work is due partly to its resemblance to earlier art: the surrealistic photographs of Man Ray, Tina Modotti and Gabriel Orozco and the biomorphic sculptures of Barbara Hepworth, Hans Arp and Henry Moore. Yet Bock also skillfully suggests how objects and styles shift over time and circumstance. Is this criminal evidence or a museum treasure? Leisure pursuit or war game? In art -- and particularly in photography -- it could be all-of-the-above. The same could be said, though, for the objects on view, which have changed hands and whose use and meaning has shifted over the course of millenniums. MARTHA SCHWENDENER
Ellie Ga
Through July 23. Bureau, 178 Norfolk Street, Manhattan; 212-227-2783, bureau-inc.com.
Ellie Ga creates precise wanderings. Ga's video work extends from the cinematic-essay tradition of Agnès Varda and Chris Marker. "Quarries" begins on a ferry in New York Harbor during a heat wave and ends in Lisbon with a final image of two patterns of waves; the bottom half in bands of black and white made from calçada, traditional Portuguese paving stones in a plaza at the edge of the undulating sea, which occupies the upper half. What connects these images and places? A sense of drift, but also, a rigorous documentary stitch work. Along the way, the narrative binds together the artist's brother, paralyzed with a crushed hand; a Greek island inhabited only by bees and the ruins of a re-education camp; and a laboratory teeming with thousands of mosquitoes.
"We're getting close to identifying what intentions look like in the brain," the chief scientist who studies neurons in flies tells us in the voice-over narration. So too does "Quarries" make visible the process of the artist's mind at work, chasing -- intentionally -- after connections, accruing into a work that is philosophical, playful and surprising, with the artist's hands often shown handling projected transparencies, sorting through images as a scholar might organize footnoted citations. Ga's work recalls artists I love, like the films of Tacita Dean and the video work of Moyra Davey. The only problem is watching the 40 minutes of "Quarries" once just isn't enough. JOHN VINCLER
Lydia Ourahmane
Through Aug. 1. SculptureCenter, 44-19 Purves Street, Long Island City, Queens. 718-361-1750; sculpture-center.org.
Earlier this year the artist Lydia Ourahmane, having cleared reams of Algerian bureaucracy, traveled with some collaborators, led by Tuareg guides with donkeys, to Tassili n'Ajjer, a hostile and baroquely beautiful plateau deep in the Sahara whose jagged sandstone formations harbor caverns rich in prehistoric rock paintings. "Tassili," Ourahmane's 46-minute video shown on a huge screen at SculptureCenter, is, on one level, an absorbing landscape study from the point of view of a trekker in this terrain, its beauty enhanced by a swelling score in four parts by different electronic-music composers. An accompanying sculpture by Ourahmane and Yuma Burgess, who was on the trip, employs black thermoplastic tiles encoded with topographic information collected on site then modified in the studio using machine learning.
One lyrical and lush, the other abstract and coded, each work is a kind of response to land that resists interpretation. The Tassili was verdant 10,000 years ago; it drew colonial explorers in the 1950s who damaged rock art while trying to document it; today it lies on trafficking and migration routes. History draws the Algerian-born, British-educated Ourahmane to the Tassili, yet her project is open-ended and ultimately metaphysical -- evidenced by a quote in the gallery text from the Tuareg novelist Ibrahim al-Koni, for whom the desert is "the only place where we can visit death ... Because it is the isthmus between total freedom and existence." SIDDHARTHA MITTER
Photograph Gracelee Lawrence's "Think All-Softly" (2022), 3-D printed PLA plastic, in her solo show "Heat Sync." (PHOTOGRAPH VIA POSTMASTERS GALLERY); A view of "Tassili," a 2022 video work by Lydia Ourahmane. The show draws on her recent journey in a remote plateau of the Algerian Sahara. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHARLES BENTON); Katinka Bock's "Some and Any Fleeting, 1" (2022). The marble shapes, being touched by anonymous hands, are game pieces from ancient Egypt. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA KATINKA BOCK AND 303 GALLERY, NEW YORK); An image from Ellie Ga's "Quarries" (2022), an 40-minute HD video, which is showing at Bureau. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ELLIE GA)
