It's a number so staggering that some analysts worry it may be a dangerous mirage for investors. Over the last 12 months, the market value of Nvidia, the kingpin of chips powering artificial intelligence, has surged by more than $ 1.4 trillion, or roughly 233 percent, to $ 1.946 trillion.
On an earnings call on Wednesday, Nvidia reported that revenue in its fourth quarter more than tripled from a year earlier to $ 22.1 billion, while profit soared nearly ninefold to $ 12.3 billion. It projected even more growth in the current quarter, forecasting that its revenue would rise to about $ 24 billion. Buoyed by this bullish outlook, Nvidia's stock price closed at 32 times its sales on Friday.
Nvidia didn't come out of nowhere. Jensen Huang, Nvidia's co-founder and chief executive, has been building its vast lead over competitors for a decade, gaining an advantage by being early to the A.I. trend and creating products that performed complex A.I. tasks like facial recognition and text generation for chatbots like ChatGPT. Tech giants including Google, Meta and IBM have produced their own versions of the chips, but they still have a lot of catching up to do: Nvidia accounts for more than 70 percent of A.I. chip sales.
But experts are divided on whether the company has enough room to grow to justify its eye-popping valuation, and some warn that Nvidia is on the verge of too-big-to-fail territory. The price-to-sales ratio generating such enthusiasm on Wall Street is what got investors into trouble when the dot-com bubble burst.
"People are very critical and cynical about information they're getting from traditional outlets. It resonates where this guy on Instagram is breaking down the news."
Mosheh Oinounou, a former producer for CBS, Bloomberg News and Fox News who aggregates and repackages news stories on his Instagram account.
"Organizational changes can only go so far in addressing the fundamental problem."
Richard Aboulafia, a managing director at the consulting firm AeroDynamic Advisory, warning that Boeing's leadership shake-up was not a panacea for its 737 Max problems.
"They are part of an ecosystem of contractors that has links to the Chinese patriotic hacking scene, which developed two decades ago and has since gone legit."
John Hultquist, the chief analyst at Google's Mandiant Intelligence, referring to the hundreds of companies that support China's aggressive state-sponsored hacking efforts.
