International
ARREST IN HACKING SCANDAL
POINTS TO POSSIBLE COVER-UP
Scotland Yard's arrest of a former personal assistant to Rebekah Brooks, a former chief executive of the British newspaper arm of Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, appears to reflect the investigators' intensifying focus on the possibility of a cover-up by executives, editors and others at the now-defunct News of the World. Page 5
RUSSIAN CHURCH WEIGHS IN
The Russian Orthodox Church continued what appeared to be a push to get authorities to address Russians' grievances with the political system, with Patriarch Kirill I, the leader of the church, saying in a televised interview that it would be "a very bad sign" if the country's leaders failed to heed recent protests over perceived electoral fraud. Page 6
SOUTH KOREAN CRACKDOWN
South Korea's National Security Law was enacted in 1948 to fight Communism, but critics say it has been used as a weapon against political dissent and free speech. For years, international rights groups, including the United Nations Human Rights Commission, have urged South Korea to repeal the law. Page 6
NIGERIAN CHURCH ATTACKED
Members of a radical Muslim sect attacked a church in northeast Nigeria during a worship service, part of a series of assaults that killed at least 15 people, authorities said. The church shooting came as members the sect, Boko Haram, attacked a beauty salon and fought government forces as part of their sectarian battle against Nigeria's weak central government. Page 11
FIJI LIFTS MARTIAL LAW
Fiji's military rulers officially lifted a state of martial law that had been in place since 2009, setting the stage for public deliberations on a new constitution and a promised return to democratic elections within the next two years. Page 12
National
UNION DELAYS TRAINING
ON DEPORTATION RULES
In a new sign of the deep dissension over immigration, the union representing some 7,000 deportation officers of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, known as ICE, has so far not allowed its members to participate in a training focused on deporting immigrants convicted of crimes. Page 14
SENATE'S ROLE CHALLENGED
To many Republicans and some constitutional scholars, President Obama's decision to ignore a sitting Senate and sidestep the confirmation process for several appointees risked nothing short of an end to the Senate's role of providing advice and consent on presidential appointments. Page 19
CASINO BILL PUT TO THE TEST
As the Florida Legislature convenes for its annual two-month session, lawmakers will face the politically volatile task of redrawing the electoral map and devising new ways to plug a $2 billion deficit in the state budget. But it is the battle over whether to allow resort casinos into the state that has the state capital's adrenaline pumping. Page 22
THIEVES SEEK USED FRYER OIL
With a demand for biofuel rising, fryer oil now trades on a booming commodities market, commanding around 40 cents a pound, about four times what it sold for 10 years ago. That makes it a tempting target for thieves, especially in hard times. Page 25
New York
A YOUNG REPUBLICAN
FOR MITT ROMNEY
The selection of Councilman Eric Ulrich as Mitt Romney's campaign chairman in the city seems intended to convince New Yorkers that Republican presidential candidates are capable of more moderate viewpoints. Big City. Page 28
Sports
SLOWED BY AGE AND INJURIES,
STEELERS STILL HAVE IRON GRIP
In a season in which the dominant story line was often the absence of defense, the Pittsburgh Steelers have allowed the fewest yards and points in the league. For the fifth time in 11 seasons the team has the top defense, an astonishing stranglehold on opposing offenses that have changed drastically in that time. Page 2
PRESSURE MOUNTS ON KICKERS
If the 2011 regular season in college football is any kind of harbinger, a game coming down to the kicker may not end well for one of the kickers. Field goal attempts missed and made have been decisive in several key college games in the past two seasons. Page 1
THIRD TIME THE CHARM?
Any quarterback drafted as early as No. 3 over all, as Atlanta's quarterback Matt Ryan was, arrives with the bar placed very high. He will attempt to get his first playoff win in three chances, when the Falcons play the Giants in the N.F.C.'s wild-card round. Page 3
PENN STATE'S NEW COACH
Penn State University introduced New England Patriots offensive coordinator Bill O'Brien as its new head football coach. O'Brien takes over amid the specter of the Jerry Sandusky child abuse scandal and in the aftermath of a day of caustic verbal jabs from former Penn State players. Page 5
LEGENDS IN A STEROIDS ERA
The noble idea of limiting the Baseball Hall of Fame to the truly elite is a fantasy as the writers who vote for players continue to wrestle with the residue of the game's steroids era. On Baseball. Page 5
HOCKEY LEAGUE SOLDIERS ON
The Federal Hockey League, which added three teams for its second season, is attempting to succeed in the Northeast where several minor leagues have recently failed. Page 7
Sunday Business
TALES OF FORECLOSURE
ACROSS TWO STATES
The authorities have fallen silent lately about a possible settlement over foreclosure abuses at big mortgage servicing companies. So it's nice to know some attorneys general in Massachusetts and Nevada are taking matters into their own hands with lawsuits filed over foreclosure fraud by mortgage servicers. Fair Game, Gretchen Morgenson. Page 1
APPS FOR FACEBOOK
Developers of apps are trying to add a professional layer to Facebook -- and are hoping that users will accept a less-than-complete separation of professional and personal information. BranchOut, a start-up that offers a Facebook app for job-related networking, pulls profile information about users' education and work, but nothing else. Page 3
THE 'WATSON' TEAM
The assignment was one of the biggest challenges in the field of artificial intelligence: build a computer smart enough to beat grand champions at the game of "Jeopardy." To complete it, independent scientists had to learn to work together in unfamiliar ways, the team leader says. Page 7
STILL WARY OF BONDS
Bond funds as a group outperformed stock funds last year, though not in the fourth quarter. And despite the bond funds' less-volatile performance, choosing one is scarcely a piece of cake. Page 14
Automobiles
MAKING DESIGN DECISIONS
FOR THE NEW ELECTRIC CARS
A century ago, when electric cars were popular, they looked discernibly different from gasoline-powered automobiles. The electric cars on display at the North American International Auto Show are adopting one of two overriding design philosophies: make it exciting, or make it familiar. Page 1
Arts & Leisure
DEFINED BY A SMILE,
A DRAWL AND A STETSON
The new season of "Justified," the acclaimed FX show about United States Marshall Raylan Givens is about to begin. In it, Timothy Olyphant may have found the defining moment of his career. Page 1
Magazine
STEPHEN COLBERT WANTS
TO PURCHASE SOME VOTES
There used to be just two Stephen Colberts, the anchor of the fake news show "The Colbert Report," and the suburban dad. Now, there is a third and this version seems bent on leaving the screen and meddling in world affairs. Page 20
Book Review
BOOKS FOR AN AMERICA
SPLIT TO THE RIGHT AND LEFT
"Pity the Billionaire," by Thomas Frank, "Rule and Ruin," by Geoffrey Kabaservice and "The Tea Party and the Remaking of Republican Conservatism," by Timothy Noah all deal with an increasingly polarized America. Page 1
Style
THE BEGINNINGS OF A BOND,
FORGED IN GOLD, BY HAND
In an age when it's possible to outsource an entire wedding, some couples are now forging bonds while forging their own gold, oxy-propane torches in hand, to create D.I.Y. wedding bands. Page 1
Editorial
AN ENGINEERED DOOMSDAY
MUST BE BETTER CONTAINED
A lab-created bird flu virus has to be destroyed, or better contained, and future research closely reviewed. Sunday Review, Page 10
SALES AND STRATEGY
The Obama administration gave away some of its leverage when it announced multibillion-dollar arms sales deals with Iraq and Saudi Arabia. Sunday Review, Page 10
FURTHER ASSAULT ON UNIONS
Voters, unionized or not, should recognize the new "right to work" push for what it is: bad economics and cynical politics. Sunday Review, Page 10
Op-Ed
MAUREEN DOWD
Rick Santorum's hot politics of aggrievement are competing with Mitt Romney's cold politics of convenience. Sunday Review, Page 11
ROSS DOUTHAT
The privacy zone around public figures has collapsed because of the deep moral divisions on display in the attacks on Rick Santorum. Sunday Review, Page 12
THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
When something extraordinary happens like the events of the past year in Egypt, no one can know what comes next. Sunday Review, Page 11
FRANK BRUNI
To hear the Republican candidates speak, you'd think Ronald Reagan was the last Republican president. Sunday Review, Page 3
THE PUBLIC EDITOR
Some familiar challenges follow The Times into the New Year. Sunday Review, Page 12
