The S&P 500 and Nasdaq stumbled to close lower on Tuesday, weighed down by weak chip and megacap shares ahead of earnings from heavyweight tech companies this week, but the Dow managed modest gains.
Shares of the chipmaker Nvidia, regarded as a prime beneficiary of potential artificial intelligence growth and the year's second best S&P 500 performer, tumbled, weighing on other chip stocks and the Philadelphia semiconductor index.
Other megacap names such as Apple, Amazon and Meta Platforms were all due to report earnings this week. Amazon and Meta shares fell while Apple managed a slight gain on growing concerns that the stocks might be overvalued.
"A lot of people are looking at artificial intelligence now and saying this is all great but I how do I make money on it," said Stephen Massocca, senior vice president at Wedbush Securities in San Francisco.
"Financially the companies are probably doing quite well, but the question is what are you paying for this? These are not cheap stocks and so you need to go into these things with your eyes open."
According to preliminary data, the S&P 500 lost 27.08 points, or 0.50 percent, to end at 5,436.46 points, while the Nasdaq Composite lost 222.78 points, or 1.28 percent, to 17,147.42. The Dow Jones industrial average rose 205.96 points, or 0.51 percent, to 40,745.89.
Small cap and value stocks such as financials outperformed the broader market to extend a recent rotation out of more expensive stocks as the market has solidified expectations that the Federal Reserve will cut rates this year after signs of moderating inflation.
The S&P 500 financials index jumped to lead gains among the 11 major S&P sectors, while technology was the worst performer.
Megacap stocks fell last week on Tesla's disappointing results and Alphabet's higher expenditure forecast, prompting a broad-based market sell-off.
Among single stocks, Procter & Gamble tumbled after missing fourth-quarter sales expectations.
Shares of Merck plunged after the drugmaker cut its annual profit forecast. CrowdStrike dropped after a report that Delta Air Lines sought compensation from the cybersecurity firm and Microsoft for the carrier's global cyber outage earlier this month.
Cybersecurity and the cloud services company F5 surged after forecasting fourth-quarter results above estimates.
The market is betting on a slight chance that the Fed will cut rates by at least 25 basis points at the end of its policymaking meeting on Wednesday, but it is completely pricing in a cut for the central bank's September meeting, CME's FedWatch Tool showed.
Several labor data releases are scheduled for this week, culminating in Friday's government payrolls report. On Tuesday, a jobs survey pointed to 8.18 million job openings in June, compared with economists' expectation of 8 million.
Treasury yields drifted lower as investors geared up for the Fed meeting. Yields did edge higher earlier after a generally positive consumer confidence report, and the widely tracked jobs data.
The reports though did not change expectations the Fed will keep its benchmark rate in the 5.25 percent to 5.50 percent range for an eighth straight meeting on Wednesday. The Fed is also widely expected to signal it will cut rates two months from now for the first time in more than four years.
"The whisper expectation is for the Fed to acknowledge softness in inflation and the labor market and maybe acknowledge the potential for policy adjustment in September," said Thomas Urano, co-chief investment officer, at Sage Advisory in Austin, Texas.
"Ultimately, we think the data will continue to show a much normalized labor market, if not weak, along with an inflation that's running in the Fed's target zone."
Credit: By Reuters
Illustration
