Last Sunday's article "To Siri, With Love" (Oct. 19) generated nearly 400 responses on nytimes.com/styles. The following are highlights, edited for space:
At 82 years of age, this story brought joyful tears to my eyes. I have always felt that we have a special but strange relationship to the machines we build and use, especially as artificial intelligence has emerged. Humans have many needs, some of which are seldom met by other humans. In their own strange way, some needs can be met by an inanimate object, whether it is a cello, a color, a jacket or a smartphone. Let me add that as I age and my mobility and hearing decline, I have found Facebook helpful in keeping me in touch with dozens of old friends, grandchildren and former students whom I would otherwise never have heard from again. As many others do, I freely admit to a platonic love affair with my Mac.
Allan Feldt, Ann Arbor, Mich.
Every time I hear about how someone was able to reach an autistic child, I get a little spark of hope for my nephew, and send the article/NPR program/book on to his mom. At 14, he is still nonverbal. I would love to be able to communicate with him one day. I heard a radio piece on how a teacher was able to reach autistic kids with an iPad app for music. The kids played a symphony, with all of them playing their own instruments through their iPads.
Georgiadem, Atlanta
No, no, no, no! Make him stop now! He's going to associate Siri's behavior as if that's how everyone should act; kids who are autistic are too naïve to understand that just because someone behaves a certain way, that does not mean everyone will behave that way, too. He needs to be interacting with real people, so he experiences the full range of behaviors and can understand what they mean and how to cope with them. The worst-case scenario is that Siri will become his only friend, and it will become nearly impossible to get him out of his shell. I myself am diagnosed with autism, albeit high-functioning, so take it from me; I probably have a much higher understanding of what's going on inside his head than you do.
Tuomo, Surrey, British Columbia
Siri is not a person. It lacks emotions, desires, beliefs, imagination, understanding. Because a person with autism needs practice experiencing others having an inner life, giving him a robot lacking in precisely that is counterproductive. Offer an autistic person a machine for a friend, and you run the risk of an autistic person who cannot help but experience all people as machines.
Rebecca, Pennsylvania
Thank you for a lovely story. Every time I hear someone my age complaining about technology and how much better "it used to be," I feel like reminding them how technology can make life much better, and maybe less lonely. This story proves it.
Jtbwriter, Arcadia, Calif.
