ECONOMY
Americans' Outlook Takes A Turn for the Better
Consumer confidence in the U.S. rose in May after three straight months of declines, though Americans are still anxious about inflation and interest rates.
The Conference Board, a business research group, said Tuesday that its consumer confidence index rose in May to 102 from 97.5 in April. Analysts were expecting the index to decline again.
The index measures both Americans' assessment of current economic conditions and their outlook for the next six months.
The measure of Americans' short-term expectations for income, business and the job market climbed to 74.6 this month from 68.8 in April. A reading below 80 can signal a potential recession.
Meanwhile, over two-thirds of respondents said they believe a recession is "somewhat" or "very" likely in the next 12 months, contrasted with one-third of C.E.O.s surveyed who foresee a recession in the next 12 to 18 months.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
TELECOM
T-Mobile Buys Rival, Furthering Consolidation
T-Mobile is buying U.S. Cellular's wireless operations and certain spectrum assets in a deal valued at $ 4.4 billion, and further consolidating the industry.
T-Mobile would get more than 4 million new customers and control of U.S. Cellular's wireless operations and about 30 percent of spectrum assets across several spectrum bands.
T-Mobile will also enter into a new master license agreement on more than 2,000 towers and extend the lease term for the approximately 600 towers where T-Mobile is already a tenant.
It may also signal the start of more consolidation in an industry with fewer players than ever. "The writing is on the wall for the carriers and consolidation is now on the horizon and could speed up into 2025," said Wedbush Securities analyst Dan Ives, calling the purchase "the first shot across the bow." ASSOCIATED PRESS
PHILANTHROPY
OpenAI Chief Pledges
To Donate Most of Wealth
The Giving Pledge announced Tuesday that OpenAI's C.E.O., Sam Altman, has joined its list of wealthy philanthropists committed to donating over half of their fortunes.
The move comes after a tumultuous six months for Mr. Altman, the co-founder of the San Francisco-based company behind ChatGPT and a venture capitalist who Forbes says amassed much of his $ 1 billion through investments. His removal and subsequent reinstatement as chief executive last November stunned the rapidly commercializing industry as internal conflicts threatened to sink one of the most sought-after voices on artificial intelligence.
Now Mr. Altman, who initially founded his company as a nonprofit research lab dedicated to safely building A.I. for humanity's benefit, says he wants to focus his philanthropic giving on "technology that helps create abundance for people." ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ETIENNE LAURENT/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)
