Georgia Tech will offer a master's degree program at a discount price to thousands worldwide.
Next January, the Georgia Institute of Technology, one of the top universities in the United States, plans to offer a master's degree in computer science to thousands of students online for a fraction of the on-campus cost, a first for an elite institution.
The university hopes to attract 10,000 students from around the world. If it even approaches that goal, it could change the landscape of higher education.
From their start two years ago -- when an artificial intelligence course from Stanford enrolled 170,000 students -- free online courses have drawn millions and yielded triumphs like the perfect scores of Battusig, a 15-year-old Mongolian boy, in a tough circuits course from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
But such massive open online courses, or MOOCs, have not, as yet, reshaped the higher education landscape, partly because they offer no credit and lead to no degree.
The disruption may be approaching, though. Georgia Tech, in Atlanta, will offer its online master's in computer science for $6,600 -- far less than the $45,000 on-campus price.
The online courses will be free for those not seeking a degree. Students who cannot meet the admission standards may be admitted provisionally and allowed to transfer in if they do well in their first two courses. And students who complete only a few courses would get a certificate.
Zvi Galil, dean of the college of computing, said the program would be particularly attractive to international students. "Online, there's no visa problem," he said.
The program rests on an unusual partnership forged by Dr. Galil and Sebastian Thrun, a founder of Udacity, a Silicon Valley MOOC provider.
Although it is just one degree at one university, the prospect of a prestigious low-cost degree program has sparked great interest. Some educators think the leap from individual noncredit courses to full degree programs could signal the next phase in MOOCs and bring real change to higher education.
"Perhaps Zvi Galil and Sebastian Thrun will prove to be the Wright Brother of MOOCs," said S. James Gates, Jr., a physicist who serves on President Barack Obama's Council of Advisers on Science and Technology. "This is the first deliberate and thoughtful attempt to apply education technology to bringing instruction to scale."
"If it really works," he said, "it could begin the process of lowering the cost of education, and lowering barriers for millions of Americans."
The plan is for Georgia Tech to provide the content and professors and to get 60 percent of the revenue, and for Udacity to offer the computer platform and course assistants for the other 40 percent. The projected budget for the test run is $3.1 million -- including $2 million from AT&T -- yielding $240,000 in profit. By the third year, the projection is for $14.3 million in costs and $4.7 million in profit.
"This is all uncharted territory, so no one really knows if it will go to scale." Dr. Galil said. "We just want to prove that it can be done, to make a high-quality degree program available for a low cost."
Not everyone believes such a degree program will be sustainable -- or even that it would be a step forward.
"The whole MOOC mania has got everyone buzzing in academia, but scaling is a great challenge," said Bruce Chaloux, executive director of the Sloan Consortium, a private group concerned with online learning. "I have to believe that at some point, when the underwriting ends, to keep high quality, Georgia Tech would have to float to more traditional tuition rates."
Some faculty members worry that, despite Dr. Galil's pledge that the program will match the quality and standards of the on-campus master's program, it could dilute the value of a Georgia Tech degree. And as in California, where Udacity is in a partnership with San Jose State University -- now suspended because of underwhelming preliminary results -- some object to the whole idea of outsourcing part of their work.
"If you spend a lot of money, you can make online great, and this will probably be a showcase program," said Chris Newfield, a professor at the University of California, Santa Barbara, who is studying online education. "But we in universities could do that ourselves if we had that money, and the whole history of private involvement in public education has been one of extracting resources. However well-intentioned, we don't need a Trojan horse product that will take money out of the system."
There is no question, educators say, that online learning will continue to spread. But whether MOOCs are the approach that will win out is not clear.
"A very large number of public universities are experimenting with how online delivery can increase quality and contain costs," said M. Peter McPherson, president of the Association of Public and Land Grant Universities. "Using MOOCs for a low-cost graduate degree certainly crosses a threshold, but so does the fact that Virginia Tech no longer teaches any freshman math except by self-paced online courses, and their costs are lower and their outcomes are better. We're going to see more online learning, but not one single absolute model."
The three leading MOOC providers -- Udacity, Coursera and edX -- have grown at a remarkable rate, adding hundreds of courses with dozens of partners. But the path ahead is less clear, and all three are now working with universities to gain credit for their students. Some state universities, leery of ceding control to outsiders, lean toward developing their own online programs and platforms. And while a few universities do offer credit for a few MOOCs, and a few more will do so this autumn, their offers have had no takers.
For-profit colleges, like the University of Phoenix, were the first to offer large online degree programs, sometimes with tuition as low as community colleges'. But their enrollment has been declining from a combination of the recession, increasing government scrutiny and congressional hearings finding that their students had unusually high default rates and low chances of graduation.
In recent years, many public universities have begun online degree programs, costing at least as much as their campus programs. But if the Georgia Tech program attracts thousands of students, that pricing model may be vulnerable.
"Online is a scale game, so the Georgia Tech thing is interesting," said Phil Regier, executive vice provost of Arizona State University Online, which takes in $90 million a year. "What we're seeing is different price points for different levels of faculty involvement. If you want no touch, or very little touch, they'll deliver that for $6,000. If you want a higher-touch program, taught and graded by regular faculty, with a lot of faculty interaction, it's going to be more expensive. "
Mr. Regier said he did not know whether the Georgia Tech's MOOC model would succeed. "What I do know," he said, "is that if they attract 5,000 students, I don't want to be doubling down on our computer science master's program. You have to know your market."
The Florida Legislature has directed the University of Florida to start fully online bachelor's degrees and price them at three-quarters of the campus tuition for in-state residents, or about $4,700. But Bernie Machen, president of the university, said he had not yet decided whether to charge out-of state online students the full $28,000 tuition they would pay on campus -- in part because he wonders about possible fallout from Georgia Tech.
"Most of us got into online graduate programs more from the revenue side than the service side," said Mr. Machen, whose university earns $75 million from its 70-plus graduate degree programs. "It was an untapped market."
Mr. Machen, like some others, said he was puzzled by the optimistic Georgia Tech financial estimates and not sure they would work out.
Higher education officials say they will be watching closely.
"Georgia Tech is exceptionally important because it's a prestigious institution offering an important degree at very low cost with a direct connection to a Fortune 100 corporation that will use it to fill their pipeline," said Terry Hartle, senior vice president of the American Council on Education. "It addresses a lot of the issues about universities that the public cares about. But how good and how transferable it is remain to be seen. "
