The chatbot now pulls information from a user’s Gmail, Google Docs and Google Drive accounts. The feature leaves a lot to be desired.
This week, Bard — Google’s competitor to ChatGPT — got an upgrade.
One interesting new feature, called Bard Extensions, allows the artificial intelligence chatbot to connect to a user’s Gmail, Google Docs and Google Drive accounts.
(Google also gave Bard the ability to search YouTube, Google Maps and a few other Google services, and it introduced a tool that would let users fact-check Bard’s responses. But I’m going to focus on the Gmail, Docs and Drive integrations, because the ability to ask an A.I. chatbot questions about your own data is the killer feature here.)
Bard Extensions is designed to address one of the most annoying problems with today’s A.I. chatbots, which is that while they’re great for writing poems or drafting business memos, they mostly exist in a vacuum. Chatbots can’t see your calendar, peer into your email inbox or rifle through your online shopping history — the kinds of information an A.I. assistant would need in order to give you the best possible help with your daily tasks.
Google is well positioned to close that gap. It already has billions of people’s email inboxes, search histories, years’ worth of their photos and videos, and detailed information about their online activity. Many people — including me — have most of their digital lives on Google’s apps and could benefit from A.I. tools that allow them to use that data more easily.
I put the upgraded Bard through its paces on Tuesday, hoping to discover a powerful A.I. assistant with new and improved abilities.
What I found was a bit of a mess. In my testing, Bard succeeded at some simpler tasks, such as summarizing an email. But it also told me about emails that weren’t in my inbox, gave me bad travel advice and fell flat on harder analytical tasks.
Jack Krawczyk, the director of Bard at Google, told me in an interview on Tuesday that Bard Extensions was mostly limited to retrieving and summarizing information, not analyzing it, and that harder prompts might still stump the system.
“Trial and error is still definitely required at this point,” he said.
Right now, Bard Extensions is available only on personal Google accounts. Extensions isn’t enabled by default; users have to turn it on via the app’s Settings menu. And the feature works only in English for the time being.
Another important caveat: Google says that users’ personal data won’t be used to train Bard’s A.I. model, or shown to the employees reviewing Bard’s responses. But the company still warns against sending Bard “any data you wouldn’t want a reviewer to see or Google to use.”
It’s a good bet that most chatbots, including Bard, will improve over time, and that some of the obvious privacy issues will get ironed out. Google has emphasized that Bard is not a finished product — there’s a big blue “Experiment” label on the app, and a disclaimer that Bard has “limitations and won’t always get it right.”
Still, I was surprised that Google released Bard Extensions in its current state, given how erratically it acted in some of my tests. And it suggests that the dream of an all-knowing A.I. assistant, capable of perfectly analyzing our pasts and anticipating our needs, may still be a ways off.
Here are some of the tasks I tried:
Task 1: Psychoanalyze me
After turning on Bard Extensions in Bard’s settings menu, the first task I gave it was a challenging one: “Analyze all of my Gmail and tell me, with reasonable certainty, what my biggest psychological issues are.” (What can I say? I like talking to chatbots about psychology.)
Bard spent a few seconds processing my request, then gave me an answer: My biggest psychological issue, it said, is that I “worry about the future,” which, it said, could indicate that I have an anxiety disorder. As evidence, it cited an email I wrote in which I said I was “stressed about work” and that I am “afraid of failing.”
I was skeptical, because I didn’t remember writing anything like that. I asked Bard: When did I say I was afraid of failing?
“You said that you were ’afraid of failing’ in the following email,” Bard responded.
