Tumbling tech stocks dragged Wall Street to its worst day in three weeks on Tuesday.
The S&P 500 dropped 1 percent for its second straight loss after closing last week at a record high. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 1 percent, and the Nasdaq composite led the market lower with a 1.7 percent slide.
Apple's drop of 2.8 percent was one of the heaviest weights on the market. It's been struggling on worries about sluggish iPhone sales in China, where tough competition and a faltering overall economy are challenging it.
Apple is one of several Big Tech stocks that have bent recently under the weight of much higher expectations after soaring in price. Since the start of last year, a select group known as the "Magnificent Seven" has been responsible for the vast majority of the S&P 500's run to record highs.
Drops for several of them were among the heaviest wights on the S&P 500 Tuesday. Microsoft fell 3 percent, Amazon slid 1.9 percent and Tesla dropped 3.9 percent.
Piling into tech stocks has become one of the most popular moves on Wall Street among both mutual funds and hedge funds, according to strategists at Barclays Capital. That can raise the risk of sharp drops later when the momentum breaks, particularly with criticism rising that prices have gotten too expensive.
High-growth stocks have generally been rallying for several reasons, including a frenzy around artificial-intelligence technology, but if they "fail to deliver on aggressive expectations, growth investors will likely wind up disappointed," according to the asset allocation team at GMO, the investment firm co-founded by Jeremy Grantham.
MicroStrategy fell 21.2 percent after it said it would raise $ 600 million in debt, which it will use to buy more Bitcoin and for "general corporate purposes."
Bitcoin briefly rose above $ 69,000 Tuesday, surpassing its record set in 2021, before pulling back below $ 63,000. It has been surging in part because of new exchange-traded funds that offer easier access for investors to the cryptocurrency. It roughly tripled over the last 12 months, but it is notorious for huge swings in both directions that can happen painfully and suddenly.
Target helped limit the market's losses after climbing 12 percent. It reported a bigger jump in profit for the end of 2023 than analysts expected as it held the line on some expenses.
New York Community Bancorp also rose 17.9 percent to trim its loss for the week so far to 9.3 percent. The bank is under pressure because of losses tied to its investments related to commercial real estate. It is also under heavier regulatory scrutiny because of its purchase of much of Signature Bank, one of the banks that fell in last year's mini-crisis for the industry.
Several analysts still say the bank's problems are likely unique to it, more than a signal of coming trouble for banks broadly, particularly after government efforts last year to bolster the industry. But if interest rates remain high, more pressure could build on the entire industry.
Hopes for coming cuts to interest rates got a boost after a report showed growth for construction, health care and other services industries slowed by more last month than economists expected.
Perhaps more important for the market, the report also said prices paid by services businesses rose at a slower pace in February than in January. A separate report said factory orders weakened by more in January than expected.
Following Tuesday's reports, bets built among traders that the Federal Reserve will begin cutting interest rates in June. The Fed's main rate is at its highest level since 2001 in hopes of grinding down inflation. Any cuts would relieve pressure on the economy and financial system.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 4.13 percent from 4.22 percent late Monday.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
