fĭjĭ-tl
A term that has taken off in the retail world to describe the seamless integration of brick-and-mortar and digital experiences for customers.
Kenergy, zillennials, situationships. Americans love portmanteaus. Which helps explain why in the retail world, "phygital" has emerged as a buzzy alternative to "omnichannel" to describe the need for companies to excel at selling things both in stores and online.
Some experts say phygital ("physical" + "digital") does a better job of describing how online and brick-and-mortar shops should work together to create a seamless customer experience. That became a necessity during the pandemic, when things like QR codes, digital payment options and contactless order pickups helped ease people's fears about contracting the virus. Plus, proponents of the term say it captures how retailers are incorporating artificial intelligence and augmented reality.
Barry Collier, an entrepreneur who helped develop Neopets, a game that involves owning virtual pets, has been keeping an eye on the term. He points to IKEA's mobile app, which allows people to virtually sample couches and curtains in their own homes before making a purchase, as an example of phygital innovation. Similarly, Sephora's technology lets shoppers in its stores see what a certain eyeliner or blush might look like without the need to physically apply it to their faces.
The term has made its way into the nonprofit world, too. In a report this month, the World Economic Forum, the independent organization that aims to improve large-scale global problems, wrote, "In the context of developing economies, where infrastructure gaps and digital divides pose significant challenges, the adoption of phygital solutions can foster inclusive development and ensure progress." The organization cited "smart agriculture" -- which uses robotics, drones and A.I. -- as an example.
Momentum Worldwide, a global marketing firm based in New York that describes itself as an experiential agency, takes credit for coining "phygital" in 2007, though it didn't really take off. At the time, it wasn't clear how important online shopping would become. That changed as technology improved, Mr. Collier said.
Some people are more skeptical of the term. John Long, a consultant at Korn Ferry who works with retail clients, thinks "phygital" is redundant with omnichannel -- and is not as easy to say.
"It's an attempt to refresh a word that we've heard a lot," he said. He also questioned whether phygital passes the litmus test for a valuable new word: "Is it truly helping you articulate something that you otherwise couldn't?" he said.
And there's still some ambiguity about what the term actually conveys.
"I do see it being used more, but I think that there's still a lot of confusion around it," Mr. Collier said, adding, "The implementation will continue to evolve, but what it means I think will eventually settle."
Shop Talk explores the idioms of the business world. Want to nominate a word or term for the column?Email shoptalk@nytimes.com
