After IBM reported surprisingly weak quarterly profits and sales Monday morning, Virginia M. Rometty did something most unusual for an IBM chief executive. She joined the conference call with analysts, and forcefully made the case for investing heavily in new fields that promise growth in the future, despite a near-term financial setback.
"We are reinventing and we are managing this company for the long term," Ms. Rometty told the Wall Street analysts. She acknowledged that third-quarter results were "disappointing," and she underlined the need to pick up the corporate pace in the midst of "unprecedented change" in the technology industry.
But Ms. Rometty insisted that IBM's "very bold moves" since she became chief executive nearly two years ago -- multibillion-dollar spending programs for data analysis software and skills, cloud computing and Watson artificial intelligence technology -- were the right ones. "The strategy is correct," she said. "Now it's our speed of execution that needs to improve."
IBM, like the entire tech industry, is going through a significant transition, which is a threat as well as an opportunity. It's a point that Ms. Rometty has made recently; in an interview earlier this year, she said 2014 would be a "rocky time" given the challenges.
But IBM's third-quarter performance brought even more attention to its particular financial struggles, as new businesses that are growing are not yet large enough to offset the weakness in its traditional hardware, software and services lines.
The quarterly results came in well below the forecasts of Wall Street analysts, and they caught IBM executives off-guard as well. In the conference call, Martin Schroeter, IBM's chief financial officer, conceded that the industry was shifting "faster than we had planned."
As a result, IBM said it was abandoning its financial target for 2015 of delivering earnings per share of $20 or more.
The company's stock price dropped over 7 percent, down $12.95, to close at $169.10 a share.
The industry transition that is buffeting IBM includes the move to deliver software as a service from remote, or cloud, data centers and the use of new kinds of less expensive software and hardware to store and analyze huge amounts of data. These are growth businesses for IBM, but they also are a shift away from the traditional software and services businesses, which have been IBM's lucrative mainstay.
Steven Milunovich, an analyst at UBS, estimates that traditional hardware, software and services products make up two-thirds of IBM's revenue. "IBM is in the midst of a multiyear transition that is unavoidable," Mr. Milunovich said. "But when you have this much change, it is very tough on legacy businesses."
For years, IBM has been moving away from some of its old-line products, especially hardware operations with lower profit margins, notably selling off its disk drive and personal computer divisions years ago. It took another such step on Monday.
IBM announced that it was shedding its chip-making operations in a deal with Globalfoundries. As part of the transaction, IBM took a $4.7 billion pretax charge against its third-quarter earnings. The charge includes writing down the value of the assets and a $1.5 billion cash payment to Globalfoundries, a large contract chip producer, based in Santa Clara, Calif.
With the charge for the chip sell-off, IBM reported net income of $18 million, or 2 cents a share.
But that move was expected and in step with IBM's strategy. The surprising weakness was in the performance of IBM's continuing businesses. The company's operating profits for the quarter, excluding the one-time chip-related charge, fell 10 percent, to $3.68 a share. That was well below the average estimate of Wall Street analysts of $4.32 a share.
Revenue for the quarter slipped 4 percent to $22.4 billion, a large shortfall from analysts' consensus forecast of $23.4 billion.
The IBM game plan, said A.M. Sacconaghi, an analyst at Bernstein Research, has been to pursue new businesses while being supported by a stable base of steady revenue from its longstanding core businesses. "The migration to new things isn't happening fast enough," Mr. Sacconaghi said, "and the stable base is not as stable as they thought."
IBM had been in negotiations with Globalfoundries for months. So the deal was expected, though the financial arrangements, including the size of the charge, were not known.
In an interview, John E. Kelly, director of IBM's research labs, said IBM planned to invest $3 billion over the next five years in advanced semiconductor research and development. The company wants to invent new chip designs while handing over the production of chips to Globalfoundries, which will build and be the sole supplier of those chips for IBM's mainframe and big data-serving computers. "What we lacked in chip-making was scale," Mr. Kelly said.
IBM's microelectronics business lost $700 million last year on revenue of $1.4 billion. Total IBM revenue last year was just under $100 billion.
The deal will further enlarge the operations of Globalfoundries, created in 2009 when Advanced Micro Devices spun out its manufacturing operations. Already, it has large chip factories in Germany and Singapore and a new facility outside Albany, N.Y. Sanjay Jha, chief executive of Globalfoundries, said the IBM factories in East Fishkill, N.Y., and Essex Junction, Vt., would increase his company's buying power for both equipment and silicon, and add to its work force of skilled employees. IBM employs about 5,000 people in its chip-making unit, and Mr. Jha said "nearly all of them" would be offered jobs with Globalfoundries.
Globalfoundries is only one step in the transformation of IBM's portfolio of businesses. In January, the company agreed to sell its business making smaller data-serving computers, powered by industry-standard personal computer chips, to Lenovo of China for $2.3 billion. IBM has also divested itself of a customer service unit in its services business. Together, the three properties accounted for $7 billion in revenue last year, but lost $500 million.
As it sheds those businesses, IBM is making multibillion-dollar investments in new data, cloud and mobile offerings, which promise higher profits. In the last couple of months, IBM has also forged a partnership with Apple to jointly develop and market mobile applications for business, and with SAP to supply cloud data center capacity for the big German business software company.
IBM's data analytics business now generates $16 billion in yearly revenue, and its cloud unit that sells software as a service grew 80 percent in the quarter on pace for $3.1 billion in annual sales. Its mobile software and security offerings are generating solid growth. In all, the businesses that IBM is increasingly counting on for the future grew by 20 percent.
"If these were separate businesses, they would be applauded for their growth," Ms. Rometty said.
Still, the growth stories were not enough to overcome the weaknesses in IBM's older businesses with hardware, software and services revenue all down for the quarter.
Photograph A Globalfoundries Chip Factory in Dresden, Germany. Ibm Made a Deal with Globalfoundries to Shed Its Chip-Making Operations. (Photograph by Oliver Killig/Dpa, Via European Pressphoto Agency) (B6)
