Warning that a new set of academic standards was on the verge of falling into the "dustbin of history," the leader of a national teachers' union called on Tuesday for school systems to postpone using new tests to evaluate teachers and promote students.
The leader, Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, said teachers needed at least a year to master a new curriculum and review test materials before schools should be held accountable for results.
"Is this about deep learning or desperate cramming?" Ms. Weingarten said during an appearance in Midtown Manhattan, where she spoke before the Association for a Better New York, a group of civic and business leaders. "The only way this will succeed is if teachers have input and ownership."
Ms. Weingarten's message seemed aimed largely at New York, one of the first states in the nation to overhaul its tests in line with new standards, known as the Common Core. The tests made their debut this spring to the grumbles of many teachers, who said they had not been adequately trained to prepare students for the exam. Most states are not expected to adopt new tests until the 2014-15 school year.
Some education advocates dismissed Ms. Weingarten's speech, calling it a stalling tactic intended to derail efforts to use student test scores in rating teachers.
"As the education status quo calls for endless delay that would prevent progress in order to hold on to its power, our kids are falling further behind the rest of the world," said Glen Weiner, acting executive director of StudentsFirstNY, an advocacy group.
City and state officials said they understood Ms. Weingarten's concerns but had already accounted for the difficulty of the new tests. New York City will require the same percentage of students to attend summer school this year because of low test scores. The state will adjust its teacher evaluation formula to account for more stringent exams.
"Radical change is very unsettling," said Merryl H. Tisch, chancellor of the State Board of Regents. "My hope and belief is that as we go into the second and third year, things will settle down."
Arne Duncan, the federal education secretary, declined to comment on Ms. Weingarten's proposal but said in a statement that her remarks "speak to a legitimate concern that we've heard and are thinking through carefully."
The Common Core standards, which have been adopted by 45 states and the District of Columbia, emphasize critical thinking and practical problem-solving skills. In her speech, Ms. Weingarten said a union poll showed that 75 percent of teachers supported the standards.
