AIRLINES
After Restructuring Deal, SAS Shares Hit the Skids
Shares in Scandinavian Airlines dropped more than 90 percent on Wednesday after the ailing carrier announced new shareholders in a restructuring scheme that will see the company delisted and existing ownership stakes erased.
The rescue deal involving the airline alliance Air France-KLM and private equity firms Castlelake and Lind Invest, which became investors alongside the Danish state, was presented late Tuesday.
The deal means that SAS will receive $ 475 million in new equity and $ 700 million in convertible debt. Scandinavian Airlines will be taken off the stock exchange in the second quarter of 2024 and no payment will be made to current shareholders.
Castlelake will become the biggest shareholder with a 32 percent stake, while Air France-KLM will hold 20 percent. The Danish government will hold 26 percent of the shares. Lind Invest will control 8.6 percent. ASSOCIATED PRESS
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
SoftBank's Chief Urges Japan to Embrace A.I.
The chief executive of SoftBank, Masayoshi Son, right, said on Wednesday that he believed artificial intelligence would surpass human intelligence within a decade, urging Japanese companies to adopt it or be left behind.
Mr. Son, speaking at a corporate conference in Tokyo, said "artificial general intelligence will surpass the total intelligence of humankind by 10 times in 10 years."
It will affect every industry, from transportation and pharmaceuticals to finance, manufacturing, logistics and others, and the companies and people that work with A.I. will be the leaders in the next 10 to 20 years, Son said.
Mr. Son, who founded SoftBank and is a leading figure in Japan's business world, has enjoyed both victories and defeats in his array of technology investments. He latched on to the potential of the internet decades ago, and now is seeking to invest in A.I.-related companies. ASSOCIATED PRESS
INTERNATIONAL
Poland's Central Bank Lowers Key Rate Again
Poland's central bank lowered its key interest rate Wednesday, pointing to a drop in inflation despite a still-high rate of 8.2 percent last month.
The National Bank of Poland cut its benchmark rate a quarter of a percentage point to 5.75 percent. Analysts were expecting it after annual inflation dropped last month from 10.1 percent in August.
It was the second rate cut since Sept. 9, when the central bank surprisingly slashed rates by three-quarters of a point.
Other central banks worldwide are increasing borrowing costs or holding rates at high levels to tackle inflation stemming from the global economy's rebound from the Covid-19 pandemic and Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
The European Central Bank hiked its key rate by a quarter-point last month to fight inflation, which has dropped to 4.3 percent in the 20 countries using the euro. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS)
