What Else Could Watson Do?
If you're like us here at Bucks, you probably found this sentence most enticing in our article on Thursday about I.B.M.'s Watson supercomputer beating two humans on "Jeopardy":
"I.B.M. executives also said they are in discussions with a major consumer electronics retailer to develop a version of Watson, named after I.B.M.'s founder, Thomas J. Watson, that would be able to interact with consumers on a variety of subjects like buying decisions and technical support."
As I imagined all of the time this could save at, say, Best Buy, my mind wandered to this question: What other areas of consumer life could Watson make easier?
Here are a few ideas:
BIG-BOX STORES At stores like Wal-Mart and Target, Watson could tell you the location of every item and even draw you a map of the exact place in the aisle where it lives.
THE POST OFFICE Watson could offer fact-based tax advice on April 15 and other dates when people are rushing to fill out their forms and get them into the mail.
TRANSIT CENTERS Watson could relieve some of the lines that tend to form at train station information booths where humans sit and give directions.
STADIUMS Watson could tell you where your seats are and get you to the food concession that has the Polish sausage.
That last one came from my colleague Steve Lohr, who also offered a different list: some places where he wouldn't want a smart butler to turn up. Watson would probably not make a good sommelier, for instance. RON LIEBER
COMMENTSRather than these trivial pursuits you'd be better off hoping Watson is your next doctor. Doctors do not deal in "creativity," or shouldn't. They should always know all the right questions to ask regarding any patient and know how to correctly interpret them and calculate very accurately the odds of the accuracy of any diagnosis. Watson can be trained to do those all flawlessly. Few, if any, doctors can.
-- AH2, New York
I hope (s)he never appears beside my hospital bed.
-- David S., New York
Online, helping me pick out last-minute gifts. -- Jeff, Atlanta
I worked for I.B.M. for eight years, and I can tell you Watson would never replace humans to do the things you mentioned above. Watson won on "Jeopardy," and that's all it will be able to do.
-- Joe, San Jose, Calif.
On "Jeopardy," Watson's success/ came largely 'cause humans can't press/ the buzzer with speed,/although we concede/ we know that it's no GPS. -- JD, Connecticut
Car Shopping:
New Strategy

If you're in the market for a new car and don't want to buy it online, here's a helpful car shopping tip from Edmunds.com: When you walk into the dealer, ask to work with an Internet sales specialist rather than the traditional staff.
According to Edmunds.com, this strategy can lead to savings of "hundreds or even thousands of dollars on your next new car."
The tip is based off the experience of Philip Reed, senior consumer advice editor at Edmunds.com. Mr. Reed got a quote on a 2011 Sienna SE that was $500 over invoice, well below the average price other buyers pay for the vehicle.
Mr. Reed, who detailed his experience on Edmunds.com, wrote that the Internet salesman told him he had saved so much because the deal "didn't go through the finance and insurance office," as is usually the case, and the dealership didn't get a chance to push additional services.
So how do you make sure you get to see the Internet sales staff? Mr. Reed recommended scheduling a test drive with the dealership's Internet manager and requesting that the document preparation be handled by the Internet manager, among other tips. JENNIFER SARANOW SCHULTZ
COMMENTSOf course you can deal with the Internet sales manager. His name is Watson.
-- Technic Ally, Toronto
After you have decided exactly what car you want and what, if any, additional features you want, spend a half day going to three (no more and no less) dealers. Tell them you are shopping today at three dealers. Tell them you will be buying the car in one week. If they say they'll give you a good price now if you commit now, tell them you'll take the price but you still are not buying for one week, until you know, for sure, which of the three is giving you the best price. The following week, get on the phone again to each, remind them who you are, and tell them you are buying the car today and will buy from whichever sweetens the deal the most. -- NR9, U.S.A.
The Internet salesperson is also useful if you live in an area with only one dealer of the car you want to buy. Twice, I've taken to my local dealer detailed Internet exchanges with an Internet salesperson 400 miles away, and the local dealer matched the deal. I owe the Internet salesperson my next purchase, though.
-- Maqroll, North Florida
The best way to save money at the dealership is to buy a car that meets 95 percent of your needs -- and then rent vehicles that meet the other 5 percent.
-- Lonely Pedant, Dallas
A Fee Break
For Travelers
There is more good news for international travelers tired of fees that credit card companies tack on when merchants process a transaction outside the United States.
Chase announced this week that it would no longer levy such currency conversion fees on its high-end United Mileage Plus Club Visa and Continental Presidential Plus cards. If you have a Chase United or Continental card with a different name, you will probably continue to pay the fee for transactions outside the United States, though you could call the company to clarify this.
While plenty of card companies continue to levy these fees, the momentum is clearly swinging toward getting rid of them. Chase had already dropped the fees on British Airways, Priority Club and Hyatt co-branded credit cards. Citigroup has done so on select cards, and American Express has announced plans for a similar move. RON LIEBER
COMMENTSYou (and many others) are missing a critical element. It's not a cause for celebration until we've made sure that Chase is not simply giving less favorable foreign exchange rates to its customers now.
-- Jim, Philadelphia
Very disappointed this does not extend to the Mileage Plus Select Visa. -- Petemoss14, Munich

Photograph This Week, Ken Jennings, Who Won a Record 74 Consecutive "Jeopardy" Games, Lost to Watson, a Computer Made by I.B.M. (Photograph by Seth Wenig/Associated Press)
