While iPhone sales dropped 1 percent, consumer interest in Apple's flagship product is expected to pick up later this year.
This spring, Apple updated its iPads and Macs with faster processors and new features. The improvements are already paying off.
On Thursday, the tech giant said sales of iPads and Macs jumped by more than 12 percent during the three months that ended in June, helping the company bounce back after a series of lackluster quarters.
Apple reported that sales rose 5 percent, to $ 85.78 billion, while profit increased 8 percent, to $ 21.45 billion. The results exceeded Wall Street analysts' expectations for $ 20.65 billion in profit during the quarter.
The company said it expected revenue to increase in the current quarter, which ends in September. Shares were flat in after-hours trading.
Demand for iPads and Macs helped offset weak iPhone sales. Interest in iPhones has waned in China, where competition from Huawei has intensified.
In China, sales of Huawei phones have surged over the past year. The Chinese smartphone maker increased its shipments in China by 45 percent during the June quarter, while Apple's shipments fell 5 percent.
Apple said iPhone sales fell 1 percent, to $ 39.3 billion in the quarter. Total sales in China fell 6.5 percent, to $ 14.73 billion.
Investors are optimistic that iPhone sales will rebound later this year after Apple releases new models with generative artificial intelligence features. In June, the company unveiled a suite of A.I. products that it is calling Apple Intelligence. The system will prioritize messages and offer writing tools to improve emails, notes and texts. It will be driven by an upgraded Siri, Apple's virtual assistant, and complemented by answers from ChatGPT, the chatbot from OpenAI.
The new features, which will become available this fall, helped calm concerns that Apple had fallen behind its biggest rivals in the tech industry's embrace of A.I. The company's stock has risen 11 percent since then, to $ 218.36, helping it reclaim its position as the world's most valuable tech company.
Wall Street analysts are predicting that the A.I. features will lift iPhone sales to a record in the final three months of the year. Millions of iPhone owners are sitting on older devices that are due for an upgrade. Several analysts have predicted that the company will sell more than 90 million units, the most in that period since it sold 88 million iPhones in late 2021.
"We're on the eve of the new iPhone 16 with A.I. features and everyone is excited," said Dan Morgan, a senior portfolio manager at Synovus Trust Company, an investment firm in Georgia that counts Apple among its largest holdings. "That could create the first catalyst we've seen for iPhone for a while."
Apple continues to benefit from its decision several years ago to broaden its focus beyond selling more devices to selling more software and services across its existing devices. The company said its services business, which includes the sales of apps, Apple Music and Apple Pay, increased sales 14 percent to $ 24.21 billion in the quarter.
During a call with Wall Street analysts, Tim Cook, the chief executive of Apple, said the company expected the introduction of Apple Intelligence later this year to help bolster its services business. This week, the company rolled out the first version of those features to app developers. Mr. Cook said customers would receive the features under a staggered fashion, with ChatGPT becoming available by the end of the year.
"We're very excited to get the initial seed out there and see what do," he said of the app developers.
But that business's future growth has been challenged by antitrust authorities around the world. In the European Union, Britain and the United States, regulators have pressured Apple to open up its App Store.
Last month, the European Union charged Apple with imposing unfair restrictions on developers and violating a new law meant to encourage competition in the tech industry. Apple has defended its practices, but it could face a fine of up to 10 percent of its global revenue.
In the United States, a federal judge is expected to issue a decision that could upend the company's business arrangement with Google. The Justice Department has accused Google of illegally locking in its monopoly by making its search option the default on devices from Apple and other brands. If the judge prevents Google from paying Apple for that position in the future, it could cost Apple about $ 20 billion a year.
Illustration
