The company's $500 million deal for DeepMind of Britain is more about algorithms than it is about artificial intelligence.
"I'd like to go on a vacation somewhere warm over the summer, but only have a budget of $1,000. Where should I go?"
If you search Google with a very long and human question like this, you will see a series of strange links to articles like, "7 Frugal Habits Everyone Should Develop," "Successful People Who Prove You Should Use Your Vacation Time" and "How to Plan a Vacation."
Google wants to change that, which is why the company bought the British artificial intelligence developer, DeepMind.
Some in the blogosphere saw the acquisition on Monday differently, speculating that Google was buying DeepMind to help make robots and thermostats more intelligent -- presumably for world domination.
While this artificial intelligence technology could be used with robots one day, possibly even in the not-too-distant future, for now Google was hoping to continue its world domination of search.
This is why Facebook was also competing to buy DeepMind, as The Information noted Monday. Facebook does not have any humanoid robots, robotic dogs or Internet-connected thermostats. What Facebook does have is something that Google dominates: search.
ReCode first reported the deal on Sunday, saying Google had agreed to pay $400 million for the company.
People who work with Google, but could not be named because they were not allowed to speak publicly for the company, said the acquisition of DeepMind had nothing to do with robots, but everything to do with semantic technology and the ability to understand what people were asking for online and answer in a very human way.
While a Google spokesman confirmed the purchase of DeepMind, he declined to comment about why Google had acquired the company or the type of projects it would be working on.
The DeepMind team will probably be working with Geoffrey Hinton, a computer scientist and psychologist who joined Google last year and works on the company's Knowledge Graph. He is best known for his work in the 1980s when he started research in machine learning -- teaching computers to put data together in patterns that are very similar to how the human brain works.
When Mr. Hinton joined Google, he wrote on his Google Plus page that he had spent time working with the Knowledge Graph team of scientists and engineers who, he thought, had a real shot at pushing machine learning into new territory. "I am betting on Google's team to be the epicenter of future breakthroughs," he wrote then.
All of this Knowledge Graph work could eventually help people search in a way that was much closer to talking to another human, but with the answers of a robot.
Deep Mind, in London, was founded by Demis Hassabis, a computer-game designer, neuroscientist and former child chess prodigy, and his partners, Shane Legg and Mustafa Suleyman.
Mr. Legg noted in a 2011 question-and-answer session with the LessWrong blog that technology and artificial intelligence could have negative consequences for humanity.
"Eventually, I think human extinction will probably occur, and technology will likely play a part in this," he said. "If a super-intelligent machine, or any kind of super-intelligent agent, decided to get rid of us, I think it would do so pretty efficiently."
