A series of surprising and serious events and trends that were unprecedented until now.
This article is part of a series called Turning Points , in which writers explore what critical moments from this year might mean for the year ahead. You can read more by visiting the Turning Points series page .
1. London’s West End lights up to celebrate Ramadan.
London’s West End glowed with 30,000 festive holiday lights strung up to mark the Islamic holy month of Ramadan for the first time in March. Mayor Sadiq Khan, London’s first Muslim mayor, ceremoniously lit the “Happy Ramadan” display of lights depicting the phases of the moon over Coventry Street. The installation was the first Ramadan celebration of its kind in a major European city.
2. Cells from two male mice produce live offspring.
Scientists from Osaka University in Japan have created mice from two biologically male parents for the first time, according to a study published in March in the journal Nature. Scientists took skin cells from the tails of male mice and used them to generate eggs that were implanted into female mice, eventually producing live offspring. The reproductive feat could have future implications for fertility treatments and the preservation of endangered species.
3. Jimin becomes the first Korean solo artist to top the charts.
Jimin, best known as a member of the K-pop group BTS, became the first South Korean solo artist to top Billboard’s Hot 100 with his hit “Like Crazy” in April. The weekly rankings reflect the most popular songs in the United States across genres. Several months later, fellow BTS member Jungkook became the second South Korean solo artist to take the No. 1 spot with his single “Seven.”
4. Chinese currency overtakes the American dollar in China’s international payments.
The Chinese yuan for the first time overtook the American dollar as the most widely used currency for cross-border payments in China in March. The Chinese government has been promoting the use of the yuan, also known as the renminbi, to internationalize its currency and challenge the American dollar’s dominance.
5. Scientists successfully extract rocks from Earth’s mantle.
After several unsuccessful attempts dating back to 1961, researchers drilled into the Earth’s mantle in May, retrieving sample after sample of the coveted dense rock for the first time. Scientists deployed an ocean drilling vessel to a spot where the mantle has been pushed up closer to the ocean floor because of the tectonic activity near the Mid-Atlantic Ridge — an area known as the Moho. The samples are giving geologists a more pristine look at what exactly lies under the Earth’s crust.
6. A 3-D scan of the Titanic wreckage shows more detail than ever before.
A full-size 3-D scan of the Titanic wreckage was revealed for the first time in May, showing detailed images of both the ship and its three-mile debris field. The wreckage is difficult to access and even harder to photograph in the murky depths some 12,500 feet below the surface of the Atlantic Ocean. The more than 715,000 still images were captured by Magellan Ltd., a deepwater seabed mapping company, more than a century after the ship sank in 1912.
7. A man with paralysis walks again using his thoughts.
With the aid of brain and spinal implants, a man with paralysis was able to walk again more than a decade after his injury by using his thoughts, according to a study published in May in the journal Nature. The implants, which use artificial intelligence technology, decoded electrical signals in his brain and sent messages to his muscles, allowing him to stand and walk with the aid of a walker. Although spinal implants have achieved similar results in the past, a button had to be pushed to activate the signals each time.
8. More than 10 percent of Japan’s population is at least 80 years old.
For the first time on record, at least one in 10 people in Japan is over the age of 80, according to Japanese national data. Released by the Health Ministry in June, the data also showed that in 2022, births in Japan slowed to their lowest rate since the country began keeping records in 1899. The country, which is home to more than 125 million people, has the world’s oldest population.
9. Regulators approve the first over-the-counter oral contraceptive and a pill to combat postpartum depression.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved a nonprescription birth control pill for the first time in July. Opill is expected to become available at pharmacies and grocery stores across the United States in early 2024. Weeks later, the F.D.A. approved the first postpartum depression pill. Zurzuvae was found in clinical trials to take effect in as little as three days, unlike other antidepressants, which can take at least two weeks.
10. The first methane-fueled rocket launches into space.
A methane-fueled Zhuque-2 rocket, created by the Chinese private space company Landspace, reached orbit in July. Although it is a greenhouse gas, methane is widely viewed as more environmentally friendly than the standard kerosene-based fuel that is used for most spaceflights.
11. The Brazilian Constitution is officially translated into an Indigenous language.
The Constitution of Brazil was given an official translation into Nheengatu, one of the more widely spoken Indigenous languages in the Amazon. The translated document, unveiled in July during a ceremony in São Gabriel da Cachoeira, was hailed by activists and Brazilian officials as a significant step in preserving and honoring Indigenous languages and cultures in the country.
12. India lands a spacecraft near the moon’s south pole.
India became the first country to successfully land near the moon’s south pole, a shadowed area of rugged terrain where prior missions by India and Russia both ended in crashes. India’s Chandrayaan-3 spacecraft touched down about 370 miles from the south pole in August. The landing made India the fourth country to launch spacecraft that reached the lunar surface, after the former Soviet Union, the United States and China. Scientists have been eager to explore the area after traces of water in the form of ice were discovered there.
13. A.I. helps decipher text from an ancient Roman scroll.
Artificial intelligence has helped interpret part of an ancient scroll for the first time in modern memory. In August, a computer science student’s A.I. model extracted the ancient Greek word “porphyras” — or “purple” — from a Herculaneum scroll, one of hundreds that were buried and preserved in ash after the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in A.D. 79.
14. Virgin Galactic makes its first space tourism flight.
Virgin Galactic flew its first group of tourists into space in August. Three ticket holders, including a mother-daughter duo and an Olympian, were launched into space from New Mexico in the VSS Unity, a rocket-powered space plane. Hundreds of people are on the waiting list for future flights, according to Virgin Galactic, with tickets currently priced at $450,000.
15. Microplastics are found in the clouds.
Researchers in Japan have found evidence that microplastics are in the clouds, according to a paper published in August in the journal Environmental Chemistry Letters, raising questions about possible climate effects. Scientists from Waseda University in Tokyo found airborne microplastics in clouds above Mount Fuji that they believe came mainly from the ocean.
16. A Category 5 storm forms in every ocean basin in the world.
A Category 5 storm, which packs winds of at least 157 miles per hour (252 kilometers per hour), formed in every ocean basin in a single year for the first time on record. Meteorologists tracked storms in the seven ocean basins which make up the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans. Experts say that rising ocean temperatures played a role in the year’s active storm season.
17. A highly lethal variant of bird flu reaches Antarctica.
The HPAI H5N1 virus was confirmed in bird and seal populations on Bird Island in Antarctica for the first time in October, alarming conservationists who note that native wildlife have no defenses against many viruses, which could potentially lead to lower breeding numbers or even the extinction of isolated species.
18. Women vote in a major Vatican meeting.
A Vatican assembly of 300 bishops from across the globe included nuns and laywomen who, for the first time, had voting rights in the synod. Topics of discussion included the advancement of women in church roles, with some priests even supporting the ordination of women deacons, a much-debated topic among Catholics.
19. Researchers discover a black hole that’s 13.2 billion years old.
Researchers using data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and the James Webb Space Telescope confirmed the existence of the universe’s oldest black hole recorded to date. It is estimated to have formed about 470 million years after the Big Bang and is 10 times bigger than the black hole in the Milky Way.
20. Earth has its hottest 12-month period on record.
From November 2022 to October 2023, Earth experienced its hottest 12 months on record, according to the nonprofit organization Climate Central. The group’s analysis shows that global temperatures have risen 1.3 degrees Celsius (2.3 degrees Fahrenheit) above preindustrial records, alarming environmental and climate scientists, as the data is nearing the 1.5-degree Celsius (2.7-degree Fahrenheit) global warming benchmark set by the 2015 Paris Agreement.
By Tricia Tisak
