Wall Street rallied Tuesday after a round of reports suggested the economy was in better shape than feared.
The S&P 500 rose 1.1 percent to resume an upward climb that had carried it earlier this month to its highest level in more than a year. The Dow Jones industrial average rose 0.6 percent, while the Nasdaq composite gained 1.6 percent.
Airlines helped lead the way after Delta Air Lines said it still saw pent-up demand in the pipeline as passengers made up for lost opportunities to travel during the pandemic. It highlighted high-income customers in particular, who account for three-quarters of spending on air travel and still look to be in good financial shape despite high inflation.
Delta's stock jumped 6.8 percent after it said earnings this year should come in at the top end of the range it had earlier forecast. American Airlines climbed 5.5 percent, and United Airlines rose 5.1 percent.
Big tech stocks were also strong, continuing a solid run this year spurred by excitement around artificial-intelligence technology. Nvidia, which has been at the center of the A.I. frenzy, rose 3.1 percent to increase its gain for the year so far to 186.5 percent.
High inflation is hurting other companies more directly, though. Walgreens Boots Alliance dropped 9.3 percent after it reported weaker profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected. The retail pharmacy company also cut its forecast for earnings this fiscal year, saying customers had become more cautious in their spending and were looking for more value amid high inflation.
Lordstown Motors sank 17.2 percent after the electric pickup truck company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. It had warned in early May that it was in danger of failing because of a dispute with electronics company Foxconn, which was wavering on a $ 170 million investment in the start-up company.
The stock market has been on a tear this year despite much higher interest rates meant to get inflation under control, in part because the economy has so far managed to avoid a recession. But many investors are just delaying their predictions for the start of a recession rather than canceling them.
Reports on the economy Tuesday were largely stronger than expected. A reading on consumer confidence jumped to its highest level since the start of 2022, and orders for long-lasting manufactured goods unexpectedly grew, beating economists' forecasts for a pullback.
Sales of new homes in May also topped economists' expectations, which buoyed stocks of home builders. Lennar rose 4.1 percent and Toll Brothers rose 3.3 percent.
A measure of manufacturing activity in the Richmond, Va., region stretching from Maryland to South Carolina contracted, but not by as much as economists feared. Manufacturing has been one of industries hardest hit by much higher interest rates.
All the economic data will feed into decisions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks about whether to keep cranking interest rates higher. High rates can undercut inflation, but they do so by slowing the entire economy and raising the risk of a recession.
Christine Lagarde, the head of the European Central Bank, pledged on Tuesday to raise rates high enough "to break this persistence."
That is also the expectation for the Federal Reserve. But the hope on Wall Street is that an increase next month could be the final one for the Fed, even though it has suggested recently that it could raise rates twice more this year.
Traders have largely given up on hopes of multiple cuts to interest rates in 2023, something many were predicting earlier this year.
"We believe central banks have more work to do," said Andrew Patterson, senior international economist at Vanguard. "We've always said inflation wouldn't come down magically, even as post-pandemic supply chain issues were resolved."
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
