Barbara Oakley's free online course "Learning How to Learn" ($49 for a certificate of completion) provides basic techniques for enhancing learning. Skills are interconnected and build on each other. Highlights: FOCUS/DON'T The brain has two modes of thinking that Dr. Oakley simplifies as "focused," in which learners concentrate on the material, and "diffuse," a neural resting state in which consolidation occurs -- that is, the new information can settle into the brain. (Cognitive scientists talk about task-positive networks and default-mode networks, respectively, in describing the two states.) In diffuse mode, connections between bits of information, and unexpected insights, can occur. That's why it's helpful to take a brief break after a burst of focused work.
TAKE A BREAK To accomplish those periods of focused and diffuse-mode thinking, Dr. Oakley recommends what is known as the Pomodoro Technique: Set a kitchen timer for a 25-minute stretch of focused work, followed by a brief reward, which includes a break for diffuse reflection. ("Pomodoro" is Italian for tomato -- some timers look like tomatoes.) The reward -- listening to a song, taking a walk, anything to enter a relaxed state -- takes your mind off the task at hand. Precisely because you're not thinking about the task, the brain can subconsciously consolidate the new knowledge. Dr. Oakley compares this process to "a librarian filing books away on shelves for later retrieval."
As a bonus, the ritual of setting the timer can also help overcome procrastination. Dr. Oakley notes that even thinking about doing things we dislike activates the pain centers of the brain. The Pomodoro Technique, she says, "helps the mind slip into focus and begin work without thinking about the work." She adds: "Virtually anyone can focus for 25 minutes, and the more you practice, the easier it gets."
PRACTICE "Chunking" is the process of creating a neural pattern that can be reactivated when needed. It might be an equation or a phrase in French or a guitar chord. Research shows that having a mental library of well-practiced neural chunks is necessary for developing expertise.
Practice brings procedural fluency, says Dr. Oakley, who compares the process to backing up a car. "When you first are learning to back up, your working memory is overwhelmed with input." In time, "you don't even need to think more than 'Hey, back up,' " and the mind is free to think about other things.
Chunks build on chunks, and, she says, the neural network built upon that knowledge grows bigger. "You remember longer bits of music, for example, or more complex phrases in French." Mastering low-level math concepts allows tackling more complex mental acrobatics. "You can easily bring them to mind even while your active focus is grappling with newer, more difficult information."
KNOW THYSELF Dr. Oakley urges her students to understand that people learn in different ways. Those who have "racecar brains" snap up information; those with "hiker brains" take longer to assimilate information but, like a hiker, perceive more details along the way. Recognizing the advantages and disadvantages, she says, is the first step in learning how to approach unfamiliar material.
Photo
