"I think as a group of business leaders, we have to think about the impact to our society of what's happening in the political discussions in our country." That's what Kenneth C. Frazier, the chief executive of Merck & Co., said last week, just days before the midterm elections. It was the crystallization of a theme that has emerged louder than ever over the past several years among a c-suite that for much of the last half century tried to avoid politics and
considered its role in society in simple terms: delivering profits to shareholders, often at the expense of other constituencies.
But as our society appears more polarized than ever, and as Washington seems in no hurry to heal this divided country, executives are finding themselves in the unwanted position of trying to play the role of uniter -- or in some cases, picking sides.
"We're not here to take political stands," Mr. Frazier told me. "My employees don't need to know what I believe about politics. But I do think, frankly, if you look around at what's happening in our society, there's more division than I think I can ever remember.
"Political discourse is such that we think that people who disagree with us are our enemies now," he continued. "And if you look at our society, our public schools are more segregated than they have been in generations; we live in communities that are essentially enclaves of people that are like us.
"The media we consume now because of cable and social media -- you can choose to go and just talk to people who agree with you. I actually think the workplace is the last place in our society where people can't choose necessarily who they work with."
Mr. Frazier, the most prominent African-American chief executive in the country, articulated the challenge that business faces in the middle of this political maelstrom, but also the chance: "Business leaders have an opportunity to help bridge some of these chasms in understanding in our society."
Executives, of course, have long liked to talk about leadership and made proud declarations about their role in society, but all too often the promises have rung hollow.
This time may actually be different.
Over the course of a day of conversations with some of the top executives in the nation during last week's conference -- DealBook: Playing for the Long Term -- a common refrain was heard, echoing the sentiments of Larry Fink, chief executive of BlackRock, the largest investor in the world with more than $6 trillion. He implored other chief executives in a letter earlier this year to be more thoughtful about their roles in society.
"What's driving a lot of the change now is millennials," Mr. Fink said, expanding on the letter. "They are asking more of their companies."
He said he believed that we were at an inflection point.
"I do believe that the demand for E.S.G. is going to transform all investing," Mr. Fink said, referring to how investors are beginning to meaningfully evaluate companies based, in part, on environmental, social and governance metrics.
"That may be one or five years away from now, but it's not that far away."
Responding to a critique that his words are just public relations and that business shouldn't get involved with issues beyond the bottom line, Mr. Fink said, "I'm not a nanny." He added: "I'm not telling companies what their purpose should be. But I do believe it's up to the company to identify what their purpose is."
Sundar Pichai, the chief executive of Google, said that although he started as an engineer, the way he spends his day has changed; increasingly, he devotes much of his time to thinking about how "technology impacts society at scale."
He said part of his job description had turned into "technologist-policy-maker-diplomat."
Indeed, companies like Google are at the center of the debate, facing questions about their size and their impact on issues like privacy but also whether they support working with the United States government on sensitive projects like artificial intelligence for the Defense Department -- a project Google chose to end, in part, because of a backlash from its employees. That outcome bolstered Mr. Fink's analysis that employees have become remarkably powerful inside some of these companies, especially as the job market continues to tighten.
Mr. Pichai said he didn't run the company "by referendum," but the day we spoke he was grappling with the fallout from a walkout by Google employees around the world over accusations of sexual harassment in the workplace, which some employees argued was prevalent in the company's culture.
At most companies, such a walkout would be unthinkable. Mr. Pichai said he welcomed it. And while he said the debate was painful for the company, there is something unique even about the shift in business culture that would allow for such a widespread outcry.
The technology industry, perhaps more than any other, is scrambling to defend itself against arguments that its products, once viewed as changing the world for the better, might be having the opposite effect.
Evan Spiegel, chief executive of Snap, was candid. "These platforms have created an environment," he said, "that incentivizes negative behavior." He added: "I think we're in this weird moment in time where this behavior's been enabled technically, and the regulatory framework actually hasn't caught up to that reality."
And while Washington seems woefully behind, at least some companies are taking things into their own hands.
Edward W. Stack, chief executive of Dick's Sporting Goods, recalled how he decided that his company would no longer sell AR-15 rifles after the school shooting in Parkland, Fla. He described crying after watching the news. "I said: 'This system doesn't work. This system is broken and we need to do something about it," he said.
He said he "went to Washington and talked about the inconsistencies in the gun laws. A number of people in Washington didn't even know this, but you have to be 21 years old to buy a handgun from a federally firearms licensed dealer," but you can be 18 to buy an AR-15.
Companies are not all going to be virtuous, and many decisions business leaders will make are hardly black and white, but the idea that executives are starting to consider their impact is at least the beginning of progress.
Photograph Andrew Ross Sorkin, left, with Evan Spiegel, co-founder and chief executive of Snap Inc., at the DealBook conference at Jazz at Lincoln Center. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRYAN THOMAS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (F2) DRAWING (DRAWING BY MIRKO ILIC)
