The News
Productivity grew at a 2.3 percent annual rate in the second quarter, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported on Thursday, surpassing economists' expectations. The pickup was a major improvement upon the sluggish 0.4 percent rate in the first quarter. And on a yearly basis, productivity increased 2.7 percent. That far exceeds prepandemic averages.
Why It Matters: A key to prosperity.
A highly productive economy generally means businesses and workers are operating efficiently, making more money in fewer hours. In the second quarter, production was up 3.3 percent, while hours worked rose 1 percent.
On a less technical level, productivity is best explained by the old axiom of "doing more with less" or the folksy virtue of "getting the biggest bang for your buck."
Economists tend to sigh with relief when they see productivity gains because it offers a potential "win-win" for workers, customers and business owners: If businesses can make more money in fewer work hours, then -- according to basic economic logic -- they can presumably make more dollars per hour, while also reinvesting and giving workers raises, without sacrificing profits.
Being able to make more with less (or with the same amount of labor and machinery) also means businesses may not feel as much pressure to set higher prices to push profits. That, too, is welcome news after a yearslong bout of inflation.
Facts to Keep in Mind: A volatile indicator.
Productivity, at a basic level, is calculated as a simple ratio: the total amount of output an economy produces per hour worked by its labor force. But the output side of the equation is adjusted for inflation on a quarterly basis. That can cause volatility, in both directions.
Did the U.S. economy, and its workers, suddenly become deeply unproductive when oil prices jumped, causing energy inflation to surge, after war broke out in Europe? No, but the impact on productivity data in those quarters was deeply negative.
On the other hand, it is highly unlikely that productivity growth in the second quarter of 2020 amid the pandemic was truly an eye-popping 6.8 percent on a yearly basis, as a face-value reading of the data back then had suggested.
What We Don't Know: The A.I. effect.
For now, most analysts say artificial intelligence is having only a nascent influence on overall productivity. A recent report from the Federal Reserve suggests that low unemployment, traditional automation, falling inflation and growing investment have more to do with the brightening data.
Skanda Amarnath, the executive director of Employ America, a think tank that tracks the U.S. labor market and economic data, said gains from A.I.-related tech hardware were "still not running at anything close to boom or mania levels" but noted that "it's starting to pick up."
Quotable Quote: An encouraging revival.
"The revival in productivity growth is encouraging for the broader inflation and economic outlook," said Gregory Daco, the chief economist at the consulting firm EY-Parthenon. "If firms can generate strong productivity growth, they will be able to control costs and protect margins without sacrificing talent in an environment of still-elevated wages and fading pricing power."
What's Next: The jobs report for July.
On Friday, the Bureau of Labor Statistics will release its monthly jobs report, which should shed more light on the state of the labor market and the U.S. economy's resilience. Economists surveyed by Bloomberg expect the data to show that 175,000 jobs were added in July.
