SECURITY
Honeywell's Safety Ops Boosted With Carrier Deal
Honeywell said on Friday that it would buy the air-conditioner maker Carrier's security unit for $ 4.95 billion in cash to bulk up its building safety business where growth has slowed in recent months.
The deal will offer Honeywell access to Carrier's brands such as Onity, an electronic lock maker used by many major hotel chains, and Supra, a cloud-based lock maker. It will help bolster Honeywell's technologies business, which has been struggling with low revenue growth this year due to weak demand. Honeywell's overall performance, however, has been supported by strong results in its aviation business.
Carrier, which provides residential, commercial and industrial security systems, said it intends to use the deal's estimated net proceeds of about $ 4 billion to pay down debt. Its fire and security unit accounted for about 17 percent of its total sales last year. Reuters
RETAIL
Chief Executive of Levi's To Step Down in January
Levi Strauss & Co. said Thursday that its chief executive, Chip Bergh, will step down in January and hand over the reins of the jeans maker to his appointed successor, Michelle Gass, the former chief executive of Kohl's.
Mr. Bergh, right, who took over at the San Francisco company in September 2011, will stay on as executive vice chair until he retires in late April, and hee will remain on as an adviser through the end of the fiscal year. Ms. Gass will take the position on Jan. 29.
Over the course of his tenure, Mr. Bergh moved the brand from a predominantly men's U.S. wholesale pants business to a global, direct-to-consumer company. He also reinvigorated the women's business. Under his leadership, Levi Strauss returned to the public markets with a successful IPO in March 2019 and expanded the company's brand portfolio with the acquisition of Beyond Yoga in 2021. Associated Press
MANUFACTURING
Nvidia Suggests Malaysia As A.I. Production Hub
The chief executive of technology giant Nvidia, Jensen Huang, said Friday that he views Malaysia as a potential hub for artificial intelligence "manufacturing." Speaking at a media roundtable, though, he did not confirm the chipmaker is in talks with YTL Corp., a local conglomerate, to set up A.I. data centers there.
Malaysia's expertise in packaging, assembly and other aspects of manufacturing make it well suited for the manufacturing of artificial intelligence, Mr. Huang said. He said Nvidia was working with 80 A.I. startups in the country.
Southeast Asia will likely be a hub for A.I. computing because countries need their own A.I. data centers to refine and transform data into valuable information. Old data processing centers were designed to hold data files and run applications.
A.I. requires use of each place's culture, language, values, literature and common sense, Mr. Huang said. Associated Press
Credit: By Reuters and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY SLAVEN VLASIC/GETTY IMAGES FOR AAFA AMERICAN IMAGE AWARDS)
