Endless wars, expensive groceries, extreme weather -- those are just some of the issues in the E section of our index of things we'd prefer to have skipped in 2024. So we asked Times Opinion staff members to share how they escaped it all this year. These are the habits we started, the ones we quit, the culture that brought comfort and the memes that made us laugh so hard that we momentarily achieved a state of Zen. This is what we'll carry with us as we turn the page to 2025.
Turn On, Tune In, Drop Out Phone a Friend My oldest friend and I do synchronized viewing of each new episode of the show "Shrinking" (which follows a rogue therapist and his patients) and text commentary and our fave quotes back and forth. We definitely want our own Derek. (IYKYK.) Michelle Cottle, writer Setting Sail In the dark months of the sailing off-season, I get my fix from the Sampson Boat Co. YouTube series. It follows a shipwright and sailor, Leo Goolden, as he rebuilds a historic wooden gaff cutter designed by the renowned yacht designer Albert Strange. From the bowsprit to the capstan, every detail of the boat is lovingly made and joyfully documented. This year the team finally launched the boat, and watching it sail in all its glory has been a true joy. Quoctrung Bui, graphics editor LOLs for Days The streaming service Dropout, formerly known as CollegeHumor, offers delightfully smart, unscripted comedy and is my go-to when I need a laugh. Taylor Maggiacomo, graphics editor Gotta Catch 'Em All I get my dose of peace by watching the Netflix show "Pokémon Concierge" while playing Pokémon on my Nintendo Switch. The double distraction blocks any thought from entering your head, and the low-stakes, low-conflict world of cute little guys provides a needed infusion of bliss. Valerie Pavilonis, editorial assistant Oui, Oui "L'Agence," or "The Parisian Agency," is a Netflix reality show about a family-run, highend real estate agency at the edge of Paris. It refreshes my French slang, the B-roll boasts endless views of Paris, and it allows a voyeuristic look into apartments and homes worth millions of euros. Sarah Wildman, writer and editor What Goes Around Comes Around JoJo Siwa's single "Karma" signaled her queer reinvention, from a ponytailed princess into something resembling a Gene Simmonsified K.D. Lang, but Ms. Siwa's new persona provoked relentless, unfair bullying from critics and, well, the entire internet. If you can get past her Kidz Bop-style sound, her naïve campiness perfectly embodies L.G.B.T.Q. culture. This year I found comfort in her transformation's implicit story: There's a greater future ahead if you shamelessly claim it for yourself. Anna Marks, editor Scratch and Sniff I love perfumes, but when I'm on Fragrantica -- the online home of aroma lovers -- I have little interest in smelling or purchasing most of what I'm reading about. The pleasure comes entirely from reading attempt after attempt at accomplishing the impossible: conveying scent through words alone. Meher Ahmad, editor Fact or Fiction The novel "All Fours" by Miranda July was the most revelatory, exciting book I read this year. Eliza Barclay, climate editor Night-Night at the Museum If my mind is too busy to sleep at night, I turn on the Met's YouTube art lectures -- the longer, the better. The videos' tone is soothing, and the content helps me connect with something beautiful and interesting from another time or place. Once my mind is immersed in, say, Greek vase paintings, I'm out like a light. Jessia Ma, deputy editor of design Checkmate I'm still a pretty terrible player, but spending 30 minutes playing virtual chess with a stranger on a chess app makes for a better commute than yet another half-hour wasted on Instagram. Emily Holzknecht, video producer Wake and Bake This year, as ever, I found distraction and refuge in the stalwart comforts of "The Great British Baking Show." It won't be lost on future cultural historians that a decade of unceasing global tumult coincided with the sturdy popularity of a TV series about a bunch of collegial normies in a tent in the English countryside, seemingly far from society, being nice to one another and baking pies. Adam Sternbergh, culture editor Record Scratch Amid the slop of artificial intelligence, there are diamonds: deepfake audio recordings of presidents singing karaoke. Donald Trump croons. Joe Biden joins in on a second verse. Frank Sinatra and Queen. Mariachi and musicals. The Carpenters -- Karen and Richard and Sabrina. For just a moment in the algorithmic feed, politics is harmonious. Rollin Hu, researcher Rom-Com Binge Given the scale of violence in Gaza and the fallout from it in the United States, it's a weird time for "Nobody Wants This," the Netflix series about a blond shiksa podcaster (Kristen Bell) who falls in love with a rabbi (Adam Brody). I kept waiting for the series to grapple with the issues in Israel and Gaza, but the moment never arrived. Maybe that's part of the charm: The series is a fantasy about how true love can transform us. Farah Stockman, editorial board member Learn a Little Something Bonjour, Duo I have a 1,726-day (and counting) streak on Duolingo French -- screen time I don't have to feel bad about. Lauren Leibowitz, editor Go for Gold I can't stop rewatching clips of Novak Djokovic winning his first Olympic gold medal after chasing one for over a decade. I don't know much about tennis or Mr. Djokovic, but I don't need to. The joy that he radiates as he collapses onto the court in tears and then bounds through the crowd to see his family transports me every time. Glyn Fox, editor Perception Deception I love everything Alfonso Cuarón does, and that's held true for his Apple TV+ series "Disclaimer." On the surface, it seems like a soapy tale of infidelity and betrayal, but it's actually a deeper, "Rashomon"-like examination of how our biases shape the way we interpret events and then create stories out of them. It's the kind of show you immediately want to rewatch when it's done. Pamela Paul, columnist Our Lips Are Sealed I loved "Say Nothing," the streaming series based on Patrick Radden Keefe's book about the Troubles in Northern Ireland. Both actresses who play the I.R.A. bomber Dolours Price -- young and older -- are amazing. Maureen Dowd, columnist Pelican State Politics "The Ritz of the Bayou" by Nancy Lemann is a hallucinatory, gin-soaked account of the racketeering trials of the former Louisiana governor Edwin Edwards. Parker Richards, staff editor Olde English The novels of Anthony Trollope pulled me away into a tranquil setting in the 19th-century English countryside populated by squires, churchmen and minor nobility. The milieu is rarefied and the language gentle, but the matters are serious: ambition, arrogance, resentment, love. Trollope has a charming habit of finding the positive in his most odious characters, and there is something calming about how he injects his authorial voice into the narrative, like a confiding friend. Dan Wakin, international editor La Dolce Vita The novel "Last Summer in the City" by Gianfranco Calligarich is a master class in dissociation. Avoidant lovers, alcoholic friends, an uncertain career in journalism -- this book has it all. Frank Augugliaro, design director Escapist Dark Humor The books of David Rakoff, particularly "Half Empty." Hyperarticulate, hilarious and eerily prescient. Leissa Jackmauh, administrative manager Enter the Void When I checked out Doug Wheeler's latest exhibition, "Day Night Day," at the David Zwirner gallery, I walked into an empty, glowing, immaculately white room. I kept my eyes trained forward, and the light seemed to radiate through the space, which has no corners or edges. As I walked in, my depth perception became warped, and I lost my sense of spatial awareness. I raised my arms, afraid I might run into something or perhaps fall off the edge. I'd like to keep that sense of wonder and timid delight as I move forward into the unknown of the next year. Jessie Wender, photo editorConcerning the UFO Sighting Near Highland, Illinois' I worried that "Illinoise," the musical based on the 2005 Sufjan Stevens album "Illinois," was just a ploy to make money off millennial nostalgia. But "Illinoise" was just so well done -- infusing new and bold artistry into a stream of songs. Though the music was familiar, I responded to it in an entirely new way. Neel Patel, health and science editor Quitting Things It's Giving '90s I've been ditching my smartphone every Saturday in a ritual I've dubbed No-Scroll Saturday. Want to listen to music? Put on a record. Read the news or cook dinner? Grab a newspaper or a cookbook. I do allow myself to call my mom or look up directions. The one sacrosanct rule: Don't scroll. Alexander Stockton, video journalist Home Envy I found a level of peace and serenity I didn't know I was missing when I finally kicked my habit of browsing property websites for fancy houses I had no intention (or means) to buy. George Pierpoint, audience editor Piano Over Podcasts I've started listening to classical music in the morning instead of jumping immediately into news podcasts the way I once did. It creates a peaceful, slightly romantic way to start the day. Cornelia Channing, editorial assistant Hard to Zip In 2024 I accepted that I am an overpacker. Small bags just do not work for me. I need space for my portable bidet, mini prayer mat, four lip glosses, dental hygiene supplies, a snack, hand creams, sticky notes, phone wipes and much, much more. Hibaq Farah, audience editor Don't Ask Me To combat the feeling of being overwhelmed that comes with endless daily decisions, I outsourced some by asking friends for recommendations and following them. I've added music to my playlists, purchased art, tried (and fell in love with) oysters and added healthy habits to my routine. Saying yes to their suggestions has made my life richer. Alexandra March, audience director Go Touch Grass After a year of nonstop news, the fields and forested trails that weave through Rock Creek Park in Washington have become the perfect reprieve from the endless notifications and stress of everyday life. Andrew Trunsky, editorial assistant The Things We Started Impromptu Hangs Like those of many middle-aged people, my schedule is both packed and unpredictable. I used to think the best way to see friends was making explicit time for them days or weeks in advance. But inevitably, something gets in the way -- a sick kid, an extra work deadline -- and that long-awaited hang gets canceled. I have had way more luck randomly texting my local pals with an hour's notice. Jessica Grose, writer One Stitch at a Time Needlepoint instantly clears my mind of any worry beyond where I am going to stitch next. The more detailed and fussy the design, the more I enjoy it. Suein Hwang, business editor Water Into Wine During these difficult days, it's wonderfully distracting to tend the cider apples and wine grapes on our family farm. In my day job, I shout at the world, and it pays no attention; on the farm, the grapes obediently turn into fine pinot noir. It is refreshing to duck from a world whose problems seem overwhelming and find my own nook with problems that are solvable -- and when solved can be celebrated with a glass of pinot. Nicholas Kristof, columnist Do You Hear the People Sing? One-day choirs assembled by the Gaia Music Collective bring together hundreds of people to learn and perform arrangements in just a few hours. You don't need singing experience to participate. Making harmonies with strangers is a welcome reprieve from our self-involved culture. Madi Winfield, audience editorial assistant Motorcycle Diaries This year, I bought a Triumph Bonneville and keep it in southern Indiana, where I regularly spend time. Riding country roads and rolling hills led me to conversations I never would have had otherwise -- with the burly Harley rider by the lake, the couple at the gas station or the young girl who also always dreamed of having a bike of her own. Kristen Cruzata, chief of staff Dewey Decimal Growing up, I moved around a few times. In each new place, my mom would get both of us cards at the local library. As an adult, I've rekindled my love for libraries, but it's more than just books. It's one of the last places you can enrich your life for free. Daniela Cobos, editorial fellow Pick a Card, Any Card Every morning, I choose a card from Oblique Strategies, a card set created by Brian Eno and Peter Schmidt in 1975 to help break creative blocks. Prompts range from "Use an old idea" to questions like "What would your closest friend do?" and occasionally surreal statements like "In total darkness, or in a very large room, very quietly." Jacqueline Bates, photography director Dewey Decimal Growing up, I moved around a few times. In each new place, my mom would get both of us cards at the local library. As an adult, I've rekindled my love for libraries, but it's more than just books. It's one of the last places you can enrich your life for free. Daniela Cobos, editorial fellow Pick a Card, Any Card Every morning, I choose a card from Oblique Strategies, a card set created by Brian Eno and Peter Schmidt in 1975 to help break creative blocks. Prompts range from "Use an old idea" to questions like "What would your closest friend do?" and occasionally surreal statements like "In total darkness, or in a very large room, very quietly." Jacqueline Bates, photography director Shred the Gnar When I began kite surfing, I questioned why anyone would ever do something so difficult. It felt like taking a geometry and anemology course and simultaneously doing cardio and a functional body workout, all while calling on muscle memory. And yet when it all connects, I'm flying on autopilot on the water. You suddenly feel you can do anything in life. Adam Ellick, head of video Remembrance of Things Read I don't have a great memory, and I often forget the content of a book once I finish it. I've started writing down quotes and leaving them in books while reading. I keep a shelf of my favorite books, with handwritten notes sprouting from them. When I pluck the bookmarks and read the quotes, I get instant access to the feeling I had reading them. Efim Shapiro, audio engineer Good Sport Wednesday is mahjong day: Each week, I'm either teaching someone about the complex game or learning as I lose to someone better than I am. Either way, I become a more strategic player. Sonia Herrero, audio engineer You Are Getting Very Sleepy I have learned to relax the tiny muscles around my eyes. I visualize the muscles and gently tell them to let go, one by one. They do! And then I feel a deep calm. It's a great way to go back to sleep at night. Peter Coy, writer Eating Our Feelings Spoonful of Sugar Putting sugar in my coffee. Austerity is out. Smallness and sweetness -- a teaspoon of turbinado -- is in. Mary Marge Locker, editor Pass the Presidential Casserole Cooking through Dwight Eisenhower's personal cookbook is not for the faint of heart -- my guests are still recovering from the cavernous melon stuffed with Jell-O and grapes. But what started as a culinary curiosity has brought me immense joy and become a delightful way to bring friends together. Kiana Cole, video producer Shaken, Not Stirred Fresh watermelon juice, gin, Lillet rosé, a highball glass. I don't know what else there is to say. Krista Mahr, international editor Medium-Rare Technically I can't blame a cookbook for my 15-point increase in LDL cholesterol, but the recipes of Cook's "Meat Illustrated" probably have something to do with it. Raina Raskin, editorial assistant Lessons From the Past 'Gatsby' Times Three "The Great Gatsby" left me cold when I read it in high school, but "Gatz," the Elevator Repair Service's seven-hour stage adaptation of the novel, is -- like the rich -- different. I've seen "Gatz" three times, and on every viewing, I've been absorbed by F. Scott Fitzgerald's examination of Americans' conflicted attitudes toward wealth and the elite, a conflict on vivid display in this year's election. Carmel McCoubrey, editor Once Upon a Time in America Over the summer I found a copy of J. Anthony Lukas's "Common Ground: A Turbulent Decade in the Lives of Three American Families" in a little free library. It's an immersive masterpiece in nonfiction that helps make sense of life today, even though it was published 40 years ago. Jillian Weinberger, audio producer Pacific Time When the workday is over and I'm not ready to tackle adulting, I head to a pier near my San Francisco home. From this windy, run-down spot, you can wedge in between the fishermen catching crabs and sardines to glimpse the sunset and migrating whales. Then, cold and refreshed, I head home wishing I knew how to catch dinner. Joanna Pearlstein, print editor Everyday Ecstasy Simon Critchley's new book, "Mysticism," has been on my night table for months. He is the rare philosopher who doesn't flinch at religious experience. And this book does something miraculous: It saves the baby of mysticism from the discarded bathwater of institutional religion. It reminds us that our attention matters, that even in our fractured digital age, ecstasy is possible. That's not religious hokum. It's practical, and most of us need reminders of it every day. Peter Catapano, editor Autocrats of Yore "The Oppermanns," a novel written in 1933 by Lion Feuchtwanger, revolves around the rise of the Nazis in Germany and the responses of one Jewish family -- the Oppermanns, owners of a furniture company. The book exerted such a pull on my psyche that I have been recommending it whenever the topic of books or reading or Nazis or danger has come up in conversation. Almost a century later, it remains resonant, no matter the country or the autocrat. Matthew Rose, editorial director
