Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry , offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here .
Hello again! I'm back from a week spent mostly offline, and am excited to get back to the internet, where I'm sure things have been totally normal and borin -- [checks earpiece] -- hang on, I'm being told that Elon Musk is dating the Canadian musician Grimes after they connected on Twitter over a joke about an obscure artificial superintelligence thought experiment?
Whew, O.K., I was worried we'd slipped into normalcy. Onward.
The biggest nonromantic tech news of this week came from a new A.I. tool introduced at Google's annual developer conference. The program, known as Duplex, is an automated voice assistant capable of making hair appointments, booking restaurant reservations and conducting other tasks over the phone. It even inserts lifelike pauses and filler words like "um" and "hmm" for extra realism. At no point in the demo were the receptionists on the other end of the calls informed that they were talking to a computer rather than another human.
[Video: Keynote (Google I/O '18) Watch on YouTube.]
The onstage demo of Duplex drew lots of oohs and aahs. Admittedly, it was an incredible piece of technological theater -- reminiscent of the "one more thing" twists of golden-age Apple events. And it's important to keep in mind that Duplex is just an experiment, and it may never be released publicly in its current form.
But the demo -- which amounted to a series of extremely high-tech crank calls -- raised a lot of hackles.
Zeynep Tufekci, a professor and writer, called Duplex "horrifying," and said that Google's willingness to use A.I. to fool humans -- and to brag about its ability to do so on stage at a public event -- showed that "Silicon Valley is ethically lost, rudderless and has not learned a thing."
Matt Haughey, the creator of the internet forum MetaFilter, tweeted, "How Google did that Duplex A.I. voice demo without anyone flagging it internally is beyond me." The company, he added, "needs a V.P. of gut checks."
In a statement, a Google representative said: "What we showed at I/O was an early technology demo, and we look forward to incorporating feedback as we develop this into a product."
Even some A.I. experts were taken aback by the Duplex demo, which showed off a kind of technology that scammers could one day use to make mass robocalls, conduct social engineering hacks and impersonate people on the phone. Google has said that the technology won't be used for telemarketing. The company says it will be used to call businesses using publicly available numbers to gather information like a store's hours. But it doesn't take much imagination to see how this kind of technology could be used for all kinds of questionable or dangerous tasks. And there's an obvious ethical question of whether a robot caller should be required to identify itself as a nonhuman.
Erik Brynjolfsson, a professor at M.I.T. who has written extensively about artificial intelligence, told the The Washington Post that while Google's Duplex demo was technologically "amazing," it still raised ethical questions.
"I don't think the main goal of A.I. should be to mimic humans," he said.
Defenders of Google's Duplex experiment have pointed out that an automated phone call service could be helpful for people with disabilities, or for freeing people from annoying customer service slogs. ("O.K. Google, cancel my cable subscription.") But Google is now in a precarious position. It wants to keep pushing its A.I. development forward, but it needs to do so in ways that won't scare people at a time when distrust of the tech industry is growing by the day.
Bloomberg reports that the backlash to Duplex caught Google by surprise. That, to me, is the most disturbing piece of this week's news -- that people inside the company thought that a demo of advanced A.I. fooling an unwitting human receptionist would be greeted with universal praise.
I keep thinking of a Twitter thread posted last November by Kumail Nanjiani, one of the stars of HBO's "Silicon Valley." He noted that while doing research for the show, the show's crew members often visited the offices of tech companies and were struck by how little thought engineers gave to the ethical implications of their products.
"Often we'll see tech that is scary," Mr. Nanjiani wrote. "And we'll bring up our concerns to them. We are realizing that ZERO consideration seems to be given to the ethical implications of tech. They don't even have a pat rehearsed answer. They are shocked at being asked. Which means nobody is asking those questions."
Maybe Google should have invited a few more actors to their prelaunch product meetings.
Some other tech stories I found interesting this week:
■ My colleague Sheera Frenkel has a story about all the mountains of Facebook data scraped by academic researchers, much of which is still trading hands in the open and potentially being misused. Cambridge Analytica is increasingly looking like the tip of the iceberg.
■ Speaking of Facebook, my colleague Cade Metz reports that the social network is opening up new A.I. labs in Seattle and Pittsburgh, mostly by raiding nearby research universities for talent. A professor at the University of Washington sums up the problem nicely: "If we lose all our faculty, it will be hard to keep preparing the next generation of researchers."
■ At The Atlantic, Robin Sloan writes about Fortnite, the video game that is taking the nation by storm. (And that I am still very bad at.)
■ My colleague Michael Corkery has a good story about how Walmart is trying to keep up with Amazon by spraying money all over the e-commerce sector.
■ Finally, I found this story about Spotify's decision to remove songs by R. Kelly from playlists because of accusations of sexual abuse against him fascinating. It's proof that internet services can't be neutral in 2018, and that complaints about "de-platforming" and censorship are only going to grow louder as more large tech platforms exercise their powers.
Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer at large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose .
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
