BIG TECH
Hundreds of Recruiters Are Laid Off at Google
Google conducted another round of layoffs on Wednesday, telling its recruiters that by the end of the day hundreds of them would be losing their jobs, three people with knowledge of the layoffs said.
Hundreds of employees who work in recruiting at the company are being notified that their positions have been cut, said one of the people, who was not authorized to discuss personnel decisions.
Google's recruiting group, which at one point had more than 3,000 employees, has already been hit hard by layoffs this year.
The cuts are an indication that Google and its parent company, Alphabet, will continue the belt-tightening that began at the Silicon Valley company this year, even as it doubles down on investments in artificial intelligence.
The recruiters and related staff members had previously been "invited to a last minute global all hands meeting with the agenda to share hard news," according to a post on an internal Google messaging board viewed by The New York Times. Brian Ong, the vice president of recruiting, told employees that he had wanted them to hear the news from him and that they could finish work from home or head home if they were in the office, a person said.
For more than a year, Sundar Pichai, Google's chief executive, has rallied employees behind an effort to trim expenses and boost productivity. In January, Google announced it was cutting 12,000 jobs, or 6 percent of its work force, marking the first significant layoffs in the company's history. NICO GRANT
EXECUTIVES
BP Chief Resigns Over Relationships
BP, the London-based oil giant, said on Tuesday that its chief executive, Bernard Looney, had resigned after acknowledging that he had not been "fully transparent" in disclosing his past personal relationships with colleagues.
In a 2022 investigation, Mr. Looney acknowledged "a small number of historical relationships with colleagues" before becoming chief executive two years earlier, and BP concluded that he had not breached its code of conduct, the company said.
But the company said it had recently received information that prompted another investigation, leading to Mr. Looney's decision to resign. "He did not provide details of all relationships and accepts he was obligated to make more complete disclosure," BP said. It did not elaborate on the relationships.
Mr. Looney, 53, led a shake-up at the company, where he spent his career. He replaced senior executives with outsiders and, in response to climate concerns, began to gradually reduce exploration and production of oil and natural gas in favor of lower-carbon energy like offshore wind and biogas as well as large charging networks for electric vehicles.
This year, however, Mr. Looney said BP would trim fossil-fuel output more slowly than previously announced. The move was well received by financial markets because of the company's profits from oil and gas, but it was criticized by environmental groups.
Mr. Looney, who is Irish, joined BP in 1991 as a drilling engineer and worked in the North Sea, Vietnam and the Gulf of Mexico, including on the Thunder Horse field, a high-profile project. STANLEY REED
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
