WHEN the idea for the Museum of Science Fiction struck Greg Viggiano last April, he shot into warp speed. He wrote a business plan, picked Washington as a prospective location, recruited volunteers and produced a video featuring befuddled Imperial storm troopers, armed with maps, searching for the phantom museum near the United States Capitol. Mr. Viggiano used the video as part of a crowdfunding campaign that has raised almost $48,000, an amount he described as a "rounding error in terms of how much we're going to need."
Mr. Viggiano, an entrepreneur and a consultant, has developed new products and advised several federal agencies but has no experience running a museum. Ultimately, he hopes to raise roughly $30 million for his museum's future home: an approximately 50,000-square-foot building with interactive galleries devoted to aliens, artificial intelligence and time travel. But first, he has more terrestrial ambitions. The museum plans to open online initially, then rent a "preview museum," in a space with roughly 3,000 square feet in Washington, to test its appeal. The question, as Mr. Viggiano puts it, is "Will it play in Peoria?"
Or Washington?
Without a billionaire benefactor to underwrite a project, it is a challenging time for aspiring curators to get into the museum business, say consultants who advise cultural institutions. A survey last year by the American Alliance of Museums found that more than two-thirds of museums faced "economic stress" in 2012. And 35 percent of the survey's respondents reported reduced government support.
"Getting people behind what I think of as a serious museum is very difficult right now," said Mark Walhimer, managing partner of Museum Planning in San Francisco. For start-ups to flourish, museum founders must think big but start small. "You are building a culture -- not a building," Mr. Walhimer added.
Fixating on bricks and mortar at the expense of compelling programming and a potent marketing plan is the most common mistake new museums make, said James R. Hackney Jr., managing partner of Alexander Haas, a fund-raising consulting firm in Atlanta. "It's so sexy and exciting to look at putting up a structure that sometimes people forget: 'Oops! We have got to run it once it gets open,' " Mr. Hackney said.
Optimistic museum founders frequently "lowball" operating expenses during the planning process, Adrian Ellis, director of AEA Consulting in Beacon, N.Y., said in an email. Mr. Ellis cited the defunct National Center for Popular Music in Sheffield, England, as an example of poor planning. Britain's lottery, which makes grants with its profits, awarded the pop museum 11 million pounds ($18.3 million), most of the project's cost. The museum then spent much of the funds on its flashy buildings, a quartet of massive stainless steel drums with rotating tops that the BBC suggested looked "more like an oil refinery than a museum."
After opening in 1999, the Sheffield museum drew about a quarter of the visitors it projected and shut down after 15 months. According to a post-mortem published in the journal Museum and Society, the pop museum was criticized for underwhelming exhibits and assuming that it could lure visitors from all over the country to industrial Sheffield -- a city with high unemployment that is not known as a tourism hot spot. "Besides the venue itself," wrote the article's co-authors, "there were few other attractions."
Underfunded museums might never get off the ground, but "too much money," observes Mr. Ellis, "stops people thinking."
Tim Strickland, who was creative director at the pop museum, acknowledges that "the basic concept of trying to capture pop music in a static museum is flawed. This was in an era of an emerging Internet in the U.K., but now websites do it far better." The museum's team of consultants, in Mr. Strickland's analysis, dispensed abysmal advice, including allowing Sheffield to be the museum's location. "It's a great place but doesn't have the historic tradition of York or Edinburgh or a critical mass of attractions such as London," concedes Mr. Strickland, who with gallows humor recounted that former colleagues joked "that there was at least one advising consultant for every £1 million of grant."
Mr. Ellis refers to museums whose buildings make better impressions than their balance sheets as "living-dead institutions, zombies whose preoccupation is daily survival." The Taubman Museum of Art in Roanoke, Va., for instance, has been plagued by financial problems since it built an 81,000-square-foot postmodernist building that drew mixed reviews from architecture critics. Battered by disappointing attendance and operating losses, the museum fired many staff members after its opening in 2008.
"Capital campaign moneys are very often devoured by direct building costs," Bryan Hantman, the museum's marketing manager, said in an email. "The new Taubman Museum of Art building was no different as a $46 million project grew to $66 million. With such an increase, no money could be set aside for operational endowment." The Roanoke museum's finances have improved. According to Mr. Hantman, the museum reported a $1.58 million profit in 2013, but the museum's endowment of roughly $3 million remains modest for a museum of its size.
Like theater producers who tinker with a new play on the road before raising the curtain on Broadway, the four founders of the National Museum of Mathematics staged a traveling exhibition before opening in New York in 2012. The nationwide tour enabled the founders to refine exhibits and brainstorm with experienced executives at science centers.
"I found it shocking how collaborative the museum industry is," said Cindy Lawrence, the math museum's co-executive director. She now often consults with start-ups like the Museum of Food and Drink, which plans to open in New York, to "pay it forward."
Peer review, a vital part of gaining coveted accreditation from the American Alliance of Museums, also benefits budding museums and "sets up a professional atmosphere," Mr. Walhimer said. Dewey Blanton, a spokesman for the museum alliance, likens the organization's endorsement to a "Good Housekeeping seal" for donors. Many foundations, he notes, reject applicants that lack accreditation. But the quest for it, which typically takes at least two years, demands many staff hours.
Some nascent museums hire consultants to ease the accreditation process, conduct feasibility studies or run capital campaigns, but the founders of the math museum received mostly free advice. "We didn't do a feasibility study; this is a completely unfeasible project," deadpanned Glen Whitney, the math museum's co-executive director and a former hedge fund analyst. The museum's founders did hire a consultant to answer a few questions. "We had no idea what attendance figures would be," Ms. Lawrence said. "What can you charge for a birthday party?"
But Ms. Lawrence urges would-be museum directors to ignore outside advisers sometimes. A consultant suggested that the National Museum of Mathematics delete "museum" from its name, because it translates as "stuffy." Ms. Lawrence and her partners disagreed. "We want to show people math is cool," she said. "In the end, we said, 'Darn it, we are the museum of math.' " They apparently made the right choice: The museum attracted 173,225 visitors in its first year -- exceeding estimates, Mr. Whitney calculated, by 155 percent. "We were not prepared for the onslaught," he said, which resulted in staffing shortages that the museum has alleviated but is still working to resolve.
Raising seed money for a museum is arguably easier than ever because of a growing number of crowdfunding websites. Kickstarter, for example, lists many new institutions seeking patrons. But for Mr. Whitney, personally persuading the math museum's first trustee to make a sizable donation was a challenge. At one point during what's known in philanthropy parlance as "the ask," Mr. Whitney handed the donor a math puzzle. "You are nowhere until you give someone a puzzle," Mr. Whitney said. "Then you've got them."
Not long after Malcolm E. O'Hagan started the American Writers Museum, he won a prestigious director's discretionary grant of $30,000 from the National Endowment for the Humanities (as well as a second grant from the agency in 2013). The early credibility bestowed by the first N.E.H. grant apparently improved the writers museum's standing with other funders; Mr. O'Hagan has raised about $1 million so far. His museum is expected to open in Chicago in phases starting in 2016.
"If you are trying to raise a million dollars, $10 million or $100 million," Mr. Hackney said, "the top 10 gifts will make or break anything you are doing."
Aside from the N.E.H. grants, Mr. O'Hagan expects little government funding, "but we wanted government support." He chose to open in Chicago in part because he received a warm welcome from local politicians; former Mayor Richard M. Daley and his successor, Rahm Emanuel, both met with Mr. O'Hagan.
Before settling on a location for a new cultural institution, Mr. Walhimer, the museum consultant in San Francisco, counsels founders to write a one-page proposal and ask local government officials to organize a town-hall meeting to discuss it. "If politicians are not interested, find another home," Mr. Walhimer said.
One of the most critical decisions museum founders must make is also one of the toughest: knowing when to quit. Successful entrepreneurs, Mr. Hackney says, frequently fail as museum directors. He points out that the ability to make a snap decision, a critical skill in the executive suite, can be of little use in a trustees meeting. "If you are, for instance, deciding where your museum is going to be located or who the architect is and you are expecting other people to help donate in order to build it, then it's better to involve those people in that decision," Mr. Hackney said.
James Ray, who goes by Walkie, a real estate developer and a former chairman of the Discovery Science Center in Santa Ana, Calif., agrees. "The people who start these institutions, who get the capital together and build the facility," Mr. Ray said, "are not necessarily the people who are best capable of managing it."
Photograph Beating a Path: Fifth-Graders On a Field Trip Last Month Enjoyed a Maze at the National Museum of Mathematics, Which Opened in 2012 in Manhattan and Exceeded Attendance Expectations.; Enlightening: The Museum On East 26th Street, Top, Came to Be After Its Founders Tested Its Marketability. Above, an Interactive Light Sculpture. (Photographs by Brian Harkin for the New York Times); Capital Drain: The Taubman Museum of Art's $66 Million Building. (Photograph by Eric Brady/the Roanoke Times, Via Associated Press) (F6)
