Devices designed to soothe, support and keep us company are venturing out of the laboratory; they take forms that are often odd, still primitive and yet, for at least some early users, strangely compelling.
Nothing Eileen Oldaker tried could calm her mother when she called from the nursing home in Pittsburgh, disoriented and distressed in what was most likely the early stages of dementia. So Ms. Oldaker hung up, dialed the nurses' station and begged them to get Paro.
Paro is a robot modeled after a baby harp seal. It trills and paddles when petted, blinks when the lights go up, opens its eyes at loud noises and yelps when handled roughly or held upside down. Two microprocessors under its artificial white fur adjust its behavior on the basis of information from dozens of hidden sensors that monitor sound, light, temperature and touch. It perks up at the sound of its name, praise and, over time, the words it hears frequently.
"Oh, there's my baby," Ms. Oldaker's mother, Millie Lesek, exclaimed that night last winter when a staff member delivered the seal to her.
After years of effort to coax empathy from circuitry, devices designed to soothe, support and keep us company are venturing out of the laboratory. Paro, its name derived from "personal robot," is one of a handful that take forms that are often odd, still primitive and yet, for at least some early users, strangely compelling.
In Japan, about 1,000 Paros have been sold to nursing homes, hospitals and individual consumers. In Denmark, government health officials are trying to quantify its effect on blood pressure and other stress indicators. Since the robot went on sale in the United States late last year, a few facilities for caring for the elderly have bought them; several dozen others have signed rental agreements with the Japanese manufacturer.
For recovering addicts, doctors at the University of Massachusetts are testing a wearable sensor designed to discern drug cravings and send text messages with just the right blend of tough love.
For those with a hankering for a custom-built companion and $125,000 to spend, a talking robotic head can be modeled on the personality of your choice. It will smile at its own jokes and recognize familiar faces.
For dieters, a robot with a touch-screen belly, big eyes and a female voice sits on the kitchen counter and offers encouragement after calculating calories and exercise.
"Would you come back tomorrow to talk?" the robot coach asks hopefully at the end of each session. "It's good if we can discuss your progress every day."
Robots guided by some form of artificial intelligence now explore outer space, drop bombs, perform surgery and play soccer. Computers running artificial intelligence software handle customer service calls and beat humans at chess.
But building a machine that fills the basic human need for companionship has proved more difficult. Even at its edgiest, artificial intelligence cannot hold up its side of a wide-ranging conversation or, say, tell by an expression when someone is about to cry. Still, the new devices take advantage of the innate soft spot many people have for objects that seem to care, or need someone to care for them.
Their appearances in nursing homes, schools and the occasional living room are adding fuel to science fiction fantasies of machines that people can relate to as well as rely on. And they are adding a personal dimension to a debate over what human responsibilities machines should, and should not, undertake.
Ms. Oldaker, a part-time administrative assistant, said she was glad Paro could keep her mother company when she could not. In the months before Ms. Lesek died in March, the robot became a fixture in the room, even during her daughter's frequent visits.
Like pet therapy without the pet, Paro may hold benefits for patients who are allergic, as well as those who are not. It need not be fed or cleaned up after, it does not bite and it may, in some cases, offer an alternative to medication, a standard recourse for patients who are depressed or hard to control.
But some social critics see the use of robots with such patients as a sign of the low status of the elderly, especially those with dementia. As the technology improves, said Sherry Turkle, a psychologist and professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, it will grow more tempting to substitute Paro and its ilk for a family member, friend or actual pet.
"Paro is the beginning," she said. "It's allowing us to say, 'A robot makes sense in this situation.' But does it really? And then what? What about a robot that reads to your kid? A robot you tell your troubles to? Who among us will eventually be deserving enough to deserve people?"
But if there is an argument to be made that people should aspire to more for their loved ones than an emotional rapport with machines, some suggest that such relationships may not be so unfamiliar. Who among us, after all, has not feigned interest in another? Or abruptly switched off their affections?
In any case, the question, say some aficionados of artificial intelligence, is not whether to avoid the feelings that friendly machines evoke in us but to figure out how to process them.
"We as a species have to learn how to deal with this new range of synthetic emotions that we're experiencing -- synthetic in the sense that they're emanating from a manufactured object," said Timothy Hornyak, author of "Loving the Machine," a book about robots in Japan, where the world's most rapidly aging population is showing a growing acceptance of robotic care. "Our technology," he argues, "is getting ahead of our psychology."
More proficient at emotional bonding and less toylike than their precursors -- say, Aibo the metallic dog or the talking Furby of Christmas crazes past -- these devices are still unlikely to replace anyone's best friend. But as the cost of making them falls, they may be vying for a silicon-based place in our affections.
Marleen Dean, the activities manager at Vincentian Home, where Ms. Lesek was a resident, was not easily won over. When the home bought six Paro seals with a grant from a local government this year, "I thought, 'What are they doing, paying $6,000 for a toy that I could get at a thrift store for $2?"' she said.
So she did her own test, giving residents who had responded to Paro a teddy bear with the same white fur and eyes that also opened and closed. "No reaction at all," she reported.
Vincentian now includes "Paro visits" in its daily roster of rehabilitative services, including aromatherapy and visits from real pets. Agitated residents are often calmed by Paro; perpetually unresponsive patients light up when it is placed in their hands.
"It's something about how it shimmies and opens its eyes when they talk to it," Ms. Dean said, still somewhat mystified. "It seems like it's responding to them."
Even when it is not. Part of the seal's appeal, according to Takanori Shibata, the computer scientist who invented Paro with financing from the Japanese government, stems from a kind of robotic sleight of hand.
Scientists have observed that people tend to dislike robots whose behavior does not match their preconceptions. Because the technology was not sophisticated enough to conjure any animal accurately, he chose one that was unfamiliar, but still lovable enough that people could project their imaginations onto it.
"People think of Paro," he said, "as 'like living."'
