1. Haiti's prime minister agreed to step down amid increasing gang dominance in the country. Which nation paused its plans to send police officers to Haiti to quell violence?
France
Kenya
Nigeria
South Africa
Thailand
2. The House passed a bill this week that could ban which social media app in the United States?
Instagram
TikTok
WhatsApp
WeChat
X, formerly Twitter
3. Airbnb announced that it was banning which of these in its listings?
Alcohol
A.I. imagery
Cleaning fees
Lawn darts
Security cameras
4. The Associated Press told news organizations to remove a photo of Catherine, Princess of Wales, and her children because it had been manipulated. How did the royal family explain the issue?
Catherine said she experiments with editing photos.
The palace said it was created by ChatGPT.
Prince William said the family Instagram had been hacked.
King Charles accused the A.P. of manipulating the image.
The palace refused to address the photo.
5. Chuck Schumer, the Senate Democratic leader, spoke on the Senate floor this week about Israel's war in Gaza. What did he call for?
An immediate, permanent cease-fire
A secular one-state solution
The resignation of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
New elections in Israel
An Israeli invasion of Rafah
6. Emma Stone (above) won the best actress Oscar on Sunday for her role as Bella Baxter in "Poor Things." What other movie did she win the same award for?
"Cruella"
"Easy A"
"La La Land"
"Superbad"
"The Favourite"
7. The Muslim holy month of Ramadan began this week. The month's start is customarily determined by the early sighting of which moon phase?
Crescent moon
Full moon
New moon
Third quarter moon
Waxing gibbous moon
8. The Federal Aviation Administration completed a six-week audit of Boeing's plane production this week. How many audits failed?
None of them
3 of 89
33 of 89
53 of 89
All of them
9. Robert F. Kennedy Jr., who is running for president as an independent, said he was considering which two people as running mates?
Larry David
Aaron Rodgers
Joe Rogan
Arnold Schwarzenegger
Jesse Ventura
10. This week was the fourth anniversary of which Covid milestone?
1,000 deaths worldwide
100,000 deaths in the U.S.
The one millionth case
The World Health Organization declaring Covid-19 a pandemic
The World Health Organization's naming of Covid-19
11. High school students have begun taking a new version of the SAT. What's different about it?
It's fully digital.
It's over four hours long.
No calculators are necessary.
The minimum score is 1000.
There are two essays.
The News Quiz is published on Fridays in the Morning newsletter. To sign up, visit nytimes.com/themorning. Solutions: 1. B; 2. B; 3. E; 4. A; 5. D; 6. C; 7. A; 8. C; 9. B and E; 10. D; 11. A.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMIR HAMJA/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
