Donald Trump triumphs. The economy chugs along. A tech billionaire builds a shadow presidency. These are just some of the events that defined 2024. Meanwhile, the challenges of climate change persist while developments like artificial intelligence continue to amaze. I dived into the data and found 10 charts that best illustrate this year. They help us understand what happened -- and provide a glimpse of where we may be going.
1. America Steps Right Mr. Trump may have won the election's popular vote by just 1.5 percentage points, but by many other measures, his victory was decisive and broad. He carried every state considered to be in play, including the Democrats' blue wall of Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania. Mr. Trump made inroads among Latinos, Black men and younger Americans -- partly due to frustrations over slow growth in real personal incomes, a surge in immigration and a belief that Democrats moved too far to the left on social issues. Source: CNN exit poll. Note: Change in vote share between 2020 and 2024 elections.
2. An Expensive Campaign Vice President Kamala Harris's loss was not for lack of resources. Once again, the Democrats outraised their Republican opponents, with Ms. Harris besting Mr. Trump among both small donors and large contributors. Only among PACs that back single candidates did Mr. Trump do better, in part because some technology executives left Democrats over regulatory issues such as cryptocurrency and antitrust. While a staggering $ 5 billion was spent on the presidential election, that is actually slightly less (adjusting for inflation) than four years earlier.
3. A Strong Economy (According to Data) On traditional measures, the economy had a strong year. Inflation came close to the Federal Reserve's target of 2 percent. Growth remained brisk. The stock market hit record highs. In many ways, the economy performed as well under Mr. Biden as under Mr. Trump. But inflation proved costly to the Democrats. Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Bureau of Economic Analysis; S&P Dow Jones Indices. Note: Indexed charts are indexed to the beginning of each presidency.
4. Manufacturing Investment Surged One of the brightest spots in the economy has been the surge in corporate investments, particularly in manufacturing facilities. The latter was stimulated by two pieces of legislation passed under the Biden administration: the Inflation Reduction Act (to support climate-friendly energy projects) and the CHIPS and Science Act (to stimulate production of semiconductors). Investment in technology and artificial intelligence has also been increasing rapidly. Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Census Bureau. Note: Spending is adjusted for inflation.
5. Elon Musk's Great Year Perhaps the most extraordinary development of the Trump transition was the emergence of Elon Musk as a kind of co-president-elect. In mid-December, Mr. Musk declared his opposition to a legislative package to prevent a government shutdown. Meanwhile, he has benefited enormously from aligning with Mr. Trump, whose victory raised Tesla's stock price and the valuation of SpaceX, increasing Mr. Musk's net worth by over $ 200 billion. A pretty good return on his investment of $ 277 million this election. Source: Bloomberg 6. Border Encounters Dropped A big factor in the Democrats' election loss was immigration. Yes, Mr. Biden made a mistake early in his presidency by appearing to encourage migrants to come to the United States, which resulted in a surge of encounters by late 2023. But what Americans don't seem to recognize -- or give Mr. Biden credit for -- was that by the fall of 2024, encounters had dropped almost all the way back to where they were four years earlier. Source: U.S. Customs and Border Protection. Note: Data broken down by citizenship is not available before 2019. 7. A Global Desire ffor Change This year, the anti-incumbency mien in America was matched by a similar desire for change in other countries. Of the nine G20 democracies that held national elections this year, the party in power lost vote share in seven of them. In fact, the shift in the United States was among the smallest in percentage terms; in Britain, for example, the incumbent Conservative Party's share of the vote dropped by 20 percentage points. Source: CNN; BBC; Politico; NPR; Al Jazeera; Center for Strategic and International Studies. Note: G20 countries with elections in 2024. South Korea uses the share of parliament seats, not vote share 8. Temperatures Remain High While the fact that the climate is warming is hardly news anymore, the magnitude of the jump from prior years was noteworthy. Average temperatures were 0.1 degree Celsius above the prior year, which had been the hottest year on record, and 1.3 degrees above the 20th-century average. Weather patterns continued to prove erratic, from hurricanes in western North Carolina to wildfires in the Northeast. Source: NCEI
9. A.I. Boom Continues Meanwhile, the artificial intelligence rocket ship continued to accelerate. A.I. has attained the fastest rate of adoption of any new technology in memory. The early success of OpenAI's ChatGPT helped spawn a raft of competitors. And the shares of companies at the center of the A.I. boom, such as Nvidia, Meta and Alphabet soared. A.I. may fall short of market expectations, but it seems certain to change our lives -- largely, I believe, for the better. Source: International Energy Agency; Bloomberg. Note: Stocks are indexed to January 2023.
10. Death From Armed Conflict Slows While armed conflict again was front of mind for many Americans, at least global death tolls retreated modestly for the second successive year. Although the war in Ukraine and the conflict in Gaza dominated news coverage, violence also continued in other places, including Sudan and Mexico. In December, Syria's regime under Bashar al-Assad unexpectedly collapsed, a welcome end to a murderous reign. Whether conflict and deaths in Syria will also end remains, however, uncertain. Source: Uppsala Conflict Data Program. Note: Data for 2024 goes through November.
