The self-help guru is joining the hotel mogul Sam Nazarian to open a chain of luxury preventive-medicine resorts, aiming for a slice of the $ 5.6 trillion wellness industry.
The life coach and self-help guru Tony Robbins is teaming up with Sam Nazarian, a hospitality veteran known for brands like the Delano and the Mondrian, on a new luxury chain of hotels and wellness centers that focus on preventive medicine, longevity and wellness.
The new brand, called the Estate, aims to tap into the $ 5.6 trillion annual global wellness market that's currently dominated by hospitality brands like Sha Wellness Clinics, Six Senses, the Well, Lanserhof and the Carillon Miami Wellness Resort in Miami Beach.
Mr. Robbins, Mr. Nazarian and the other investors, which include the singer Marc Anthony, plan to open 15 luxury hotels and residences, along with 10 longevity centers in major markets, by 2030, according to a statement from the company. The first four hotels are scheduled to open by 2026, on the Caribbean island of St. Kitts, as well as in Britain, Italy and Switzerland. The brand's first urban longevity center plans to open its doors in Los Angeles in late 2025. Membership at the longevity centers will cost $ 35,000 a year, while rooms at the hotels are expected to cost around $ 1,000 per night.
Mr. Robbins is already an investor in Fountain Life, a preventive-health and longevity company, which will provide diagnostic and therapeutic offerings for the Estate. "Tony and Sam want to take technology out of the walls of the doctor's office and embed it into the hospitality experience," said Dr. Bill Kapp, the founder of Fountain Life, in a phone interview.
Mr. Nazarian credited Fountain Life's technology with saving his life last year after a full-body scan detected an asymptomatic brain aneurysm, which he underwent neurosurgery to repair.
Guests staying at the Estate will have access to similar Fountain Life scans and procedures as well as spa treatments by Clinique La Prairie, a Swiss health resort. "Our No. 1 goal is to make sure people don't die of something avoidable," said Dr. Kapp. The offerings will include full-body M.R.I.s to search for cancer, CT scans to detect plaque in coronary arteries, neurocognitive testing, epigenetic screenings and more, using generative artificial intelligence to identify patterns.
Mr. Robbins, known for books like "Awaken the Giant Within" and "Money: Master the Game," as well as for his philanthropic work, was accused of sexual misconduct by several female fans and staff members in a 2019 BuzzFeed News investigation. He has denied the accusations.
Dr. Kapp said he pictured the Estate properties as the vanguard of a new movement in which wellness treatments, including preventive medicine, become a pillar of the hospitality experience. "Health is the new wealth," he said.
Follow New York Times Travel on Instagram and sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to get expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation. Dreaming up a future getaway or just armchair traveling? Check out our 52 Places to Go in 2024 .
Illustration
