Wall Street churned to a mixed finish Tuesday, fretting over a long list of worries, even if the most pressing crisis seems to be calming as Washington moves to avoid a default on its debt.
The S&P 500 was essentially unchanged, hovering close to its highest level since August. The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 0.2 percent. The Nasdaq composite led the market with a 0.3 percent gain as excitement keeps building about artificial intelligence.
Tuesday was the U.S. stock market's first trading since President Biden and Speaker Kevin McCarthy struck a deal to allow the government to borrow more money, which would let it avoid a default on its debt. They now must persuade Congress to approve it before the government runs out of cash to pay its bills, which could happen as soon as Monday.
Beyond the drama around the nation's debt limit, the economy is slowing, inflation is still high and interest rates may be heading even higher, which would further tighten the reins on the economy and financial markets.
The worries are also global, with China's economic recovery weaker than expected following its relaxation of anti-Covid restrictions.
Stocks have rallied despite such worries recently after companies reported drops in profit for the start of the year that weren't as bad as feared. And at the center of it has been Wall Street's growing frenzy over artificial intelligence.
Nvidia, whose chips are helping to power the tech world's newest rush, rose another 3 percent after already more than doubling so far this year. Last week, it gave a monster forecast for upcoming revenue as it described customers of all kinds racing to apply A.I. to their businesses.
Nvidia's surge has its total value nearing $ 1 trillion, a threshold passed by only the biggest stocks, including Apple. The huge gains are raising worries about another possible bubble sweeping the stock market. But evangelists say A.I. is the next big revolution to reshape the global economy.
Also helping to prop up Wall Street in recent weeks have been reports showing a resilient job market and other signals that the slowing economy may avoid a recession.
"I'm sure there's going to be a lot of money to be made in A.I. for a select group of companies, but that's not enough to lift the entire economy out of a potential recession here," said Rich Weiss, senior vice president at American Century Investments.
He acknowledged the job market had remained much better than he expected under the weight of higher interest rates, but he pointed to weakness in the housing market, manufacturing, corporate profits and other areas that often fall before the labor market ahead of a recession.
"The job market will follow the others, not the other way around," Mr. Weiss said.
He also highlighted how concentrated the stock market's gains have been this year among a handful of companies, many benefiting from A.I. The majority of stocks in the S&P 500 are down for the year so far, partially on worries about the economy.
A report Tuesday showed that confidence among consumers is falling and remains well below where it was before the pandemic, though it remains stronger than economists expected.
On the losing end of Wall Street were companies in the energy industry. Exxon Mobil fell 0.9 percent, as the price of crude oil fell even more steeply amid worries about demand for fuel.
In the bond market, Treasury yields eased as fears about a possible default diminished.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 3.70 percent from 3.81 percent late Friday. It helps set rates for mortgages and other loans. The yield on the two-year Treasury fell to 4.46 percent from 4.57 percent. It more closely tracks expectations for what the Federal Reserve will do.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
