ACQUISITIONS
Credit Karma Paves Way For Its Sale to Intuit
Credit Karma agreed to sell its tax business to the payments company Square in an effort to win approval from the federal government for its $ 7.1 billion acquisition by Intuit, the companies announced Wednesday.
The Justice Department's antitrust division had filed a lawsuit Wednesday in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia to block the deal. But it also proposed a settlement: a sale of the tax unit to Square.
Court approval of the settlement would pave the way for Intuit, which owns TurboTax, to close its acquisition of Credit Karma, and create a financial assistant giant aimed at serving ordinary Americans.
The Justice Department claimed that putting TurboTax and Credit Karma Tax under the same parent eliminated that necessary competition and would likely have resulted in higher prices and lower quality for consumers. LAUREN HIRSCH and ANDREW ROSS SORKIN
TECHNOLOGY
IBM May Eliminate10,000 Jobs in Europe
IBM is said to be planning to cut about 10,000 workers in Europe as it prepares to split off its traditional technology services business from the rest of the company.
IBM has been briefing committees that represent employees to management, a step large companies are required to take in advance of any significant layoffs. The largest cuts will be in Britain and Germany.
Bloomberg first reported the planned job cuts.
The company announced last month that it would spin off its basic technology services business, which maintains, supports and upgrades the computing operations of thousands of corporate customers. That business generated about $ 19 billion in revenue last year, accounting for about a quarter of IBM's total revenue.
The remaining business, which will retain the IBM name, will focus on faster-growth fields like cloud computing and artificial intelligence. It will also include its hardware, software and consulting services units. STEVE LOHR
AGRICULTURE
Improving Farm EconomyDrives Up Deere Earnings
Deere & Co. on Wednesday reported a rise in quarterly earnings, defying Wall Street estimates, as higher crop prices, government subsidy payments and replacement demand lifted sales of farm machines.
The maker of John Deere forecast net income of $ 3.6 billion to $ 4 billion for fiscal 2021 as it expects to benefit from improving conditions in the farm economy.
Industry sales of agricultural equipment in the United States and Canada, Deere's biggest combined market, are forecast to grow by up to 10 percent next year.
Tightening grain supplies and strong demand from China have increased prices for soybeans and corn in the United States by a third since early August. Wheat prices are up by 22 percent on the back of an increase in baking.
The rally marks a sharp reversal in fortunes for the U.S. agricultural economy after four years of global surplus grain stocks that have kept prices low. REUTERS
Credit: By Lauren Hirsch, Andrew Ross Sorkin, Steve Lohr and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICK WILKING/REUTERS)

Location: United States--US; Europe
