Zachary Mason's critically praised first novel comes with a largely self-explanatory title: "The Lost Books of the Odyssey" purports to be a compilation of 44 alternate versions of Homer's epic. What that title cannot possibly convey, though, is the unusual journey of Mr. Mason's manuscript on its way to publication by Farrar, Straus & Giroux last week.
Mr. Mason, 35, a computer scientist specializing in search recommendation systems and keywords, once worked at Amazon.com. He avoided writing workshops and M.F.A. programs as a matter of principle, and produced "The Lost Books" at night, during lunch breaks and on weekends and vacations.
"I've been writing for many years, but just small stories or fragments of things that could become stories," he said. "I decided after a long time that if I was going to be serious about writing, I had to do a book. So I started looking through my notes, looking for things I thought were worth preserving, and some things jumped out at me. And so I sort of extracted them from my notebooks, and they seemed to imply a shape, and the shape was this book of themes and variations."
Early reviews of the book have been enthusiastic. Michiko Kakutani of The New York Times called it a "dazzling debut novel."
In person, Mr. Mason is extremely soft-spoken and tends to talk in a flat, unemotional tone, though he does note with regret that he "turned down Google two weeks before their I.P.O." (He's now employed at a Silicon Valley start-up.) He approaches literature almost as if it were a branch of science, governed by laws that are quantifiable and predictable, as when he talks of devising an algorithm, later discarded, to determine an optimum chapter order for his novel or when he compares writing to the annealing of metals.
"What I'm interested in scientifically is understanding thought with computational precision," he explained. "I mean, the romantic idea that poetry comes from this deep inarticulable ur-stuff is a nice idea, but I think it is essentially false. I think the mind is articulable and the heart probably knowable. Unless you're a mystic and believe in a soul, which I don't, you really don't have any other conclusion you can reach besides that the mind is literally a computer."
Without an agent to help him, Mr. Mason was just as methodical in his effort to get "The Lost Books" into print. In 2007 he entered it in a competition sponsored by Starcherone Books, a small, independent press based in Buffalo, and won first prize: $1,000 and publication.
"This book was so perfect from the moment I first saw it that it was obviously destined for something spectacular," said Ted Pelton, Starcherone's founder. "It didn't even feel to me like a real person had written it. Instead, it felt like one of those born-from-the-head-of-Zeus things."
Hoping to call attention to the book, Mr. Mason sent it to some reviewers wrapped in high-grade paper, with the opening stanzas of "The Odyssey" in calligraphy, and to others, including The New York Times Book Review, inside a custom-made miniature wooden Trojan horse. He assumes that it helped him land a favorable review in The Los Angeles Times early in 2008, "but that didn't lead to anything, to my disappointment," he said. (The Times Book Review blogged about the horse, but did not review the novel then.)
Still convinced that the book had a future, he entered it in the New York Public Library's Young Lions competition, for writers under 35. When the book became a finalist last year, "suddenly I was getting mail from agents every day, instead of never in my entire life," Mr. Mason recalled, and winning the praise of established writers and editors.
"It's a very generative and constructive book, designed with repetitions and elongations that suggest someone with a mind for patterning," said Mary-Beth Hughes, a novelist and a member of the Young Lions committee. "But the thing that is most beautiful is that out of this construction comes moving poetry, with wonderful interplay between the intellectual puzzles and soulful reading."
As a result, "The Lost Books" also came to the attention of Jonathan Galassi, the president and publisher of Farrar, Straus. After acquiring rights to republish the book, he and Mr. Mason set about fashioning version 2.0 of the novel, which is two chapters shorter, drops the tongue-in-cheek author's biography in which Mr. Mason described himself as a "professor of Archaeocryptography and Paleomathematics at Magdalen College, Oxford" and also eliminates the original preface and appendix.
"I think you could see his artificial-intelligence training more in the apparatus for the first edition, and that has sort of been expunged, in a way," Mr. Galassi said. "There were some things that seemed overly complicated and distanced the reader from the magic of the storytelling itself. This way, without the protective layering he didn't really need, you're really dealing with the myths more immediately."
In some of the alternate histories Odysseus returns to Ithaca only to find the island abandoned, or Penelope a ghost or married to a man who is "soft, grey and heavy." In others Achilles is a golem who slaughters Greeks and Trojans alike, while Odysseus marries Helen or kills her, doesn't make it back home at all, becomes the author of "The Odyssey" or is confined to a sanatorium for a psychiatric evaluation.
Reviews of "The Lost Books" suggest that Mr. Mason has absorbed a variety of postmodern influences, including Jorge Luis Borges, Italo Calvino and others from the Oulipo group of writers and mathematicians: in her review Ms. Kakutani said that Mr. Mason had created "an ingeniously Borgesian novel that's witty, playful, moving and tirelessly inventive."
Mr. Mason cheerfully describes himself as an avid reader of all the above, as well as of science-fiction writers like Stanislaw Lem and William Gibson.
Greek and Norse mythology also interested him early on, Mr. Mason added, because of their "magic and wonder" and ability to address "things that are deeply and universally resonant."
Born and raised in the Silicon Valley area, the only child of a probation officer and a librarian, Mr. Mason was an extremely precocious student, graduating from high school at 14, starting work on his doctorate at 19 and eventually writing a thesis at Brandeis University that he described as "a corpus-based computational model or method for conventional metaphor detection and analysis."
As the excitement about "The Lost Books" grows, Mr. Mason continues to write. He has a long-term project that he describes as "still more inaccessible and recherche than 'The Lost Books,' " consisting of "the imagined literature of artificial intelligence, like a fictive translation of the stories the machines tell themselves." But since that book is advancing only in fits and starts, for relief he has been experimenting with a retelling of a Roman-era text, Ovid's "Metamorphoses."
"I don't want to be the guy who rewrites ancient authors for a living, but I started playing with Ovid, and it was working well," he said. "I feel like it is a good complement to 'The Odyssey.' 'The Lost Books' is a very rational and masculine book, and Ovid is all Eros and Thanatos. I hope they will form an interesting pair, andthen I'll really be done with the classics."

Photograph Zachary Mason, a Computer Scientist and the Author of "the Lost Books of the Odyssey." (Photograph by Jim Wilson/the New York Times)(C1); a Promotional Trojan Horse Containing a Copy of "the Lost Books of the Odyssey." (Photograph by Tony Cenicola/the New York Times) (C4)
