Charles Krauthammer, the Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist for The Washington Post, occasionally takes up his pen and instead of lashing liberal causes writes about one of his passions: chess.
Krauthammer, in a recent interview, said he had written many columns on chess, including one each year for 20 years in Time magazine. When he was nominated for the Pulitzer in 1986, he said one of the 10 columns submitted to the judges was about one of the world championship matches between Garry Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov. (He did not win the Pulitzer until the following year, when all of the submitted columns were political commentary.)
Krauthammer became hooked on the game when he was 20 -- he is now 60 -- and visited a friend in Cambridge, Mass. He found his friend's roommate sitting with a chess set and an unfamiliar device.
"I said, 'What is that?' " Krauthammer recalled, "And he said, 'That is a chess clock.' I had just come in from the plane. It was 10 o'clock at night, and I sat down to play and didn't get up until 5 in the morning. I had found something that I loved, and I was in deep trouble."
Krauthammer has chess boards in his office and a "chess room" at home. For a while, he held a small, informal chess club every Monday; members included the liberal scourges Charles Murray (co-author of "The Bell Curve") and the writer Dinesh D'Souza. Krauthammer said they called it the Pariah Chess Club.
During the 1990 World Chess Championship match between Kasparov and Karpov, Krauthammer traveled to New York, where the first half was played, and found himself in a room full of grandmasters, including Mikhail Tal, a former world champion, who were analyzing Game 8. Krauthammer wrote about the experience in Time: "It was like watching the World Series with five Hall of Famers parsing every pitch and Cy Young correcting them."
Five years later, when Kasparov played Viswanathan Anand in a match atop one of the World Trade Center's twin towers, Krauthammer again came to New York, this time with Murray and Jose Zalaquett, the Chilean human rights lawyer, who was living in exile in Washington. "It was such great fun," Krauthammer said, adding that as they tried to follow the grandmasters' analysis, "we were desperately trying to keep up intellectually."
Krauthammer entered his first and only tournament in 2002. "I found the concentration and exhaustion almost unbearable," he said. But he did win $150, which he framed and hung on the wall of his chess room. "It was worth more to me than the money."
For a while, he also played online, but had to stop. "It was an addiction," he said.
Krauthammer says he is a tactical player who is always looking for combinations and knockouts. "I've never been able to play strategic chess," he said.
Among his regular sparring partners these days are Zalaquett, who is now back in Chile, and Natan Sharansky, the former Soviet dissident, who lives in Israel and is a master-level player. "Whenever he is in town, he comes over to my office and we play," Krauthammer said. "The problem is that he is so much stronger than me that I have to give him practically no time on his clock."
One of Krauthammer's favorite columns was one he wrote for The Weekly Standard after Kasparov lost to the computer Deep Blue in 1997. It was headlined, "Be Afraid: The Meaning of Deep Blue's Victory." It wasn't just that Deep Blue won, he wrote, but how it won, particularly in the second game, when the computer appeared to play in an almost human fashion.
In that game, Kasparov resigned in what an analysis showed was a drawn position. But the experience shook him, and he later admitted that he played scared for the rest of the match. In The Weekly Standard column, Krauthammer said Deep Blue had passed a threshold of artificial intelligence, which should worry people.
"The fact is that we will instead be creating a new and different form of being," he wrote. "And infinitely more monstrous: creatures sharing our planet who not only imitate and surpass us in logic, who have perhaps even achieved consciousness and free will, but are utterly devoid of the kind of feelings and emotions that, literally, humanize human beings."

Illustration Diagram
