"The Headlines," a show by The New York Times, promises to bring listeners the most noteworthy news of the day in about 10 minutes.
What do a Republican presidential debate, Meta's foray into artificial intelligence and a new musical by the composer Stephen Sondheim, who died in 2021, all have in common?
Each was a subject of a recent episode of "The Headlines," a weekday morning news show from The New York Times. The show, which began airing in May on The Times's Audio app, shares three of the biggest stories of the day, as told by the journalists who are reporting them.
"Our goal is to bring listeners closer to the news," Annie Correal, a Times reporter and the host of the show, said. "We wanted to offer listeners something only our reporters can provide, which is access and authority over their subject matter, whether it's an in-depth investigation or the latest on their beat."
Episodes are short -- around 10 minutes -- so that listeners can learn what they need to know by their last sip of coffee.
Here, Ms. Correal shares the challenges of producing a daily news show, especially on "news challenged" days, and of keeping tabs on the wide world of Times coverage. This interview has been edited.
How did you become involved with "The Headlines"?
In early 2022, I was a guest host on "The Daily" podcast and was asked if I wanted to help launch "The Headlines," which was envisioned as a place to showcase more of the day's top stories. As we piloted episodes, we realized we wanted the show to be a home for journalists to highlight their reporting, their analysis and some of the behind-the-scenes moments that listeners love from "The Daily." That could mean interviewing a reporter at a debate or a journalist arriving on Maui after the devastating wildfires. Or someone with decades of experience covering a specific region, like Frances Robles, who writes about Latin America and the Caribbean, explaining a situation in Haiti.
How do you find episode ideas?
We take cues from the newsroom. At 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. every day, we attend big newsroom meetings, when the editors of each desk come together and share the articles their teams are working on. We attend smaller meetings with editors and closely watch Slack, where we can follow how our teams around the world are planning coverage.
We see what's coming down the pike both in terms of big investigations and breaking news, who is covering what and when we can book them for an interview. Our show is based only on the work of Times journalists.
What's a typical day like for your team?
Our team is based in New York City, but we have editors and producers across the country. After the morning news meeting, we gather and choose our stories for the day. Then we split up into teams of editors and producers and interview reporters working on our selected stories. From there, we write a script and go over it. Then I narrate parts of the episode; we call that "tracking." Meanwhile, producers are pulling together and scoring the segments; eventually they add musical cues throughout the episode. Once we're finished, we send the episode to the app, and it magically appears on phones around the world the next morning.
How do you decide which stories to pursue?
We look for stories with news energy; we want something to feel of-the-minute and fresh. We also want expert analysis from reporters. The third thing we look for is that human element, the kind of details that reporters provide through their encounters on the ground. It's an element of storytelling that I think really sets apart New York Times Audio from other news outlets.
When are your deadlines?
We try to finish everything by roughly 7 p.m., though some production happens after that. When there's a late-breaking or late-night news story, a smaller team of us will stay online to speak with reporters. Last week, for example, we interviewed Jonathan Swan on the night of the second Republican presidential debate. I think he was standing outside the Reagan Library in the dark when we reached him around midnight Eastern time.
This week, after Kevin McCarthy was ousted as Speaker of the House, we scrapped our coverage plans and reached out to Annie Karni, who covered the vote in the Capitol. That episode didn't come together until around midnight.
What does a slow news day look like for you?
We call it "news challenged." It doesn't happen often. We try to build out a shelf of ideas. When we have a slow day, it's nice to have an element that we can dust off, produce and add to the show. Those so-called slow news days actually give us opportunities to step back and cover say, a big investigation, or go to different parts of the country and hear from reporters who are fanning out, learning what different voters might be thinking.
What feedback have you received from listeners?
People tend to appreciate learning about things that they feel they should know about, but don't. The feedback that we've gotten is that "The Headlines" gives people a real point of entry into The Times's journalism. Oftentimes, unless you read The Times's coverage 24 hours a day, you won't have a chance to dig deep on certain topics.
As a reporter at The Times for more than a decade, what challenges did you encounter as you transitioned from the written word to the spoken word?
You can provide context with the written word. You can tell people where Crimea is, as an example. With audio, you either have the tape or you don't. The host can always come in and explain something, but with "The Headlines," we really want a reporter's voice to carry a segment. We often have to think ahead: If a person mentions a place, we may ask them to provide a 10-second explanation of where it is. With audio, you're always considering the missing pieces.
Illustration
