Generate image description FILE -- Gov. Gina Raimondo, of Rhode Island, speaks in Wilmington, Del., on Friday, Jan. 8, 2021, where then President-elect Joe Biden introduced her as his nominee to become secretary of commerce. On Tuesday, Jan. 26, 2021, Raimondo, will appeared before the Senate Commerce Committee for a confirmation hearing. (Kriston Jae Bethel/The New York Times)
WASHINGTON — Gov. Gina Raimondo, President Joe Biden’s nominee to be the next commerce secretary, told lawmakers Tuesday that she plans to help American communities bounce back from the coronavirus, aggressively enforce trade rules to combat unfair practices from China and leverage the power of the government to mitigate climate change if confirmed to a Cabinet post.
Raimondo, the governor of Rhode Island and a former venture capitalist, reassured members of the Senate Commerce Committee that she planned to work with them on priorities like protecting American fisheries, expanding broadband access that has become particularly vital for students during the pandemic, and promoting American research into cutting-edge technologies like artificial intelligence and advanced communications.
The Trump administration made heavy use of the department’s authorities to crack down on Chinese technology firms, turning often to the so-called entity list, which allows the United States to block companies from selling American products and technology to certain foreign firms without first obtaining a license. Dozens of companies have been added to the Commerce Department’s list, including telecom giants like Huawei and ZTE, which many U.S. lawmakers see as threats to national security.
Raimondo declined to commit to keeping Huawei or other Chinese companies on the entity list when pressed to do so by Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas. But she vowed to use the powers of the Commerce Department “to protect Americans and our network from Chinese interference,” adding, “that’s Huawei, ZTE or any other company.”
“China’s actions have been anti-competitive, hurtful to American workers and businesses, coercive, and as you point out, they are culpable for atrocious human rights abuses,” she said. “Whether it’s the entity list, or tariffs, or countervailing duties, I intend to use all those tools to the fullest extent possible to level the playing field for the American workers.”
Asked about the steel and aluminum tariffs levied on foreign countries by the Department of Commerce during the Trump administration, Raimondo declined to say whether they would be removed or changed. She said that the Biden administration would carry out a broad review of trade policies in consultation with its allies, aggressively pursue uncompetitive trade behaviors from China and ensure that the process that excludes certain companies from the tariffs is swift, fair and objective.
Several senators praised her combination of public and private sector experience, saying those skills could help the country deal with economic damage from the pandemic, invest in American workers and business, and promote the marine and space economies, which the Commerce Department oversees.
Raimondo said that her background in the private sector as a venture capitalist and her experience as state treasurer and governor of Rhode Island have prepared her to help realize the Commerce Department’s mission to create good-paying jobs and empower American entrepreneurs and workers.
“In this time of overlapping crises, the Commerce Department must be a partner to businesses and workers to help them innovate and grow,” Raimondo said.
Generate image description Gov. Gina Raimondo testifies remotely via videoconference during a Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee hearing on her nomination to be secretary of the Commerce Department, as Chairman Roger Wicker (R-Miss.) and ranking member Maria Cantwell (D-Wash.) listen on Capitol Hill in Washington, Tuesday, Jan. 26, 2021. Raimondo, President Biden’s nominee, told lawmakers on Tuesday that she plans to help American communities bounce back from coronavirus, aggressively enforce trade rules to combat unfair practices from China and leverage the power of the government to mitigate climate change if confirmed to a cabinet post. (Jonathan Ernst/Pool via The New York Times)
