AUTOMOTIVE
Nissan Urges Caution
Over Its Older Vehicles
Nissan is urging the owners of about 84,000 older vehicles to stop driving them because their Takata airbag inflaters have an increased risk of exploding in a crash and hurling dangerous metal fragments.
Wednesday's request comes after one person in a Nissan was killed by an exploding front-passenger inflater, and as many as 58 people were injured since 2015.
"Due to the age of the vehicles equipped with defective Takata airbag inflaters, there is an increased risk the inflater could explode during an airbag deployment, propelling sharp metal fragments which can cause serious injury or death," Nissan said.
Nissan said the "do not drive" warning covers certain 2002 through 2006 Sentra small cars, as well as some 2002 through 2004 Pathfinder SUVs, and 2002 and 2003 Infiniti QX4 SUVs.
Nissan originally recalled 736,422 of the vehicles in 2020. Associated Press
MINING
BHP Halts Plan to Buy
Rival Anglo American
The mining giant BHP Group walked away on Wednesday from its $ 49 billion plan to take over rival Anglo American, which rejected a last-ditch request for more time, ending for now its six-week pursuit.
BHP's aim was to secure Anglo's prized copper assets in Latin America and increase access to a metal central to the global shift toward clean energy and electric vehicles. But the structure of BHP's deal, which required Anglo to unbundle its South African platinum and iron ore businesses, was a major reason for its collapse.
Anglo had granted BHP a one-week extension until Wednesday to submit a binding offer, after rejecting a third takeover proposal. Under U.K. rules, BHP cannot return for at least six months, unless there is another offer for the London-listed miner.
Anglo said on Wednesday it was fully focused on plans to increase value to shareholders. Reuters
TECHNOLOGY
OpenAI Reaches Deals
With Vox and Atlantic
OpenAI said on Wednesday that it had signed content and product partnerships with The Atlantic and Vox Media, helping the artificial intelligence firm to boost and train its products.
Last week, OpenAI signed a similar deal with News Corp. Such partnerships are not only crucial for the training of AI models, they can also be lucrative for news publishers, which have traditionally been denied a slice of profits internet giants earn for distributing their content.
(The New York Times has sued OpenAI and its partner, Microsoft, claiming they used copyrighted news articles without permission.)
Vox Media said OpenAI would help the company develop products for its consumers and advertising partners.
Separately, The Atlantic said it was creating an "experimental microsite, called Atlantic Labs," that would also pilot OpenAI's tech. Reuters
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY MELANIE BURTON/REUTERS)
