Alphabet, the Google holding company, is cleaning up the company's robotics division, with an eye toward turning idea into real companies.
CORRECTION APPENDED
Google's robotics division has been plagued by low morale and a lack of leadership since the unit's founder left abruptly in 2014. Now Alphabet is cleaning it up.
Over the past two months, Alphabet, the new holding company that separated Google from its collection of speculative projects, has reframed the robots effort, moving it from a standalone division inside Google to a piece of the "X" research division. The company has also hired Hans Peter Brondmo, a technology industry veteran who last worked at Nokia, to help manage various projects, none of which have been publicly disclosed.
Courtney Hohne, a spokeswoman for X, confirmed the moves but declined to comment further.
A reorganization of the robots group is one of a number of recent moves inside the X division, which used to be called "Google X" but was rebranded with the Alphabet reorganization and recently unveiled a new logo.
It also comes as a range of companies, from tech competitors like Amazon to car manufacturers, are signaling their interest in robotics.
"Everything is happening, from industry manufacturing to self-driving cars to drones to personal robots to A.I. systems," said Fei-Fei Li, director of Stanford University's artificial intelligence laboratory.
X has several different projects in varying degrees of completion, but has lately been "graduating" them to standalone companies or preparing them for such a move. The life sciences group, for example, is now called "Verily," and X recently hired an auto industry veteran to lead its self-driving car effort -- called "Chauffeur" internally -- while noting that the project is a good candidate to be spun off.
Robotics has gone in the opposite direction for reasons that are both personal and practical. The division was created in 2013 by Andy Rubin, who led the development of the widely used Android operating system, and it has been without a leader since Mr. Rubin left in 2014 to start a technology "incubator" that helps young start-ups turn their ideas into businesses.
X, which is run by Astro Teller, is using some element of robotics in numerous initiatives like self-driving cars; Wing, a project to deliver packages with drone aircraft; and Makani, an effort to create wind energy with high-flying kites.
In December, the division was moved inside X. The first order of business will be for the X team to review the various projects and refocus them toward solving specific problems that would be reframed as a particular "moonshot" effort, according to Ms. Hohne of X.
The group's most recent hire, Mr. Brondmo, will help with that process. He has a background as a product manager. He graduated from the Media Lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and has led a number of successful Internet start-ups, including an early digital video company, an Internet marketing firm and Plum, a social networking company, which was acquired by Nokia in 2009. At Nokia, he developed an unannounced camera project until it was canceled in 2014.
Ms. Hohne, the X spokeswoman, said that Mr. Brondmo declined to comment.
After starting the robotics division, Mr. Rubin quickly went on a buying spree, purchasing a number of promising companies, including Boston Dynamics, the high profile maker of experimental military robots, and Shaft, a Japanese robotics company that grew out of the University of Tokyo.
The robotics division was called "Replicant" internally -- a nod to "Blade Runner," the 1982 science fiction film -- and at one point was considering deals to supply robots to load and unload trucks for a major package delivery firm.
But while the companies were promising, Mr. Rubin invested in several technologies that had industry observers scratching their heads about his overall direction. Mr. Rubin originally said that the robotics division would be a 10-year "moonshot," and when he was in negotiations to acquire companies he talked about the possibility of the driverless Google car rolling up to your house and the Google robot jumping off the back bumper.
"Andy Rubin acquired some of the best, innovative companies out there, but also a mix that leaves one wondering about how he imagined it all fitting together," said Tandy Trower, founder and chief executive of Hoaloha Robotics, which is developing robots to help seniors and people with disabilities.
Mr. Rubin now directs an artificial intelligence-oriented investment incubator called Playground Global. It is based in Palo Alto, Calif., a few miles from his old offices, and has received investments from Google, the Foxconn Technology Group and others.
Mr. Rubin did not respond to emails seeking comment.
Google's robotics effort stalled after his departure, going through variety of leaders including James Kuffner of the Carnegie Mellon University's Robotics Institute, who has since joined Toyota's research and development laboratory in Palo Alto, Calif., and Jonathan Rosenberg, who is a troubleshooter for Larry Page, the Google co-founder who is now Alphabet's chief executive.
Many in the industry say that it is likely to be a while before companies, Alphabet included, can get through the many technological and regulatory hurdles that stand in the way of robots becoming a huge business.
"Despite the acceleration of robotics technology, accessibility to it may take longer than we anticipate," Mr. Trower said. "Other examples are the new regulations that are being put in place to address the use of autonomous cars or flying drones."
CORRECTION:
As published in the International New York Times
An article in the Saturday-Sunday issue about a revitalization of Google's robotics division misstated part of the background of Hans Peter Brondmo, who has been hired to help manage the unit, now part of the X research division of the Alphabet holding company. He graduated from M.I.T., not the M.I.T. Media Lab.
Thursday, January 21, 2016
