To the untrained eye, the small ground-floor space in Brooklyn held a few largely unremarkable objects: what appeared to be a flat-screen television and a plexiglass light fixture hung on one side; a scramble of wires and a strip of what looked like Christmas lights adorned the other.
But to the 30 or so guests at Devotion Gallery in Williamsburg on Wednesday night - most in town for the International Computer Music Conference this week - these were objets d'art. More than that, they were buzzing, blinking examples of artificial intelligence.
The cluster of wires, vaguely squid-shaped, for example, replicated neurological pathways: the structure chirped in response to any sound. The plastic ceiling lamp was actually a speaker streaming a mash-up of 24 sad voicemail messages and guitar riffs from the Internet, scratching and mixing the messages in real time. The artists called the resulting music "Cellphonia: Blues."
Arne Eigenfeldt, 46, a professor of music technology in Vancouver, British Columbia, had come just to see the blinking Christmas lights. Actually, they were a kaleidoscopic display of computerized smarts: the LED bulbs played off one another, changing colors according to an algorithm.
"It's a paradox," said Scott McLaughlin, scrutinizing the lights with Mr. Eigenfeldt. "Yeah, it's Christmas lights - until you know what it is."
Mr. McLaughlin presented his own interactive event, called "Shoals," during which the gallery guests huddled together and played a symphony of tones from the Internet on their iPhones, laptops and an iPad. An anthem of the Internet age.
Guests sipped wine and discussed things like complexity theory and generative art. Mr. Eigenfeldt wondered whether the type of art on view could have a future.
But for some, it proved too brave a new world.
Phillip David Stearns, 28 spent six months creating the chirping wire cephalopod. "I'm so over it," he said.
"Every time we try to make life from machines, it shows how much we are missing," he said, adding, "I went back to gardening."
Have a tip for Nocturnalist? E-mail us.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph Aglow: An Led Installation by Philip Galanter. (Photograph by Beatrice de Gea for the New York Times)
