Stocks on Wall Street closed lower on Wednesday, as a pullback in big technology companies outweighed gains elsewhere in the market.
The S&P 500 fell 0.6 percent, weighed down by drops in Nvidia, Apple, Microsoft and Amazon. About 56 percent of the stocks in the benchmark index finished in the red. Tech sector stocks include many companies with outsize values that tend to lean more heavily on the index.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which was coming off two consecutive highs, fell 0.4 percent. The Nasdaq composite, which is heavily weighted with technology stocks, closed 1.1 percent lower.
The selling came ahead of an eagerly anticipated earnings report from the semiconductor company Nvidia, whose chips power A.I. applications. The company is one of the most influential stocks on Wall Street, with a total market value topping $ 3 trillion.
Nvidia is one of several companies that have ridden a wave of enthusiasm over artificial intelligence developments and have been responsible for much of the broader market's big gains over the last year.
Nvidia fell 2.1 percent, though it is up 153 percent for the year.
Investors also had a mixed batch of earnings and corporate financial updates from other companies to review. Nordstrom rose 4.2 percent after beating analysts' earnings expectations and raising its financial forecasts for the year. A rival, Kohl's, rose 0.3 percent after also beating analysts' earnings expectations.
PVH, which owns the Calvin Klein and Tommy Hilfiger brands, fell 6.4 percent after giving investors a revenue forecast short of analysts' expectations. The food producer J.M. Smucker fell 4.9 percent after trimming its earnings forecast for the year.
Super Micro Computer sank 19.1 percent for the biggest decline among S&P 500 stocks after the server technology company said it was delaying the filing of its annual report.
All told, the S&P 500 fell 33.62 points to 5,592.18. The Dow fell 159.08 points to 41,091.42. The Nasdaq fell 198.79 points to 17,556.03.
The latest results from retailers and others come as Wall Street and the Federal Reserve try to gauge the resiliency of U.S. consumers amid the squeeze from inflation and high borrowing rates. The latest updates from clothing retailers, food producers and others can help shed more light on how and where people are spending money.
Investors are also looking ahead to Friday, when the U.S. government releases its latest data on inflation with the PCE, or personal consumption and expenditures report, for July. The hope is that the data shows inflation easing further -- or at least stagnating -- so that Fed officials remain comfortable cutting interest rates at their September meeting as they've strongly suggested they will.
Economists expect the PCE, which is the Fed's preferred measure of inflation, to show that inflation edged up to 2.6 percent in July from 2.5 percent in June. It was as high as 7.1 percent in the middle of 2022. The rate of inflation has been easing steadily back toward the central bank's target of 2 percent since then, following the Fed's aggressive interest rate hikes.
Traders expect the central bank to begin trimming its benchmark interest rate back from a two-decade high at its next meeting in September, with cuts totaling up to 1 percent by the end of the year.
Treasury yields were mixed in the bond market. The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 3.84 percent from 3.83 percent on Tuesday.
The investor Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway unloaded more of its Bank of America stake, selling nearly 25 million shares worth almost $ 1 billion over the past week. Berkshire Hathaway's class A stock, already the most expensive stock on Wall Street, gained enough ground to elevate the conglomerate into the club of companies valued by the stock market at over $ 1 trillion.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
