Nvidia's stock price surged after delivering another blowout quarter, setting off a rally in other technology companies that carried Wall Street to another record high.
The chipmaker, a central player in the boom surrounding artificial intelligence technology, reported scorching demand for its semiconductors.
The S&P 500 rose 2.1 percent Thursday to another record high. The Nasdaq added 3 percent. The Dow Jones industrial average, which has a smaller weighting in tech stocks, rose 1.1 percent.
Nvidia surged more than 16 percent after reporting that its revenue and profit soared in the latest quarter thanks to booming demand for its chips used for artificial intelligence. The stock has tripled over the past year thanks to a surge in investor enthusiasm over artificial intelligence.
Synopsis, which makes software used to test and develop chips, rose 7.1 percent after raising its profit forecast.
Other chipmakers and companies involved in the chip-making industry gained ground. Advanced Micro Devices rose 11.4 percent and Lam Research rose 4.8 percent.
Overnight, Japan's Nikkei 225 surged to a record high. Huge gains in corporate earnings have enhanced the appeal of shares in Japanese companies, along with the weakness of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar.
Bond yields were relatively steady. The yield on the 10-year Treasury edged down to 4.32 percent from 4.33 percent late Wednesday.
On the losing end, shares of the electric truck and S.U.V. maker Rivian tumbled 26.1 percent after the company reported another loss and issued a weaker-than-expected production outlook. Lucid, another electric vehicle manufacturer, slid 16.1 percent after it missed Wall Street sales forecast and also gave a weaker production estimate than analysts had called for.
The online craft marketplace Etsy fell 8.5 percent after it missed Wall Street's profit forecast by a wide margin.
Technology stocks have been the driving force behind the market's rally that started in October. Solid earnings from some of the biggest names in the sector are helping justify and reinforce those big gains.
"Investors are still wondering, will the market top out or broaden out," said Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at CFRA. "As of now, investors are basically saying, 'I'm going to let this market take me where it wants to go, and right now that's higher."'
Wall Street expects just under 4 percent growth for earnings in the overall S&P 500 during the fourth quarter. The communication services sector, which includes Google's parent Alphabet, is expected to report 45 percent growth. Information technology companies, which include Nvidia, are expected to notch 22 percent growth.
"The near-term momentum in A.I.-related stocks is likely to continue," said Solita Marcelli, chief investment officer for the Americas at UBS Global Wealth Management.
Nearly 90 percent of companies in the S&P 500 have reported earnings. There are still a few big names on deck this week. The online travel giant Booking Holdings and the TurboTax maker Intuit will report later Thursday.
Wall Street's focus on earnings this week follows economic data from the previous week that prompted a stumble in the market. Inflation data came in hotter than Wall Street expected, while retail sales fell more than anticipated. That raised concerns about the timing of hoped-for interest rate cuts from the Fed.
Wall Street is now betting that the central bank will start trimming its benchmark rate in June, rather than March.
Investors could get more clarity on inflation next week when the government releases its monthly report on personal consumption and expenditures. Analysts expect that report to show inflation cooled to 2.3 percent in January. It peaked at 7.1 percent in June 2022.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
