I'm the Houston bureau chief for The New York Times, covering Texas. I am always toggling between books, music and shows about the Lone Star State while trying to stay connected to New York City, where I was born and raised. Here's a few things that have grabbed my attention recently.
Khruangbin
I discovered this Houston instrumental trio when I moved here in 2021 and have become a big fan, especially after seeing them live at a packed hometown show. Their musical influences really capture the city, and their song, "Texas Sun," featuring Leon Bridges, has been on repeat for me during long -- long -- drives across the state.
The Big Rich
There are a lot of great Texas books, but "The Big Rich," a history of the great oil barons by Bryan Burrough, is the most compelling I've read. I also just finished "The Great Tamasha" -- it isn't about Texas, but it helped me understand the global business of cricket, which now includes a professional league in Texas.
How To With John Wilson
I recently finished the third and final season of "How To With John Wilson," which consists of offbeat interviews and video essays, often very personal, told with ostensibly found footage from around New York City. It's basically a love letter to the city in all its everyday oddity and always makes me laugh.
God, Human, Animal, Machine
The audio version of "God, Human, Animal, Machine" by Meghan O'Gieblyn was a great way in to some of the thornier questions raised by artificial intelligence. I've been listening to a lot of books now that I drive everywhere, and this one is really conducive to audio, just very conversationally written.
Friday Night Lights
All the "Friday Night Lights" content is good: the book, the movie, the TV show. Since moving to Texas, I've been rewatching the show. I first encountered it as a childless person in Queens. Now I have kids and live in Houston. It holds up quite well, and now I mostly identify with the parents.
From left, Mark Speer, Donald Johnson and Laura Lee of Khruangbin. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMY HARRIS/INVISION, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS); "How To With John Wilson" (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAX)
