Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
For an article that ran on Tuesday's front page, I interviewed a dozen or so black mathematicians about the subtle racial slights they have been subjected to by white and Asian colleagues. Among them, several took pains to note that theirs is not the only field typified by what one called "the racism of educated people."
"Unconscious bias is a problem for academics in general," said Danny Krashen, an algebraist at Rutgers, who has learned reliable techniques for deflecting race-related skepticism from peers when it arises. Academics are prone to "assume we're immune" to assorted prejudices, he said, "because we think of ourselves as smarter."
Medieval studies, high-energy physics, journalism and Hollywood have all drawn deserved scrutiny for their abiding tolerance for extreme racial imbalance -- not to mention corporate law and the Silicon Valley technosphere. But the unusually candid blog post that served as the inspiration for my article happened to be written by a black mathematician, Edray Goins. There were several reasons I felt that the toll this type of bigotry -- which often goes undocumented -- takes on black mathematicians was worth reporting on.
One is the sheer magnitude of the underrepresentation of black academics in research math. According to the American Mathematical Society, there are 1,769 tenured mathematicians at the math departments of the 50 United States universities that produce the most math Ph.D.s. No one tallies the number of black mathematicians in those departments, but as best I can tell, there are 13. That comes to seven-tenths of 1 percent of the total -- perhaps as far as any job classification gets from accurately reflecting the share of black Americans in the general adult population, which stands at 13 percent.
Maybe it seems like splitting already ludicrously fine hairs, but in biomedicine, the share of black scientists who receive major research grants from the National Institutes of Health (1.4 percent) is about twice as high as the share of black mathematicians on the tenured faculty of top United States math departments. The share of employees at Facebook who are black (4 percent) is roughly six times higher; the share of black graduates from United States medical schools (6 percent), nine times higher. Among the film and television agents at Hollywood's top four talent agencies, according to a recent New York Times article, black agents number in the dozens, which makes their share roughly eight times that of the black mathematicians.
"To say that I feel isolated is an understatement," Dr. Goins wrote.
Then there is the cost of that underrepresentation to the public. In the private sector, shareholders bear the opportunity lost by excluding demographic groups. But mathematics research is funded largely by taxpayers. Federal agencies distributed some $350 million in grants to American universities for basic math research alone in 2016. And math -- "the queen of the sciences," as the 19th-century mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss is said to have labeled his discipline -- underpins virtually all of the tens of billions of dollars worth of basic science research that Americans support each year.
"How much further forward might mathematics have gotten today," Richard Taylor, a prominent (white) mathematician at Stanford, wrote in an email, "if we had attracted that talent?"
And there is the matter of the people who don't get a shot at charting the mathematical universe for a living. Most of the hand-wringing about underrepresentation of racial minority groups in science, technology, engineering and math is centered, for good reason, on the economic injustice: So-called STEM jobs, whether in finance or machine learning or academia, pay nearly twice the national average, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
But research mathematicians frequently suggest that their work is closer to poetry or painting than other sciences, a concept perhaps best-illustrated by an XKCD cartoon bearing the legend "Fields Arranged by Purity," with physicists claiming dominion over chemists, biologists, psychologists and sociologists, all spaced the same width apart ("it's nice to be on top") until the figure representing the mathematicians, far off in the distance, turns to notice the cluster to her left. "Oh hey," she says. "I didn't see you guys all the way over there."
As Daniel Zaharopol, the director of a program for mathematically talented low-income middle-school students, put it when I interviewed him for a 2017 article: "Math is beautiful, and being a part of that should not be limited to just some people."
Some misguided people claim that there are not many black research mathematicians because African-Americans are not as intelligent as other races. These people, whom I have reported on for other stories in recent months, almost invariably use mathematical accomplishment as their yardstick for intelligence. They note that no individuals of African descent have won the Fields Medal, math's equivalent of the Nobel Prize. They lack any genetic evidence to explain the gap in average I.Q. scores between white and black Americans that they cite as the basis of their belief, or reason to think that a genetic trait would be impervious to social or educational intervention, or that high I.Q. is key to math ability, which Timothy Gowers, a 1998 Fields medalist, has attributed largely to "the capacity to become obsessed with a math problem."
But I have been reporting on these topics for several years, and I am acutely aware that math prowess factors heavily into the popular conception of intelligence. There's a vicious cycle at work: The lack of African-American representation in math can end up feeding pernicious biases, which in turn add to the many obstacles mathematically talented minorities face. Which was one more reason it seemed especially important to hold up to the light all the racial biases that contribute to that underrepresentation.
That includes the well-documented racial disparities in public-school resources, the selection of students for gifted programs -- and the fact that having a parent with a Ph.D. is helpful to getting one in math, while black children are less than half as likely as white children to live with such a parent.
I learned some of the math-specific history of racial exclusion, too, from Dr. Goins's speech at last month's math conference in Baltimore: In 1969, when the leadership of the nearly all-white American Mathematical Society counseled members to reject a resolution to address the shortage of black and Hispanic mathematicians in its ranks, a white mathematician, Lee Lorch, wrote in protest.
"Do we care only for those already in the profession?" Dr. Lorch had written. "Is the Society willing to accept the present nearly-complete exclusion from our mathematical manpower pool of Black America?"
Yesterday, it echoed in my mind when I saw a tweet responding to a sentence in my story referring to a Columbia University administrator's conclusion that "progress would hinge partly on majority-group faculty members' adjusting their personal behavior."
"That's us," Kevin Covey, a white astronomer at Western Washington University, said. "Things won't change unless WE change."
______
Follow the @ReaderCenter on Twitter for more coverage highlighting your perspectives and experiences and for insight into how we work.
Photograph Edray Goins, a math professor at Pomona College, gave up a job at Purdue after racial slights. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JARED SOARES FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
