TECHNOLOGY
Humanoid Robot Maker
Teams Up With OpenAI
OpenAI, the creator of ChatGPT, is looking to fuse its artificial intelligence systems into humanoid robots as part of a new deal with a robotics start-up, Figure.
Figure, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., announced the partnership on Thursday along with $ 675 million in venture capital funding from a group that includes the Amazon founder Jeff Bezos as well as Microsoft, the chipmaker Nvidia and the start-up-funding divisions of Intel and OpenAI.
Figure is less than two years old and doesn't have a commercial product but is persuading influential tech industry backers to support its vision of shipping billions of humanlike robots to the world's workplaces and homes.
OpenAI will build specialized A.I. models for Figure's humanoid robots, likely based on OpenAI's existing technology such as GPT language models, the image-generator DALL-E and the new video-generator Sora.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
EARNINGS
Anheuser-Busch InBev
Recovers From Backlash
Anheuser-Busch InBev, the maker of Budweiser, Bud Light, Stella Artois and Corona, reported better-than-expected net income in the fourth quarter despite lower beer volumes.
The beverage company said Thursday that its fourth-quarter operating earnings rose 7 percent to $ 19.98 billion, or 82 cents per share, more than the 76-cent profit analysts expected, according to FactSet.
Revenue in the United States declined 17.3 percent in the fourth quarter and 9.5 percent for the year. Bud Light, the company's best-selling U.S. brand, faced a conservative backlash last year after it sent a commemorative can to the transgender activist Dylan Mulvaney. Transgender rights supporters also deserted the brand, saying it didn't do enough to support Ms. Mulvaney.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
LAYOFFS
Electronic Arts Cuts 5%
Of Work Force in Pullback
Electronic Arts is cutting about 5 percent of its work force, or approximately 670 employees, as layoffs in the technology and gaming sector continue after a surge of hiring in recent years.
The video game maker said in a regulatory filing that its board approved a restructuring plan that includes the layoffs, as well as closing some offices or facilities.
The Redwood City, Calif., company had 13,400 workers globally as of March, 31, 2023, according to a filing.
Electronic Arts estimates incurring about $ 125 million to $ 165 million in total charges related to the restructuring. The company anticipates approximately $ 50 million to $ 65 million in charges associated with office space reductions and about $ 40 million to $ 55 million related to severance and employee-related costs.
The announcement comes just days after Sony said that it would cut about 900 jobs in its PlayStation division. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY GODOFREDO A. VÁSQUEZ/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
