RETAIL
Target Posts Quarterly DipIn Revenue and Sales
Target on Wednesday posted a decline in quarterly revenue as higher prices on essentials cut into shopper spending.
Target, based in Minneapolis, delivered profit results that were below analyst expectations and issued a muted profit outlook. It posted its fourth straight quarter of declines in comparable sales, those from stores or digital channels operating at least 12 months.
Target reported net income of $ 942 million, or $ 2.03 per share, 3 cents short of analysts' projections, according to a survey by FactSet. Profit for the period ended May 4 was also below last year's $ 950 million, or $ 2.05 per share. Its revenue slipped 3.1 percent to $ 24.53 billion, slightly better than the $ 24.52 billion Wall Street expected.
Comparable sales slipped 3.7 percent in the latest quarter, primarily in discretionary categories, a smaller decline from the 4.4 percent drop during the fourth quarter. ASSOCIATED PRESS
HOUSING
Sales of Existing HomesFell by 1.9% in April
High mortgage rates and rising prices continued to put a damper on spring homebuying last month.
Existing home sales fell 1.9 percent to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 4.14 million in April from a revised 4.22 million in March, the National Association of Realtors reported on Wednesday. Sales dropped 4 percent in the Northeast, 2.6 percent in the West, 1.6 percent in the South and 1 percent in the Midwest.
Economists had expected sales to come in at 4.2 million.
The median price of previously occupied homes rose 5.7 percent to $ 407,600, the 10th straight increase and a record for April.
The rate on the benchmark 30-year, fixed-rate loan has risen five of the last six weeks and stands at 7.02 percent, up from 6.39 percent a year ago. The supply of homes rose 9 percent from March to 1.2 million but remains low: It was 1.7 million before the pandemic.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
Amazon Investors RejectDisclosure Proposals
Amazon investors voted against 14 resolutions that asked the retailer to disclose more about its carbon emissions and its directors' donations and to form a committee to oversee artificial-intelligence development, among other issues. Amazon announced the preliminary vote at its annual shareholder meeting on Wednesday, where all 12 directors were voted in for an additional term.
Amazon had asked shareholders to reject all of the outside proposals. Additional resolutions sought to have Amazon create a committee to address the financial impact of policy positions and make reports on lobbying expenditures, warehouse working conditions and packaging materials.
Amazon's chief executive, Andy Jassy, appeared to indicate Amazon, unlike Meta Platforms and Alphabet, had no plans to announce a dividend. He also said the Alexa voice-assistant service would receive a "more expansive" generative A.I. update. REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAUL LOEB/AFP -- GETTY IMAGES)
