Meta has already spent billions on developing artificial intelligence, and it plans to spend billions more. In its quarterly earnings report on Wednesday, the company said that it would spend as much as $ 40 billion this year, up from a previous forecast that had an upper limit of $ 37 billion. The money will largely go toward investments in A.I. infrastructure, including data centers, chip designs and research and development.
Just before the announcement, Meta rolled out smart assistants across Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp. The assistants are powered by the company's A.I. language model, which can generate prose, conversations and images based on what users type into a search bar. It is the latest way Meta is trying to make good on the promise of its leader, Mark Zuckerberg, to introduce A.I. software "to billions of people in ways that will be useful and meaningful."
But despite Meta's bullishness on the technology -- and despite the 27 percent increase in the company's revenue and profit, its best ever in the first quarter -- there were some caveats. Meta warned on Wednesday that A.I. costs would weigh on near-term results, saying that it anticipated second-quarter revenue to be lower than analysts had expected. Those words of caution appeared to unsettle investors, who sank Meta's stock by more than 16 percent in a sell-off in after-hours trading on Wednesday afternoon.
Mr. Zuckerberg urged patience, telling analysts that stock volatility was not uncommon at times when Meta was "scaling a new product" but not yet making money from it. But patience may be wearing thin as the company continues to burn billions on his vision for the metaverse, the immersive virtual world that he unveiled more than two years ago and has had a rocky start.
"It's going to be a royal mess."
Anupam Chander, a visiting scholar at the Institute for Rebooting Social Media at Harvard, on the aftermath of the U.S. ban on TikTok, which President Biden signed into law on Wednesday.
"Given the nature of what's required, the new C.E.O. may prove to be a bit of a unicorn."
Analysts at Bank of America Global Research, in a research note this month about the troubles that Boeing may face in finding a new leader after intense scrutiny over the safety of its planes.
