PEOPLE who frequent social media sites like Facebook and Twitter have come to rely on the news feed as a crucial filter that sifts through news, personal stories, trends and facts on their behalf.
So it is no wonder that many people have strong opinions about how those companies handle their feeds.
Those opinions have become more vocal recently, as the companies have adjusted the feeds. The point of the changes, the companies say, is to make the feeds more interesting, engaging or profitable.
The companies are finding, however, that the audience insists it already knows what it wants. After all, on a social network, users aggregate their own information, deliberately choosing friends and personal connections, preferred news organizations and favorite brands. That sense of ownership makes for a prickly bunch of users.
But Facebook, Twitter and other social networks have a different calling: They are businesses that need to make money by keeping their users interested. So despite the protests of protective readers, news feeds and timelines are ripe for experimentation.
Facebook probably takes the most heat for adjusting how it delivers information in its news feed. Since the feed was introduced in 2006, Facebook has ranked posts based on a computer program meant to show the posts you'll find the most interesting and engaging.
As a result, you can never be sure whether something you post to Facebook will be seen by your friends. Companies that have spent countless hours and dollars building up their Facebook "likes" may find themselves shouting into the wind. And promoted posts -- paid ads -- can seem even more glaringly out of place, because they pop up regularly, unlike some of your friends or favorite brands.
Nevertheless, Facebook says its practice actually makes the site more interesting, even if users sometimes think otherwise.
"We know that ranking isn't perfect," said Greg Marra, a product manager on Facebook's news feed team. "But in the past we've given people a nonranked feed by default and asked them how they compare, and we actually see that people prefer to have the best stories first and they're more satisfied with Facebook when they have it ranked."
Facebook offers the ability to reorder your feed by most recent posts. On the mobile app, find it under the menu or More option, then scroll down to Most Recent. You'll have to choose it each time you return to the app, however; there's no way to make it the default setting.
On the web, click the drop-down arrow next to News Feed in the left-side menu and choose Most Recent. The site will stay that way for at least the next few times you visit.
Facebook's top stories are useful if you've been away from the site for a few days and maybe missed an engagement or a birthday or some other big event. But a chronological feed can offer new variety and a richer look into more people's lives.
Twitter, meanwhile, seems to lean toward the Facebook model, experimenting with how to make its strictly real-time, linear feed a little more full of context and relevant information.
Twitter hasn't given any indication that it might abandon its reverse-chronological ordering of tweets. But it has inched that way ever so slightly, including with new conversation threading that displays replies as a cascading discussion instead of as they are posted, which breaks the usual ordering of tweets.
A strictly time-based feed doesn't always offer users context or explanation about an event or topic. You'll see snippets of commentary, reaction or mysterious ranting, but Twitter's timeline has a tendency to bury important information within minutes of its happening. I might come to Twitter and notice a conversation already in progress about a controversial news event or a sports game, and it can take some work to figure out what's actually going on.
Twitter declined to comment on possible changes to its feed. But the company is known for experimenting with its news delivery, and it has recently been testing a sort of suggested tweet technique, which inserts tweets into your feed from people you don't follow but who are followed by your friends.
When I was looking at my Twitter feed the other night, a tweet from New York magazine popped up, linking to an article about campus sexual assault. At the top, it told me which friend followed the feed. Otherwise, it looked identical to any other tweet or retweet that might show up in my timeline, and it was utterly inoffensive (and interesting).
In recent months, Twitter has also introduced push notifications that pop up notifications on a phone's home screen when people you follow are all following the same account or discussing a topic. And it's easy to imagine that Twitter could tinker with inserting tweets that link to a major story that might be unfolding, tweets that are relevant based on whom you follow, or even tweets based on a user's location.
And would that be such a bad thing?
Both Twitter and Facebook are working hard to keep our interest. We users might have done some initial filtering, but it's impossible to know what we want to know at all times.
"The real goal of all of these editors, curators, everybody, is to get you to come back, and the only way to get you to come back is that you are helpful, you are satisfying some need," said Charlene Li, founder of the business research firm Altimeter Group. "It's some form of mind-reading, to anticipate what it is that people want to hear about."
Ms. Li said that equation was complicated by sponsored tweets and posts, because the user must trust that the site is presenting suggested content because it thinks it's relevant, and not just to make money.
Facebook has arguably stumbled by presenting its ranking in a way that suggests that it knows best what you want to read about. And what you often want to know, Ms. Li said, is what your friends are reading about.
"The most interesting feed I find is the one that's dictated by what my friends are looking at," she said.
With that in mind, some other social sites are also experimenting with ways to deliver personalized information. LinkedIn recently acquired a site, Newsle, that scans the web for information about your social contacts.
In addition to its occasional pop-ups about what your followed friends are talking about, Twitter also offers a pane in its mobile apps called Discover that displays trending tweets, suggested tweets from people you follow, and tweets your friends have marked as favorites.
And as new messaging apps and sharing platforms like Instagram and Vine begin to proliferate, it may be that new web users will choose a far more stripped-down, immediate and even disappearing way to share quick updates and information.
Information delivery in the online age is still evolving, and the only sure bet is that no one will ever agree on what makes the perfect feed.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Illustration Drawing (Drawing by Minh Uong/the New York Times)
