Generate image description Since the public release of ChatGPT kicked off a wave of interest in artificial intelligence, models have snaked their way into many people’s everyday lives, and, despite their flaws, are helping people save time at work, code without knowing how to code, make daily life easier or just have fun. (Jay Daniel Wright/The New York Times)
The public release of ChatGPT last fall kicked off a wave of interest in artificial intelligence. AI models have since snaked their way into many people’s everyday lives. Despite their flaws, ChatGPT and other AI tools are helping people to save time at work, to code without knowing how to code, to make daily life easier or just to have fun.
It goes beyond everyday fiddling: In the last few years, companies and scholars have started to use AI to supercharge work they could never have imagined, designing new molecules with the help of an algorithm or building alien-like spaceship parts.
Here’s how real people are using AI for work, life, play and procrastination.
PEOPLE ARE USING AI TO ...
Plan gardens.
John Pritzlaff
Gardener
Pritzlaff is building a permaculture garden in his backyard in Phoenix, where he uses drought-resistant trees to give shade to other species.
“I do these ultra-high-density planting arrangements,” he said. “And I’ve been employing ChatGPT to give me inspiration on species that wouldn’t have otherwise occurred to me, and for choosing the site for each tree: the best part of the yard with regard to the sun at different times of the year.”
Taking into account his geographical location, ChatGPT suggested, for example, that he might use a moringa tree to provide shade for a star apple.
Plan workouts.
Louis Maddox
Data scientist
Maddox finds ChatGPT to be the perfect companion for his workouts. For example, one day he pasted in his workout notes and said:
Give a concisely formatted summary of this workout and the muscle groups activated. Note any muscle groups that were missed and suggest how to cover them with extras/replacements.
After summarizing the notes, ChatGPT said:
Missed Muscle Groups & Suggestions — Quadriceps: Add leg press, squats or lunges. Calves: Add standing or seated calf raises. Glute Activation: Consider adding glute bridges or hip thrusts for better glute focus.
From there he asked ChatGPT what to prioritize if he didn’t have much time for the gym, and to sketch out roughly how long it might all take.
It’s not perfect, he says, but it gets the job done. Mostly, he says, ChatGPT helps him get going under time constraints, and not let the busywork “become an excuse not to do it.”
Plan meals.
Kelsey Szemborski
Stay-at-home mother of three
Szemborski is a busy mom who is “always on the lookout for something that will make my life easier.” So when she found ChatGPT, she tried asking it for a gluten-free meal plan. And she added:
It needs to be both budget-friendly and also kid-friendly for kids who are picky eaters and we need to avoid peanuts. Please include a grocery list. Thank you!
And ChatGPT obliged. Here’s the first day of a week’s meals:
Breakfast: Gluten-free oatmeal with banana and honey. Snack: Fresh fruit (apples, bananas, oranges). Lunch: Grilled cheese sandwich on gluten-free bread with tomato soup. Snack: Gluten-free crackers with hummus. Dinner: Slow-cooked beef stew with gluten-free biscuits.
“It completely eliminated my normal meal-planning process that involved searching for recipes, trying to think of meal ideas, configuring a list of all of those ideas, and then making a list of the ingredients I need, too,” she said.
Play devil’s advocate.
Paul De Salvo
Data engineer
“I use ChatGPT every day for work,” De Salvo said. “It feels like I’ve hired an intern.”
Part of De Salvo’s job is convincing his bosses that they should replace certain tools. That means pitching them on why the old tool won’t cut it anymore.
“I use ChatGPT to simulate arguments in favor of keeping the existing tool,” he said, “so that I can anticipate potential counterarguments.”
Design parts for spaceships.
Ryan McClelland
NASA research engineer
McClelland’s job is to design mission hardware that is both light and strong. It’s a job that has always required a lot of trial and error.
But where a human might make a couple of iterations in a week, the commercial AI tool he uses can go through 30 or 40 ideas in an hour. It’s also spitting back ideas that no human would come up with.
“The resulting design is a third of the mass; it’s stiffer, stronger and lighter,” he said. “It comes up with things that, not only we wouldn’t think of, but we wouldn’t be able to model even if we did think of it.”
Sometimes the AI errs in ways no human would: It might fill in a hole that the part needs in order to attach to the rest of the craft.
“It’s like collaborating with an alien,” he said.
Organize research for a thesis.
Anicca Harriot
Ph.D. student
Harriot has been powering through her doctoral thesis in biology with the help of Scholarcy and Scite, among other AI tools that find, aggregate and summarize relevant papers.
“Collectively, they take weeks off of the writing process,” she said.
Make a gift.
Matt Strain
Technology and innovation consultant
Strain used ChatGPT to create a custom book of cocktails based on the tenets of traditional Chinese medicine and written in the style of the J. Peterman catalog. He took the idea further the next day, using DALL-E to generate images of the cocktails for the final book, which he gave to his girlfriend for Valentine’s Day.
Write a wedding speech.
Jonathan Wegener
Occasional wedding officiant
Wegener and his girlfriend were officiating a friend’s wedding in December, but he had procrastinated.
“A few hours before, I said, ‘Can GPT-3 write this officiant speech?’” he recalled. “The first version was generic, full of platitudes. Then I steered it.”
Adam is a great lover of plants.
“The speech came back with these beautiful metaphors,” he said. “It nailed it.” It was just missing one important part.
Can you add that thing about in sickness and in health?
Build a clock that gives you a new poem every minute.
Matt Webb
Consultant and blogger
“Yes, programmatic AI is useful,” Webb said. “But more than that, it’s enormous fun.”
Skim dozens of academic articles.
Pablo Peña Rodríguez
Private equity analytics director
Rodriguez works for a private equity fund that invests in soccer players. And that means reading a lot.
“We use our own data sets and methodology, but I always want to have a solid understanding of the academic literature that has been published,” he said.
Instead of picking through Google Scholar, he now uses an AI tool called Elicit. It lets him ask questions of the paper itself. It helps him find out, without having to read the whole thing, whether the paper touches on the question he’s asking.
“It doesn’t immediately make me ‘smart,’ but it does allow me to have a very quick sense of which papers I should pay attention to when approaching a new question,” he said.
Cope with ADHD ...
Rhiannon Payne
Product marketer and author
“With ADHD, getting started and getting an outline together is the hardest part,” Payne said. “Once that’s done, it’s a lot easier to let the work flow.”
She writes content to run marketing tests. To get going, she feeds GPT a few blog posts she has written on the subject, other materials she has gathered and the customer profile.
“Describing the audience I’m speaking to, that context is super important to actually get anything usable out of the tool,” she said. What comes back is a starter framework that she can then change and build out.
... and dyslexia, too.
Eugene Capon
Tech founder
“Because I’m dyslexic, it takes me a really long time to get an article down on paper,” Capon said. “So the hack I’ve come up with is, I’ll dictate my entire article. Then I’ll have ChatGPT basically correct my spelling and grammar. So something that was taking, like, a full day to do, I can now do in like an hour and a half.”
Transcribe a doctor’s visit into clinical notes.
Dr. Jeff Gladd
Integrative medicine physician
Gladd uses Nabla Copilot to take notes during online medical consultations. It’s a Chrome extension that listens in to the visits and grabs the necessary details for his charts. Before, writing up notes after a visit took about 20% of consult time. Now, the whole task lasts as long as it takes him to copy and paste the results from Copilot.
Write Excel formulas.
Mike Jungbluth
Video game animator
“I could ask a specific question on the type of formula I wanted, and then I could reword my question based on the answer it gave me,” Jungbluth said. “This allowed for a more interactive and iterative process towards finding the answer than I found through tutorials, articles or random message board posts.”
Jungbluth had needed a formula that would assign time estimates when he picked out a combination of variables. With a few prompts to ChatGPT, eventually he got it:
=IF(OR(C263=”GroupAType1”, C263=”GroupAType2”, C263=”GroupAType3”, C263=”GroupAType4”), IF(D263=”GroupASize1”, Key!$K$3, IF(D263=”GroupASize2”, Key$K$4, IF(D263=”GroupASize3”, Key!$K$5, “NA”))), IF(OR(C263=”GroupBType1”, C263=”GroupBType2”), IF(D263=”GroupBSize1”, Key!$K$8, IF(D263=”GroupBSize2”, Key!$K$9, IF(D263=”GroupBSize3”, Key!$K$10, “NA”))), “NA”))
Get feedback on fiction.
Paul Gamlowski
Microfiction author
After finishing about 98% of a story, Gamlowski said, he prompts ChatGPT with:
Summarize the meaning or symbolism of this story I wrote. Mention any plot twist. Speculate on the moral of the story. Analyze how well the story reads to an average reader grammatically and structurally. Analyze if the title matches appropriately.
If ChatGPT misses the point, or the moral, “that tells me as a writer probably many readers will miss it, too,” Gamlowski said. And he’ll give it another shot. “So I just adjust a few words or a phrase and have it re-analyze and it gets it,” he said. “It doesn’t take away from the story because I still write in a literary symbolic way, but it helps me get insight into what a future reader might get or miss.”
Appeal an insurance denial.
Dr. Jeffrey Ryckman
Radiation oncologist
Ryckman uses ChatGPT to write the notes he needs to send insurers when they have refused to pay for radiation treatment for one of his cancer patients.
“What used to take me around a half-hour to write now takes one minute,” he said.
Write an insurance rebuttal to an insurance company about treatment of the primary prostate tumor and single site of metastases. Make the tone polite but assertive. Use the terms “medically necessary” and “would render the patient without evidence of radiographic disease.”
Sort through an archive of pictures.
Daniel Patt
Software engineer
On From Numbers to Names, a site built by Patt, a Google engineer, in his free time, Holocaust survivors and family members can upload photos and scan through half a million pictures to find other pictures of their loved ones. It’s a task that otherwise would take a gargantuan number of hours.
“We’re really using the AI to save time,” he said. “Time is of the essence, as survivors are getting older. I can’t think of any other way we could achieve what we’re doing with the identification and discoveries we’re making.”
Get homework help.
Maya Upadhyay
High school student
Upadhyay takes Advanced Placement math classes, including statistics and calculus, and says when she’s confused with a homework question, she’ll feed it into ChatGPT.
It will give her an answer, but also step-by-step instructions on how it got there — a kind of self-guided tutoring process for which she once used math apps or Khan Academy videos.
“Sometimes, if I’m still confused, I can ask the AI to put it into simpler terms,” she said. “It’s just become another option for me to use and it’s been really helpful to have whenever I need it.”
Write an email.
Nicholas Wirth
Systems administrator
Wirth uses ChatGPT to simplify tech jargon when he emails his bosses: “My organization specifically pays me to keep the computer’s internet online, and my own literacy is limited,” he said. “I work with C-level executives, and their time is not to be wasted.”
He also gets it to generate first drafts of long emails to vendors. He might say:
I need a midsized summary email written pertaining to data not being given to us in time.
He also asks for a bullet-point list of the concerns that have to be addressed in the email.
And ChatGPT starts a reply:
