Hey, dude, can you tell, like, how old I am? Not if I'm over 30 and tweeting, it turns out.
In a study of language on Twitter, researchers in the Netherlands pitted a software program against humans in trying to guess people's ages based on their posts. The software did better than the humans, but it was accurate only in predicting the ages of younger people, usually coming within four years of a person's real age. For people over 30, all bets were off.
There are reasons to like this software, however. "Starting from older ages (around 40 to 50) the system almost always underpredicts the age," according to the study, which looked at the musings of 3,000 Dutch Twitter users and was published by the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. Older people also "have a higher usage of links and hashtags, which can be associated with information sharing and impression management."
And yes, teenagers and millennials do conform to some of their stereotypes. On Twitter, "younger persons talk more about themselves and use more chat language such as haha, XD," the researchers wrote, "while older people use more conventional words indicating support or wishing well (e.g. wish, enjoy, thanks, take care)." For those of you over 30: XD is a synonym for LOL; it represents a laughing face shown sideways. (I had to look it up.)
What good is such research? According to the study, which was written up by New Scientist, a computer program that can automatically predict people's ages "could also be used to improve targeting of advertisements and to support fine-grained analysis of trends on the Web." Just what the world needs: more grist for marketers.
Developments
Space
The Rain on Saturn
Is there any third grader whose favorite planet isn't Saturn? Those rings are not only fun when making models for the science fair, but also a meaningful source of water falling to the planet's surface -- a phenomenon that scientists refer to as "ring rain." "Saturn is the first planet to show significant interaction between its atmosphere and ring system," said James O'Donoghue of the University of Leicester in England, the lead author of an article in Nature about the water falling on Saturn. Through telescope work at the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii, the researchers confirmed that the dark bands on Saturn come from charged water particles that influence the composition and temperature of parts of its upper atmosphere. "The main effect of ring rain is that it acts to 'quench' the ionosphere of Saturn, severely reducing the electron densities in regions in which it falls," Mr. O'Donoghue said in a news release. To Space.com, he put it a more user-friendly way: "We estimate that one Olympic-sized swimming pool of water is falling on Saturn per day."
Environment
Wine and Climate Change
Every day, it seems, global warming finds a new way to discomfit us. Researchers recently reported that rising levels of carbon dioxide could lead to more turbulence on trans-Atlantic flights . Now comes a new report that vast swaths of wine country may soon grow too warm to nurture those perfect grapes. A paper in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences predicted the decline of wine production in the Bordeaux and Rhone regions in France and Tuscany in Italy and noted, in scientific deadpan, that demand for wine would be likely to increase as the global population gains affluence. The good news? "Large newly suitable areas are projected in regions of Northern Europe and western North America," the paper said. Or as a report in The Guardian put it, "Bid adieu to Bordeaux, but also, quite possibly, a hello to Chateau Yellowstone."
Fauna
Behold: The Striped Bat
She is striped like a zebra, black and white, and would fit neatly in the palm of your hand (though you might want to wear gloves). She is a new genus of bat, described in a paper in Zookeys, that was found in the Bangangai Game Preserve in South Sudan last July. At first, the bat-collecting researchers thought the unusual specimen in their net was an example of Glauconycteris, a "poorly known bat," as they put it, that is also "poorly represented in museum collections." (A similar-looking bat had been reported in 1939 by a researcher named Hayman working in the Belgian Congo, who had called it "one of the most striking discoveries of recent years.") But further analysis of the new striped bat showed that she belonged to a separate genus, by virtue of her odd appearance and the fact that "the bat's anatomy was also distinct, featuring a larger skull, differently shaped ears, bigger teeth and longer wingtips," according to Wired, which compared it to "a tiny flying bulldog." Her genus has been named Niumbaha, which means "rare" in the language of a local tribe in South Sudan.
Neuroscience
Clear Brains
Take this literally, not metaphorically: scientists have found a method for making brains transparent -- the tissue, that is -- which will help them study systems within a cadaver's brain without having to cut it up. The process, called Clarity, "preserves the biochemistry of the brain so well that researchers can test it over and over again with chemicals that highlight specific structures and provide clues to past activity," The New York Times reported on Thursday. "The researchers say this process may help uncover the physical underpinnings of devastating mental disorders like schizophrenia, autism, post-traumatic stress disorder and others." So far, the researchers, from Stanford, have been able to peer inside a whole mouse brain and part of a human brain and to highlight various networks of neurons in fluorescent colors.
Coming up
Space
A Faraway Stroll
It's spring, so time to go outside: On Friday, two Russian flight engineers aboard the International Space Station will take a six-hour spacewalk "to deploy and retrieve several science experiments and install a new navigational aid," NASA said. It will be broadcast on NASA TV, the ultimate reality channel. This year, there will be as many as six spacewalks by Russians; two by Americans are scheduled for July. In other NASA TV programming this week, the test launching 0f the Antares rocket, developed by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Va., is scheduled for Wednesday. Orbital is one of two companies under contract with NASA to haul cargo to and from the space station; the other, SpaceX, has already made several trips.
Photograph Clockwise From Top: An Artist's Rendering Shows the Charged Water Particles of Saturn's Rings; a New Genus of Bat, Found in South Sudan, Is Tiny and Striped; a New Technique Makes Brains Transparent. (Photographs by Nasa/Jpl-Caltech/Space Science Institute/University of Leicester; Dee Ann Reeder/Bucknell University; Kwanghun Chung and Karl Deisseroth, Howard Hughes Medical Institute/Stanford University)
