In an interview, John Koblin, who covers the television industry for The New York Times, discussed the ongoing writers' strike.
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
Prepare to wait awhile longer for the return of "Stranger Things," "Abbott Elementary" and a number of other beloved TV shows.
Last week, the Writers Guild of America, which represents about 11,500 writers of television and film, went on strike after contract negotiations with studios and streaming services failed. It is the W.G.A.'s first strike in 15 years; the last strike, which began in 2007, lasted 100 days.
The impasse has brought many television productions to a standstill. Last week, picket lines formed in Los Angeles and New York; late-night talk shows went dark and their slots have since been filled with reruns. With no solution in sight, the fate of popular shows -- and perhaps, the fall TV season -- hangs in the balance.
In an interview, John Koblin, a media reporter who covers the TV industry for The New York Times, discussed how the rise of streaming services factored into the strike and where negotiations might go from here. This conversation has been edited.
Can you tell me about the strike and what's at stake for the W.G.A.?
The writers went on strike early last week. They say this moment is existential and that the survival of the writing profession is at stake. The reason they're using this really urgent language is because they say that their working conditions have deteriorated significantly in the streaming era.
Despite the fact that there has been an explosion in television production, their pay has stagnated. W.G.A. leaders say this affects every writer, from the well-decorated showrunner to the junior writer just getting a foot in the door.
What is the W.G.A. asking for?
In a very 2023 twist, one of the issues is putting significant guardrails around the use of artificial intelligence. The writers are looking for this in two ways. One is that ChatGPT, for example, cannot write or be credited on a script. Another is to put guardrails against source material. An example that one screenwriter, John August, gave me was that a studio executive cannot have ChatGPT generate a 15-page document about pandas and then take that document to you and say, "Write a movie about pandas."
But really, the core of this strike is about compensation. There are two things they're asking for. One is a miniroom, also known as a developing room. There's no one definition for a miniroom, but they have proliferated over the last decade. In one example, studios will convene a miniroom before a show has been ordered to series. The writers claim that because it's not a formal writers' room, they will use that as justification to pay writers less, even though they're writing scripts and developing a show.
The other issue is the fact that 20 years ago, episode orders could be for 22, 24, 26 episodes. But in the streaming era, episode orders are much shorter -- six, seven, eight episodes. As a result, writers say that they leave a miniroom or a writer's room sooner than they would have in the past; they are left scrambling to find another job.
How does this moment compare to the writer's strike that began in 2007?
You'll hear the writers say, as united as they were then, they are even more united now. In 2007, they didn't have a lot of other support from their union brethren. It's very different this time around. Other unions, including the Hollywood union, voiced support for the writers. Another thing you'll hear the writers say is that as significant as their ambitions were in 2007, it's even more urgent now.
W.G.A. renegotiates contracts with studios every three years. Why is this happening now?
We could have potentially seen some labor issues in 2020, but the pandemic happened just as negotiations began. One of the chairs of the W.G.A.'s negotiating committee said, We only walk when we feel like we are facing an existential crisis and like something significant has happened. That is why you have these generational strikes; they usually accompany technological shifts. In 2007, that was the advent of the internet.
Would you say this strike is the result of the rise of streaming services?
Yes. A decade ago, Netflix introduced "House of Cards." That was one of its first original shows. In the last four years, we've seen the rise of streaming services, such as Apple TV+ and HBO Max, and the decline of cable television. You'd be hard-pressed to find a lot of people who watch cable or network TV in the way that they did a few years ago.
Where do you predict the strike goes from here?
The talks broke down a week ago; there have been no negotiations all week. After the strike was called, one of the lead W.G.A. negotiators told me in an interview, "Philosophically and practically, we're very far apart," which is something that has been underscored and reiterated by company executives in recent days as well, including by Bob Bakish, the chief executive of Paramount.
It's such a significant gap right now, and the writers are very fired up and united. It's really hard to predict, but there is a feeling within Hollywood that this could be a long strike.
Photograph Picket lines formed last week in Los Angeles, top, and New York, above, as Hollywood writers embarked on their first strike in 15 years, seeking better pay and working conditions. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARK ABRAMSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; JEENAH MOON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
