TECHNOLOGY
OpenAI Is Fined by Italy For Using Personal Data
Italy's data protection watchdog has fined OpenAI 15 million euros, or $ 15.6 million, after an inquiry into the collection of personal data by the company's popular chatbot, ChatGPT.
The watchdog, known as Garante, said last week that its investigation had shown that OpenAI processed users' personal data to train ChatGPT "without having an adequate legal basis and violated the principle of transparency and the related information obligations towards users."
OpenAI called the decision "disproportionate" and said it would appeal. It added, however, that it remained "committed to working with privacy authorities worldwide to offer beneficial A.I. that respects privacy rights."
The investigation also found that OpenAI did not provide an "adequate age-verification system" to prevent users under 13 from being exposed to inappropriate A.I.-generated content. ASSOCIATED PRESS
RETAIL
U.S. Accuses Walmart
In Coercion of Drivers
The U.S. consumer finance watchdog accused Walmart and the work force payments company Branch Messenger on Monday of forcing more than a million delivery drivers into using accounts that cost them more than $ 10 million in junk fees.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau said in a lawsuit that Walmart had told "last mile" drivers in its Spark Driver program it would fire them unless they collected their pay in Branch accounts opened without their consent, the agency said.
"Companies cannot force workers into getting paid through accounts that drain their earnings with junk fees," the C.F.P.B. director Rohit Chopra said.
Representatives for Walmart and Branch Messenger both rejected the C.F.P.B.'s allegations, accusing the agency of failing to allow them time to offer explanations and of "rushing" to file the lawsuit. Reuters
M. & A.
Xerox to Buy Lexmark
In a $ 1.5 Billion Deal
The office equipment manufacturer Xerox has agreed to buy Chinese-owned printer and printing software maker Lexmark International in a $ 1.5 billion deal to expand its presence in Asian markets and better compete in an industry upended by the digital age.
The purchase from Ninestar, PAG Asia Capital and Shanghai Shouda Investment Centre will bring Lexmark back to U.S. ownership. Formed out of IBM in 1991, Lexmark was sold to a group of Chinese investors in a $ 3.6 billion deal in 2016.
Xerox, a household name globally, has posted revenue declines for five straight quarters as demand for printing equipment sputtered and it faced tough competition from HP and Canon. Its shares jumped 7 percent Monday.
The combined company is expected to serve more than 200,000 clients in 170 countries and have a market share among the top five firms globally in various print segments. Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY WILL OLIVER/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)
