Wall Street rallied to its best day since June on Wednesday after pressure on stocks from the bond market relaxed a bit.
The S&P 500 climbed 1.1 percent to trim its loss for what has been a dismal August. The Dow Jones industrial average rose 184 points, or 0.5 percent, and the Nasdaq composite jumped 1.6 percent.
Big Tech stocks and others that benefit from easier interest rates led the way. They got some relief as the 10-year Treasury yield eased back further from its highest level since 2007 after a report suggested the U.S. economy could be cooling.
A 2.2 percent gain for Apple's stock and a 1.4 percent climb for Microsoft shares were two of the strongest forces pushing the S&P 500 upward.
Nvidia, another of the market's most influential stocks, rallied 3.2 percent ahead of its highly anticipated profit report.
Expectations were immense after Nvidia stunned Wall Street three months ago by predicting that a boom in artificial-intelligence technology would mean it would make roughly $ 11 billion in revenue during the three months through July. That was nearly $ 4 billion more than analysts had been forecasting and a 64 percent leap from a year earlier.
The announcement set off a rush across Wall Street. Stocks of A.I.-related companies soared, and investors tried to count how many times a chief executive could mention A.I. in an earnings call. Nvidia's stock has more than tripled this year, and it will need to meet the much higher expectations around it to justify its big move.
A preliminary reading of U.S. services and manufacturing businesses eased to a six-month low, sending yields down across the bond market. The measure of output from S&P Global Market Intelligence still indicated growth, but less as inflation and higher interest rates bite into activity.
"A near-stalling of business activity in August raises doubts over the strength of U.S. economic growth in the third quarter," said Chris Williamson, chief business economist at S&P Global Market Intelligence.
For now, softer-than-expected data on the economy may be good for financial markets. That is because a string of surprisingly strong reports has raised expectations for the Federal Reserve to keep interest rates higher for longer. The Fed has increased its main interest rate to the highest level since 2001 in hopes of grinding down high inflation.
High rates work by slowing the entire economy and hurting prices for investments, and they have helped inflation to ease since its peak above 9 percent last summer. But a still-solid job market and spending by U.S. households threaten to make it difficult for inflation to come down the last percentage point to the Fed's target of 2 percent.
On Wall Street, Toll Brothers rose 3.9 percent after the home builder reported stronger profit for the latest quarter than expected. It had been struggling, along with the entire housing industry, as high mortgage rates ground down activity.
Advance Auto Parts climbed 3.1 percent after it named a new C.E.O. and reported stronger revenue for the spring than analysts had expected. Its profit, though, fell short of forecasts.
Foot Locker tumbled 28.3 percent after reporting weaker profit for the latest quarter than expected. The company also paused its dividend and cut its financial forecasts for the full year, describing a "still-tough consumer backdrop."
Shares of companies that make products sold in Foot Locker stores were also weak. Nike fell 2.7 percent.
All told, the S&P 500 gained 48.46 points to 4,436.01. The Dow rose 184.15 to 34,472.98, and the Nasdaq climbed 215.16 to 13,721.03.
In markets abroad, stock indexes were modestly higher in Europe and mixed across Asia.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
