In 1952, when Lois Smith was 22, she made her professional debut, playing the middle sister, an aspiring actress, in a frothy Broadway comedy called "Time Out for Ginger." Brooks Atkinson called her characterization "bubbly and enchanting." At the last performance, as she made her final exit, the veteran actor Melvyn Douglas closed the door behind her and ad-libbed, "She's going to be a great actress, that kid."
Mr. Douglas was right.
If Ms. Smith has never quite become a marquee name, she is an invaluable presence in film ("East of Eden," "Five Easy Pieces"), television ("True Blood") and theater ("Buried Child," "The Trip to Bountiful"). She has an innate grace, a steely gaze and terrific posture. She is sweet and sharp, tender and very tough, unafraid to speak her mind. The playwright Annie Baker, in an email message, called her "intimidatingly cool."
At 85, Ms. Smith is taking on two of the most challenging roles of her career in Jordan Harrison's futuristic "Marjorie Prime," a finalist for a Pulitzer Prize, which opens on Dec. 14 at Playwrights Horizons. She plays Marjorie, a former violinist losing her memory. For comfort and company, her daughter and son-in-law set her up with a "Prime," a sophisticated artificial intelligence holographic program, which in this case resembles her dead husband, Walter. The Prime can engage her in conversation and remind her of life events. Later in the play, Ms. Smith plays the Prime version of herself.
The Playwrights Horizons premiere concludes an eventful year for Ms. Smith, who found time before an afternoon rehearsal to chat about her life and work. She was dressed comfortably, if somewhat somberly, in black pants and a black blouse with large buttons, like an undertaker's idea of casual Friday. Her feathery hair -- half gray, half white -- was pulled away from her ears.
"As I've gotten older, it's not as though the parts have fallen away," she said. "Just the opposite. I've been busy in more ways in the past year that I don't think I could have fit in anything else."
At this time last year, she had just finished starring in the world premiere of "Marjorie Prime" at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles. She filmed a role in the coming Russell Crowe/Ryan Gosling movie "The Nice Guys," then flew to Chicago to appear in Steppenwolf's production of Rory Kinnear's "The Herd," a performance The Chicago Tribune called "blistering." Then she played a blind woman in Ms. Baker's "John" Off Broadway, opening one scene with the terrific line, "That was around the time I went crazy."
When that play closed, she began filming the movie version of "Marjorie Prime," directed by Michael Almereyda. The shoot finished at 1 a.m. on the same day that rehearsals were to begin for the Playwrights Horizons version. Ms. Smith was right on time for the meet and greet.
"That's more travel than I usually do or want to do," she said tartly.
After all that tumult, playing Marjorie and her Prime counterpart ought to be relaxing; she's already had two cracks at the role. But preparing the play with a different director (Les Waters directed it in Los Angeles, Anne Kauffman directs it here) means a certain amount of change, of choice, "of trying to reconcile things I think I know," she said.
"It sometimes makes me cranky and sometimes excited," she said. "It's lovely and hard."
Her work on "Marjorie Prime" began several years ago when another director, Pam MacKinnon, handed her the script. "I loved it the minute I saw it," she said. "I just thought it was wonderful. I still do." She liked the surprise of the science-fiction element, the slow and steady drip of revelation, the spareness of the writing.
This was lucky, because Mr. Harrison -- an inventive playwright with two other plays, "Futura" and "Maple and Vine," considering how people use technology -- had written it just for her. He knew he needed someone who could characterize both Marjorie's cutting intelligence and accompanying vagueness as her memory gives way. "Lois makes her a continuous person," Mr. Harrison said. "The warmth and the sharpness are there in equal measure."
Ms. Smith began performing as a toddler in plays that her father, a telephone company employee, directed at churches the family belonged to. She studied acting for a couple of years at the University of Washington and then later at the Actors Studio. She took the roles that came her way and said she didn't think there was anything unusual about her acting process. "I don't have any secret systems," she said. Then she paused and smiled slightly. "Maybe everything that goes through oneself is secret in a way."
Her work on a script is a fairly intense process of getting acquainted, like a long, successful blind date or perhaps a fortuitous arranged marriage. "Learning how it relates to me and me to it, that's great fun," she said.
Some actors her age rely on earpieces for help with their lines. She does not. For the past 25 years, she has made sure she is word-perfect before the first day of rehearsal. "I really now treasure the time alone with the script," she said. "I learn it better; I learn it deeper."
Colleagues describe her as an astute and searching collaborator. Ms. Kauffman, speaking by telephone, called Ms. Smith "a force to be reckoned with and also very, very kind." The playwright Amy Herzog, who worked with her on "After the Revolution," called her "offended by cliché," to the point that Ms. Smith persuaded her to change a line in the script that smacked too much of "a familiar Jewish Grandma-ism. She was right."
Similarly, Mr. Harrison has found, "She never feels like we're penetrating enough. She's the opposite of glib."
Following the Taper premiere of "Marjorie Prime," he and Ms. Smith forged a friendship. They see plays and screenings. They drink at seedy bars and trade "salty theater tales." He gave her a bottle of tequila for her birthday. Still, he was careful in describing their relationship, fearing that "if I tell a story like, 'She's so vital at 85,"' Ms. Smith would respond with a swift kick.
Ms. Smith is vital at 85, but it's the same vitality she has always had. Mr. Almereyda, who was moved to make the film of "Marjorie Prime" after seeing Ms. Smith in the play, described watching a screen test that she and James Dean had made for "East of Eden" 60 years ago. She has "the same otherworldly look in the eyes," he wrote in an email, "the same bewitching crooked smile. There's no one like her."
If she seems a natural at playing Marjorie, a woman losing her memory and her autonomy, it is deceptive. "She really has to act that," Mr. Almereyda wrote. "Lois carries a spark, an eagerness and alertness, even in repose."
Not that repose is something she has a lot of time for. Ms. Smith lives alone, in the same apartment on 86th Street she has inhabited for 40 years, though her grandchildren are occasional visitors. Asked if she would like a Prime -- an understanding and sympathetic companion whom Ms. Smith described as "a hopeful replica" of a living person -- she demurred. "I think this is for another time of life," she said.
Right now, she'd be much too busy to pay it any attention.
Photograph Lois Smith, Left, and Above in "Marjorie Prime" at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles. The Show Opens On Dec. 14 at Playwrights Horizons. (Photographs by Richard Perry/the New York Times; Craig Schwartz) (Ar9); Georgia Engel, Left; Christopher Abbott; and Lois Smith in "John" at the Pershing Square Signature Center. (Photograph by Sara Krulwich/the New York Times) (Ar13)
