Donald Trump's vice-presidential pick has indicated he favors a hands-off approach to A.I. but also wants to increase scrutiny of the biggest tech firms in the field.
Senator J.D. Vance, Republican of Ohio, is a strong skeptic of regulating artificial intelligence. He's also in favor of reining in Big Tech, companies he says have grown so powerful that they stymie smaller companies' ability to succeed.
That seeming contradiction could play a role in shaping the Trump administration's stance on A.I. policy if former President Donald J. Trump is elected later this year. Mr. Vance -- the Republican pick for vice president and a former tech investor -- has pushed for looser regulations and has vocally supported open-source A.I., the public release of underlying code that can be copied and altered to create new technology.
But he has also broken with his party to support Lina Khan, the chair of the Federal Trade Commission, for her aggressive stance on antitrust action against Big Tech. And he has strong ties with some of the tech industry's most powerful backers, many of whom fund smaller A.I. start-ups.
Last week, during a committee hearing on privacy and A.I., Mr. Vance accused Big Tech companies of predicting that A.I. could destroy humanity in order to solicit new regulations that only the largest companies could comply with.
Those regulations would "entrench the tech incumbents that we actually have, and make it actually harder for new entrants to create the innovation that's going to power the next generation of American growth" and jobs, Mr. Vance said.
Mr. Trump has not said whom he would ask to lead the administration's policymaking on A.I if he reclaims the presidency in November. But Mr. Vance could heavily influence the growing industry.
Tech policy experts expect that Mr. Vance would take a more laissez-faire approach to A.I. regulations compared with the Biden administration's. The president has issued an executive order requiring safety testing and urged further regulation. Mr. Vance would most likely favor rolling back some of the current A.I. guardrails in place for the U.S. military, which has taken a cautious approach to using the new technology. He has also urged more investment in U.S. companies to help them compete against China, which is racing to dominate A.I.
Still, Mr. Vance's competing visions for looser regulation on A.I. and strong accountability for Big Tech, which is currently leading in creating and improving the technology, may be hard to balance, the experts say.
"Vance is of two minds and I don't know if he can reconcile those things," said Matt Mittelsteadt, a research fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University.
Mr. Vance did not respond to a request for comment. He hasn't previously directly addressed the apparent contradiction in his regulatory views.
Generative A.I., a form of the technology that powers humanlike chatbots and creates realistic images, has prompted concerns worldwide that the technology could wipe out jobs, fuel disinformation and eventually replace the need for humans completely.
The resulting scramble to regulate the industry has led to laws in Europe that ban the riskiest uses of A.I., such as the collection of biometric data by law enforcement, and force companies to reveal when A.I. is being used on consumers. Domestically, dozens of states have passed or are in the process of creating laws for A.I. that require security testing and transparency for consumers.
While Congress has held forums and hearings with A.I. creators, academics and company chiefs, there hasn't been movement on federal legislation.
Mr. Vance has participated in policy forums hosted by Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, on how A.I. will affect security, copyright, discrimination and labor. He previously worked for Peter Thiel, a co-founder of PayPal, and was recently a co-host of a Trump fund-raiser with David Sacks, a venture capital investor.
In 2020, Mr. Vance founded Narya Capital, a venture capital firm based in Cincinnati and backed by Mr. Thiel and other Silicon Valley investors.
Mr. Vance said he was hoping to find a company to compete with Google's ad tech business, but realized it was too dominant.
"We want innovation and we want competition, and I think that it's impossible to have one without the other," he said in February.
He has criticized Meta and Apple for "parasitic" business practices and has called for the breakup of Google, but hasn't specifically addressed what to do about the most powerful A.I. companies, which include private companies like OpenAI and Anthropic.
Kara Frederick, the director of the Tech Policy Center at the conservative Heritage Foundation, said Mr. Vance would most likely buoy the A.I. industry and prioritize start-ups in the field.
"He has more firsthand experience to understand how new entrants have not been able to compete in a genuine free market," Ms. Frederick said.
Photograph J.D. Vance, former President Donald J. Trump's pick for vice president, is expected to be easier on A.I. regulations than the Biden administration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROKO MASUIKE/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
