COMPANIES
PepsiCo Raises Prices, and Profits Rise, Too
Price increases lifted PepsiCo's profits in the third quarter, but the company says those increases are likely to moderate in the coming year.
Pepsi raised prices 11 percent in the July to September period, the seventh straight quarter that the company has increased prices by double-digits. The higher prices took a toll on demand, with sales volumes down 2.5 percent.
PepsiCo said some of that volume decline was strategic. The company said it had been shrinking package sizes to meet consumer demand for convenience and portion control.
But there is also some consumer pushback on prices. Consumers are looking for value and, in some cases, are trading down to cheaper stores.
"I do think that we see the consumer right now being more selective," PepsiCo's chief financial officer, Hugh Johnston, said Tuesday on a conference call with investors. ASSOCIATED PRESS
AVIATION
Boeing Deliveries Dip as a Supplier Struggles
Boeing's deliveries of airline jets slumped in the third quarter as the company struggled with production problems that are cutting into its ability to generate cash.
Boeing said it delivered 27 planes in September, including 15 of its best seller, the 737 Max.
That was far behind its European rival, Airbus, which delivered 55 planes last month. It brought Boeing's quarterly total to 105 deliveries, down from 112 in the same period last year.
Boeing gets the largest share of the purchase price when it delivers planes, so the dip hurts cash flow.
Production and deliveries of the Max and the 787 Dreamliner have been affected by production flaws, notably at Spirit AeroSystems, which builds the fuselages. In the most recent example, the companies said in August that improperly drilled fastener holes would delay deliveries of 737s. ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
AMD Says It Will Buy A.I. Start-Up Nod.ai
Advanced Micro Devices said on Tuesday that it planned to buy an artificial intelligence start-up, Nod.ai, as part of an effort to bolster its software abilities.
In its race to catch a rival chipmaker, Nvidia, the company plans to invest heavily in the critical software necessary for the company's advanced A.I. chips. Through more than a decade of work, Nvidia has built a powerful advantage in the A.I. chip market through the software it makes, and the software developer ecosystem.
AMD has vowed to invest in and build a unified collection of software to power the various chips the company makes.
The acquisition of Nod.ai fits into the strategy because its technology enables companies to deploy A.I. models that are tuned for AMD's chips more easily. Nod.ai sells its technology to large data center operators, among other customers. REUTERS
Credit: By Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER CZIBORRA/REUTERS)
