It's the night of two season finales. "The Young Pope," Paolo Sorrentino's campy and operatic drama starring Jude Law, wraps up its limited run on HBO. And Matt Iseman faces off against Boy George in the final round of "The New Celebrity Apprentice," hosted by Arnold Schwarzenegger. What's on TV
THE YOUNG POPE 9 p.m. on HBO Paolo Sorrentino's campy melodrama that stars Jude Law as -- well, a young pope -- ends its limited run of 10 operatic, often outrageous episodes. "There is something very current about this series, and not simply because Pius is a norm-breaking, reactionary American interloper, running against the establishment and seeking to engird his church with a big, beautiful wall (with a tiny door)," James Poniewozik wrote in The New York Times. "'The Young Pope' echoes a larger phenomenon, of which our election was just one part: the movement toward retreat and insularity in the West, an attitude that Pius sees as a holy mandate. Brexit, meet Pontifexit."
THE NEW CELEBRITY APPRENTICE 9 p.m. on NBC. This month, President Trump taunted Arnold Schwarzenegger -- the host of this reality TV competition -- at the National Prayer Breakfast, saying he wanted to pray for the show's ratings. Mr. Schwarzenegger shot back with a short video posted on Twitter, in which he suggested that he and the president switch jobs, since Mr. Trump is "such an expert in ratings." It was the type of bizarre, surreal spat that we may need to say goodbye to for now as "The New Celebrity Apprentice" ends its season with the final round: Matt Iseman vs. Boy George. Guests include Caitlyn Jenner.
HUMANS 10 p.m. on AMC. This series returns for Season 2 and more sci-fi world-building that questions murky philosophy and ethics in an age of advanced artificial intelligence and uncanny robots. It's all seen through the eyes of the Hawkins family in Britain. "The season's plotting can be predictable and too neat, especially in how it contrives to keep every Hawkins family member involved in the story," James Poniewozik wrote in The Times. "Not every exploration pays off, especially on the human side, like a subplot about 'synthies' -- teenagers who identify as robots -- which falls flat even if you don't read it as a facile analogy for transgender issues."
KILL BILL: VOL. 1 (2003) 10:02 p.m. on Starz. "Revenge," as this film's epigraph says, "is a dish best served cold." Quentin Tarantino mixed that idea -- the story of the Bride (Uma Thurman) who gets back at the assassins who worked with, then betrayed her -- with hyper-stylized homages to spaghetti westerns, blaxploitation and martial arts genre films. "While being so relentlessly exposed to a filmmaker's idiosyncratic turn-ons can be tedious and off-putting, the undeniable passion that drives 'Kill Bill' is fascinating, even, strange to say it, endearing," A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. "Mr. Tarantino is an irrepressible show-off, recklessly flaunting his formal skills as a choreographer of high-concept violence, but he is also an unabashed cinephile, and the sincerity of his enthusiasm gives this messy, uneven spectacle an odd, feverish integrity."
Sebastian Roché, Left, and Jude Law. (Photograph by Gianni Fiorito/Hbo); Ivanno Jeremiah in "Humans." (Photograph by Colin Hutton/Kudos and Ch4, Via Amc); Uma Thurman (Photograph by Andrew Cooper/Miramax Films)
