Generate image description The tech titan Alex Karp, who said that he supports Kamala Harris for president and describes his politics as “populist-left,” at his home in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, June 15, 2024. (Ryan David Brown/The New York Times)
THE WHITE MOUNTAINS, N.H. — Alex Karp never learned to drive.
“I was too poor,” he said. “And then I was too rich.”
In fact, Karp, a cofounder and the CEO of Palantir Technologies, the mysterious and powerful data analytics firm, doesn’t trust himself to drive. Or ride a bike. Or ski downhill.
“I’m a dreamer,” he said. “I’ll start dreaming, and then I fall over. I started doing tai chi to prevent that. It’s really, really helped with focusing on one thing at a time. If you had met me 15 years ago, two-thirds of the conversation, I’d just be dreaming.”
Karp is a lean, extremely fit billionaire with unruly salt-and-pepper curls. He is introvert-charming (something I aspire to myself). He has attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and can’t hide it if he is not interested in what someone is saying.
After a hyper spurt of talking, he loses energy and has to recharge on the stationary bike, or by reading. Even though he thinks of himself as different, he seems to like being different. He enjoys being a provocateur onstage and in interviews.
“I’m a Jewish, racially ambiguous dyslexic, so I can say anything,” he said, smiling.
Unlike many executives in Silicon Valley, Karp backed President Joe Biden, cutting him a big check, despite skepticism about his handling of the border and his overreliance on Hollywood elites like Jeffrey Katzenberg. Now he is supporting Vice President Kamala Harris, but he still has vociferous complaints about his party.
So how did a daydreaming doctoral student in German philosophy wind up leading a shadowy data analytics firm that has become a major American defense contractor, one that works with spy services as it charts the future of autonomous warfare?
He’s not a household name, and yet Karp is at the vanguard of what retired Gen. Mark Milley, a former chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has called “the most significant fundamental change in the character of war ever recorded in history.” In this new world, unorthodox Silicon Valley entrepreneurs like Karp and Elon Musk are woven into the fabric of America’s national security.
Karp is also at the white-hot center of ethical issues about whether firms like Palantir are too Big Brother, with access to so much of our personal data as we sign away our privacy. And he is in the middle of the debate about artificial intelligence.
Critics worry about what happens when weapons are autonomous and humans become superfluous to the killing process. Tech reflects the values of its operators, so what if it falls into the hands of a modern Caligula?
“I think a lot of the issues come back to ‘Are we in a dangerous world where you have to invest in these things?’” Karp told me, as he moved around his living room in a tai chi rhythm, wearing jeans and a tight white T-shirt. “And I come down to yes. All these technologies are dangerous.” He adds, “The only solution to stop AI abuse is to use AI.”
Palantir is derived from palantíri, the all-powerful seeing stones in the J.R.R. Tolkien fantasies. The company’s Palo Alto, California, office features “Lord of the Rings” decor and is nicknamed the Shire.
Born in New York and raised outside Philadelphia, Karp has a Jewish father who was a pediatrician and a Black mother who is an artist. They were social activists who took young Alex to civil rights marches and other protests.
“I just think I’ve always viewed myself as I don’t fit in, and I can’t really try to,” he said. “My parents’ background just gave me a primordial subconscious bias that anything that involves ‘We fit in together’ does not include me.
“Yes, I think the way I explain it politically is like, if fascism comes, I will be the first or second person on the wall.”
Palantir was founded in 2003 by a gang of five, including Karp and his old Stanford Law School classmate Peter Thiel (now the company’s chair). It was backed, in part, by nearly $2 million from In-Q-Tel, the CIA’s venture capital arm.
“Saving lives, and on occasion taking lives, is super interesting,” Karp told me.
Karp does not believe in appeasement. “You scare the crap out of your adversaries,” he said. He brims with American chauvinism, boasting that we are leagues ahead of China and Russia on software.
Karp’s friend Diane von Furstenberg told me that he sees himself as Batman, believing in the importance of choosing sides in a parlous world. But some critics have a darker view, worrying about Palantir creating a “digital kill chain” and seeing Karp less as a hero than as a villain.
Palantir got its start in intelligence and defense — it now works with the Space Force — and has since sprouted across the government through an array of contracts.
It has assisted Ukraine and Israel in sifting through seas of data to gather relevant intelligence in their wars — how to protect special forces by mapping capabilities; how to safely transport troops and how to target drones and missiles more accurately.
While Palantir’s role in helping Ukraine was heralded, its work with Israel, which is trying to catch terrorists hiding among civilians, is far more controversial.
“I think there’s a huge dichotomy between how the elite sees Ukraine and Israel,” Karp said.
The wild origin story of Palantir plays like a spy satire.
After graduating from Haverford College, Karp went to Stanford Law School, which he calls “the worst three years of my adult life.”
He met Thiel, and they immediately hit it off, trash-talking law school and, over beers, debating socialism vs. capitalism. “We argued like feral animals,” Karp told Michael Steinberger in a New York Times Magazine piece.
“I think we bonded on this intellectual level where he was this crazy leftist, and I was this crazy right-wing person,” Thiel told me, “but we somehow talked to each other.”
Karp received his doctorate in neoclassical social theory from Goethe University Frankfurt in 2002. He reconnected with Thiel soon afterward, while working at the Jewish Philanthropy Partnership in San Francisco. The two began doing “vague brainstorming,” as Thiel put it, about a business they could start.
Thiel thought he could figure out how to find terrorists by using some of the paradigms developed at PayPal, which he helped found, to uncover patterns of fraud.
Karp said that we are “very close” to terminator robots and at the threshold of “somewhat autonomous drones and devices like this being the most important instruments of war. You already see this in Ukraine.”
In 2020, after 17 years in Silicon Valley, Karp moved Palantir’s headquarters from Palo Alto to Denver. “I was fleeing Silicon Valley because of what I viewed as the regressive side of progressive politics,” he said.
He thinks that the Valley has intensified class divisions in America.
The AI revolution, he said, will come with a knotty question: “How do you make sure the society’s fair when the means of production have become means that only 1% of the population actually knows how to navigate?”
I asked if he agrees with Musk that AI is eventually going to take everyone’s jobs.
“I think what’s actually dangerous,” Karp replied, “is that people who understand how to use this are going to capture a lot of the value of the market and everyone else is going to feel left behind.”
He said he would support class-based affirmative action and declared himself “pro draft.”
“I think part of the reason we have a massive cleavage in our culture is, at the end of the day, by and large, only people who are middle and working class do all the fighting,” he said.
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
Generate image description The tech titan Alex Karp at his home in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, June 15, 2024. (Ryan David Brown/The New York Times)
Generate image description The tech titan Alex Karp at his home in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, June 15, 2024. (Ryan David Brown/The New York Times)
Generate image description The tech titan Alex Karp goes through his tai chi moves in a renovated barn at his home in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, June 15, 2024. (Ryan David Brown/The New York Times)
Generate image description Rubik's cubes and books, among a few of the favorite things of the tech titan Alex Karp, at his home in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, June 15, 2024. (Ryan David Brown/The New York Times)
Generate image description The tech titan Alex Karp, who said that he learned things that have been helpful to him as a business leader while working at the Sigmund Freud Institute in Frankfurt, Germany, at his home in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, June 15, 2024. (Ryan David Brown/The New York Times)
Generate image description The tech titan Alex Karp, who described himself as “an artist with a gun,” at the shooting range on his property in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, June 15, 2024. (Ryan David Brown/The New York Times)
Generate image description The headquarters of Palantir Technologies, the data analytics firm led by Alex Karp, in Palo Alto, Calif., July 15, 2020. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)
Generate image description The workout room in a renovated barn at the home of the tech titan Alex Karp, in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, June 15, 2024. (Ryan David Brown/The New York Times)
Generate image description The tech titan Alex Karp goes through his tai chi moves in a renovated barn at his home in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, June 15, 2024. (Ryan David Brown/The New York Times)
Generate image description The tech titans Elon Musk and Alex Karp at a conference with lawmakers on artificial intelligence, at the Capitol in Washington, Sept. 13, 2023. (Haiyun Jiang/The New York Times)
Generate image description The tech titan Alex Karp goes through his tai chi moves in a renovated barn at his home in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, June 15, 2024. (Ryan David Brown/The New York Times)
Generate image description The tech titan Alex Karp, who participated in a conference about artificial intelligence with lawmakers, at the Russell Senate Office Building in Washington, Sept. 13, 2023. (Haiyun Jiang/The New York Times)
