To the Editor:
Re "Yes, Those Calls You're Ignoring Are Increasing" (front page, May 6):
While robocalls from scammers may be growing in volume, politicians have a dirty little secret: They are exempted from the robocall laws they wrote.
Every year politicians hold hearings and act concerned about scams while secretly doing absolutely nothing to stop the barrage of electioneering via robocall. In fact, the only thing that brings Republican and Democratic voters together may be equal disgust for political robocalls.
Until politicians follow the same laws everyone else does, few will take their concern as anything more than public relations spin.
SHAUN DAKIN, FALLS CHURCH, VA.
The writer is the founder of the National Political Do Not Call Registry.
To the Editor:
This article hit the nail on the head in describing the robocalling problem, but it can be readily solved without regulator or consumer involvement. The telecom companies can stop these attacks by using machine learning tools to figure out good guys versus bad guys while ensuring that legitimate calls such as snow day notifications go through. That would eliminate 99 percent of the problem.
With a little ingenuity and determination, robocalls will become the junk email of the future -- something that everyone vividly remembers getting but that now barely exists outside of our spam folders.
EYAL ROSENTHAL, TEL AVIV
The writer is director of business development for Starhome Mach, a company that offers fraud prevention for telecom companies.
To the Editor:
This article notes that millions of robocalls are being made because they're so inexpensive. Phone companies should be required to charge for phone calls (as they did as recently 10 years ago). If the entities making these invasive calls had to pay one cent or more per call, they would think twice about making a million calls.
Citizens and small businesses could be protected from such charges by allowing, say, 500 or even 1,000 free calls per month, but then each additional call would cost 5 or 10 cents.
Half the money collected would go to the phone providers and the other half to the government to reduce the national debt. Everyone wins, except the bad guys.
ARTHUR M. TELCHIN, NEW YORK
The writer is a technology risk consultant.
To the Editor:
I recently ordered something online from an organization. Before I clicked "place order" I had to check a box "agree to contact terms." When I opened those terms the organization required that I authorize it to call me with prerecorded or artificial voice messages using an automatic dialing system -- the ghastly robocalls.
It gave an 800 number that I could call to opt out -- after agreeing. How many people read the fine print and then make the call to opt out? I hope the new legislation makes it illegal to require online customers to agree to robocalls.
PEGGY TROUPIN, NEW YORK
To the Editor:
The annoying robocalls could be worse. In Australia we get lots of robocalls from our politicians.
I get phone calls from "Prime Minister Turnbull," and when I try to tell him of my concerns about the state of the country, he keeps talking and ignores me -- just like live politicians.
DENNIS FITZGERALD
MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA
