Big technology stocks bounced back Wednesday and drove a rally for U.S. indexes, as Wall Street grew even more convinced long-sought cuts to interest rates will be arriving soon.
The S&P 500 jumped 1.6 percent for its best day since February. The Dow Jones industrial average rose 99 points, or 0.2 percent, and the Nasdaq composite soared 2.6 percent.
The widespread gains came as Treasury yields eased in the bond market after the Federal Reserve gave the clearest indication yet that it could begin lowering interest rates in September. Fed Chair Jerome Powell said policymakers are "getting closer to the point" of comfort about inflation where they could cut rates for the first time since COVID-19 crashed the economy.
"We think that the time is approaching," Powell said. "And if we do get the data that we hope we get, then a reduction in our policy rate could be on the table at the September meeting."
After the Fed voted to keep interest rates steady on Wednesday, as was widely expected, Powell spent much of an ensuing news conference discussing the risks of both moving too early or too late with rate cuts. One could allow inflation to reaccelerate, while the other could cause unnecessary pain for the economy and ultimately throw Americans out of their jobs.
After keeping its main interest rate at a two-decade high for roughly a year, speculation may rise that the Fed waited too long. That "has the potential to add to the stock market's choppiness as we head toward what is historically its most volatile period," said Chris Larkin, managing director of trading and investing at E-Trade from Morgan Stanley.
For Wednesday, though, the dominant mood on Wall Street was jubilance.
Advanced Micro Devices rallied 4.4 percent after reporting better profit and revenue for the latest quarter than analysts expected, thanks in part to accelerating artificial-intelligence business. That helped drive Nvidia, the chip company that's become the poster child for Wall Street's frenzy around AI, up 12.9 percent a day after it lost 7 percent.
All told, the S&P 500 rose 85.86 points to 5,522.30. The Dow gained 99.46 to 40,842.79, and the Nasdaq composite jumped 451.98 to 17,599.40.
How such Big Tech stocks perform matters a lot because they're Wall Street's most valuable companies, and that gives them the biggest sway on the S&P 500. A handful of these stocks, known as the "Magnificent Seven," drove the U.S. stock market to dozens of records this year, even as many other stocks struggled under the weight of high interest rates. But they ran out of momentum last month amid criticism they had grown too expensive and expectations had run too high.
Such criticism hasn't gone away, and Microsoft fell 1.1 percent despite reporting profit and revenue for the latest quarter that edged past analysts' expectations. Growth in its Azure cloud-computing business fell a bit shy of analysts' forecasts. That followed earlier profit reports from Tesla and Alphabet that investors found underwhelming, which raised concerns that other Magnificent Seven stocks could also fail to impress.
Meta Platforms rose 2.5 percent as investors waited for its profit report, which arrived after trading closed for Wednesday. Amazon and Apple will follow on Thursday, and each rose at least 1.5 percent.
Stronger-than-expected profit reports from companies outside the Magnificent Seven also helped lift the market.
DuPont rose 4.1 percent after delivering better profit and revenue than expected.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury eased to 4.05 percent from 4.14 percent late Tuesday. It's been falling from 4.70 percent in April as a slowdown in inflation raised expectations for coming cuts to interest rates.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
