Technology stocks led Wall Street broadly lower on Tuesday as the chipmaker Nvidia pulled back ahead of its earnings report this week.
The S&P 500 fell 0.6 percent. The benchmark index is coming off only its second losing week in the last 16. The Nasdaq composite gave up 0.9 percent and the Dow lost 0.2 percent.
Technology stocks were among the biggest weights on the market. Nvidia, which has ridden a wave of investor enthusiasm over artificial intelligence, lost 4.4 percent. The stock has more than tripled over the past year.
Big retailers reported mixed earnings. Walmart rose 3.2 percent after reporting stronger-than-expected results for its latest quarter and issuing sales forecasts that came in ahead of what Wall Street was expecting.
The home improvement retailer Home Depot wavered between small gains and losses, ending up 0.06 percent. It beat Wall Street's earnings forecasts, but gave investors a disappointing profit forecast for the year.
Outside of earnings, credit card company Capital One Financial rose 0.2 percent as it moves ahead with a $ 35 billion buyout of Discover Financial Services. Discover soared 12.9 percent for the biggest gain in the S&P 500.
Markets are coming off a heavy week of economic reports that hinted at stubborn inflation squeezing consumer spending. That has pushed expectations for the Federal Reserve to start cutting interest rates further out into 2024. The central bank on Wednesday will release minutes from its latest meeting, potentially giving investors more insight into its next move.
The central bank held interest rates steady at its last meeting in late January and investors had been hoping for rate cuts as soon as March. Those hopes were dashed by the Fed's comments and the latest batch of economic data. Wall Street is now betting on a possible rate cut in May and a likely rate cut in June, according to CME's FedWatch Tool.
Those lowered expectations for interest rate cuts and renewed worries about inflation have essentially tripped up the broader market.
"The narrative that drove us to these levels is very much being called into question," said Sameer Samana, senior global market strategist at Wells Fargo Investment Institute.
Bond yields fell. The yield on the 10-year Treasury slipped to 4.27 percent from 4.28 percent late Friday. The yield on the two-year Treasury fell to 4.58 percent from 4.65 percent.
Markets in Europe were mixed and markets in Asia were mostly higher.
China's central bank kept its one-year loan prime rate unchanged on Tuesday but cut its five-year rate by 25 basis points to 3.95 percent. That came as a surprise, the first time the five-year rate was cut since May 2023.
Investors have a relatively light week of economic updates ahead, with the latest data on home sales expected Thursday. The broader housing market remains tight, with demand still outpacing supplies. Mortgage rates also remain high, though still below late October, when the average rate on a 30-year mortgage hit 7.79 percent.
Companies from a broad range of industries will report their latest earnings this week. The online travel company Booking Holdings reports Thursday. The latest batch of results might give investors a clearer idea of the economy's path ahead.
More than 80 percent of companies in the S&P 500 have reported their latest results. Analysts polled by FactSet expect overall earnings growth of about 3.3 percent for the fourth quarter and are forecasting earnings growth of about 3.6 percent for the current quarter.
Wall Street will have to wait until the end of February for another inflation update, when the government releases its monthly personal consumption and expenses report, which is the Fed's preferred measure.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
