Wall Street rebounded on Tuesday, retracing some of the losses in the previous day's rout. Stocks in Japan, the hardest hit by recent selling, jumped 10 percent.
A measure of calm returned to global markets on Tuesday, as stocks staged a modest recovery from the panic that had overtaken investors to start the week.
On Wall Street, the S&P 500 rose 1 percent, after falling 3 percent on Monday, which was its sharpest daily decline since September 2022. Tuesday's trading -- a rally that lost steam late in the session -- marked a break in a three-day retreat for stocks, and came after two weeks of turbulence across financial markets.
Investors are grappling with a number of changing dynamics in the global economy: A steep rise in the yen recently had upended some popular trades, while a weaker-than-expected U.S. jobs report sparked fears of a slowing American economy. Meanwhile, concern about whether artificial intelligence would keep driving big gains for tech companies weighed on an important sector of the market.
"The statistics from yesterday's sell-off had the feel of the 'sell now, ask questions later' kind of day where everything and anything is piling on to reasons for selling," said Quincy Krosby, chief global strategist at LPL Financial, an investment adviser. "Today, the market by any metric is 'oversold' and due for a bounce."
The tech-heavy Nasdaq mirrored gains in the S&P 500, rising 1 percent. Crude oil prices inched higher, too.
In Japan, where the losses on Monday were largest, stocks bounced higher. The Nikkei 225 index rose 10.2 percent after plunging 12.4 percent the day before. That was the benchmark index's biggest one-day point decline, larger than the plunge during the Black Monday crash in October 1987.
Markets in Europe were mixed, after fluctuating between small gains and losses throughout the day.
The sharp jolt to stock markets started last week in Japan, where worries about the state of the U.S. economy were compounded by concerns about the effects a rapidly strengthening yen would have on corporate profits.
On Friday, a report on American jobs showed a considerable slowdown in hiring, prompting a sell-off in U.S. markets. More widespread panic took hold on Monday over fears that the Federal Reserve might have waited too long to start cutting interest rates, threatening the strength of the U.S. economy.
The Fed is expected to start cutting rates, which are at a more-than-two-decade high, later this year.
Conditions in Japan have been complicated by a policy shift in the opposite direction. The Bank of Japan increased its key rate to a quarter point last Wednesday. It was only the central bank's second rate increase since 2007. After years in which policymakers kept interest rates low to try to bolster prices and consumption, inflation has risen to levels at which they felt they could begin raising rates.
The prospect of higher rates caused the yen to strengthen, a trend that could be good for Japan's economy over the longer term but would be a drag on corporate profits, especially for big companies that relied on selling abroad. The currency's rise spooked investors, some of whom feared a stronger yen would spell the end of a more-than-yearlong rally in Japanese stocks that had been driven by a weakened currency.
"There was a lot of panic selling and now the markets are recovering," said Joy Yang, head of market research in Asia for Point72, a hedge fund. Trading will likely remain "choppy" in the coming weeks, she added.
A stronger yen also undercut some global investments made when the currency was cheaper, acting as a catalyst to wider selling across markets already nervous that stock prices had risen too high, too quickly. A popular trade among some investors involved borrowing in yen and then investing it in markets like those in the United States. But as the strength of the dollar this year began to ebb, profits from that trade also started to reverse course.
The yen weakened on Tuesday, trading at around 145 to the dollar, but remained considerably stronger than it was about a month ago, when it hit its weakest levels in decades, at around 160 to the dollar.
Although the chain reaction of a strengthening Japanese currency and declining stocks seems to have calmed, for now, analysts expect large market fluctuations to carry forward until there is more clarity about the direction of the U.S. economy. The latest Consumer Price Index is set to be released next week, providing data on inflation in July.
"Could this turn into a bear market? This, in our view, remains unlikely," analysts at Goldman Sachs wrote in a report published early on Tuesday. The bank's economists consider a U.S. recession in the coming year "a risk rather than a likely outcome," they said, noting that "very significant cash piles" have been built up in money market funds that investors could tap to buy stocks at lower prices.
Joe Rennison and Daisuke Wakabayashi contributed reporting.
Joe Rennison and Daisuke Wakabayashi contributed reporting.
Illustration
