MOSCOW -- President Trump's announcement that the United States would withdraw from a nuclear disarmament treaty with Russia drew sharp criticism Sunday from one of the men who signed it, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who called the decision reckless and not the work of "a great mind." In making his announcement Saturday, Mr. Trump cited Russian violations of the pact, the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which was signed in Washington in 1987 by President Ronald Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev.
Mr. Gorbachev, who is now 87 years old, cast Mr. Trump's decision as a threat to peace.
In an interview with the Interfax news agency, Mr. Gorbachev called Mr. Trump's rollback of the disarmament agreement "very strange." He added: "Do they really not understand in Washington what this can lead to?"
The last Soviet leader, who is perceived more warmly in the West than inside Russia, has already watched his domestic reform agendas supporting democracy and greater freedom of the press unravel in recent years. Nuclear disarmament also defined his legacy.
"All agreements aimed at nuclear disarmament and limiting nuclear weapons must be preserved, for the sake of preserving life on earth," Mr. Gorbachev said on Sunday.
Mr. Trump's announcement also drew criticism from some Senate Republicans.
Rand Paul, the Kentucky Republican who sits on the Foreign Relations Committee, said on "Fox News Sunday" that it would be a "big, big mistake to flippantly get out of this historic agreement."
He added: "This was a big part of Reagan's legacy, and we should not get rid of it. It was an important step. We went from 64,000 nuclear-tipped missiles down to 15,000."
The pact required the elimination of short- and intermediate-range missiles launched from land, and helped pull the superpowers back from the hair-trigger nuclear posture of the Cold War. The United States formally notified Russia of suspected violations four years ago, for developing banned missiles.
On CNN's "State of the Union," Bob Corker, the Tennessee Republican who leads the Foreign Relations committee, said that Mr. Trump may have been trying to lay down an ultimatum.
"This could be something that is just a precursor to try to get Russia to come into compliance," he said.
But Mr. Corker also said he hoped that the administration was not trying to undo much of the nuclear arms control treaties that have been put in place.
President Vladimir V. Putin had as early as 2007 suggested that the treaty no longer served Russia's interests. Still, it remained in force as a cornerstone of the disarmament agreements of the late Soviet period.
"Russia has not, unfortunately, honored the agreement so we're going to terminate the agreement and we're going to pull out," Mr. Trump told reporters after a political rally in Elko, Nev., on Saturday.
The Kremlin said Mr. Putin would seek an explanation about the move when he meets this week in Moscow with John Bolton, Mr. Trump's national security adviser.
A deputy Russian foreign minister, Sergei A. Ryabkov, called the plans for a unilateral withdrawal "very dangerous" and said Russia might respond with unspecified technical means.
The treaty, known in shorthand as the INF agreement, resolved a crisis of the Cold War as both superpowers deployed a new generation of relatively short-ranged missiles in Europe, the Soviet Union in the late 1970s and the United States in response in 1983.
The United States' missiles in Europe, including the Pershing II, shortened the decision-making window for the Soviet leadership in Moscow to respond to a nuclear strike to as little as 10 minutes, compared with about half an hour for an intercontinental ballistic missile launch.
If a leader failed to respond in time, the Soviet command might be obliterated before ordering a retaliatory nuclear assault on the United States.
In part to address this shortcoming in the Soviet deterrence posture, the Soviet Union developed a so-called "dead hand" launch mechanism that could fire missiles at the United States even if the leadership died in a first strike.
The Russian government first publicly acknowledged the existence of this launch authority during Mr. Putin's tenure.
In a period of tensions at the outset of the Ukraine crisis, the government newspaper, Rossiskaya Gazeta, published an article describing this system for launch using a computer and "artificial intelligence." It is not activated in peacetime, the article said.
The INF Treaty banned nuclear-capable, ground-based missiles with a range of more than 500 kilometers, or 311 miles.
Mr. Trump's plan to withdraw from the treaty came after United States assertions that Russia was understating the range of at least one of its missiles, known as the Iskander, which is launched from a truck and can carry conventional or nuclear payloads.
Credit: ANDREW E. KRAMER; Noah Weiland contributed reporting from Washington.
President Ronald Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev at the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty Signing Ceremony in Washington in 1987. (Photograph by Bob Daugherty/Associated Press)
