U.S. stocks slumped Wednesday after a morning rally evaporated, but the losses on Wall Street weren't as bad as the manic moves that wracked markets worldwide over the last week.
The S&P 500 slipped 0.8 percent after an earlier jump of 1.7 percent petered out. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 234 points, or 0.6 percent, while the Nasdaq composite dropped 1 percent.
Stocks swung lower as Nvidia, one of Wall Street's most influential companies, went from a morning gain of 4.4 percent and pushing strongly upward on the S&P 500 to a loss of 5.1 percent that made it the index's heaviest weight. Nvidia and other Big Tech stocks have been struggling the last month on worries that their prices shot too high amid Wall Street's frenzy around artificial-intelligence technology.
A profit report from Super Micro Computer, whose stock more than quadrupled in less than three months to start the year, helped further mar excitement around A.I. Even though its revenue soared 143 percent in the latest quarter, profit for the company that sells server and storage systems used in A.I. and other computing fell short of analysts' heightened expectations. Its stock tumbled 20.1 percent.
Still, other signals in the market showed less fear than in prior days when sharp losses cascaded globally. The S&P 500 is coming off a 1 percent rally that broke a brutal three-day losing streak where it tumbled a bit more than 6 percent.
Several reasons were likely behind the slide for markets worldwide, and one of them, centered in Japan, seems to be calming. The Bank of Japan raised its main interest rate last week in a small move that sent aftershocks worldwide. It scrambled a favorite trade among some hedge funds and other investors, who borrowed money for very cheap in Japanese yen and then invested it elsewhere around the world.
Speaking to business leaders in the northern island of Hokkaido, Shinichi Uchida, deputy governor of the Bank of Japan, acknowledged the recent market turmoil, which was also triggered in part by concerns about the slowing U.S. economy.
Japan's central bank can afford to wait, he said, and "will not raise its policy interest rate when financial and capital markets are unstable." He also said he believed the U.S. economy would have a "soft landing" and avoid a recession, even if fears have risen the Federal Reserve has kept interest rates too high for too long in hopes of stifling inflation.
The Japanese promise offered a balm for markets, nervous about additional moves by the Bank of Japan, which only recently ended its yearslong campaign to keep interest rates below zero.
But it also highlights how risks may remain, suggesting there's still room left for the popular "carry" trade to unwind and that some hedge funds and other investors may "still remain offsides," according to John Lynch, chief investment officer for Comerica Wealth Management.
Japan's rate increase last week sent the value of the Japanese yen soaring, and the resulting exit of investments by those hedge funds likely slapped turbochargers onto market losses, including Monday's drop for the Nikkei 225. That was its worst since the Black Monday crash of 1987.
The value of the Japanese yen is one of the first things Darrell Cronk, chief investment officer for Wealth & Investment Management at Wells Fargo, checks now when he wakes each morning because it shows how much the "carry" trade is unwinding.
The other thing Mr. Cronk checks is the two-year Treasury yield, which he says shows where the market wants or needs the Federal Reserve to take its main interest rate.
Treasury yields tumbled sharply on Monday, when fear in the market was spiking and investors were speculating that the Federal Reserve might even have to call an emergency meeting to cut interest rates quickly. But they've stabilized since then.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
