For its first conference on the creator economy, the Biden administration celebrated social media creators. The president lauded them as a "breakthrough in how we communicate."
As soon as President Biden walked into the Indian Treaty Room across the street from the White House on Wednesday, the smartphones flew up. Dozens of social media influencers and people who work with them stood almost in unison to capture the moment.
Mr. Biden turned his back. Then he whipped out his own phone to take selfies with them, before delivering remarks on how creators represented the future of communication.
"I have a bunch of grandchildren, and with all due respect, they don't read the same newspapers or watch the same television I do," he said. "They listen to all of you."
Mr. Biden seemed to relish the chance to connect with the influencers, joking that he wanted them to give him a job and overriding his aides to riff with the group even after he was scheduled to depart. When a TikTok star known for videos about taxes jumped onstage and asked the commander in chief to do the "Dougie" celebratory dance with him, Mr. Biden obliged -- a moment that was, of course, posted online within a few hours.
Mr. Biden's appearance was part of the White House's first conference focused on the creator economy. The event was a capstone of the administration's efforts to court and celebrate digital creators as an avenue for speaking directly to Americans in an increasingly fragmented media landscape.
Mr. Biden has regularly appeared in influencers' posts and series on YouTube and TikTok, a seemingly friendlier option for public appearances than interviews with the national news media. The strategy is increasingly popular in politics -- former President Donald J. Trump recently appeared in a livestream with Adin Ross, a 23-year-old internet celebrity. The Democratic National Convention next week will offer credentials to content creators for the first time.
"It feels really nice to finally have almost a sense of legitimacy from the highest power in the country," said Victoria Bachan, president of Whalar Talent, a unit of a creator commerce company that works with more than 230 social media personalities, "saying: 'Oh, hey, what you guys do isn't a joke. It's real, it's powerful, it's massive, it provides jobs and major economic impact."'
The recognition at Wednesday's White House event was "therapeutic," added Lon Seidman, a product reviewer with more than 300,000 YouTube subscribers.
Attendees, who were a mix of creators and people from companies that work with them, were encouraged to post throughout the event, which unofficially began on Tuesday, when a large group was invited to go bowling at the White House lanes. Creators took photos almost nonstop, with several capturing moments through Meta's new Ray-Ban camera glasses and others holding rectangular selfie lights in one hand to get their images just right.
The Biden administration has regularly invited creators to briefings and celebratory events in recent years, in hopes that TikTok, Instagram and YouTube stars would share information about its policies and initiatives with their followers. It held its first digital creator holiday party last year and hosted creators for State of the Union watch parties and Cinco de Mayo and Diwali events.
Wednesday's event, however, was the first to dive more substantively into the kinds of issues that plague content creators, like the specter of artificial intelligence's using their content without permission and the challenges of online bullying. Many of the conversations reflected the lack of protections that creators can face and the power imbalance between them and the tech giants who host their content.
Wally Adeyemo, the deputy treasury secretary, took to the stage for a session on fair pay for creators with Hannah Williams, a TikTok star whose account focuses on salary transparency. Neera Tanden, the president's domestic policy adviser, discussed the mental health challenges influencers face on a panel that included Joel Bervell, a Black creator and medical student who flags racial bias in medical tools, and Kate Mackie, an online personality known for a show where she interviews people while running.
Mr. Biden's praise to creators -- "you are the new breakthrough in how we communicate" -- was paired with some derisive comments about traditional news outlets. He said the national news media had "no editors" and was driven by clicks, adding, "They're not that crazy about me, but I like them."
Other organizations were eager to tap into the swell of talent and money that descended on the city this week. SAG-AFTRA, the actors' union, helped sponsor rooftop cocktails for the group on Tuesday night. The group had pressured digital creators to stand with its striking members last year by threatening their ability to join the union in the future.
An after-party on Wednesday was thrown by Palette, a talent management company that represents many creators with political ties and that has taken money from the Democratic National Committee to help with social media influencers.
"I don't know how many people, five or seven years ago, would think that the White House would take the time out to do something like this or work with creators in the way that they're doing today," said Lindsey Gamble, 36, a creator economy consultant and attendee, who writes a newsletter about the industry.
Glaringly absent from the public conversations was acknowledgment of recent legislation, signed into law by Mr. Biden, that will ban TikTok in the United States as of January unless it has been sold by ByteDance, the app's Chinese parent company. Some creators said that the topic had been discussed in breakout sessions, which were closed to the news media, and that the administration had maintained that it was seeking a "Chinese divestment" rather than a removal of the app in the United States.
Duke Alexander Moore, 29, a Dallas-based creator who posts videos about taxes, said he had suggested in a breakout session that if TikTok did ultimately face a ban, the administration should consider offering a special type of unemployment assistance or loans for people and small businesses who would lose their livelihoods as a result.
Mr. Moore was also the creator who persuaded Mr. Biden to perform the Dougie dance with him.
"He was about to leave," Mr. Moore said. "I was like, I don't know what to do, I want to get content."
Photograph Instagram personalities were among the digital creators who attended a White House conference on the creator economy.
