The S-Class by Mercedes-Benz, with an estimated starting price of about $100,000, can largely drive itself in traffic. It's a further evolution in systems that may one day relieve the tedium of driving completely.
Hangar doors slid open to reveal a fleet of white Mercedes-Benz cars arrayed on a rain-slicked runway.
As fireworks shot skyward, a gray limousine zoomed between them onto a temporary stage. The door opened, and out stepped the singer-songwriter Alicia Keys, in a dark floor-length evening dress, who sat down at a piano and performed several numbers with a local backup band, the Hamburg Symphony.
Befitting Mercedes's flagship vehicle, the premiere of the new S-Class at a vast Airbus jetliner factory in Hamburg on Wednesday night was as grandiose as the company could make it. But this latest incarnation of the S-Class is notable not only for options including so-called hot-stone massage built into the reclining rear seats. Or the Wi-Fi. Or the cup holders that keep drinks warm or cold.
The new S-Class, with an estimated starting price of about $100,000, is a highly autonomous auto. That is, while it still requires a human behind the steering wheel, the car can largely drive itself in city traffic or on the highway at speeds as high as 200 kilometers, or 125 miles, per hour, using an array of infrared and optical sensors and radar to track lane markings or the car ahead, even around curves.
The car will go on sale in Europe, the United States and other markets in September.
"It marks the beginning of autonomous driving," said Dieter Zetsche, the chief executive of Daimler, the parent company of Mercedes-Benz.
There might be an element of hype in that statement. But certainly the S-Class, which can also park itself, brake automatically to avoid hitting humans or other cars and sense when a driver is becoming fatigued, is a further evolution in systems that relieve people of some of the tedium of driving and prevent them from doing stupid things. The optional system is analogous to the autopilots that enable airliners to perform many of the routine tasks of flight and cruising but still require a human pilot to keep an eye on things.
Along with its German luxury rivals BMW and Audi, Mercedes is pushing such technology ever closer toward a virtual chauffeur. BMW plans to roll out a system similar to the one in the S-Class later this year in the battery-powered i3 city car, and soon after in its 7 Series luxury sedan. Future upgrades of the Mercedes S-Class will be able to change lanes automatically at autobahn speeds.
Almost all major carmakers are working on autopilot systems. The 2013 Lincoln MKZ has a system that keeps the car in the lane and maintains a set distance from the vehicle ahead, effectively driving itself. But the Germans seem to have a lead in bringing the latest technology to market. Unlike the Lincoln, the S-Class is programmed to hold the car in the middle of the lane, rather than just correcting if the driver drifts out of line.
But even German engineers are skeptical of predictions by Google and others that within five years vehicles will be driving themselves from the garage to the grocery store without human intervention. It will take a decade, maybe more, to solve all the technological and legal problems, they say.
"We think we still have quite a bit of work ahead of us," said Werner Huber, director of "driver assistance" technology at BMW.
If any carmakers should be leading progress toward vehicles that can drive themselves, it would arguably be the Germans. Their well-heeled customers are willing and able to pay for the latest features. And they are the sort of people who would rather be checking their stock portfolios online than studying the license plates in front of them while stuck in traffic.
Even the motorheads at BMW in Munich are willing to acknowledge that there are times when the company's longtime German marketing slogan --"Freude am Fahren," or "the joy of driving"-- does not apply.
"In a lot of situations you don't have any joy in driving," Mr. Huber said during a recent interview in a plain brick building in Munich that houses his research team. His group includes engineers, software specialists, sensor experts and psychologists. "The joy is in being driven."
Self-driving cars might one day also offer mobility to people who are unable to drive because of age or handicap. Google, applying its expertise in artificial intelligence, created a stir last year with a video that showed a blind man at the wheel of the company's self-driving prototype. The implication is that self-driving cars are just around the corner.
Google engineers have been quoted as saying driverless cars could be available in five years. David L. Strickland, administrator of the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, referred to such claims Wednesday in testimony before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
"What was once previously thought of as science fiction and decades away from reality may now appear to be just around the corner," Mr. Strickland said, according to a text of his remarks.
The more cautious assessment of self-driving technology by Mr. Huber and others partly reflects the difference in mentality between Germany's rational, data-driven engineers and the visionaries of Silicon Valley. The discovery of who proves to be right could have major implications for society. At least in theory, self-driving cars would be safer, able to react more quickly than humans to avoid danger and use less fuel because they would continually calculate the most efficient driving style.
But German engineers point out that they are a long way from software that can do things that come naturally to humans, like discerning whether a person standing at a street corner is about to cross the road or is just waiting for a bus.
There are also myriad legal issues that must be solved by governments and insurance companies. If a car gets in an accident while on autopilot, who pays the damage -- the owner of the car or the auto company? The questions about liability are one reason that the S-Class system requires the driver to keep at least one hand on the wheel.
Mr. Zetsche, the Daimler chief executive, said that prototype Mercedes technology already enabled a car to drive itself from one place to another without human intervention, though he said work must still be done to ensure that the system was totally reliable. It might take longer to perfect the legal framework than the software, he said.
"Certainly in a decade I would sit in a car -- a Mercedes car -- and let the car go from A to B," Mr. Zetsche said during a brief interview at the S-Class event. "We might still struggle with the legal challenges."
A ride in BMW's prototype self-driving car recently illustrated some of the hurdles. The test vehicle, a 5 Series sedan loaded with a dozen unobtrusive sensors, handled heavy autobahn traffic outside Munich with aplomb. It slowed down to let a Ford Fiesta merge into traffic from a ramp, for example. It read traffic signs and adjusted the car's speed automatically.
But the logic-driven robot BMW still has trouble gauging the intentions of erratic individuals. When a vehicle in the lane to the left slowed down for no apparent reason, the BMW slowed down too, to avoid passing on the right. A human being might not have interpreted the rules of the road so literally.
Mr. Huber said that more sophisticated sensors were needed to make it possible for cars to analyze everything that was happening on the road and to react more as a human driver would.
What is more, BMW's self-driving car works best on stretches of road where the online mapping has been upgraded for extra precision. It will take time and money to build such exact online navigation everywhere.
As part of its autonomous driving program, Audi, the luxury car unit of the Volkswagen Group, is working on a system that would enable cars to drive themselves into a parking garage and find an empty space without a human being aboard -- a threat to valet parking attendants everywhere. But the system requires specially equipped parking garages.
Autonomous driving will be easier to manage when car companies work out standards that would allow cars to transmit information, like location and speed, to each other.
Cost is another obstacle. Self-driving technology will not be feasible until the equipment itself is affordable. The expense of research and development is one reason BMW formed a partnership with the German components supplier Continental to develop its Connected Drive systems, as it calls them.
Alejandro Vukotich, head of development for driver assistance systems at Audi, pointed out that predictions of utopian technological progress were notoriously unreliable. He recalled reading an article in National Geographic as a boy that predicted cars would be driving themselves by the year 2000.
"We have passed the year 2000," Mr. Vukotich noted. He and others see the path to fully automated driving as gradual. "It's difficult to make a prognosis," he said. "We will get closer step by step."
