BELLINGHAM, Wash. -- More than most of us, the science historian George Dyson spends his days thinking about technologies, old and very new. His 1986 book "Baidarka" was a meditation on an ancient Aleut kayak.
Eleven years later, in "Darwin Among the Machines," he wrote of the history of artificial intelligence. "Project Orion," in 2002, focused on an abortive NASA project to use nuclear bombs to power space rockets. "Turing's Cathedral," his reconstruction of the early moments of modern digital computing, will be published in March.
Though this 58-year-old author's works are centered on technology, they often have an autobiographical subtext. Freeman Dyson, the physicist and mathematician who was a protagonist of Project Orion, is his father. Esther Dyson, the Internet philosopher and high-tech investor, is his sister. We spoke for three hours at his cottage here, and later by telephone. A condensed and edited version of the conversations follows.
Why did you spend 10 years researching "Turing's Cathedral"?
It's an important story. And a good one! I don't know a single person who is not immersed in the digital universe. Even people who are strongly anti-technology are probably voicing that view on a Web site somewhere. Third-world villagers without electricity have cellphones. So we are all living in this digital world that started from zero.
With many forms, we have no idea how they began. But the digital world actually goes back to a single point -- the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton in the late 1940s and early 1950s. The story I tell in my book is of how at the end of World War II, John von Neumann and his team of mathematicians and engineers began building the very machine that Alan Turing had envisioned in his 1936 paper, "On Computable Numbers." This was a machine that could answer any question asked of it.
Now, there'd been computing machines before von Neumann's. They were extremely slow. The I.A.S. machine was the first to have an absolutely modern form of memory where you could go to any location at any time. On von Neumann's machine, you put in a 10-bit address and you got back a 40-bit string of code.
Once that was possible, numbers ceased being symbols and began doing things. The numbers have been proliferating ever since. Almost all computers we use today -- from our iPads to laptops -- are essentially copies of this one.
Aside from its speed, why did von Neumann's computer become the prototype for all others?
Von Neumann was tremendously interested in self-reproducing machines, and he set up the conditions where that was likely to happen. Everything his team did was clearly documented and publicized right away. The machine was not patented. The intention was for it to be copied, which it was, in about 10 different places. It's why copies were made of the copies and are still being made of the copies.
The computer was built to aid in the development of the hydrogen bomb. Why was it needed for that?
There's no way to partially test a hydrogen bomb. A computing machine was needed to model the explosion before the actual test was done. Of course, von Neumann had many interests beyond the bomb. Once the machine was up and running, he used it for weather prediction and to model biological and stellar evolution. Von Neumann certainly supported the idea of building an H-bomb -- indeed, he advocated preventive nuclear war against Russia -- but he also viewed the bomb as a chance to get a computer built.
Did you ever meet von Neumann?
I don't think I did. He died when I was 4. Nonetheless, I grew up with his computer. It was on campus when I was a child, and it fascinated me. In 1958 -- for reasons I explain in the book -- the computer was completely shut down, never to run again. After that, the computer building seemed a bit like a morgue with a dead body in it. Something interesting was there. But what was it? Writing this book finally got me behind those closed doors.
The I.A.S. sounds like a remarkable place to grow up. Was it?
In many ways, it was. Wherever you grow up, you think of it as normal. I happened to grow up in a place where people were designing a hydrogen bomb and inventing the digital universe.
My sister, Esther, who is older, remembers more of the great scientists who were there. I have memories of Kurt Godel, who was a friend of our mother's. Some of the physicists were not particularly child-friendly. When they came to the house, we were not part of the conversation. Edward Teller, he liked children. Hans Bethe did, too. Whenever my sister and I went to Fuld Hall, the main building, you could see doors quickly shut. At one point, someone complained about us. Robert Oppenheimer, who was the director, thereafter ruled that no children could come into the building unescorted.
Einstein's secretary, Helen Dukas, was our baby sitter. I remember once being jumpy. "Why don't you read a book?" she said. "There are no books to read," I snapped. And she went to the shelf and pulled down Thor Hyderdahl's "Kon Tiki." This was the first adult book I'd ever been given. It would shape me.
You left the cocoon of Princeton when you were 16. Why?
I was a rebellious adolescent. It was the '60s. Everyone was rebellious. I hated high school. When they wouldn't let me graduate early because I hadn't taken gym, I quit altogether and went off to British Columbia. It was a time when a lot of kids ran away from home. My father didn't stop me. At first, I worked with this guy who'd built his own boat, and we ran around the Northwest delivering things. I loved it. Canada had real wilderness. British Columbia was like Yosemite in the ocean. Being there was so liberating -- getting my own food, making my own living. I built myself a boat in the style of the Aleut-Russian kayak, the baidarka. I'd work on tugboats and fishing boats for a while, and then I'd take my baidarka and explore. I did this for about 20 years.
And today you make your living as a historian of science and technology. How does a high school dropout get to do that?
Hey, this is America. You can do what you want! I love this idea that someone who didn't finish high school can write books that get taken seriously. History is one of the only fields where contributions by amateurs are taken seriously, providing you follow the rules and document your sources. In history, it's what you write, not what your credentials are.

If von Neumann were alive today, what would he be doing?
His greatest interest, at the end, was in biology and neurology. I think he would be studying the brain. And of course, he'd now have the tools to do that. These fantastic new technologies like functional M.R.I. are exactly what he envisioned. Here was someone who used his brain so much. He was interested in how it worked.
I also think von Neumann would probably be doing very different kinds of computing from what he did at the institute. As Darwin wasn't a Darwinist, Johnnie von Neumann would not belong to the school named after him. What we call the Von Neumann architecture is just a very crude approximation of the right way to do computation. In the contemporary computer, 99 percent of the parts are idle most of the time. They just sit there waiting for instruction. The machine does only one thing at a time. However, the computers are so powerful and so cheap that it doesn't really matter -- although it would, to him. He'd probably be annoyed that this primitive stuff is named after him.
And what about Alan Turing?
Well, he'd be almost 100. And he died at 41. He gave us this one revolution, and we really don't know what the next one might have been because he was just getting started. He died being interested in biology, though we can't guess too much about this because he didn't leave many papers. I'm sure he'd be working on something that would surprise. It would be something that we just cannot imagine.

Illustration Drawing (Drawing by Sean Mccabe)
