Generate image description FILE — Mark Zuckerberg, then the Facebook chief executive, testifies before a House committee in Washington, Oct. 23, 2019. The Federal Trade Commission has said it will remove Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Meta, from a lawsuit to block the company’s acquisition of Within Unlimited, an artificial intelligence start-up. (Pete Marovich/The New York Times)
The Federal Trade Commission has said it will remove Mark Zuckerberg, CEO of Meta, from a lawsuit to block the company’s acquisition of Within Unlimited, an artificial intelligence startup.
The agency said in a court filing Tuesday that it agreed to drop Zuckerberg as a defendant after Meta, formerly known as Facebook, promised he would not try to personally purchase Within Unlimited. Meta had asked the agency to remove Zuckerberg as a defendant.
In June, the FTC filed its complaint with U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California to prevent Meta and Zuckerberg from acquiring Within, which makes the popular virtual reality fitness app Supernatural. The FTC included Zuckerberg as a defendant in the suit and accused him and Meta of planning to buy Within to dominate the nascent virtual reality market and violate antitrust laws.
The lawsuit — which is part of a new strategy by FTC Chair Lina Khan to be more forward-looking in antitrust enforcement — is considered a long shot by many legal experts because it involves an acquisition in a nascent market with many startups. In the past, most antitrust court cases involved more mature markets and focused on how a merger can lead to higher prices for consumers.
But Khan has said she plans to prevent the biggest tech platforms from extending their dominance into emerging markets, such as virtual reality. The FTC previously failed to predict problems with mergers between tech companies, Khan has said. In 2012, for instance, the agency approved Facebook’s purchase of Instagram, a deal that facilitated the rise of Facebook into a social media juggernaut.
The FTC lawsuit against Meta was also the first major action against a tech company under Khan, who has vowed to step up scrutiny of corporate executives and hold them to greater account for violations by their companies.
The FTC did not immediately respond to a request for comment, and Meta declined to comment. This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
