The writer and director of new science fiction "Ex Machina" film is optimistic about technology and the future.
In the last few years, I've become increasingly fascinated by artificial intelligence, and in particular our escalating fear of it. It seemed to me that our increasingly holistic relationship with technology and abstract clouds of information was compounding this fear and perhaps edging it into paranoia.
These thoughts were crystallized while I was writing and directing my new film "Ex Machina." It tells the story of a young male coder in a tech company who is given the job of assessing the level of consciousness in a female-presenting robot called Ava. He's bewitched, gives up the day job and starts making plans to elope.
I remember feeling pleased when I hit upon this plot. Robot sentience hadn't really been tackled since Steven Spielberg's "A.I." (2001), which was less interested in artificial intelligence than the title suggested, and the ideas of machine-thinking and human consciousness felt like a rich seam.
So I was dismayed when after submitting the script, I discovered I wasn't alone in writing an A.I. movie. There was "Her" (2013), which tracked a love affair between a man and his computer's sentient operating system. Next was "Transcendence" (2014), in which Johnny Depp uploaded his mind to the Internet. In "Automata" (2014) and "Chappie," this year, servile robots acquired independence. In "Big Hero 6" (2014), an A.I. befriends a boy. And in "Avengers: Age of Ultron," out this spring, a robot tries what we all know they're secretly planning: the destruction of mankind.
Among filmmakers there was an A.I. party going on, to which we at "Ex Machina" were late. Worse yet, someone else had shown up in the same dress. Another film had freakish similarities to ours. It was called "The Machine" and also starred a female-presenting A.I. named Ava. (Initially I wondered if it was an incredibly early porn parody of "Ex Machina" that had missed the more obvious riff of "Sex Machina." But it turned out to be a thoughtful action movie by the Welsh writer-director Caradog James.)
Alongside this sudden preoccupation in the film world, a growing number of public figures began making statements about the inherent danger of A.I. research. The gist was that if mankind wasn't careful, we would code the terms of our own destruction by robot overlords. These are warnings one might expect from a religious perspective, concerned with the godlike aspects of creating sentient life. But interestingly, the warnings were actually coming from the science and tech worlds.
They began as distant thunder. A high-level cognitive robotics researcher told me almost in passing that he was considering telling his children that they should not have children themselves, because he was so concerned about the A.I.-shaped world on our horizon. By the time "Ex Machina" was in postproduction, the thunder was a full-blown lightning storm, with the bright discharges coming from major public figures of our age.
The theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking said that "the development of full artificial intelligence could spell the end of the human race." Elon Musk, the chief executive of Tesla Motors, suggested that A.I. was "potentially more dangerous than nukes." Steve Wozniak, a co-founder of Apple, told us that "computers are going to take over from humans" and that "the future is scary and very bad for people."
With entertainment and science joining forces to spin cautionary tales, it felt very alarming, and very zeitgeist. But it also felt confusing, in that zeitgeist is a response to something. Film production runs in roughly three-year cycles, and if you looked back three years from the glut of A.I.-related releases, you might expect to find an event that had led to the screenplays. Perhaps a Nobel Prize relating to consciousness, or a successful robot project with the profile of the Large Hadron Collider, or Dolly the sheep. But there was nothing. In fact, breakthroughs in A.I. research were either conspicuous by their absence or so nuanced that you would struggle to convince lay people that the breakthrough existed at all. This raised a question: Was A.I. anxiety in part a projected fear of something else? In particular, I wondered if it stemmed from a general disconnect in our relationship with technology.
We have laptops and cellphones and tablets, and most of us don't understand how they work. But the devices seem to understand how we work. They anticipate what we want to say in text messages and search-engine inputs, and know what we want to buy, see and read. This one-way understanding makes us anxious. We locate the anxiety in the machines, which translates as anxiety about A.I.
But there is a mistake here. The machines in question are not strong A.I.'s. They are weak. They have no motivation, no intention; they're neutral. The thing with an agenda is us: consumers, who want to buy the machines, and manufacturers, who want to sell them. And looming over both, giant tech companies, whose growth only ever seems to be exponential, whose practices are opaque, and whose power is both massive and without true oversight. Combine all this with government surveillance and lotus-eating public acquiescence, and it's not the machine component that scares me. It's the human component.
So here is a counterargument, in favor of the machines: In very broad terms, human behavior is frightening when it is unreasonable. And reason might be precisely the area where artificial intelligence excels.
I can imagine a world where machine intelligence runs hospitals and health services, allocating resources more quickly and competently than any human counterpart.
Public works aside, the investigation into strong artificial intelligence might also lead to understanding human consciousness, the most interesting aspect of what we are. This in turn could lead to machines that have our capacity for reason and sentience, but different energy requirements and a different relationship with mortality. That could mean a different future. A longer future. In which case, we could rephrase the warnings of Mr. Hawking and Mr. Wozniak. Where they say that A.I. will spell the end of humans, we could say that one day A.I. will be what survives of us.
