WHEN Richard M. Nixon lost the California gubernatorial race of 1962, he famously (and, as it turned out, prematurely) held a news conference avowing, "You don't have Nixon to kick around anymore."
Fifty years later, he probably would have tweeted it.
The exit strategies of the recently unemployed have taken a new tack: social media is proving to be an outlet for those who decide that they don't want to go quietly. Whether the leave-taking is voluntary or pink-slipped, anyone with a Facebook page, Twitter account or Tumblr feed can issue a very public kiss-off to a former boss or company, abandoning the conventional career advice about not bad-mouthing an employer when leaving a job.
After four years at a hotel in Providence, R.I., Joey DeFrancesco handed in his notice, accompanied by a dozen members of the band in which he plays trumpet, along with a friend to act as a videographer. "My manager really hated me, and I wanted a big send-off," he said. He posted the video on Facebook ("for a few friends who are fellow hotel workers") and uploaded it to YouTube, where it went viral. "The band was playing a Serbian song," he said, "so I'm even a weird minor celebrity in Serbia."
It seems unlikely that Dan Harmon will be working for NBC anytime soon. In May, after he was fired from "Community," the TV comedy he had created, he took to Tumblr contradicting a statement from the network president that implied he would have a continuing role in the show.
"I think he meant to say he's sure cookies are yummy," Mr. Harmon wrote. "Guys like me can't actually just be shot and left in a ditch by Skynet," he added, referring to the artificial intelligence in "The Terminator." "We're still allowed to have a title on the things we create and 'help out,' like, I guess sharpening pencils and stuff."
When Aaron Brown was fired as a CNN anchor, he was contractually precluded from speaking about it for several years. With the muzzle taken off, he was reproachful on The Huffington Post ("I didn't think the viewers were behind me when we did dumb television") and downright cheeky on MediaBistro, where he scoffed: "I know the difference between journalism and a slogan. 'Keeping them honest' is a slogan," a reference to the tagline for "Anderson Cooper 360" on CNN. (To which CNN responded that its coverage "speaks for itself.")
"I clearly took a pop at CNN," said Mr. Brown, who now teaches journalism at Arizona State University. "There was no higher purpose there. When I thought about it, that's not how I wanted to be. I was trying to make a larger point, I think. One of the things I hate about TV is that everything is branded. You turn on two morning shows and see the same interview, but both shows call it 'exclusive.' "
"Leaving a job or being fired is an amazing test of your sense of self," Mr. Brown said, "and you have to think about who you are. I tried to behave nonsnarkily but still wanted to be a part of the conversation. I don't think being snarky makes the snarker look good."
Unsurprisingly, a few denizens of Silicon Valley have engaged in digital bomb-throwing. Google's former engineering director James Whitaker blogged about his last months on the job as "a whirlwind of desperation, trying in vain to get my passion back."
"As I wrote, the process became cathartic," Mr. Whitaker said in an e-mail. "I don't think I fully understood why I left until I wrote it down. Repercussions have been interesting. I have received a lot of praise from many friends who, like me, really miss the Google of old. There are those who are convinced I did it out of spite, and I will never change their mind."
Although some might be concerned about backlash from an employer that is a powerful behemoth, Mr. Whitaker was sanguine. "Free speech isn't a vague concept," he said.
The title of Max Zachariades's blog post at TechCrunch was "Frustration, Disappointment and Apathy: My Years at Microsoft," a screed about the software giant's management style after he was fired. "It was a way to empower myself," he said. "Very often in corporate settings, there is no freedom of expression. I was told that if I took them to court, I wouldn't win -- they were too big. So instead I took the whole thing online. Social media allows a speeding up of karma."
For sheer audacity, nothing beats the financial world, which has engendered a cacophony of tweets from executives who leave with briefcases full of golden-parachute money and seem to notice the industry's problems only when looking back over their shoulders with "Casablanca"-like epiphanies ("I'm shocked, shocked").
Once called the most powerful woman on Wall Street, Sallie Krawcheck took to Twitter this year after being fired from Bank of America, needing far fewer than 140 characters to take satisfying bites from the hand that no longer feeds her. ("More on the theme of big bank complexity: not Too Big to Fail, but Too Complex to Exist?")
The "Sayonara, sucker" postings have spawned their own form of response and retribution. Greg Smith punctuated his departure from Goldman Sachs with an op-ed article in this newspaper about what he characterized as his former firm's "moral bankruptcy." That same day, a British Web site called The Daily Mash published a parody titled "Why I am leaving the Empire" by Darth Vader. ("The Empire today has become too much about shortcuts and not enough about remote strangulation. It just doesn't feel right to me anymore.")
Joshua Brown has some advice for disgruntled Wall Streeters on his blog The Reformed Broker: "Deal with it or leave and open an Etsy store." Mr. Brown spent about a dozen years as a retail stockbroker, only to conclude: "The business is one giant conflict. Even someone who wanted to do right by his clients couldn't."
He is now a registered financial adviser, and his blog, as the name implies, is devoted to illuminating the public about the booby traps of investing. He cheerfully acknowledges the appeal of social media to express regret, disappointment or anger about a former employer.
"Social media is inherently me-centric to begin with -- all about me, where am I going," Mr. Brown said. "But not everyone has to be Jerry Maguire on the way out the door." And social-media ranting begets social consequences. "There are people in my former industry who won't even make eye contact with me," he said.
As a senior vice president at Yahoo, Brad Garlinghouse wrote an internal memo accusing the company of spreading its resources too thinly, like peanut butter on a slice of bread, with a focus "on nothing in particular." As with many "internal" memos, the Peanut Butter Manifesto, as it came to be called, found a wide online audience, although Mr. Garlinghouse points out that he waited two more years before exiting.
"I'm generally opposed to the 'rant' or scorched earth approach when leaving a job," he wrote in an e-mail. But he pointed out what he calls "a big delta" between a genuine effort to identify problems and come up with solutions versus telling your boss off on the way out the door.
There is an ultimate homage to the idea of job-ending nose-thumbing on YouTube: a video featuring a young woman holding a succession of placards that trash her boss, starting with "I quit," moving on to "I put up with your temper and your bad breath because I wanted to be a broker," and finally outing him for spending "19.7 hours per week playing Farmville."
The video turned out to be a hoax, perpetrated by a group of punksters at a site called The Chive. But they missed an opportunity. Instead of an annoying ticking clock as the soundtrack, they could have used Don Henley's "My Thanksgiving," which surely expresses the appropriate sentiment: "Sometimes you get the best light from a burning bridge."
AuthorAffiliation AIMEE LEE BALL Aimee Lee Ball writes for numerous national magazines and is a co-author of four books, including "No Time to Die."
Photograph Photo
