ABC and CNN gear up for the Games. CBS airs the season premiere of the reality competition show.
For those who still enjoy a cable subscription, here is a selection of cable and network TV shows, movies and specials that broadcast this week, July 15-21. Details and times are subject to change.
Monday
THE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL CONVENTION starting at 8 p.m. on various channels. Republican delegates will be gathering in Milwaukee through Thursday to nominate the party's candidate for president. Former President Donald Trump is the only candidate since Nikki Haley, Ron DeSantis and Vivek Ramaswamy dropped out of the race. The Democratic National Convention will be held in mid-August.
Tuesday
CATFISH 8 p.m. on MTV. Nev Schulman and Kamie Crawford have another successful season in the books after doing what they do best -- catching people who are lying about who they are online. And it truly never gets old -- anyone who watches the show can immediately tell you their favorite episode (mine is a tie between the infamous Kelly Price one or the one with the slow-clapper on crutches).
Wednesday
BIG BROTHER 9 p.m. on CBS. As "Love Island USA" is wrapping up its run this year, this prototypical reality show is coming back for its 26th season. In a somewhat haunting, "Black Mirror" type twist, the theme will be artificial intelligence, or what the producers are referring to as "B.B.A.I." In the newly redone house, each room is designed based on a prompt like "sci-fi rocky planet setting" or "futuristic bedroom for the year 2500." I'm a little creeped out, but at least it's inventive.
WILD WILD SPACE 9 p.m. on HBO. With the rom-com "Fly Me to the Moon" newly released and the 55th anniversary of the lunar landing looming, the moon is on our minds. But, as this documentary points out, the new and more valuable frontier is low Earth orbit. This area, at an altitude of 1,200 miles or less, could serve as the future of communication, transportation and observation. This documentary follows Chris Kemp and Peter Beck and their rocket companies, which are competing to be the overlord of L.E.O.
Thursday
LUCKY 13 9 p.m. on ABC. If you enjoy going to your local bar and playing a round of trivia (may I recommend Bravo trivia at Vacations Bar in Bushwick?), then this is the show for you. Hosted by Gina Rodriguez and Shaquille O'Neal, this game show asks contestants to answer 13 trivia questions -- with an added layer. If contestants can guess how well they are going to do in the game before they play, they could be walking home with $ 1 million.
Friday
AMERICAN PIE (1999) 5:30 p.m. on Bravo. "This one time, at band camp ..." I decided to watch this raunchy classic. The film, which went on to have three sequels, follows a group of four close friends who make it their mission to lose their virginity before they graduate from high school. Though Jason Biggs, Chris Klein, Thomas Ian Nicholas and Eddie Kaye Thomas make up the main cast, it's cameos from Eugene Levy and (most importantly) Jennifer Coolidge that really make the movie memorable.
INSPIRING AMERICA: TEAM USA 8 p.m. on NBC. As Paris is preparing to host thousands of athletes just a couple of weeks from now (including working to make it possible to swim in the Seine), this special can get us in the Summer Olympics spirit. NBC News anchors and reporters are sitting down with Olympic athletes, including Simone Biles, LeBron James, Katie Ledecky and Coco Gauff, to discuss their experiences at the Games and their hopes for the coming competition.
Saturday
LOVE LIES BLEEDING (2024) 8 p.m. on HBO. This movie stars Kristen Stewart as Lou, a gym manager, who falls in love with Jackie (Katy O'Brian), a body builder with dreams of winning a competition in Las Vegas. From there things get a little unhinged. "What happens is hot, yummy stuff, but romances like these need something to get in their way, whether it's a bag of loot, a jealous ex or just a contrivance," Manohla Dargis wrote in her review for The New York Times. "This movie obliges with violence, lots of guns, spooky flashbacks and a classic villain, played by a fantastic Ed Harris with a sneer and an epically terrible wig."
Sunday
HOW IT REALLY HAPPENED: THE ATLANTA OLYMPIC BOMBING 9 p.m. on CNN. In 1996, the Summer Olympic Games took place in Atlanta. Eight days into the Games, a pipe bomb blast killed one person and injured 111. The CNN series "How It Really Happened," hosted by Jesse L. Martin, is back to unpack the events of that day.
THE MIGHTY DUCKS (1992) 9 p.m. on ABC. As most of the country is absolutely sweltering, and has been for the past couple of weeks, on the small screen, George Bombay (Emilio Estevez) is in snowy and cold Minneapolis, though he's not exactly being chill. An unpleasant, win-at-all-costs lawyer, he has been sentenced to community service as the coach of a peewee hockey team. What starts as a depressing look at adulthood ends with the satisfaction that perseverance and grit can bring.
Photograph Craig Melvin and LeBron James on "Inspiring America: Team USA." (PHOTOGRAPH BY NBC NEWS); "Wild, Wild Space" looks at the future frontier of low Earth orbit. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HBO)
