8 P.M. (CNN) IN AMERICA: NEW ORLEANS RISING Five years after Hurricane Katrina ravaged New Orleans, Soledad O'Brien reports on the rebuilding of Pontchartrain Park, a largely black middle-class neighborhood born out of segregation, which had one of the lowest rates of returning homeowners after the storm. This special follows the actor Wendell Pierce -- a star of HBO's "Treme," who evacuated his elderly parents (above with Mr. Pierce at left) from their Pontchartrain home before Katrina -- as he battles red tape, financing and reluctant residents to lead a charge to return his childhood community to its former glory, despite no experience as a developer. Ms. O'Brien also visits two families: Hurby Oubre, who is committed to staying in the neighborhood, and his wife, Lisa, who, seeing no possibility of returning, has moved to Baton Rouge with her son; and Meldon and Audrey Woods, who have taken out a loan they fear they will never be able to repay in order to rebuild their home. Lisa P. Jackson, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, who grew up in Pontchartrain Park, and the former New Orleans mayor Ray Nagin weigh in. The jazz trumpeter Terence Blanchard, who called the neighborhood home as a child, composed and performed the program's theme music.
10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Kim Lawton looks at a kidney exchange program in which donors who are not a match for a friend or family member can give a kidney to someone else, in exchange for a compatible kidney for their loved one. Lucky Severson interviews the inventor Ray Kurzweil, who believes that artificial intelligence will surpass human intelligence by 2050, leading to a hybrid of man and technology.
NOON (13) RICHARD HEFFNER'S OPEN MIND In a rebroadcast of a 1990 program, David Brown, the author, editor and stage and film producer perhaps best known for movies like "The Sting," "Jaws" and "Driving Miss Daisy," discusses his books "Brown's Guide to Growing Gray" and "Let Me Entertain You." Mr. Brown died on Feb. 1 at 93.
8 P.M. (HBO) THE INFORMANT! (2009) In Steven Soderbergh's retelling of a real-life whodunit reported in a book (and for The New York Times) by Kurt Eichenwald, Matt Damon, right, adds some pounds and a prosthetic nose to play Mark Whitacre, a biochemist and Archer Daniels Midland executive, who informs on his company in a global price-fixing scheme. Scott Bakula and Joel McHale are the F.B.I. agents who become so protective of Whitacre that they carry around a picture of his family after wiring up his body and briefcase. "Like all of Mr. Soderbergh's movies, this one can be appreciated on purely formal terms, for the clarity of its images and the economy of the storytelling," Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. "But it is Mr. Soderbergh's insistence on seeing the A.D.M. scandal as a collective tragedy rather than as another white-collar crime that gives the movie force, resonance, feeling. In the face of such corruption perhaps only laughter will do: after all, for a while now the joke has most definitely been on us."
9 P.M. (Lifetime) CONFINED (2010) After losing her job and suffering a mental breakdown, Victoria Peyton (Emma Caulfield) relocates to suburbia with her husband, Michael (David James Elliott), where she starts to suspect that her next-door neighbor (Michael Hogan) is holding a young woman captive in his basement. But is Victoria simply losing her mind?
9 P.M. (Syfy) LAKE PLACID 3 (2010) A game warden (Colin Ferguson, "Eureka") moves his family to Lake Placid, once home to killer crocs. The locals say the man-eaters are gone. But the warden's son has discovered some baby crocodiles -- and he's feeding them. "Lake Placid 2" leads in at 7.
10 P.M. (Cinemax) WHIP IT (2009) Ellen Page, left, plays Bliss Cavendar, a Texas teenager rebelling against the beauty pageant dreams of her mother (Marcia Gay Harden) in this directorial debut from Drew Barrymore. And what better way than to become a roller derby girl, with a nifty new name: Babe Ruthless? Ms. Barrymore also appears as Smashley Simpson, one of Bliss's sharp-elbowed teammates, alongside Kristen Wiig (as Maggie Mayhem), Juliet Lewis (Iron Maven) and the rapper Eve (Rosa Sparks). " 'Whip It' has an easygoing spirit, a lightness of touch in spite of occasional excursions into melodrama, that makes it hard to mock and easy to like," A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. "It will not change the way you think about movies, roller derby or the relations between teenage girls and their mothers, friends or dreams. But it does invite you to stop and appreciate all those things." KATHRYN SHATTUCK

Photograph Photos
