Bill Hader stars as a hit man yearning for a new life in "Barry." And Stormy Daniels breaks her silence on "60 Minutes."
What's on TV
BARRY 10:30 p.m. on HBO. One week removed from a triumphant return to "Saturday Night Live," Bill Hader kick-starts a new era of his career with "Barry." He plays a weary and tightly wound hit man who learned the skills of the trade in Afghanistan. But when he digs into the life of his next mark, an aspiring actor, he finds a passion for acting bubbling to the surface, and begins to take classes, much to the chagrin of his handler. "You don't expect this comedy to find its target in the way it does," James Poniewozik wrote about this series in his New York Times review; he named it a Critic's Pick.
GREAT PERFORMANCES AT THE MET 12 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Last fall, the Met Opera was besieged by live sheep, ghostly violins, slamming doors and shattering dishes in Thomas Adès's "The Exterminating Angel." "This riveting, breathless, score -- full of quick-cutting shifts, pointillist bursts, and episodes of ballistic intensity -- may be his best work," Anthony Tommasini wrote in his Times review. The opera, inspired by the classic Luis Buñuel film of the same name, follows a hellish dinner party, where the guests find themselves unable to leave; the opera includes the highest note ever sung at the Met.
60 MINUTES 7 p.m. on CBS. The sordid tale of the president and the pornographic film actress hits its next chapter as Stephanie Clifford, who goes by the stage name Stormy Daniels, sits down with Anderson Cooper to recount a relationship with Donald J. Trump in 2006 and 2007. (The interview took place in spite of a nondisclosure agreement, which she claims is void, and in spite of a threat of an injunction.)
LEAVING EARTH: OR HOW TO COLONIZE A PLANET 8 p.m. on Smithsonian Channel. One of Stephen Hawking's last television projects is an exploration of his assertion that humans must leave Earth to survive -- and should devise an escape plan within the next 100 years. "It could be a new virus, climate change, nuclear war, artificial intelligence gone rogue: We must use your curiosity and intelligence to look to the stars," he says in this special. He and other scientists examine the various facets of how we might make the leap -- from a plasma-powered rocket engine to giant greenhouses to NASA's "robot army."
CALL THE MIDWIFE 8 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). This British import has unflinchingly portrayed childbirth in all its messy glory for six seasons. It's more than a medical show, though, with the almost exclusively female ensemble cast weaving deep relationships and tackling social issues like abortion, incest and racism. The seventh season kicks off with two back-to-back episodes as the midwives of the Nonnatus House continue to endure the brutal winter of 1963 and await the arrival of a new midwife.
Photograph Bill Hader (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN P. JOHNSON/HBO); Stormy Daniels and Anderson Cooper (PHOTOGRAPH BY CBS NEWS/60 MINUTES); A scene from "Call the Midwife." (PHOTOGRAPH COURTESY OF NEAL STREET PRODUCTIONS 2017)
