Are Democrats and independents truly souring on President Biden's re-election bid, as some recent polls suggest, or are they blowing off steam before coming home to back him in 2024? And why do so many of his past supporters, especially younger and nonwhite voters, seem shaky on him now, judging him to be a decent man with good policies but not the leader they want for four more years?
For our latest Times Opinion focus group, we wanted to dig into the ambivalence and skepticism about Mr. Biden and whether it was sufficiently strong to cause some voters to flip to a Republican or third-party candidate in 2024 (or to forgo casting a ballot entirely). We convened a cross section of 11 Americans who voted for him in 2020 and may be leaning toward or against him but haven't firmly decided for 2024.
We tried to get creative with some of our questions -- "If you were to describe the state of America as a weather forecast, what would it be?" -- along with probing how Mr. Biden aligned with what these voters want most. Perhaps the most surprising answers came when we asked the 11 if they saw Mr. Biden as a strong leader and as someone who shared their values.
If anything, this focus group underscored that Mr. Biden has vulnerabilities and that at least some Democrats and independents are open to other Democrats challenging him for the nomination. But therein lies a danger: If he is a relatively weak candidate for re-election in the eyes of his own party, a Democrat who challenges him could be blamed if he ends up a bruised, even weaker nominee who goes on to lose in the general election.
For now, many of these 11 voters seemed inclined to back him as the lesser of two evils -- a phrase we heard time and again during the conversation. Donnia, a 62-year-old Black independent from Illinois, said of Mr. Biden, "I think he may be slow and a camel and a sloth and all of that, but I think that he would be the better option than Trump or DeSantis -- the G.O.P., period." If you were giving the weather forecast for how things are going in America, what would you say? Ken: Icy, stormy. We're headed in the wrong direction.
Donnia: Cloudy with a chance of tick, tick, boom. There's going to be an outer force of danger that is going to unite us, kind of like 9/11 did. The pendulum has to swing the other way.
Chris: Very cloudy with a chance of a heavy downpour and maybe a tornado.
Moderator: What's the tornado?
Chris: The rising prices of everything, from food to gas to oil.
Vikranth: I would use the same descriptions that everyone else did. But even with things that caused a big uproar, like the court ruling around abortion, I feel like everything's been pretty stagnant over the last four years.
Max: Scattered showers. But I do feel like people have a tendency to think that everything is bad at a given time. History has been a lot worse. We're due for some clear weather at some time soon.
Moderator: Is there something making you feel optimistic or hopeful?
Jahnique: Our parents and previous generations have a kind of a hush-hush attitude with conflicts within either the community or the country. But now we are able to speak on it and call things out and have an open dialogue.
Vikranth: I agree with Jahnique. Open dialogue has gotten a lot better. I'm also optimistic about artificial intelligence.
Nick: If everybody's being pushed so far left or right on all these issues, maybe there'll start to be a resurgence of people in the middle and more of a common understanding.
Marquita: Right, the level of the country's consciousness has grown. We are more aware of how our actions and behaviors affect each other. That doesn't mean we always make the right decisions, but if we have more people being more conscious about how we affect each other, that can inform our future decisions and behaviors. We now have a very clear picture of how we affect our environment, for example.
Moderator: What is one word you would use to describe how you feel about the November 2024 presidential election?
Milan: Is "[EXPLETIVE] show" one word or two? How about "circus"?
Claudia: Anxious.
Chris: Apprehensive.
Vikranth: Scared.
Ken: Eager.
Marquita: Confused.
Max: Geriatric.
Donnia: Defeated.
Chris: Not sure what to expect. Is Biden going to run again? He's old and showing signs of not being all there. Trump? I just have no idea why these guys in their mid-to-late 70s would want to be president of the United States. Just go off and retire somewhere. I'm not even 55, and I can't wait to retire. I don't know what these guys are thinking.
Donnia: With the current candidates that we have, I don't think that anyone is really interested in solving the problems of our country.
Milan: Democrats have decided that Joe Biden's the only candidate. On the other side, they seem to be trying to one-up each other on every conservative issue possible. It's insane between Trump and DeSantis. Even my own governor in New Hampshire, Sununu, who's seemed relatively normal, is starting to pick up culture war issues. For what reason? He's not going to ever have a chance. It is possible, even likely, that the 2024 election will be a rematch between Donald Trump and Joe Biden. How would you feel about that? Jahnique: Like Nick said, it would basically be just choosing the lesser of two evils. That is a direct consequence of the two-party system. You have no choice. You can either vote for one or the other or you cannot make your voice heard by picking a third party.
Marquita: A rematch would cause a lot of people to disengage from the process. You'll have a lot of people questioning our democracy or democracy as a whole. There's going to be a lot of people who, if we had good candidates, would go out and vote who, this time around, just don't really care. No matter who wins, it's going to feed into a lot of extremist views.
Milan: I feel like all progressives, in general, have been left behind by the Democratic Party and definitely by the Republican Party. We just would like to see the country move forward and not be regressive on social values or have a side of corporatism. That's all we have, it seems.
Moderator: You are all in this group because you voted for Joe Biden in 2020. That does not mean that you love what he's done or that you support him now. It just means you voted for him in 2020. So why did you vote for Joe Biden in the 2020 election?
Claudia: It really was the lesser of two evils. It felt like the only thing I could do.
Ken: I just couldn't stomach Trump.
Chris: I hate to say it, but pretty much the same reason.
Donnia: I didn't vote for Biden. I voted against Trump.
Moderator: Why don't you think Joe Biden shares your values?
Claudia: I just feel like politicians align with what most of the country believes. So really, I can't be sure what any politician's real, true values are.
Donnia: Biden is a corporate elitist that camouflages himself as a regular guy.
Moderator: How do you think Joe Biden has performed as president, relative to your expectations when we had the 2020 election?
Milan: I honestly didn't expect too much to get done. He did pass the Inflation Reduction Act. And then not a whole lot since, because it's hard to get things done in the Senate, and then he lost the House.
Marquita: Similar to that, I didn't have high expectations for him. I knew that he was going to dampen some of the tension that was going on in the country. And he has done that. I just didn't want it to get worse, and I can't say it's worse than it was before.
Nick: One of the things I disliked about Trump was I felt he was an embarrassment for how he handled himself. And I hoped Biden would represent better. But now I feel embarrassed for how Biden represents our country to the rest of the world.
Ken: I expected Biden to be more of a leader, since he's a career politician, to be able to reach more across the aisle and bring more people to his camp so that he would be able to accomplish more. He has failed in that regard.
Moderator: When President Biden announced that he is going to run for re-election, did any of you have positive reactions to that?
Donnia: I think that that calms me a little bit, more than if Trump were to be president again. I'll take four more years of Biden than to have what America stands for be taken away. I'll take four more years of Biden in exchange for democracy continuing and the Constitution being our backbone.
Ken: I was hoping that he would not announce that he was running again. I was hoping for a new phase. But having said that, if it's between him and Trump, I would vote for Joe Biden again.
Moderator: President Biden also announced that Vice President Kamala Harris will be on his ticket as his running mate for 2024. How do you feel about his decision to run with Harris as his vice president again?
Milan: Who? I didn't know he had a V.P.
Jahnique: Vice presidents don't really have official jobs. They're just like presidents in waiting, essentially. So stick with what worked, I guess, is his approach. She's an ornament, like just about all vice presidents are. She's a nice ornament.
Marquita: I think that it's a smart move on his part. It legitimizes his campaign. He needs the female vote. He needs the people of color vote. I think that it's the best thing for him to do to stand a chance at really winning. But I do wonder if part of why he is running again is to provide Kamala a nice pathway to the presidency. She would never win in an actual election. So just strategically speaking, it makes sense. But it doesn't make me feel any more optimistic about the job that either of them will do. What has President Biden done that you have been the happiest about? Nick: Man, I'd have to think about this one for a little bit.
Sana: I also need a second to think about it.
Marquita: Student loan forgiveness is something that is going to benefit me and almost every adult that I know. And so I think that that's a good hill to die on.
Milan: I was going to say student loan forgiveness as well. But my next one will be not backing down over the debt ceiling and gutting a lot of the social services and things for veterans out there that Republicans apparently want to cut.
Nick: Infrastructure spending. We need a lot of that. I don't think he did enough, but at least he did something.
Moderator: What about the flip side? What are some issues where maybe he hasn't done a very good job, or what's something that he has done that has frustrated you?
Jahnique: Climate change. He sold us the dream about the whole climate change situation, and then he approved that project in Alaska for oil. He's doing things to say that he's followed through with this plan, but he's not actually executing his promises.
Chris: I'd say two things. The first is probably giving too much money to the war in Ukraine. And the second thing is when the oil prices skyrocketed, I don't think he opened up the reserves soon enough.
Max: I wish that he was able to protect women's health and abortion rights more. And I don't know if that necessarily was his fault or if he could have done more.
Donnia: I'm disappointed about the border. I'm originally from Texas, and I'm not saying, "Build the wall." That was ridiculous. But I do think that the border issue is something that is going to affect us. Here, in Illinois and Chicago, they've been busing a lot of immigrants -- or refugees, I can call them, because they're fleeing something -- to this area. I don't know that we're getting any help, and it's depleting a lot of our resources.
Sana: I know inflation is not his fault, but because he is the leader of the country, I wish he would do something.
Nick: There's not enough being done to help shoulder some of these increases. When you see these other companies posting record profits, that's concerning to me. Continuing to line the pockets of the elite while everyone else is struggling is not OK.
Moderator: Everyone has been pretty tough in terms of how you see Biden. But I do wonder, in the end, if you're going to vote for him.
Ken: Yes, I would vote for him again.
Max: Yeah. The people on the right are just so far right that -- I don't know. I feel like I'm just trying to vote for someone who's more in the center, and that would be Biden, even though that's not who I really want to vote for. But so, yes, I would, and I will do it, unfortunately.
Claudia: I'd vote against Trump or DeSantis. So if those are my choices, then, again, just the lesser of two evils.
Moderator: Claudia, is there a way Biden could become not the lesser of two evils but someone who you'd feel excited about?
Claudia: I don't think so, at this point, because it's not like he's coming in fresh. He's had four years. So we've already seen what he can do or the lack of what he's done.
Vikranth: I agree with everyone else.
Marquita: The only way that I would happily vote for Biden is if DeSantis ran against him. I live in Florida, so I have a lot of visibility into how he works, and I absolutely don't want him to be the president. If it were a Biden versus Trump, I just wouldn't vote. If the last eight years have shown me anything, it's really that votes don't matter as much as we would like to think they do.
Moderator: Marquita, do you regret voting for Biden in 2020 instead of voting for Trump?
Marquita: No. I disagree with Trump on almost all social issues, but I tend to be a bit more conservative financially. We would have been too vulnerable on the world stage if Trump would have been elected again. So that's not to say that I feel safe with Trump at the helm.
Donnia: I would never not vote. I would vote for Biden again versus the G.O.P., just because I don't even know what they stand for anymore. He may be slow, but he would be the better option than Trump or DeSantis -- the G.O.P., period.
Moderator: Is there anyone who regrets voting for Biden in 2020, given the choices that you had? [No one raised a hand.]
