COMPANIES
Peloton's C.E.O. Is Leaving Amid Planned Layoffs
Peloton said on Thursday that its chief executive, Barry McCarthy, was stepping down and that it would lay off more workers, as it continued to struggle in the fitness market.
The connected-fitness company announced disappointing quarterly earnings on Thursday, with revenue down 4 percent from last year. The company, which has not turned a profit since December 2020, is also looking to refinance more than $ 1 billion in debt.
Peloton had a spectacular rise at the start of the pandemic, when gyms and fitness centers closed and consumers were hungry for at-home workout options. But after gyms reopened, Peloton began to face stiffer competition.
It is reducing its head count by 15 percent, or 400 workers, in an effort to cut its costs by $ 200 million by June 2025. Peloton has had several other rounds of job cuts in the past couple of years, most recently in October 2022, when it laid off about 12 percent of employees, or about 500 people.
"Hard as the decision has been to make additional head count cuts, Peloton simply had no other way to bring its spending in line with its revenue," Mr. McCarthy said in a statement.
Investors appeared optimistic about the news; Peloton's stock price rose about 9 percent in premarket trading.
The company said it was looking to reduce its retail footprint and instead invest in "software, hardware and content portfolio and in improvements" for paying subscribers.
Mr. McCarthy, a former Spotify and Netflix executive, joined Peloton in February 2022, taking over from the company's founder, John Foley. Two board members, Karen Boone and Chris Bruzzo, will serve as interim co-chief executives. J. EDWARD MORENO
ENTERTAINMENT
Universal Music Group Exceeds Earnings Forecast
Universal Music Group on Thursday reported first-quarter earnings that comfortably beat expectations, helped by the record-breaking success of its star act Taylor Swift.
UMG executive were also upbeat about the label's new deal with TikTok, also announced on Thursday, which settled a dispute over artist pay and helped address wider artificial intelligence concerns in the industry.
UMG, the world's biggest music label, posted adjusted core earnings of 591 million euros ( $ 632.6 million), up 15.9 percent year-on-year and above the 567 million euros expected by analysts in a Visible Alpha consensus shared by the company.
Swift's commercial success has boosted the group's earnings through royalties from streaming, album sales and concert tickets.
Taylor's Eras Tour, consisting of 152 shows across five continents, has generated more than $ 1 billion in ticket sales, making it the world's highest-grossing concert tour. And her new album, released in April, is dominating the charts.
Other top sellers in the quarter were Noah Kahan, Ariana Grande and Olivia Rodrigo, UMG said.
Earlier on Thursday, UMG and TikTok said they had reached a new licensing agreement that will restore the label's songs and artists to the social media platform. REUTERS
Credit: By Reuters
Illustration
