He spoke English. She spoke Spanish. After the couple was set up on a blind date, an A.I.-powered lip-dubbing app helped them form a connection.
In June, LeRoy Romero drove four hours from his hometown, Peoria, Ariz., to an Applebee's in Mexicali, Mexico, to meet Brenda Ochoa for the first time.
It was a blind date, set up by a mutual friend who had sensed a potential match. Going in, Mr. Romero, who works as a mortgage loan originator, knew that he found Ms. Ochoa, a 29-year-old casino dealer, attractive and that she was significantly taller than him. He also foresaw one minor issue: Mr. Romero didn't speak Spanish, Ms. Ochoa's native language. And she did not speak English.
As they shared a margarita, Mr. Romero suggested they use translator apps like Google Translate and DeepL Translate to get to know each other. Acting as their interlocutors, the apps inadvertently created less small talk. The couple talked about their inspirations and where they saw themselves in one, three and five years from now. "I felt it was nice without all the useless chatter," Mr. Romero, 45, said.
But later that month, Mr. Romero realized there might be an even easier way to communicate. At work, Mr. Romero uses an app called Captions to create videos and answer questions for clients. The app uses artificial intelligence to help users edit and record videos, as well as write scripts and add captions. He recalled his friend nudging him to test the app on Ms. Ochoa, saying, "Dude, you got a translation button. Translate, send her a video."'
Like HeyGen, Verbalate and Zeebra, which debuted similar software last year and have attracted millions in venture capital investments, Captions allows users to not only add captions to their videos but to translate, lip-dub and add subtitles as well, giving users the ability to sync audio and lip movements to a target language, such as Spanish, Hindi, Italian or Japanese. The lip-dub feature, which is also a stand-alone app, can imitate a person's natural lip movements and echo his or her pitch and tone. That means a video of Mr. Romero can look and sound just like him -- it would just be in Spanish.
4:02 p.m. Swoosh. Message sent.
Technology has long mediated communication with romantic interests and potential suitors. Sliding into DMs, swiping right and exchanging an endless stream of messages throughout the day has become the norm. While some are wary of letting A.I. into their love lives, others have begun to embrace it, using chatbots to draft love letters and alleviate the tedium of online dating. Some experts say stories like Mr. Romero and Ms. Ochoa's could become more common.
"When people go, 'Oh, my, we're dating in an A.I. world -- I'm like, 'Well, who hasn't used Google Translate?"' said Julie Spira, a cyber dating expert and the author of the memoir "The Perils of Cyber-Dating." "And so I think that A.I. is part of the dating tool kit."
As a dating coach who has studied the intersection of love and technology and been in the industry for 30 years, Ms. Spira has watched the digital dating scene shift to include tech in new ways, such as with A.I.-powered dating apps and platforms that enlist A.I. to help users choose better photos.
"I think finding love is a combination of suggestion, through A.I. -- whatever form of A.I. you'd like to use -- and intuition, trusting your gut," she said. "We need to realize that just like online dating is no longer online dating -- it's just dating. A.I. dating is also going to be known just as dating, because it's already in use throughout the dating apps."
Mr. Romero visits Ms. Ochoa in Mexico about once a month. But when they're apart, the A.I.-powered app transports Ms. Ochoa to Mr. Romero's kitchen or to a wrestling tournament as he coaches his teenage son. They exchange messages on WhatsApp and video chat as Ms. Ochoa gets ready for work. In addition to the lip-dub feature, Ms. Ochoa will often use her iPad to translate their tête-à-tête, while Mr. Romero uses the Timekettle WT2 Edge -- earbuds with two-way simultaneous translation that help him follow a conversation in real time.
Because their work hours differ, Ms. Ochoa is usually working while Mr. Romero is sleeping. "But in the morning, it's always, 'Good morning, love,' accompanied by a video from LeRoy wishing me a good day," she said.
The tech apps aren't always perfect -- but Mr. Romero said sometimes that was a good thing.
"There's no retakes unless you shoot the video several times," Mr. Romero said of the lip-dubbing app. "I think it brings out the perfect imperfections of communication, and I think it helps you grow."
In October, Mr. Romero sent a new translated video message -- this time to Ms. Ochoa's grandmother, seeking her blessing before asking Ms. Ochoa to marry him in person. Shedding his A.I. helpers, Mr. Romero said he meticulously memorized Spanish phrases for weeks leading up to the engagement. They're planning a wedding for this summer in Rosarito, Mexico.
They realize they will probably not rely on A.I. tools forever: The couple have also begun helping each other learn Spanish and English the old-fashioned way. "I try to teach him five flashcards a day when he's with me," Ms. Ochoa said. "He'll tell me, 'No, four -- no, three. And I'm like, 'No -- five!"'
In a joint interview this month, the couple chatted in both languages, occasionally pausing to make sure they were on the same page -- and so Mr. Romero could offer a "te amo" to Ms. Ochoa.
Haniyeh Mahmoudian, a global A.I. ethicist at DataRobot, a firm that helps companies develop and use artificial intelligence, said it was important to understand the bounds of the technology.
It's a "misconception to assume A.I. is infallible," she said. "A.I. lip-dubbing tools, like any technology, have their limitations and errors."
She said it was worth keeping in mind, as it was possible that more people would "place greater trust in A.I. algorithms to determine compatible partners, basing these decisions on A.I.'s judgment of how potential dates communicate and other subtle traits identified by the technology."
In Ms. Ochoa and Mr. Romero's case, technology is only part of the equation. The rest, they said, comes down to chemistry and putting in the work on their relationship.
"It's not complicated," Ms. Ochoa said. "We have many methods that we use to communicate, and that makes it easier."
Illustration
