The Silicon Valley congressman is spending his time going to 15 state delegation breakfasts and maybe, just maybe, laying groundwork for higher office.
As Representative Ro Khanna of California left a Michigan delegation breakfast this week after giving a brief speech, he was humble about the impression he had made.
The attendees, he had noticed, were "clearly more interested in their breakfast than any of the speakers."
But one of his lines, he noted happily, had drawn a favorable reaction: "Donald Trump, in four years, how many new factories came up in those four years in Michigan?"
"Zero!" the crowd responded.
"My big focus is trying to make the economic case for the Harris-Walz ticket," Mr. Khanna said, holding a cup of coffee as he waited for a Lyft to whisk him to his next stop. He added, "I use these state breakfasts to see how I can build on that economic message."
Over two hours on Tuesday morning, Mr. Khanna offered a snapshot into the life of a busy, well-known Democrat at the party's national convention in Chicago. His eventful schedule showed the behind-the-scenes rigors of climbing the political ladder, with elected officials laboriously rehearsing their stump speeches and retail skills away from the limelight.
Mr. Khanna's whirlwind morning took him next to speak at breakfasts for the Nevada and New Hampshire delegations, where he snapped photos, signed a copy of his book, "Progressive Capitalism," and lingered to chat with attendees until a harried staff member ushered him away to an interview. Earlier, he had spoken with Abbas Alawieh, an "uncommitted" delegate from Michigan and a founder of a protest group representing Democratic primary voters who opposed President Biden over his stance on the war in Gaza.
Mr. Khanna, who served as a chair of Senator Bernie Sanders's 2020 presidential campaign and represents a wealthy and influential district that encompasses much of Silicon Valley, seemed invigorated by all the activity.
For an ambitious Democrat like him, conventions mean that breakfast is certainly the most important meal of the day.
He planned to attend 15 morning gatherings of state delegations throughout the week, he said, as well as a host of progressive panels, Asian American events and late-night parties. "I love it," he said simply. "It's energizing."
Mr. Khanna, a four-term congressman who emerged as a sort of unofficial mediator between Mr. Biden's campaign and pro-Palestinian activists this year, insisted that his main goal was helping his party win in November.
But he is also burnishing his own image, and he did not dismiss the frequent speculation that he aspires to higher office. He has flirted with running for Senate and is often mentioned as a future presidential candidate.
"What role I play in the future in the party depends a whole lot on, do we win the House majority?" he said. "Can I play a role as a chair of an important committee? Do we, hopefully, win the presidency?"
He added, "But I think that the key is that I want to have my ideas out there, influencing the party, influencing our national leadership."
And he has a lot of ideas.
He hopes Vice President Kamala Harris will put more pressure on Israel to end the war than Mr. Biden did, likening her to Hubert Humphrey, Lyndon B. Johnson's vice president, who broke with Mr. Johnson over the war in Vietnam after the president dropped his re-election bid and he became the party's nominee.
Closer to home, Mr. Khanna wants to make it easier to distribute the wealth and innovation of Silicon Valley across the nation. He is also focused on the regulation of artificial intelligence and protecting workers' jobs from automation.
During the Lyft ride, Mr. Khanna suggested he was one of the few members of Congress who actually uses generative artificial intelligence tools like ChatGPT.
He provided an example of how he puts them to work, using his phone to ask ChatGPT who won the lone electoral vote from Nebraska's Second Congressional District in 2020. It was Mr. Biden.
Photograph Representative Ro Khanna of California speaking at a breakfast for Michigan's convention delegation on Tuesday in Chicago. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KENNY HOLSTON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
