HOUSING
Sales of New Homes Rebounded in March
Sales of new homes surged 20.7 percent in March to the highest level since 2006, rebounding from a sharp decline the previous month when severe winter storms wreaked havoc in many parts of the country.
Sales climbed to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.02 million last month after a 16.2 percent tumble in February, the Commerce Department reported on Friday. It was the fastest pace for new home sales since the housing boom of the mid-2000s when sales reached 1.04 million units in August 2006.
The median sales price of a new home sold in March was $ 330,800, up only 0.8 percent from the median sales price a year ago.
The big jump in new home sales stands in contrast to sales of existing homes, which fell for a second consecutive month in March, a drop that was blamed on a lack of supply which has pushed exiting home prices to new highs.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
AUTOMOBILES
Daimler's Profit Jumps Amid the Global Recovery
Daimler A.G. on Friday said net profit rebounded strongly to 4.4 billion euros ( $ 5.3 billion) in the first three months of the year, as the global economic recovery and demand for the company's lineup of luxury vehicles in China fattened the bottom line.
The German automaker raised its outlook for an important measure of profitability this year, saying that it now expected profit of 10 percent to 12 percent on sales of its Mercedes-Benz cars, up from an outlook for 8 percent to 10 percent. Strong profits on conventional vehicles are key to funding the huge investments in new technologies such as electric cars and digital services that are shaking up the auto industry.
The first-quarter profit compared to the 168 million euros scraped out in the first quarter of 2020, when the company shut factories and shifted into preservation mode as the pandemic began.
Daimler AG revenue rose 10 percent to 41.0 billion euros as sales at the Mercedes-Benz car business jumped 15 percent to 538,869. ASSOCIATED PRESS
COMPANIES
Panasonic Will Acquire Software Firm Blue Yonder
In its biggest acquisition in a decade, Panasonic on Friday said it would buy U.S. supply-chain software company Blue Yonder in a deal worth $ 7.1 billion, to tap growing demand from companies as the pandemic tests their resilience to disruption.
The Japanese electronics manufacturer, which bought a 20 percent stake in Blue Yonder for 86 billion yen ( $ 797 million) last year, will acquire the rest of the stock from shareholders including Blackstone Group and New Mountain Capital in an agreement, including debt, that values Blue Yonder at $ 8.5 billion, the company said in a news release.
Panasonic deepened its partnership with Blue Yonder in May, gaining a seat on its board after acquiring a minority stake. The U.S. company uses machine learning to help companies manage supply chains that connect factories to warehouses and retailers. REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY RALPH ORLOWSKI/REUTERS)
