We would probably be kidding ourselves if we treated President Trump's imposition of sweeping new tariffs on China as motivated by some grand ideology or seismic shift in a War of Ideas.
Even if his advisers might throw around names like Thucydides, Mr. Trump has consistently framed international issues in the far simpler terms of machismo and zero-sum competition, and often while appearing to misunderstand the issue itself.
Still, deliberately or not, the tariffs do represent another Trump-era step away from what is short-handed as the "liberal world order" -- the post-World War II default of free trade and international cooperation -- and back toward the 19th-century ways of nationalism, protectionism and great-power rivalry.
It's been pretty well established that the liberal world order has been really beneficial for the United States, which, after all, engineered that system to serve its interests, and that returning to the old system brings little obvious gain for American interests. Though Mr. Trump has argued that protectionism will help American workers, the last big American act of protectionism -- George W. Bush's brief imposition of steel tariffs in 2002 -- cost 200,000 American jobs, according to one study.
But it's a little harder to say whether a return to pre-World War II geopolitics and economics would be better or worse for China's global position.
Does a world defined by spheres of influence and mercantilism benefit China, allowing it greater sway over Asia and freedom from Western economic dominance? Or does it hurt China, which has risen in the American-led international system and relies on that system to prosper?
That's a difficult question for several reasons. One, no country like China (an enormous command economy but one reliant on foreign trade) existed in the 19th century. Two, Beijing itself has seemed uncertain about whether it wants to maintain or break the American-led order.
China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001 but has chafed against its rules. The country relies on American-imposed stability in parts of the world other than its own, but challenges that dominance in Asia.
Chinese companies need access to the enormous American market, and Chinese consumers rely on American products and services. But China also benefits from closing some markets that would otherwise be American-dominated, for instance on smartphone software, which gives Chinese firms space to grow their products.
Maybe hardest to know is whether China's command economy is better- or worse-suited than the American free market economy to advance the national interest within a system of closed international trade.
We often hear comparisons to the Cold War, which supposedly proved that the American economic system prevailed over the Soviet-style command system. But the Soviet economy collapsed largely because it relied on commodity prices, a vulnerability that remained in place during Russia's catastrophic free-market 1990s and still today.
And the American economy was more centralized during the Cold War than is widely remembered. Though Americans told themselves that their geopolitical advances sprang naturally from private enterprise, many came from state-led projects, such as those that developed the space program or the internet. The country also poured money into strategic industries such as automobiles and steel during a period, the 1950s and 1960s, when vast international markets were opening up.
Yet now the United States is drifting into a strange place where it really does have the decentralized, unguided economy that it told itself it had during the Cold War, but it is now also closing access to the international trade that such a system requires.
And China, long unwilling to choose between an open or a closed world, is being pushed toward the latter. The country certainly presents itself as economically self-sufficient, something that becomes more true as its middle class grows into a robust domestic market. And its ability to direct vast resources to state-led projects, such as solar power or artificial intelligence, do promise the sort of geopolitical gains once achieved in the United States.
But the modern Chinese economy really dates only to the early 1990s, and it has always relied on American-led free trade, particularly access to the United States itself. While many critics of Mr. Trump's tariffs argue that a self-imposed American decline will naturally aid China's rise, this is merely another version of Mr. Trump's zero-sum worldview. Maybe it's correct. But it's also possible that China, however tentatively, bought into the American-led order for a reason, and that the decline of this system will hurt Beijing, as well.
The safest bet, however, is almost always on the forces of the status quo. Mr. Bush's 2002 foray into protectionism also initially looked like an end to the then-much-younger era of Chinese buy-in to the liberal world order. It wasn't, and this might not be either. Time will tell.
AuthorAffiliation The Interpreter is a column by Max Fisher and Amanda Taub exploring the ideas and context behind major world events. Follow them on Twitter @Max_Fisher and @amandataub. Photograph President George W. Bush imposed steel tariffs in 2002. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICK WILKING/REUTERS)
