Stocks held steady on Thursday as the market's momentum cooled after leaping to a fresh record a day earlier.
The S&P 500 dipped by less than 0.1 percent. The Dow Jones industrial average added 0.2 percent, while the Nasdaq composite slipped 0.1 percent after hitting its own record.
Big Lots tumbled 18.2 percent after reporting a larger loss for the latest quarter than expected. The retailer said it missed targets for sales because its customers continued to pull back on their spending, particularly for things that aren't essentials.
Another retailer, Five Below, gave more discouraging comments about how its customers are doing. Its profit and revenue last quarter fell short of analysts' expectations, and the chief executive, Joel Anderson, said struggles for the company's core lower-income customers dragged on results, even as it saw strong growth from its higher-income customers. Five Below's stock fell 10.6 percent.
Many retailers and other companies have been highlighting a split between their customers making lower and higher incomes. Inflation is particularly hurting those at the lower end, who are struggling to keep up with a cost of living that's still rising, even if inflation is not as fast as before. That threatens to crack a linchpin that has kept the economy out of a recession despite high interest rates: strong household spending.
Another factor that has helped consumer spending stay so strong has been a remarkably solid job market. A report on Thursday showed some potential softening there as well.
More workers applied for unemployment benefits last week than the week before, when economists were expecting to see a slight decline. The numbers are still low compared with history, but they could suggest some slowing in the job market.
Wall Street is actually hoping for just such a slowdown. That's because a cool-down could drive inflation lower and persuade the Federal Reserve to deliver the cuts to interest rates that traders want. The danger is if the slowdown for the economy overshoots and turns into a recession, which would ultimately hurt stock prices.
In a potentially discouraging signal for markets, a separate report on Thursday said the productivity of workers wasn't quite as strong in the first three months of the year as economists thought.
After the economic reports, Treasury yields held relatively steady. The yield on the 10-year Treasury remained at 4.29 percent, where it was late Wednesday.
On Wall Street, Lululemon Athletica climbed 4.8 percent after reporting better profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected, in large part because of strong growth in sales outside the Americas. J.M. Smucker rose 4.6 percent after the company behind Uncrustables and Jif peanut butter likewise topped profit expectations.
Robinhood Markets rose 6.4 percent after saying it agreed to buy Bitstamp, a cryptocurrency exchange.
GameStop soared 47.5 percent in the latest whipsaw move for the videogame retailer's stock. It's been particularly volatile since a central character from its initial supernova run in 2021 recently returned to social media after a yearslong hiatus. The online hero, who goes by Roaring Kitty among other nicknames, is scheduled to return to YouTube for a livestream on Friday.
Nvidia reversed an early gain and slipped 1.1 percent a day after becoming the third company to see its total value top $ 3 trillion. The chip company has been riding a tidal wave of enthusiasm for artificial-intelligence technology.
Trading could be more exciting on Friday, when the government offers the latest monthly update on the job market. Economists expect it to show slight accelerations in hiring and average hourly wage gains from the month before.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
