Student loan relief isn't dead. In the coming days, more than 30 million borrowers will be invited to enroll in a new Biden administration program that rolled out this week.
The program, called SAVE, is something of a Plan B for President Biden, whose efforts to cancel up to $ 20,000 per borrower were thwarted by the Supreme Court in June, when justices ruled that he had overstepped his authority.
While perhaps less flashy than Mr. Biden's earlier effort, SAVE will reduce payments for millions of borrowers, eventually by as much as half.
For borrowers who enroll, the new payment amounts will be determined by income and family size, and will be readjusted each year. To start, all borrowers would see their payments fall to 5 percent of their discretionary income -- or the money that's left after paying for basics like rent and food -- for undergraduate loans.
A single person who makes less than $ 32,805 a year would qualify for $ 0 payments, as would a person in a household of four who makes below $ 67,500.
After monthly payments are made for a set number of years -- usually it's 20 -- any remaining balance is wiped out.
Unlike Biden's initial student debt cancellation plan, SAVE will become a permanent part of the student loan infrastructure and be available to current and future borrowers.
Borrowers will want to act quickly: Applications can take about four weeks for the Education Department to process, and after more than three years of being on pause, student loan payments are scheduled to resume in October.
"I do want students to learn to use it. They are going to grow up in a world where this is the norm."
Yazmin Bahena, a dual-language middle school social studies teacher in Washington State, referring to the use of ChatGPT in classrooms.
"I could take a billboard out on I-95 saying we're hiring, $ 7.25 an hour. You know who would apply? Nobody."
Janette Desmond, the owner of a sweet shop in New Hampshire, where she pays employees at least $ 14, almost twice her state's minimum wage.
"What was promised was a significant amount to many of the victims that were counting on it. They're losing about 70 percent of what they were promised."
Joseph Steinfeld, a lawyer representing about half of the roughly 40,000 individuals in a case with Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, whose $ 1.7 billion settlement was slashed by $ 1 billion.
