Mr. Musk said that he would resign as Twitter's chief executive once he found a successor "foolish enough to take the job." YouTube reaches deal for the rights to stream N.F.L.'s Sunday Ticket games. And Mark Zuckerberg appears in court in an antitrust hearing.
What's Up? (Dec. 18-24)
Vox Populi, Vox Musk
Elon Musk said that he would resign as Twitter's chief executive once he found a successor "foolish enough to take the job." Last weekend, after he faced backlash over unpopular content moderation policies and suspensions of high-profile users, including some journalists, Mr. Musk asked his nearly 123 million Twitter followers in a "poll" whether he should resign, saying he would abide by the results of the vote. Fifty-seven percent of the 17.5 million respondents said "Yes." After a notable silence, Mr. Musk said on Tuesday he would step down as chief executive -- though he added that he still planned to oversee Twitter's software and server teams. Mr. Musk has shown an affinity for polls in the past. When asking for users' input on decisions, Mr. Musk has posted "Vox Populi, Vox Dei," which roughly means that the voice of the people is the voice of God.
Sports and the Streaming Wars
YouTube beat out bids from Apple and Amazon to acquire the rights for the National Football League's Sunday Ticket package of games. YouTube has agreed to pay the league about $ 2.5 billion per year, about a $ 1 billion bump from DirecTV, the previous rights holder. The deal will allow people to stream nearly all of the N.F.L. games on YouTube next season. The exact timeline of the deal is unclear, but YouTube and the N.F.L. called it a "multiyear deal." Apple recently dropped out of the race for the rights, opting instead to sponsor the 2023 halftime show -- a performance by Rihanna.
Zuckerberg's Day in Court
When a lawyer asked Mark Zuckerberg whether Meta, the parent company of Facebook, WhatsApp and Instagram, was "trying to shape the future of technology," he hesitated and then replied: "Yes. That's a fairly broad statement, but yes." Mr. Zuckerberg appeared as the star witness in federal court in San Jose, Calif., on Tuesday. The case will determine whether the Federal Trade Commission will be granted an injunction to block Meta's $ 400 million acquisition of Within, a company that makes a virtual reality fitness game. If the F.T.C. blocks the acquisition (originally announced in 2021), it could set a precedent for antitrust law.
What's Next? (Dec. 25-31)
A new year -- and who knows!
In the lead-up to the new year, economists and officials are trying to predict what may come next for the economy. But the future, as Fed chair, Jerome H. Powell, said this month of the possibility of a recession, is "not knowable." That's true in any year, and especially now, in our current economic climate. The economy has upended forecasts and defied usual patterns over the past couple of years. Historical data, which is generally useful for those who make economic predictions, has not proved a reliable guide. In 2022, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates at the fastest pace since the 1980s in an attempt to slow growth and bring price increases under control. It remains to be seen just what effect those rate changes will have in the year to come.
S.B.F. in U.S.A.
Last month, the disgraced crypto mogul Sam Bankman-Fried told The New York Times's Andrew Ross Sorkin that he was having "a bad month." He has had another bad month since then -- he was arrested in the Bahamas and held in a notorious prison -- and is probably looking at more "bad months" ahead. Mr. Bankman-Fried, who was extradited from the Bahamas to New York on Wednesday, has been charged with two counts of wire fraud and six counts of conspiracy related to securities fraud, money laundering and violating campaign finance laws. He was released on bond and will stay with his parents in California while awaiting trial. Meanwhile, his one-time colleagues Caroline Ellison and Gary Wang are cooperating in the federal criminal case against him. Other associates may follow: The U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York urged FTX employees to come forward.
ChatGPT raises alarms
ChatGPT, an experimental chatbot, could shake up everything from big tech to homework assignments in the new year. The chat bot technology, which was released by OpenAI, an artificial intelligence lab, serves information in clear sentences. Already, Google is keeping a close eye on what happens next. The tech behemoth's management declared a "code red" over ChatGPT, which could present an existential threat to Google's search business. And this may be just the beginning; OpenAI is said to be working on a better model that could be released next year.
What Else?
Ambulance workers in Britain went on strike, the latest workers to walk out as inflation and a cost-of-living crisis grip the country. King Charles III will appear on pound notes there. The "Avatar" sequel has so far failed to live up to high expectations at the box office.
Illustration
