Questions about ethics, technology and how to piece the puzzle together.
In setting the United States on a course to map the active human brain, President Barack Obama may have picked a challenge even more daunting than ending the war in Afghanistan or finding common ground with his Republican opponents.
In more than a century of scientific inquiry into the interwoven cells known as neurons that make up the brain, researchers acknowledge they are only beginning to scratch the surface of a scientific challenge that is certain to prove vastly more complicated than sequencing the human genome.
The Obama administration is hoping to announce as soon as March its intention to assemble the pieces -- and, even more challenging, the financing -- for a decadelong research project that will have the eventual goal of building a comprehensive map of the brain's activity.
Scientists are a long way from doing so now. Even before they can begin the mapping process, they have to develop the tools to examine the brain. And before they develop the tools that will work on humans, they must succeed in doing so in a number of simpler species -- assuming that what they learn can even be applied to humans.
Besides the technological and scientific challenges, there are a host of issues involving storage of the information researchers gather, and ethical problems related to what can be done with the information. Also highly uncertain is whether the science will advance quickly enough to meet the time frames being considered for what is being called the Brain Activity Mapping project.
Rafael Yuste, a Columbia University neuroscientist who has pioneered the use of lasers to measure the activity of neurons in the cortex of mice, said he had been involved in presentations to White House representatives and has raised the goal of identifying a million neurons in 10 years. "But I'm talking about for a mouse," he said.
The state of the art in animal research is to sample from roughly 1,000 neurons simultaneously, Dr. Yuste said. The human brain has 85 to 100 billion neurons. "For a human it's a different ballgame, because for a human we must develop new techniques, and some of them from scratch," he said.
An article last autumn in the journal Neuron described a possible path toward mapping the active human brain. The article, signed by six scientists, proposes that the project begin with species that have brains with very small numbers of neurons and then work toward increasingly complex animals. But the leap to the human brain is enormous. For example, the scientists cited the worm C. elegans, which to date is the only animal for which there is a complete static map, or "connectome." That worm contains just 302 neurons with 7,000 connections. The authors propose moving on to the Drosophila fly brain, which has 135,000 neurons; the zebra-fish with roughly one million neurons; the mouse; and then the Etruscan shrew, the smallest known mammal, whose cortex is composed of roughly one million neurons.
No one knows whether the information gained will even be applicable, and the tools usable, in humans.
"I feel for the scientists who are pushing these brand new technologies," said Jason Scott Robert, an associate professor of Ethics in Biotechnology and Medicine at Arizona State University. "I worry that we are asking questions that are relevant for the animals that we are studying, rather than questions that are worth asking."
While the researchers have proposed a wide range of technologies that might be applied to the problems, many of them are still prototypes or speculative. Some of them, like nano-robots being designed at places like the Wyss Laboratory at Harvard University, seem like they are straight from "Fantastic Voyage," the 1966 movie that imagined the ability to shrink submarines and humans for journeys through the human body. Moreover, many technologies now used to sample human brain activity at high resolution require opening the skull, dramatically restricting what is possible. Progress is being made using those available techniques, but only at a basic level.
Still, last week in the journal Nature a group of neurosurgeons at the University of California San Francisco reported significant new insights into mechanisms of the language center of the human brain. That research, which was conducted with permission from three people who suffered from severe epileptic seizures, involved installing a dense sensor mesh of electrodes on the surface of the patients' brains. The 264 electrodes each sampled from an area that might encompass as many as millions of neurons, according to Edward F. Chang, a neurosurgeon who led the team.
Although the sensor's resolution was crude, it was four times more powerful than what has been used until now. It revealed new insights into how the speech centers in the human cortex control the human larynx, tongue, jaw, lips and face, all of which are involved in making the sounds that constitute human speech.
"I don't think this was a major technological innovation," Dr. Chang said. "But it demonstrates the power of even incremental advances, and shows how they can have a major impact on what we can understand."
The goal of the University of California group is ultimately to gain enough understanding of the speech mechanism in the brain to be able develop sophisticated prosthetics, making it possible for victims of paralysis or stroke to speak.
It is that potential that has excited scientists, and generated pressure for a multibillion dollar effort by the United States government, in partnership with research foundations and institutions, to develop a human brain activity map.
The scientists acknowledge that, beyond the scientific hurdles, the Brain Activity Mapping project faces significant technical challenges.
For instance, though it is frequently compared to a computer, the human brain's information processing capabilities so dwarf the world's most powerful supercomputers that in comparison they seem like primitive abacuses.
At a meeting on Jan. 17 to explore the data storage needs of the proposed mapping project, scientists concluded that it will require three petabytes of storage capacity to capture the amount of information generated by just one million neurons in a year.
There are one million gigabytes in a petabyte. The Large Hadron Collider in Geneva generates about 10 petabytes annually. If the brain contains between 85 and 100 billion neurons, that means that the complete brain generates 300,000 petabytes of data each year.
One facet of the project certain to create controversy is that the scientists are also developing technologies that manipulate neurons, raising the specter not just of mind reading, but mind control. The scientists argue that it is in controlling neurons that they can gain valuable information on brain function.
They also point out that a deeper understanding of the brain will lead to significant progress in advancing artificial intelligence technologies like computer vision, speech and even reasoning.
