TRANSPORTATION
Safety Agency Closes Case on Tesla Front Suspension
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said on Wednesday it has closed a preliminary evaluation into 74,918 Tesla vehicles over front suspension failures.
The auto safety agency's Office of Defects Investigation had opened a probe into the issue in 2020, based on complaints alleging failure of front suspension fore links in 2015-2017 Tesla Model S and 2016-2017 Model X vehicles.
However, the agency said it closed the investigation as no instance showed that a failure of the part prevented the ability to control the vehicle in testing and reported instances of failure.
Reuters reported in December that tens of thousands of owners had experienced premature failures of suspension or steering parts since 2016, citing Tesla documents and interviews with customers and former employees.
The documents showed that the automaker sought to blame drivers for frequent failures. Reuters
LABOR
Actor Union Reaches Deal to Sell Voices for A.I. Use
The Hollywood actors' union SAG-AFTRA announced on Wednesday a deal with online talent marketplace Narrativ that enables actors to sell advertisers rights to replicate their voices with artificial intelligence.
As performers fear A.I. will make the theft of their likenesses common, the new agreement seeks to ensure actors can derive income from the technology and have control over how and when their voice replicas are used.
"Not all members will be interested in taking advantage of the opportunities that licensing their digital voice replicas might offer, and that's understandable," a SAG-AFTRA official, Duncan Crabtree-Ireland, said in a statement. "But for those who do, you now have a safe option."
The actress Scarlett Johansson, above, drew attention to the perils this year when she accused OpenAI of copying her voice for its conversational A.I. system. Reuters
REGULATIONS
F.T.C. Bans the Business of Fake Online Reviews
The U.S. Federal Trade Commission on Wednesday finalized a ban on companies knowingly buying or selling fake online reviews, giving the agency the power to levy fines against the practice.
The ban covers trafficking in fake reviews, whether by nonexistent customers, company insiders or artificial intelligence. It also prohibits buying and selling fabricated views or followers on social media, and using intimidation to remove negative reviews.
The F.T.C. can seek a maximum penalty up to $ 51,744 per violation.
"Fake reviews not only waste people's time and money, but also pollute the marketplace and divert business away from honest competitors," the F.T.C. chair, Lina Khan, said in a statement.
The rule does not require platforms that publish consumer reviews to verify their veracity.
Teresa Murray, a consumer advocate, said 90 percent of online shoppers base purchase decisions in part on reviews. Reuters
Credit: By Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DIMITRIOS KAMBOURIS/GETTY IMAGES)
