Stocks slipped Thursday as the market's big burst after Donald J. Trump's election continued to cool.
The S&P 500 fell 0.6 percent, the Dow Jones industrial average dropped 0.5 percent, and the Nasdaq composite sank 0.6 percent.
Cisco Systems' 2.1 percent drop weighed on the market, even though the tech giant reported stronger profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected. Investors may have been looking for it to raise its financial forecasts more, analysts suggested.
The stock market broadly has been rising faster than corporate profits, which has raised criticism from skeptics that it's gotten too expensive.
Super Micro Computer, which has been one of the biggest winners of the artificial-intelligence boom, tumbled 11.4 percent for one of the worst losses in the S&P 500 after telling U.S. regulators it needed more time to file its financial statements for the latest quarter, which ended in September.
The server maker's stock has been struggling recently, particularly after Ernst & Young resigned as its public accounting firm. A special committee of the company's board has since said that a three-month investigation found "no evidence of fraud or misconduct on the part of management or the Board of Directors."
Some of the stocks that have felt the biggest bump from Trump's election also lost momentum. Tesla fell 5.8 percent and was on track for just its second loss since Election Day. It is run by Elon Musk, who has become a close Trump ally.
Smaller stocks also lagged the rest of the market, and the Russell 2000 index of small stocks was down 1.4 percent. It was a turnaround from the election's immediate aftermath, when the thought was that an "America First" president would benefit companies that do business domestically over big multinationals that could be hurt by tariffs and trade wars.
Even though Republicans have swept control of the White House, Senate and House of Representatives, which could give them more leeway to push through their policies, "promises made on the campaign trail may not be implemented immediately, with final legislation likely to be a pared-down version of the original proposals," said Solita Marcelli, chief investment officer, Americas, at UBS Global Wealth Management.
Helping to keep Wall Street's losses in check was The Walt Disney Co., which jumped 6.2 percent after the entertainment giant reported stronger profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected.
Tapestry shares climbed almost 13 percent after the luxury fashion company said it was terminating its merger with Capri, another luxury brand owner. Capri shares rose 4.4 percent after erasing a morning loss.
ASML, a major supplier to the global chip industry, also gave some encouraging signals for technology stocks. The Dutch company said it expected global semiconductor sales to top $ 1 trillion by 2030, with the help of demand related to artificial-intelligence technology, and it stood by its long-term financial forecasts. ASML shares that trade in the United States rose 2.9 percent.
Stocks were also feeling the effects of swinging yields in the bond market following the latest update on inflation. Prices paid at the wholesale level were 2.4 percent higher in October from a year earlier. That was an acceleration from September's 1.9 percent inflation rate and a worse jump than economists expected.
A separate report suggested that the job market remained solid. Fewer workers applied for unemployment benefits last week, in the latest signal that layoffs were not taking off.
Treasury yields initially jumped following the reports, as traders trimmed their expectations a bit for a coming cut to interest rates by the Federal Reserve at its meeting next month. But yields later regressed, and the yield on the 10-year Treasury slipped to 4.44 percent.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
