ECONOMY
Demand for Labor PersistsEven as Job Openings Dip
Employers in the United States posted 8.8 million job openings in November, a dip from October and the fewest since March 2021. But demand for workers is still strong.
A Labor Department report on Wednesday showed a drop in the number of job vacancies from 8.9 million in October. It said the number of people quitting their jobs -- a sign of confidence in the labor market -- fell to its lowest point since February 2021 and is now roughly at the level just before the pandemic nearly four years ago.
In November, job openings dropped by 128,000 in transportation, warehousing and utilities and by 78,000 at hotels and restaurants. The federal government reduced job openings by 58,000. Openings in construction rose by 43,000 and in retail by 42,000.
Job openings peaked at a record 12 million in March 2022. But they remain historically high: Before 2021, monthly job openings had never topped eight million.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
TRAVEL
Canceled Flights in 2023Were Lowest in a Decade
U.S. flight cancellations in 2023 fell to the lowest rate in at least a decade, after a string of bumpy years for air travel, the Transportation Department said Wednesday.
There were 16.3 million U.S. flights in 2023 and a cancellation rate below 1.2 percent, the lowest since at least 2013, the department said.
It added that the rate from Dec. 17 through Jan. 1 was even better, at 0.8 percent, despite a record number of passengers. That was far below last holiday season's 8.2 percent cancellation rate, which included the Southwest Airlines meltdown that disrupted two million passengers and led to a record $ 140 million civil penalty.
"We've been pushing the airlines hard," Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg said on CNBC on Wednesday. "We've pressed them on realistic scheduling."
REUTERS
TECHNOLOGY
Intel Announces CreationOf Separate A.I. Company
Intel said on Wednesday that it was forming a new independent company around its artificial intelligence software efforts with backing from the digital-focused asset manager DigitalBridge Group and other investors.
Intel executives would not comment on the deal's value or whether it would retain a majority stake in the new venture. They said the new firm would have an independent board of directors and Intel would be a shareholder.
The new entity will not be publicly traded and will be called Articul8 AI (pronounced "Articulate A.I."), and Arun Subramaniyan, formerly vice president and general manager in Intel's data center and A.I. group, will become Articul8 AI's chief executive.
"We've been really trying to address the biggest gap in generative A.I. today," Mr. Subramaniyan said, adding, "Getting things into production and doing it safely and in a cost-sustainable way is really what is missing." REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW HARNIK/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
