EARNINGS
Tiffany & Co. Misses Tourists From China
There was something missing at the luxury jeweler Tiffany & Co. in recent months: Chinese tourists.
For the second time in as many months, a big seller of high-end goods noticed that a crucial demographic of its shopping base had made itself sparse, damaging sales and stoking fears of worse to come.
On Wednesday, shares of Tiffany & Co. plunged 12 percent after reporting weaker-than-expected sales in its third quarter. CEO Alessandro Bogliolo said that Chinese tourists have failed to show up, and open wallets up, with the same vigor that they had in the past.
Tiffany is considered a bellwether for luxury goods, which is why shares of Ralph Lauren and Movado also fell on Wednesday.
Tiffany's third-quarter revenue rose 4 percent to just above $1 billion, yet industry analysts were anticipating a bigger boost. Part of the reason was fewer Chinese tourists at stores New York and Hong Kong. A.P.
FINANCE
Banks in Britain Pass Stress Tests
All seven British banks and building societies in this year's Bank of England stress test passed, indicating they could withstand a disorderly departure from the European Union, known as Brexit, without having to curb lending.
The BoE's Financial Policy Committee (FPC) said on Wednesday that it has reviewed a scenario whereby Britain crashes out of the European Union in March with no deal or transition period.
"The FPC judges that the UK banking system is strong enough to continue to serve UK households and businesses even in the event of a disorderly Brexit," it said in its twice-yearly Financial Stability Report.
"No bank needs to strengthen its capital position as a result of the stress test," it said, adding that the stress test was tougher
Parliament is expected to vote on Dec. 11 on Britain's divorce settlement and transition deal with the EU, but it is unclear if it will be approved, raising the prospect of a no-deal Brexit. REUTERS
TECHNOLOGY
Amazon Enters the Microchip Market
Amazon.com on Wednesday launched a microchip aimed at so-called machine learning, entering a market that both Intel Corp and Nvidia Corp are counting on to boost their earnings in the coming years.
Amazon is one of the largest buyers of chips from Intel and Nvidia, whose semiconductors help power Amazon's booming cloud computing unit, Amazon Web Services. But Amazon has started to design its own chips.
Amazon's so-called "Inferentia" chip announced on Wednesday will help with what researchers call inference, which is the process of taking an artificial intelligence algorithm and putting it to use, for example by scanning incoming audio and translating that into text-based requests.
The Amazon chip is not a direct threat to Intel and Nvidia's business because it will not be selling the chips. Amazon will sell services to its cloud customers that run atop the chips starting next year. If Amazon relies on its own chips, it could deprive both Nvidia and Intel of a major customer. REUTERS
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph Shares fell 12 percent on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WILFREDO LEE/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
