COMPANIES
IBM Will Acquire Portion
Of Software AG's Business
IBM said on Monday that it would buy the enterprise integration platforms of Software AG, a German company, for $ 2.33 billion to bolster its artificial intelligence and hybrid cloud offerings.
IBM will acquire Software AG's StreamSets and webMethods platforms with cash, it said. The two units formed Software AG's so-called Super Ipaas business, which was created in October.
The platforms provide application integration, application programming interface management, and data integration, among other uses.
The majority of Software AG is owned by the private equity firm Silver Lake, which owns 93.3 percent of shares in the company after a takeover pursuit spanning several months.
That deal valued the whole business at $ 2.84 billion.
The transaction is subject to regulatory approvals and is expected to be completed in the second quarter of 2024. REUTERS
BIOTECHNOLOGY
Icahn Makes New Push
For Changes at Illumina
The activist investor Carl Icahn, right, said on Monday that he planned to oust directors at the gene-sequencing company Illumina, laying the groundwork for a second board challenge months after shareholders elected one of his director candidates.
Mr. Icahn disclosed his plans, without offering details, in a letter to other shareholders less than 24 hours after Illumina said it would divest the blood-test maker Grail.
The investor had long been critical of Illumina's $ 7 billion Grail acquisition and made it a centerpiece of his previous proxy fight in which Andrew Teno, a portfolio manager working for Icahn, won a seat on the 11-member board.
In Monday's letter, Icahn blamed the Grail acquisition, which has faced regulatory challenges since 2021, for a 75 percent drop in Illumina's share price that he says wiped away $ 55 billion in value for shareholders. REUTERS
ENERGY
Crude Exports Surging
Out of the Gulf Coast
Oil is flooding out of Texas in the final weeks of 2023, as traders find outlets abroad for record U.S. production and dodge a hefty year-end tax bill on their inventories.
U.S. crude exports, nearly all of which leave from the Gulf Coast, averaged about four million barrels per day so far this year, according to government data, about 500,000 more than last year's record as oil production climbed to 13.2 million barrels per day.
West Texas Intermediate crude's wider discount to the global benchmark Brent, currently about $ 4.50 per barrel, is making U.S. oil more attractive to European and Asian refiners.
Gulf Coast crude inventories fell 1.2 percent to 247.9 million barrels last week, the third straight week of declines, in part because of strong exports. Storage utilization stood at about 63 percent of total working capacity along the coast, lower than average utilization in prior years. REUTERS
Credit: By Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN YANG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
