Our guide to stand-up, improv and variety shows happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
TED ALEXANDRO at the Creek and the Cave (Dec. 14-15, 7 p.m.). Alexandro released one of the best stand-up comedy specials of the year (my words, describing his words) with "Senior Class of Earth." The comedian practices what he preaches, whether it's onstage at the Comedy Cellar making fun of his peer Louis C.K., or marching in the streets with fellow activists. As co-founder of the New York Comedians Coalition, he successfully organized the first pay raise in decades for hundreds of city comics. Find out what's on his mind these days as he works on developing a new hour of material during his "Week at the Creek" residency.
917-806-6692, creeklic.com
'ASK ME ANOTHER' at the Bell House (Dec. 17, 7:30 p.m.). Ophira Eisenberg hosts this weekly trivia program from National Public Radio and WNYC, which poses questions to puzzle gurus, audience members, special guests and the host herself. Her guests this time around: the "Saturday Night Live" alum Jay Pharoah and the actor-comedian Adam Pally, from "The Mindy Project" and "Happy Endings."
718-643-6510, thebellhouseny.com
'CELEBRITY AUTOBIOGRAPHY ON BROADWAY' at the Marquis Theater (Dec. 17, 8 p.m.). The long-running Off Broadway show completes a limited run on the Great White Way on Monday, with actors and comedians reading from the hilarious-but-true memoirs of other celebrities. The lineup for Celebrity Autobiography's holiday finale includes Mario Cantone, Rachel Dratch, Jonathan Van Ness, Susan Lucci and Michael Urie.
212-382-0100, marquistheatre.com
'INTERNET EXPLORERS' at Caveat (Dec. 19, 9:30 p.m.). Each month, the comedian Mark Vigeant invites audiences into the stranger corners of the World Wide Web with fake lectures from some of the city's best comedians. As a bonus, one comedian leaves with a brand-new website built during the show. This month's theme: artificial intelligence. Guest performers include Arthur Meyer, Ayo Edebiri and Alex Song.
212-228-2100, caveat.nyc
ROY WOOD JR. at Gotham Comedy Club (Dec. 14-15, 8 and 10 p.m.). The star correspondent from "The Daily Show With Trevor Noah" also hosts his own storytelling showcase on Comedy Central, "This Is Not Happening." His second one-hour stand-up special, "Roy Wood Jr.: No One Loves You," premieres in January on the cable network. Hear some of it in advance this weekend.
212-367-9000, gothamcomedyclub.com
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
