Generate image description Michelle Obama and former President Barack Obama embrace as he took the stage during the Democratic National Convention in Chicago, on Tuesday, Aug. 20, 2024. (Todd Heisler/The New York Times).
CHICAGO — How to attack former President Donald Trump?
It’s a question that has tormented Democratic Party strategists for nearly a decade. Hillary Clinton called him “Dangerous Donald” and a racist. President Joe Biden uses grave and lofty terms to describe him imperiling American democracy.
Vice President Kamala Harris is trying something different: deflating him.
The first two nights of the Democratic National Convention in Chicago have brought into sharper focus the lens through which Harris and her allies intend to frame Trump from now until Election Day.
In slickly produced videos shown to delegates and in speech after speech, a host of attacks emerged. Harris is the future-oriented change agent, and Trump is the stale past. He’s been playing a long con on the American people that has outlived its expiration date.
The goal of Harris’ anti-Trump messaging is trying to shrink her opponent in order to rise above him, minimizing him and disengaging from him to avoid getting drawn into reacting to his every provocation. There is less engagement on highlighting Trump’s racist statements or casting him as a threat to democracy, than focusing on a portrait Democrats believe will resonate with voters: that of Trump as a mean-spirited fraud who only cares about himself and his billionaire friends.
The attacks are designed not just to earn applause on the floor of the convention hall but also to win votes. The goal is to erode Trump’s support among the undecided and mostly white middle-class voters in the three so-called Blue Wall states that are likely to decide the election: Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin. Trump, Harris and her allies are effectively saying, is a fake working man’s populist and an anti-union “scab” who has revealed himself to be selfish to an un-American degree.
Harris’ surprise appearance on the first night of the convention seemed ripped from her opponent’s playbook, a Trumpian bit of stagecraft that electrified the arena. The video that preceded her entrance established the tone and the imagery of her campaign’s path forward, and illustrated her attempt to wrestle back from Republicans ownership of Americana and patriotism.
The video on the arena’s Jumbotron opened with a wide shot of horses galloping across dusty open plains. The giant screen flashed with symbols of American greatness: six Marines raising the flag at Iwo Jima, the Statue of Liberty, the moon landing, images of the American flag.
Then came the Democratic twist. Beyoncé’s voice rang out: “Freedom, freedom. I can’t move. Freedom, cut me loose.” A deep male voice-over cut in to define “freedom” on Harris’ terms. “Freedom from control” was paired with an image of a woman standing in front of the Supreme Court, holding up a sign reading “My body my choice.” “Freedom from extremism and fear” was paired with footage of the violent mob that Trump helped summon to the Capitol on Jan. 6.
The video’s tone was youthful and optimistic, jumping from one joyful Harris crowd to the next. It portrayed Trump as the dark, ugly past and Harris as the bright future. And it ended with the narrator’s dig at Trump’s legal troubles: “That’s our choice: a prosecutor or a felon.”
For Harris, the most important part of that message is her being defined as a prosecutor — someone who is tough and battle-hardened. The felon aspect pleases the Democratic base, but is seen by Harris’ advisers as less central to defining Trump, according to two people with knowledge of their thinking.
Still, felon talk has been a kind of political chum at the convention. Hillary Clinton, the focus of “Lock her up!” chants by Trump supporters in 2016, smiled broadly when the delegates in Chicago chanted “Lock him up!” on Monday night during her speech. There was a video that parodied the intro of “Law & Order” and ripped Trump as a lifelong criminal. And there are expected to be two short films on Wednesday night focused on Trump’s lies about how widespread fraud cost him the 2020 election, and the consequences of his words.
A Trump spokesperson, Karoline Leavitt, said in a statement that there has never been “a politician as selfless” as Trump.
“He gave up a comfortable life to save this nation,” she said. “He has been indicted, shot, and slandered and doesn’t give up. He has put his own life on the line to restore American sovereignty and greatness. These Democrats wouldn’t know bravery if it walked into the shower with them. They just want more power for themselves and control over the people.”
One of the most blistering descriptions of Trump at the convention came from Shawn Fain, the president of the United Auto Workers, who wore a T-shirt reading “Trump is a scab” that he dramatically showed off after removing his blazer. The word “scab” is the labor movement’s highest insult.
“This election comes down to one question: Which side are you on?” Fain said on Monday night. Trump and his running mate, Sen. JD Vance of Ohio, are “two lap dogs for the billionaire class who only serve themselves.”
It remains to be seen whether Harris’ approach is durable enough to survive until Election Day, and whether it can crack the calcified partisanship hardening many voters’ views. Democrats and Republicans agree that Harris has had a near-perfect four weeks and that Trump has had one of his worst-ever months in politics. Instead of sharp policy attacks against Harris, he has flailed about with personal insults, including a ridiculous claim that images of her crowds were fakes generated by artificial intelligence.
And yet, despite Harris’ uninterrupted run of good fortune, the race remains a tossup. Even though she is the vice president, she remains largely unknown as a political figure, and Republicans will spend hundreds of millions of dollars defining her in the coming weeks as “dangerously liberal” and tying her to Biden’s most unpopular policies, including on immigration. They will remind voters of the range of left-wing positions she staked out in 2019 when she was briefly trying to be the Democratic presidential nominee.
Back in 2016, Trump gave Democrats so many potential avenues for criticizing him that winnowing them down proved challenging. Clinton ran a campaign focused on trying to re-create President Barack Obama’s winning demographic coalition. As Trump made misogynistic and race-baiting statements, she and her supporters responded with outrage. That gave Trump the fight he wanted, allowing him to dominate news cycle after news cycle.
Harris has learned lessons from Clinton’s campaign, people who have spoken to her say. It’s unlikely that Harris will give a speech about the dangers of white supremacy, as Clinton did in 2016. Nor will she dwell on the “glass ceiling” aspect of her candidacy, even as Clinton did so on Monday night. When Trump claimed falsely that Harris only recently embraced her Black identity, she did not take the bait.
Instead of expressing outrage and denouncing Trump as a racist, the vice president dismissed it as part of a boring and stale act.
“The same old show,” she said at a rally in Texas. “America deserves better.”
And other leading Democrats are delivering that message. On the first night, Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez called Trump a “two-bit union buster” who “would sell this country for a dollar if it meant lining his own pockets and greasing the palms of his Wall Street friends.”
And on Tuesday night, Obama and his wife, Michelle, echoed that theme in their speeches. Barack Obama said Trump was “a guy whose act — let’s face it — has gotten pretty stale” and described him as obsessed with helping himself and his “rich friends.”
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
Generate image description The audience as first lady Michelle Obama speaks on the second night of the Democratic National Convention at the United Center in Chicago, Tuesday, Aug. 20, 2024. (Kenny Holston/The New York Times)
Generate image description Vice President Kamala Harris, the Democratic presidential nominee, speaks on the first night of the Democratic National Convention at the United Center in Chicago on Monday, Aug. 19, 2024. (Maddie McGarvey/The New York Times)
Generate image description The teleprompter notes Donald Trump’s felony convictions during Hillary Clinton’s speech at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago, on Aug. 19, 2024. (Haiyun Jiang/The New York Times)
Generate image description Former President Donald Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, at a rally at the Mohegan Sun Arena in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., Aug. 17, 2024. (Doug Mills/The New York Times)
Generate image description Delegates on the floor during the second day of the Democratic National Convention at the United Center, in Chicago, Aug. 20, 2024. (Maddie McGarvey/The New York Times)
