Stocks drifted around their record heights Thursday following the latest signals that the U.S. economy continues to hum.
The S&P 500 closed little changed Thursday. The Dow Jones industrial average added 0.4 percent to the record high it set the day before, and the Nasdaq composite edged up less than 0.1 percent.
Nvidia and other companies in the chip industry helpe lead the way after the global heavyweight Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. reported bigger profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected. TSMC credited strong demand related to smartphones and artificial intelligence, and its stock that trades in the United States jumped 9.8 percent.
The rise for Nvidia was the strongest force pushing upward on the S&P 500, and it was a sharp turnaround from earlier in the week when a warning from a major Dutch supplier to the chip industry, ASML, sent stocks sinking across the industry. Because Nvidia and other tech stocks have grown so big, their movements pack extra weight on the S&P 500 and other indexes.
But a 1.4 percent slide for Google's parent company, Alphabet, and a 10.6 percent tumble for Elevance Health helped keep stock indexes in check.
Treasury yields were also rising in the bond market after the latest encouraging reports on the economy.
Retailers made more in sales in September than in August, and underlying growth trends within the data were better than economists expected. The strength was "all the more impressive in the face of stretched household finances, particularly among lower-income shoppers, and pre-election jitters," according to Gary Schlossberg, market strategist at Wells Fargo Investment Institute.
A separate report said fewer workers applied for unemployment benefits last week, a signal that layoffs nationwide are relatively low and aren't damaging the job market.
Such data bolster the hope that has sent U.S. stocks to records: The economy could make a perfect escape from the worst inflation in generations, one that doesn't end with a recession that many investors worried was nearly inevitable. And with the Federal Reserve now cutting interest rates to help the economy keep humming, the expectation among optimists is that stocks can rise even further.
Critics, however, warn that stock prices look too expensive given how much faster they've climbed than profits for companies.
On Wall Street, the insurer Travelers was another winner and rose 9 percent after reporting stronger profit and revenue for the latest quarter than analysts expected. Higher income made from its investments and elsewhere helped cover greater losses because of Hurricane Helene and severe wind and hail storms in multiple states.
Blackstone also helped push indexes higher after the investor in real estate, hedge funds and other alternative investments reported stronger profit than expected. It climbed 6.3 percent after Stephen Schwarzman, the chief executive, said it was seeing broad-based acceleration across its businesses.
They helped offset the drop for Elevance Health, which reported weaker profit for the latest quarter than expected. The Blue Cross-Blue Shield insurer also cut its forecast for profit for the full year, saying it was dealing with a "timing mismatch" between Medicaid rates and higher claims from customers.
CSX fell 6.7 percent after falling short of analysts' profit expectations for the latest quarter. The railroad also expects only modest volume growth the rest of the year as the Southeast rebuilds after two major hurricanes.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 4.09 percent from 4.02 percent. The two-year yield, which moves more closely with expectations for action by the Fed, rose to 3.99 percent from 3.94 percent.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
