The chief executive called results disappointing as the company said it would pay $1.5 billion to shed its chip-making unit.
IBM is struggling financially as it moves away from older businesses like hardware and invests heavily in new fields that promise growth and higher profits. The company's third-quarter results, reported on Monday, show that this transition is more difficult than expected.
In an interview earlier this year, Virginia Rometty, IBM's chief executive, said that 2014 would be a "rocky time" given the challenges. The company's third-quarter profit and revenue came in well below the analysts' forecasts.
The overall results were blurred by another step IBM announced on Monday, shedding its chip-making operations in a deal with Globalfoundries. IBM took a $4.7 billion pretax charge against its third-quarter earnings, which were reported before the stock market opened on Monday. The charge includes writing down the value of the assets and a $1.5 billion cash payment to Globalfoundries, a large contract chip producer.
With the charge for the chip deal, IBM reported net income of $18 million, or 2 cents a share. The big one-time charge, for a move in line with IBM's long-term strategy, is the sort of thing investors expect and often applaud. But IBM's shares were down nearly 7 percent in midday trading in New York on Monday.
The real weakness, however, was in the performance of IBM's continuing businesses. The company's operating profits for the quarter, excluding the chip-related charge, fell 10 percent, to $3.68 a share. That was well below the average estimate of Wall Street analysts of $4.32 a share. Revenue for the quarter slipped 4 percent to $22.4 billion; analysts had forecast $23.4 billion.
In a statement, Ms. Rometty said, "We are disappointed in our performance. We saw a marked slowdown in September in client buying behavior, and our results also point to the unprecedented pace of change in our industry."
Ms. Rometty added that the businesses that IBM is betting on for growth, including software and services that help businesses analyze large amounts of data, as well as cloud computing, did well. But those gains were not enough to make up for the slowdown in IBM's traditional hardware, software and services businesses in the quarter.
IBM had been in negotiations for months with Globalfoundries, which is based in Santa Clara, Calif., and has manufacturing operations in Germany and Singapore. So the deal was expected, but the financial arrangements, including the size of the charge, were not known.
Getting out of the chip-making business is part of IBM's long-term strategy of steadily pulling back from businesses with low profit margins. In January, the company agreed to sell its business making industry-standard data-serving computers to Lenovo of China for $2.3 billion.
At the same time, IBM is making multibillion-dollar investments in services and businesses that promise higher profits, including its Watson artificial intelligence technology.
IBM's microelectronics business, analysts estimate, accounted for $2.5 billion in revenue last year and lost an estimated $500 million. Total IBM revenue last year was just under $100 billion.
IBM has said it has no intention of abandoning the semiconductor business altogether. In July, it announced that it planned to invest $3 billion over the next five years in advanced semiconductor research and development. IBM wants to invent new chip designs while handing over the production of chips to contract manufacturers like Globalfoundries.
Globalfoundries was created in 2009 when Advanced Micro Devices spun off its manufacturing operations; it later acquired the chip factories of Chartered Semiconductor. Globalfoundries, based in Santa Clara, Calif., has manufacturing operations in Germany, Singapore and a new chip factory outside Albany, N.Y. Its principal shareholder is the investment arm of the government of Abu Dhabi.
Months after publicly defending his role as an eBay director against Carl C. Icahn, the venture capitalist Marc Andreessen said Monday that he was stepping down from eBay's board, Michael J. de la Merced reported.
As eBay moves to spin off its PayPal payments unit, effectively breaking itself in two, Mr. Andreessen said the time had come for him to resign as a director.
The e-commerce company disclosed the move in a news release. The resignation comes months after Mr. Andreessen defended his tenure as an eBay director when the company faced a proxy challenge by Mr. Icahn, a campaign aimed at forcing the spin-off of PayPal.
