RETAIL
Kohl's Cuts Profit Estimate
After a Quarterly Loss
Kohl's cut its annual sales and profit forecasts after posting a surprise quarterly loss on weaker consumer demand for its apparel and footwear on Thursday.
American shoppers are still prioritizing essential purchases over discretionary products like apparel, electronics and home goods, as they face dwindling pandemic-era savings and higher interest rates.
Discretionary spending by Kohl's middle-income customers continues to be pressured by a number of economic factors including high interest rates and inflation, while it has remained steady among high-income customers, Tom Kingsbury, the company's chief executive officer, said during a post-earnings call.
The department store chain's dismal quarterly report came in contrast to those delivered by some of other retailers including Abercrombie, which reported strong first-quarter sales owing to its merchandise being more on-trend. REUTERS
ELECTRONICS
Best Buy Expects Increase
In Its Computing Sales
Best Buy said on Thursday that it expected sales in its key computing category to improve this year on renewed demand after its quarterly profit beat Wall Street estimates, benefiting from its membership program and cost-saving efforts.
Demand for artificial intelligence-enabled laptops as well as higher-end televisions is helping Best Buy regain lost ground on sales in the country as consumers look to upgrade or replace their gadgets after more than two years of restraint on spending on electronics.
The company is also banking on the launch of Microsoft's AI-powered Copilot+ PCs, which are expected to go on sale on June 18.
Corie Barry, Best Buy's chief executive, said on a post-earnings call that the company expected to have more than 40 percent of the product assortment at the rollout exclusive to the company.
REUTERS
DELIVERY
F.A.A. Allows Amazon
To Expand Drone Program
Federal regulators have given Amazon key permission that will allow it to expand its drone delivery program, the company announced Thursday.
In a blog post published on its website, Amazon said that the Federal Aviation Administration has given its Prime Air delivery service approval to operate drones "beyond visual line of sight," removing a barrier that has prevented its drones from traveling longer distances.
Amazon pilots can now operate drones remotely without seeing it with their own eyes. An F.A.A. representative said the approval applies to College Station, Texas, where the company began drone deliveries in late 2022.
Amazon said it planned to immediately expand its operations in that city in an effort to reach customers in more densely populated areas. It said the approval also "lays the foundation" to expand its operations to more locations. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW KELLY/REUTERS)
