MEDIA
Disney and Warner Bros. Join for Streaming Bundle
In a rare moment of solidarity, two entertainment giants are teaming up to try to get consumers to stop canceling their streaming services so frequently.
Disney and Warner Bros. Discovery announced on Wednesday that they would start offering a bundle of their Disney+, Hulu and Max streaming services this summer, a sign of how rivals have become more willing to join forces in order to confront an ever-changing media landscape.
The companies said that the bundle would be available to buy on any of the three streaming platform's websites (Disney owns Disney+ and Hulu; Warner Bros. Discovery owns Max), and that there would be a commercial-free version as well as one featuring ads. The companies did not announce prices or a date when the offering would become available.
The monthly retail price for subscribing to commercial-free versions of all three services is currently $ 48; the plans with ads cost a combined $ 25. A bundled offering is likely to cost less.
Media executives have been vexed in recent years as the extremely profitable cable bundle has come undone by cord cutting, and as viewers have rapidly turned to on-demand streaming entertainment. The transition to streaming has been difficult for the companies, which have been bleeding cash.
Consumers have shown a much greater willingness to cull and cut streaming services over the last year or so, further confounding executives who have slashed costs and reduced the number of television shows to get closer to making meaningful profits.
JOHN KOBLIN
SOCIAL MEDIA
TikTok to Begin Labeling Content Created With A.I.
TikTok will begin labeling content created using artificial intelligence when it's been uploaded from outside its platform in an attempt to combat misinformation.
"A.I. enables incredible creative opportunities, but can confuse or mislead viewers if they don't know content was A.I.-generated," the company said in a statement Thursday. "Labeling helps make that context clear."
TikTok's shift in policy is part of a broader attempt in the technology industry to provide more safeguards for A.I. usage. In February Meta announced it was working with industry partners on technical standards that will make it easier to identify images and eventually video and audio generated by A.I. tools. Users on Facebook and Instagram would see labels on A.I.-generated images.
Google said last year that A.I. labels are coming to YouTube and its other platforms.
A push for digital watermarking and labeling of A.I.-generated content was also part of an executive order that President Biden signed in October.
TikTok is teaming up with the Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity and will use its Content Credentials technology.
The company said the technology can attach metadata to content, which it can use to instantly recognize and label A.I.-generated content. TikTok said it began to deploy the technology Thursday. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By John Koblin and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAE C. HONG/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
