In this week's newsletter, Marc Stein on memorable moments amid the grief at All-Star weekend, and LeBron James's effect on the Lakers.
Want more basketball in your inbox? Sign up for Marc Stein's weekly N.B.A. newsletter here .
On a frigid Friday night in Chicago, before the annual Rising Stars Game, Pau Gasol joined the W.N.B.A. star Sue Bird at midcourt to pay homage to Kobe Bryant and the former N.B.A. Commissioner David Stern.
Gasol, one of Bryant's favorite former teammates with the Los Angeles Lakers, told the story of how "my older brother Kobe used to say, 'Do epic things always."'
"So let's have an epic weekend," Gasol urged the United Center crowd.
Epic, in truth, was probably not a realistic target so soon after the deaths of Bryant and Stern, both last month. The leaguewide sense of loss is too great.
Yet the various All-Star events did manage to produce an array of memorable moments amid all the grieving. So as regular-season play resumes, here are my five biggest takeaways from what we saw (and didn't see) in Chicago: The Anthony Davis free throw that clinched the All-Star Game was not the biggest problem with the "Elam" scoring system.
The overwhelming reaction to Sunday's fourth quarter was positive. Playing to a "target score," with no clock -- and with hundreds of youngsters, set to directly benefit from the outcome through charity, screaming from lower-bowl seats for their heroes -- was a more successful formula than the league office ever could have dreamed.
So count me out if you're looking for a sympathetic ear to join you in getting hung up on the fact that the game ended on a Kyle Lowry foul and Davis's conversion at the line. This is professional basketball, not pickup at the playground. Fouls and free throws are part of the game.
I'm holding firm on this one: Sunday's fare was too unexpectedly uplifting to nitpick.
The real issue here, sadly, is that what so many of us loved about that fourth quarter is bound to backfire someday if the league sticks with this new format.
Just imagine if one of those All-Stars got hurt. The conversation would have changed so quickly if Lowry or Oklahoma City's Chris Paul or anyone else who was throwing their body around Sunday night had sustained an injury of any note.
Instinct tells me that the Dallas Mavericks, deep down, didn't mind one bit that Luka Doncic, fresh off a sprained ankle, got bumped out of the most intense quarter in All-Star Game history by Paul on the basis of seniority.
The biggest names in the game, playing as hard as they did, is what basketball romantics like myself have always hoped the All-Star Game could be. But "Elam" scoring will become the scourge of the league as soon as such intense play leads to an injury. Sad but true.
Improbable as this sounds, we're not talking enough about Zion Williamson.
So much happened in Chicago that the rim Williamson bent in Friday night's Rising Stars Game featuring first- and second-year players was easily forgotten. We repeat: Zion bent the rim in an actual game.
Guard depth in the Western Conference is such that Memphis's Ja Morant will have to be even better than he has been in a brilliant rookie season to become an All-Star in Year 2, like Doncic and Atlanta's Trae Young. But I think we can safely say that Williamson, if healthy, is a lock to make it to the big game in Indianapolis next February.
Although his New Orleans Pelicans may run out of time to make up the 5 ½ games by which they trail Morant's Grizzlies for the final playoff spot in the West, Williamson has been an absolute force in his first 10 regular-season games. In 27.4 minutes per game, Williamson is averaging 22.1 points (on 57.6 percent shooting) and 7.5 rebounds.
Get ready to enjoy him on the All-Star stage for years -- health permitting.
I can't wait for March 25.
The Milwaukee Bucks play host to the Houston Rockets that night. It will be their teams' first meeting since Milwaukee won at Houston on Oct. 24 in the season opener for both.
It will also be the first time Giannis Antetokounmpo squares off against James Harden after a couple of recent shots from Antetokounmpo about The Beard.
Remember how on Feb. 9, we wrote about how Antetokounmpo does anything he wants these days? This apparently now includes a little trash talk, something he had never really engaged in before.
Harden was a vocal critic of the news media's voting of Antetokounmpo as last season's regular-season most valuable player -- over Harden and his league-leading 36.1 points per game.
Antetokounmpo said nothing at the time, but he has flicked a couple of jabs at Harden in the past few weeks that have been impossible to ignore.
During the All-Star player draft on Feb. 6, Antetokounmpo essentially said he didn't select Harden for Team Giannis because he dribbles too much. Then on Sunday night, after the All-Star Game, Antetokounmpo announced that his team's fourth-quarter strategy was essentially getting the ball to whomever Harden was guarding.
Given the prospects of a Bucks-Rockets matchup in the N.B.A. finals, March 25 is thus likely the last time this season that we're bound to see Antetokounmpo and Harden share the same floor. I would advise you not miss it.
The Luka Doncic and Trae Young GIF from Friday's Rising Stars Game, after Young dared Doncic to hoist a half-court shot that banked in, makes me laugh every time I see it.
To watch it, click here. To disagree with me, click elsewhere.
For the record: I also loved the modestly snowy Chicago weather for much of the weekend -- once we got past a truly arctic Valentine's Day on Friday -- but don't @ me about that, either.
Michael Jordan's steadfast insistence on avoiding the spotlight, even for a few minutes, will never make sense to me.
The team Michael Jordan owns played host to the 2019 All-Star Game in Charlotte, N.C. The team Jordan led to six championships in the 1990s just played host to the 2020 All-Star Game in Chicago.
Jordan made the briefest of public appearances last year, when he was essentially considered the All-Star grand marshal, and then stayed completely out of public view this year.
Jordan defenders always tell me, when I bring this stuff up, that I cannot possibly understand how hard it is for His Airness to put himself out there. He's a very private person, they always say, and makes it his mission to avoid the spotlight.
But Jordan had such direct ties to these last two All-Star Games. This has nothing to do with an ink-stained wretch from the news media like me wanting to interview him; this is about Hornets fans a year ago and Bulls fans worldwide this year who were desperate to see him.
The natural instinct Sunday night, when you saw Scottie Pippen being introduced to a roaring United Center audience, was obviously to ask: Where's Michael?
One Jordan defender asked me why I haven't made an issue of the fact that we never saw the Bulls' team owner Jerry Reinsdorf over the past few days. Fair point. But who is really clamoring to see Reinsdorf except Bulls fans frustrated with the direction of their team?
Mortals like me will never be able to understand what it's like for Jordan to put himself out there, true, but Barack Obama was an omnipresent figure throughout All-Star festivities. If arrangements can be made to allow the former president of the United States to comfortably serve as such an integral part of the weekend, surely there's a way for Jordan to let himself be seen for the briefest of glimpses.
The only sure way to see Jordan at the first All-Star Game in Chicago since 1988 was to score an invitation to his exclusive annual party Friday night. Monday is when it really hit me how far behind the scenes he stayed all weekend, because the day after Sunday's All-Star Game was Jordan's 57th birthday.
Just as the whole party was leaving town, social media was awash with Jordan tributes and factoids. It's hard not to be disappointed that Monday's discourse was as close as the masses got to him.
The Scoop @TheSteinLine
This newsletter is OUR newsletter. So please weigh in with what you'd like to see here. To get your hoops-loving friends and family involved, please forward this email to them so they can jump in the conversation. If you're not a subscriber, you can sign up here .
Corner Three
You ask; I answer. Every week in this space, I'll field three questions posed via email at marcstein-newsletter@nytimes.com . (Please include your first and last name, as well as the city you're writing from, and make sure "Corner Three" is in the subject line.)
Q: Are you surprised by the Lakers' success? Is it purely because of LeBron James's influence, or are they now a legitimately well-structured team? My hesitation with backing the Lakers is the potential for injuries to bring the whole program down. -- David Redfern (Melbourne, Australia)
Stein: I certainly can't say I expected the Lakers to hold the Western Conference's best record (41-12) at the All-Star break and establish a 63-win pace. And, yes, much of the credit for that has to go to LeBron James.
If James did not pick the Lakers in free agency in the summer of 2018, Anthony Davis likely would not have followed via trade the following off-season. Those two are so good together that they can make a lot of people look smart.
The roster still has holes -- playmaking beyond James, shooting, wing depth -- but Lakers management can certainly celebrate its decision to hire Frank Vogel as coach. Although the search was as messy as possible in the moment, Rob Pelinka's decision to go with Vogel after talks with Tyronn Lue collapsed -- with a strong nudge from the team adviser Kurt Rambis -- has been a hit.
Worry all you want about the health of James and Davis, but I try not to spend too much time fretting about injuries that haven't happened yet. What good does that do?
The Lakers are obviously relying heavily on their two studs, but it's the way it has to be this season. The Clippers have many of the same worries, too, so it's not exclusively a Lakers problem.
The Lakers appear to have much stronger team chemistry than outsiders imagined, too, which is also largely attributed to James's influence. Factor in how James has missed only two of Los Angeles's 53 games, and it must be said that his 17th N.B.A. season is shaping up to be one of his best.
Q: Who was it named for before? -- @joesanders33 from Twitter
Stein: Joe is asking about the N.B.A.'s All-Star Most Valuable Player trophy, which has been named in Kobe Bryant's honor in the wake of Bryant's death.
Before the change, which the league made official Saturday, its All-Star M.V. P. trophy did not bear a former player's name. The N.B.A. finals M.V.P. award was named after Bill Russell in 2009.
Q: How far did N.B.A. players run in each decade? As a 72-year-old lifelong fan of the game, I am frustrated hearing about "load management" and how much harder players worked "back in the day" without any data to back up these claims. Where is the data? -- William Briggs (Nalcrest, Fla.)
Stein: It's a great question, William.
The basic eye test tells you that there is more movement in the modern game than ever before, but you're absolutely right. You can't say so conclusively without the data. And the sad reality is that the data you seek isn't available.
The tools teams have to track these things are a relatively new phenomenon, so the data doesn't go too far back. The only consolation I can offer is that I do believe such data will be available someday.
It's impossible to say how long it will take, but people much smarter than me who are well-versed in the rise of artificial intelligence would surely tell you that technology will eventually allow the curious to review old games and compute approximate averages.
I don't think the computing power for processing video is quite there yet, but it will get there. All it would take then is curious souls like you who are willing to do the research. It will happen.
Numbers Game
8
Eight of the 24 All-Stars who played Sunday were classified as international players: Giannis Antetokounmpo (Greece), Luka Doncic (Slovenia), Joel Embiid (Cameroon), Rudy Gobert (France), Nikola Jokic (Serbia), Domantas Sabonis (Lithuania), Pascal Siakam (Cameroon) and Ben Simmons (Australia).
8
Eight teams are on pace to win fewer than 30 games this season entering Thursday's resumption of play following the All-Star break. They are: Chicago, Charlotte, Detroit, Atlanta, Cleveland and the Knicks in the East, along with Minnesota and Golden State in the West. There were only five sub-30-win teams last season.
7
Only seven teams in the league have winning records against .500-or-better teams. In the East, they are Milwaukee (12-7), Boston (13-9) and Miami (13-11). In the West, they are the Lakers (15-10), Denver (15-9), the Clippers (14-11) and Houston (14-11).
0
Another indication of the San Antonio Spurs' struggles this season after making 22 consecutive playoff appearances: San Antonio had zero participants in the league's various All-Star events for the first time since 1996-97. That was the season Coach Gregg Popovich took over for Bob Hill and, after the Spurs posted a 20-62 record, they won the draft lottery and the right to select Tim Duncan.
12
Dallas's Luka Doncic and the Lakers' LeBron James are tied for the league lead with 12 triple-doubles this season. Denver's Nikola Jokic is just behind with 11.
Hit me up anytime on Twitter ( @TheSteinLine ) or Facebook ( @MarcSteinNBA ) or Instagram ( @marcsteinnba ). Send any other feedback to marcstein-newsletter@nytimes.com
Zion Williamson bent the rim on a dunk in the Rising Stars Game. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KYLE TERADA/USA TODAY SPORTS, VIA REUTERS); Anthony Davis shooting a free throw during the "Elam" scoring in the fourth quarter. (PHOTOGRAPH BY QUINN HARRIS/USA TODAY SPORTS, VIA REUTERS); Giannis Antetokounmpo, right, doesn't care for James Harden's game. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TIM WARNER/GETTY IMAGES); Trae Young, right, cracked up after Luka Doncic's half-court shot banked into the basket.; Michael Jordan, top, was scarce, but Chicago fans embraced Scottie Pippen. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KYLE TERADA/USA TODAY SPORTS, VIA REUTERS);
