Artificial intelligence technology seems almost magical, but success, experts say, will rely on business virtues like focus, flexibility and speed.
In 2010, Kris Hammond, an experienced artificial intelligence researcher, and a few partners founded Narrative Science. The Chicago start-up's software ingests and interprets numbers for things like investment holdings, billing records and sports statistics and transforms them into written summaries or stories.
From the outset, the company's technology was promising, but the timing was tricky for the new venture. It opened its doors the year before IBM's Watson publicly demonstrated the potential of machine intelligence with its "Jeopardy!" victory.
"At the start, we didn't call it artificial intelligence because A.I. was still in disrepute," recalled Mr. Hammond, chief scientist for Narrative Science.
Today, a start-up that can lay claim to doing artificial intelligence has increased its odds of getting attention and funding. A.I. efforts, scientists agree, are far more advanced than in past boom and bust cycles for this type of technology.
Yet if the technology seems almost magical at times, success, venture capitalists and entrepreneurs say, will rely on basic business virtues like focus, flexibility, speed and resilience.
That is particularly true for start-ups.
"Big companies like Google can make A.I. investments with a 10-year horizon, but a start-up has to release a product in a year or two," said Chris Dixon, a general partner at Andreessen Horowitz.
In past cycles, research advances in A.I. generated excitement but not much business. "It was a long, long way from being practical," said Forest Baskett, a computer scientist who is a general partner at New Enterprise Associates. "What makes it investable now is there are applications, things you can do with these tools."
The technical ingredients behind modern A.I., he noted, were vast new sources of data, machine-learning software and powerful, inexpensive computing delivered over the so-called computing cloud.
When asked about investable applications in N.E.A.'s portfolio, Mr. Baskett pointed to three examples that exploit data and machine-learning: DataRobot, which evaluates math models to predict which will work best on a particular kind of data; Dato, whose machine-learning tools analyze the graphs of online users' social connections; and Qbotix, which makes specialized robots for optimally tilting and maintaining the panels that absorb the sun's rays on solar farms.
There is no bright line separating big data analytics and A.I. In both cases, data is the fuel and machine-learning algorithms are the engine of pattern recognition and classification. Yet A.I. technology, propelled by advances in so-called deep-learning techniques, is moving up the ladder of perception, getting far better at mimicking the humanlike tasks of seeing and hearing -- image recognition and speech recognition, in computing terms.
In 2014, after three years leading the drive to commercialize Watson at IBM, Manoj Saxena left and founded Cognitive Scale. The start-up, based in Austin, Tex., is focused on building applications on top of Watson.
Cognitive Scale concentrates on short sprints with small teams, getting a working application up and running within 90 days. Speed to market is its product. Cognitive Scale is working first with customers in the health care, finance and retail industries.
"Our approach is small bets, brought to market quickly for better decisions and better customer engagement in your industry," said Mr. Saxena, the chairman. "We bring practical A.I. into businesses."
MetaMind, based in Palo Alto, Calif., grew out of A.I. research at Stanford University conducted by the company's founder, Richard Socher, and others. The company name, Mr. Socher said, points to MetaMind's vision of creating deep-learning A.I. technology that is "broadly applicable and can solve many different problems."
But vision doesn't pay the rent. Mr. Socher and his team are focused on early applications to build the company, notably using its deep-learning software to screen medical images, an automated assistant for radiologists. MetaMind technology, Mr. Socher said, was being used in emergency rooms in a partnership with vRad, a teleradiology company, doing thousands of scans a day.
When he founded MetaMind in late 2014, Mr. Socher said he had a "laid-out plan." But that is no longer the case. The current plan emphasizes flexibility and opportunism. MetaMind's future direction? "It depends on the market," Mr. Socher said.
