Stocks dropped Thursday following another mixed set of profit reports from companies, as rising expectations for interest rates keep up the pressure on Wall Street.
The S&P 500 fell 0.9 percent, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 0.7 percent and the Nasdaq composite sank 1 percent. All three indexes had been up by close to 1 percent in the morning, before momentum gave out.
Stocks have been shaky this week amid uncertainty about where interest rates and inflation are heading. A strong jobs market has investors buying more into the Federal Reserve's forecast that it will raise rates a couple of more times before holding them at a high level through this year.
A narrowing disconnect between markets and the Fed could lead to less volatility in markets in the future, said Thomas Martin, senior portfolio manager at Globalt Investments. But for now, with a jumble of earnings reports pouring in from companies along Wall Street and questions remaining about whether the economy can avoid a sharp recession, swings are likely to remain.
"There's continuing evidence that the economy is stronger than people thought it was going to be," Mr. Martin said. "The question is what is the economy's ability to continue that resilience in the face of interest rates that are a lot higher than they were a year ago."
In the bond market, at least, a warning signal is continuing to flash red with yields on shorter-term Treasurys well above longer-term Treasurys. It's an unusual occurrence that has often preceded recessions in the past.
The two-year Treasury yield, which tends to move with expectations for Fed action, climbed to 4.48 percent from 4.43 percent late Wednesday. It reached its highest level since mid-November during the day, according to Tradeweb. The 10-year Treasury, which helps set rates for mortgages and other loans, rose to 3.68 percent.
"We're still somewhere in that 40 percent to 60 percent area of a recession," Mr. Martin said. "I'm not trying to be wishy-washy about it, but there are so many ways to go. The level of uncertainty has been high and remains high."
High inflation and worries about a slowing economy have already begun to hit corporate earnings, and big U.S. companies have been reporting relatively lackluster results for the end of 2022.
The Walt Disney Co. surprised the market when it reported stronger profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected. It also said it will cut about 7,000 jobs as part of a plan to reduce its costs by $ 5.5 billion. Its shares fell 1.3 percent after being up more than 5 percent earlier in the morning.
The media giant joined the growing list of high-profile companies to announce layoffs amid an uncertain economy. The bulk began in the technology industry, where companies acknowledged misreading the boom coming out of the pandemic and hiring too many people. Job cuts have since spread to other industries.
"Things have gotten good on the inflation front, but now I think the next cause of volatility is beginning to shift to recession fears," said Brent Schutte, chief investment officer at Northwestern Mutual Wealth Management Company.
Overall, though, the job market has remained resilient. Last week, 196,000 U.S. workers filed for unemployment benefits. That was slightly more than the prior week, but it remained below the 200,000 level for a fourth straight week.
While a strong job market is good for workers and for sales of companies selling to them, the Federal Reserve also worries that it could lead to upward pressure on inflation.
Another drop for Google's parent company, Alphabet, also weighed heavily on the market. It fell 4.4 percent, continuing its rough week amid worries about competition from Microsoft, which recently unveiled a new Bing search engine powered by artificial intelligence.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
