Worries about a potentially toxic cocktail combining stubbornly high inflation with a flagging economy dragged stocks lower on Thursday. A sharp drop for Facebook's parent company, one of Wall Street's most influential stocks, also hurt the market.
The S&P 500 fell 0.5 percent and sliced some of the gain off what had been a big winning week. It looked to be heading for a much worse loss in the morning, when it tumbled as much as 1.6 percent.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 1 percent. The Nasdaq composite sank 0.6 percent.
Meta Platforms, the company behind Facebook and Instagram, dropped 10.6 percent even though it reported better profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected. Investors focused instead on the big investments in artificial intelligence Meta pledged to make. A.I. has created a frenzy on Wall Street, but Meta is increasing its spending when it also forecast a range for upcoming revenue whose midpoint fell below analysts' expectations.
Expectations had built high for Meta, along with the other "Magnificent Seven" stocks that drove most of the stock market's returns last year. They need to hit a high bar to justify their high stock prices.
The entire market felt the pressure of another rise in Treasury yields following the disappointing data on the economy. The report undercut a central hope that has sent the S&P 500 to record after record this year: The economy can avoid a deep recession and support strong profits for companies, even if high inflation takes a while to fully get under control.
That's what Wall Street calls a "soft landing" scenario, and expectations had grown recently for a "no landing" where the economy avoids a recession completely.
But Thursday's report said the U.S. economy's growth slowed to a 1.6 percent annual rate during the first three months of this year from 3.4 percent at the end of 2023.
That was weaker than expected and would have been disappointing by itself. Making it worse for financial markets, the report also said inflation was hotter during the three months than economists forecast. That could tie the hands of the Federal Reserve, which typically juices sluggish economies by cutting interest rates.
Thursday's economic data will likely get revised a couple times as the government fine-tunes the numbers. But the lower-than-expected growth and higher-than-expected inflation is "a bit of a slap in the face to those hoping for a 'no landing' scenario," said Brian Jacobsen, chief economist at Annex Wealth Management.
"Things can change a lot from one quarter to the next, so it's too early to say the Fed has failed, but this doesn't help their cause."
Underneath the surface, the economic report may not have been as bad as initially thought. Much of the slowdown stemmed from a rise in imports and other factors that can swing sharply and quickly. The main engine of the economy, household spending, remained relatively solid.
That helped blunt the worry caused by the report, helping markets to pare their morning losses.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 4.70 percent from 4.65 percent late Wednesday.
That puts more pressure on companies to deliver bigger profits.
Southwest Airlines fell 7 percent after the carrier reported worse results for the first quarter than analysts expected. C.E.O. Robert Jordan said the airline was limiting hiring and making other moves "to address our financial underperformance" and cope with delayed deliveries of new planes from Boeing.
Textron tumbled 9.7 percent after the maker of Bell helicopters and Cessna jets reported weaker profit and revenue than forecast. Caterpillar sank 7 percent despite reporting stronger profit than expected. Its revenue for the latest quarter fell short.
On the winning side was Chipotle Mexican Grill, which rose 6.3 percent after reporting stronger profit and revenue than analysts expected.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
