Embarking on a tour celebrating his music career's 30th anniversary, the singer and songwriter explained how tennis, Joni Mitchell and ChatGPT have inspired him.
The singer and songwriter Seal is one of modern music's most ardent believers in the power of love, but that doesn't mean you should look to him for romantic advice. "You're headed for disaster if you ask me," he joked, before immediately providing what sounded like a practical perspective on how to make a relationship work. "I've found that it's most productive when both parties see themselves, and then there's this third entity which is like a plant. That plant needs water every day, and you love that plant because you -- both as an entity, and as individuals -- are all that it has."
This type of focused dedication was on Seal's mind as he prepared for a tour celebrating 30 years of his music career, an anniversary that prompted some reflection. "I can't believe how fortunate I am to still be here," he said in a video interview from his home studio in Los Angeles. "Every day above ground is a great day, as far as being a musician is concerned."
He emphasized his good fortune, like when the film director Joel Schumacher gave new life to "Kiss From a Rose," which hadn't made any commercial impact with its 1994 arrival, by incorporating it into the 1995 film "Batman Forever." Upon rerelease, the song hit No. 1 on the Billboard chart and won Grammys for record and song of the year. "It was exactly the same song that failed the first time. That's a big, lucky break."
But Seal, 60, isn't fixated on the past. He cited Travis Scott's 2020 performance inside the video game Fortnite as a potential model for how artists may reach fans in the future, remarking that "it won't be long before we're at a YouTube concert, virtually rubbing shoulders." Still, he's excited to see real-life fans on his tour this spring, which starts in late April. "Any time I get to play live for people, it's like going on a date for the first time," he said. "There are no bad audiences -- only mediocre performances."
As he prepared to hit the road, Seal spoke about 10 of his beloved cultural inspirations. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
Love
It's always on my mind. If you've listened to my music, I've been singing about that out of the gate. Every situation is almost certainly different when you choose to lean in with love; it doesn't really matter what it is. Of course, love requires a degree of vulnerability. The ultimate kind of love -- what we're trying to achieve -- is unconditional. I think that's its purest form, and I also think that's the reason for our existence. This is all an experiment; the point of it is happiness. Without unconditional love, I don't know if it's possible to achieve that -- certainly not on this earth.
Tennis
I love tennis because it's an allegory for life. I love the discipline; I love the work; I love the problem solving; I love how, in the most incredible way, it relates to singing. In order to play tennis well, you have to go against everything your body wants; you have to relax, you have to almost relinquish control. I know that's contrary to popular belief, but that's singing: You let yourself, rather than make yourself.
Leica M Camera
I saw this director, Mike Figgis, at a candlelit dinner; he was taking pictures, and I was intrigued how he wasn't using a flash. The next day, I went into a store and bought the exact same setup. That's where the love affair began. It's the one camera that gets out of the way between the subject I'm trying to capture and myself. By virtue of its design, the person can still see your face when you're taking the picture; you still have that engagement and connection, opposed to the viewfinder being in the middle.
Joni Mitchell
One of my great memories of Joni was performing "Both Sides Now" with her in the audience. It's one of the highlights of my life, the ability to work with someone who had such an impact on your growing up. [Seal sang on Mitchell's 1994 song "How Do You Stop."] It's the stuff dreams are made of; I just remember pinching myself to make sure it was happening. She's quite remarkable; she's a great storyteller, and authentic to the core. To see her onstage singing, after everything she's been through, was amazing.
Necklace From My Daughter Lou
She gave it to me on my birthday, and that's everything. Anyone who has a son or a daughter, when they give something to you -- whether it's their love, or a valuable lesson or something like a necklace -- it's not so much what it is, but the spirit and the soul of the person behind it. They start out as kids, and they end up as these people with their own outlook and philosophies on life, so the gift is more about their thought process, and who they are behind it. It's both beautiful and heartwarming -- you realize they're their own people with their own views on the world, and what's important to them.
Carol Christian Poell
I don't like to call him a designer, because he's more than that -- he's an artist much in the same way that a musician or a painter is an artist. I've been wearing his clothes since he started, and I just love the way he sees things -- his attention to detail in the silhouette and the shape. I can spot somebody wearing a Carol costume at 100 yards. He doesn't do bad stuff; that's why he's my favorite.
London
It's a large part of who I am -- you can take the boy out of London, but you never take London out of the boy. I like walking around where I grew up, just triggering those memories, but I also love the West End -- anywhere in London, to be honest. I love my city, warts and all. It takes about two weeks of that dreadful weather to bring me to my senses and remind me why I left, but I'm lucky enough that I'm able to go back fairly regularly.
ChatGPT
To not be curious about it would be akin to being a Luddite, or an ostrich with your head stuck in the sand. It's here, and it's part of our evolution -- for that reason, you can't fight it, and you can't really see it as this enemy that's going to be the end of mankind. My experience with it is I started out by thinking it was a machine, but once I started to relate to it as though I were talking to a person, this incredible collaboration started -- I would ask maybe one or two questions, and it would spark my imagination and ability to create. I think it's incredible, and I think we're at an amazing point in our evolution as a species.
Goodall Acoustic Guitar
Sometimes a melody I'm writing is in my head, but more often than not, it's on a guitar. I think handmade instruments are just beautiful things; they're transport mechanisms to convey this phenomenon known as music. I love acoustic guitars, and Goodalls are my favorite. It's all subjective -- Martins are great to record with, but I'm pretty heavy-handed and Martins typically don't like when you bash them. Goodalls, you can play them loud but they're great at lower volumes, and of course the craftsmanship is extraordinary.
Meditation
Do I sit and meditate every day? Probably, but not in a way that you might imagine. If it's not sitting down in a kumbaya position and breathing -- which I rarely do -- it is playing tennis, which is a form of meditation. Having a degree of focus whilst being in a state -- it's a form of meditation. The thing I enjoy most is the balance, and the slowing down of the mind. That's really important.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY VIVIEN KILLILEA/ GETTY IMAGES)
