TRAVEL
Hotelier Writes Off
2 San Francisco Properties
Park Hotels & Resorts, the operator of two of the most prominent hotels in San Francisco, is handing in the keys on the properties -- and, in essence, giving up on a city that has fallen on hard times.
Park Hotel stopped making payments on a $ 725 million loan tied to the Hilton Union Square and Parc 55, the real estate investment trust said on Monday. The hotels, a few blocks from the once-bustling Moscone Center conference hall, have a combined total of nearly 3,000 rooms.
A slowing economy and a remote-work thunderclap have emptied offices nationwide, with some warning of a ticking bomb in the commercial real estate market. Slammed by layoffs in tech and a slowdown in Moscone's conference calendar, downtown San Francisco has been hit hard.
The departure of Park Hotels & Resorts is raising fears that others could follow suit. San Francisco is highly dependent on business travel, which remains down. LAUREN HIRSCH
WORKPLACE
Reddit to Cut 5%
Of Its Work Force
Reddit said on Tuesday that it was laying off about 5 percent of its work force, or 90 employees, joining a list of technology companies that have been cutting jobs.
Reddit, which was spun off from the magazine conglomerate Condé Nast in 2011, saw a recent surge in appeal because of the popularity of WallStreetBets and other forums on its platform that have become a venue for retail investors to speculate on stocks.
The Wall Street Journal reported Reddit's move earlier on Tuesday, citing an email sent to employees from Reddit's chief executive, Steve Huffman.
Mr. Huffman said the company would also reduce its hiring for the rest of the year to about 100 people from an early plan of 300, The Journal reported.
In December 2021, Reddit had confidentially filed for an initial public offering with the U.S. securities regulator after the company's message boards became the go-to destination for day traders during a meme stock frenzy. REUTERS
TECHNOLOGY
GitLab Plans A.I. Product
To Aid Software Coding
Shares of GitLab jumped 31 percent by the close of trading on Tuesday after the software development platform announced plans to launch a revenue-boosting artificial intelligence-powered product.
GitLab, widely used by software developers for coding work, will add a ModelOps feature to its main DevSecOps platform with new abilities including code-writing suggestions. The product, expected this year, will cost $ 9 a month, GitLab said Monday.
The product "has the potential to be a healthy growth driver in FY25," Bank of America analysts led by Koji Ikeda said in an investor note.
GitLab's stock rose as much as 35.4 percent Tuesday, its biggest one-day percentage jump since the company went public in 2021.
GitLab said on Monday its first-quarter revenue jumped 45 percent to $ 126.9 million, beating estimates and the company's earlier forecasts. REUTERS
Credit: By Lauren Hirsch and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DADO RUVIC/REUTERS)
