I'm a correspondent covering technology in Asia from Taiwan. It's a job that involves staying on top of the latest advances in everything from artificial intelligence to e-commerce, so in my free time, I look for entertainment that doesn't move at quite such a blistering pace. Here are five things I've recently slowed down with.
Getz/Gilberto
This album is known for the bossa nova classic "The Girl From Ipanema," but I like to play the entire thing on loop until my worries melt away. Don't let Stan Getz and João Gilberto take all the credit: Antônio Carlos Jobim's minimalist piano is the star of the show. If I had to pick one favorite: "Para Machucar Meu Coração."
Scopa
Since my husband and I learned this Italian card game at a sidewalk bar in Catania, we've played it on planes, trains, beaches and at the kitchen table. The images on the 40-card decks vary across regions in Italy -- as do the rules! -- but it's never too complicated to pick up, even after a Negroni or two.
I.M. Pei: Life Is Architecture
This retrospective of Pei's work at M+, the contemporary art museum in Hong Kong, includes drawings from his school days and models of his most iconic buildings. I was impressed with how far the style that his work exemplifies has spread around the world. The exhibition continues through Jan. 5.
Detective Montalbano
Detective Salvo Montalbano solves murders and fights crime in a fictional town in Sicily and blows off steam by swimming in the sea and eating heaping plates of pasta. Come for the turn-of-the-millennium Italian fashion, stay for the slapstick bumbling of his assistants on the police force.
The Books of Jacob
Olga Tokarczuk's boundary-blurring masterwork is a meditation on the social constructs that unite and divide us. Her skillful skewering of cults, con men and celebrities has my vote for a work in translation that should have been on the New York Times list of the best 100 books of the century so far.
Luca Zingaretti in "Detective Montalbano." (PHOTOGRAPH BY MHZ NETWORKS)
