Generate image description FILE -- Sen. Mark Warner (D-Va.) at the Capitol in Washington, Oct. 26, 2020. The Senate Intelligence Committee will examine the influence of Russia and other foreign powers on anti-government extremist groups like the ones that helped mobilize the deadly attack on the Capitol last month, the panel’s new chairman said in an interview this week. (Anna Moneymaker/The New York Times)
WASHINGTON — The Senate Intelligence Committee will examine the influence of Russia and other foreign powers on anti-government extremist groups like the ones that helped mobilize the deadly attack on the Capitol last month, the panel’s new chairman said in an interview this week.
As the executive branch undertakes a nationwide manhunt to hold members of the mob accountable, Sen. Mark Warner, D-Va., said it would be vitally important for the influential committee to do a “significant dive” into anti-government extremism in the United States, the ties those groups have to organizations in Europe and Russia’s amplification of their message.
With the power-sharing agreement between Democrats and Republicans in place, Warner took over as the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee this week, after four years as its vice chairman. In an interview Wednesday, Warner outlined his priorities, such as the spread of disinformation, the rise of anti-government extremist groups, Chinese domination of key technologies, Russia’s widespread hack of government computer networks and strengthening watchdog protections in the intelligence agencies.
The White House has ordered the Office of the Director of National Intelligence to work with the Department of Homeland Security and the FBI on a new analysis of the threat from domestic extremist groups and the support they receive from foreign powers or overseas organizations.
Those anti-government extremists include QAnon, a conspiracy movement, and the Proud Boys, a far-right organization that Canada named as a terror group on Wednesday. Supporters of those groups and others were part of the attack on the Capitol building on Jan. 6, which aimed to stop the transfer of power to the Biden administration.
The issue is a difficult one for the intelligence community. By law, the most influential agencies, including the CIA and the National Security Agency, are not allowed to collect information domestically. But Avril Haines, director of national intelligence, has some oversight of the intelligence arms of the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security, which can collect information domestically. Other intelligence agencies look at foreign attempts to influence U.S. groups.
While preliminary work by Haines’ office is underway, administration officials said that analysis was unlikely to be completed before April. But there appears to be significant interest in moving quickly on the issue in the Senate. At Haines’ confirmation hearing last month, a number of lawmakers raised the issue of domestic extremist groups.
The Senate Intelligence Committee will look at both white supremacist groups on the right, and anti-fascist, or antifa, groups on the left, although Warner was quick to say that the danger the groups posed was not the same. “I don’t want to make a false equivalency argument here,” he said, “because the vast preponderance of them are on the right.”
Like the intelligence community, Warner’s panel could face its own jurisdictional challenges as a handful of other House and Senate groups jockey to play a role in studying the aftermath of the Capitol siege and congressional leaders contemplate setting up an independent commission.
For the past four years, the committee has done extensive work on disinformation efforts. Warner said that experience could guide the panel as it looks at how extremists groups spread propaganda and how foreign powers amplify it.
Unlike most corners of Capitol Hill, and unlike the House Intelligence Committee, Warner’s panel has managed to operate, for the most part, with bipartisan agreement. All but one senator on the committee backed its five-volume report on Russian interference. Completed last year, the Senate investigation, perhaps the definitive word on Moscow’s interference efforts, found that Russia had disrupted the 2016 election to help Donald Trump become president.
Warner said Wednesday that the bipartisan record of the committee was important for him to preserve, and that he intended to begin work with closed-door meetings to make the case to other committee members about the threat the groups represent and how they could be exploited by outside powers.
Democrats and Republicans on the committee have expressed interest in examining anti-government extremist groups, Warner said. But he acknowledged the political sensitivities after the Capitol attack and Trump’s support among far-right factions of those groups. Making the case that anti-government groups are a problem not only in the United States but also in Europe is one way to build consensus on the issue. The committee, Warner said, will begin its discussions in closed-door sessions so lawmakers can have a candid and less political discussion.
Beyond an investigation of anti-government extremism and foreign efforts to promote it, Warner said the committee would work on pushing for new protections for whistleblowers and making it more difficult to fire inspectors general, government officials charged with finding waste, fraud and abuse.
Trump last year fired Michael Atkinson, inspector general of the intelligence community. It was Atkinson who investigated the whistleblower complaint about Trump’s call with his Ukrainian counterpart in 2019 and ultimately delivered that report to Congress.
At Haines’ confirmation hearing last month, Warner began his questioning by describing how his own views on the Chinese government had changed, thoughts he repeated in his interview. He said he was wrong to have believed that China would democratize the more it was brought into the world order.
“I will astonish you and acknowledge that directionally, Trump was right,” Warner said Wednesday.
Warner said he disagreed with John Ratcliffe, Trump’s final director of national intelligence, who had argued that China was trying to interfere with the election. But Warner said he believed China had “a very, very sophisticated effort to influence American policy.”
The Senate committee will also look at Chinese technological investments, building on work members of Congress have done on Beijing’s dominance of 5G, the next generation of mobile phone networks, Warner said. He said the United States needed to carefully assess its technology compared with China’s on artificial intelligence, facial recognition and quantum computing.
Having a government role in bringing some manufacturing back to the United States from China was an area of bipartisan agreement, Warner said, mentioning Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., a member of the Intelligence Committee.
“There is a coalition of the willing to take on the challenge of China,” Warner said. “China has taken the best lessons of British imperialism and American imperialism, and we find them in a kind of authoritarian capitalism model.”
