Stocks rose on Wednesday to recover much of their sharp losses from a day before, which were triggered by worries that high interest rates could stick around for months longer than hoped.
The S&P 500 climbed 1 percent and clawed back more than two-thirds of its loss from Tuesday. A hotter-than-expected report on inflation forced investors to delay forecasts for when the Federal Reserve could cut interest rates, potentially into the summer. Expectations for such cuts are a big reason stocks rallied to records recently.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 0.4 percent. The Nasdaq composite rose 1.3 percent.
The smallest stocks, which took the hardest hit from worries about higher interest rates on Tuesday, bounced back more than the rest of the market. The Russell 2000 index leaped 2.4 percent.
Helping to keep things steadier on Wall Street was a calmer bond market. Treasury yields eased after shooting upward a day earlier on expectations the Fed would keep rates high for longer. The central bank has already jacked its main interest rate to the highest level since 2001 in hopes of slowing the overall economy just enough to grind high inflation down to its target.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 4.26 percent from 4.32 percent late Tuesday. It is still well above its 3.85 percent level at the start of this month.
Critics have been arguing that stock prices may have run too far, too fast in their rally since October. A pullback could be healthy if it take some of the "froth" out of the market, according to JJ Kinahan, chief executive of IG North America.
Mr. Kinahan said he found it interesting that big recent winners like Nvidia and other chipmakers finished Tuesday well off their lows for the day, which made him think the day's drop "was more about taking some profits than it was panic selling" by investors.
Nvidia, which has been riding a mania around artificial-intelligence technology, rose 2.5 percent Wednesday and was the single strongest force pushing up the S&P 500 index.
DaVita jumped 8.6 percent for one of the S&P 500's larger gains after the health care company reported stronger profit and revenue for the latest quarter than analysts expected.
Most companies in the S&P 500 have been topping analysts' forecasts for the last three months of 2023. Hopes for stronger growth in 2024 from a solid economy have been another reason the S&P 500 has set 10 records already this year.
Lyft shares leaped 35.1 percent after a wild ride in off-hours trading driven in part by a typo in its latest earnings report. The ride-hailing company reported stronger results than analysts expected, but its news release also said it expects a key measure of profitability to improve by 500 basis points, or 5 percentage points. Later, it said that should have been 50 basis points, or 0.5 percentage points.
A rival, Uber Technologies, rose 14.7 percent after its board authorized a program to buy back up to $ 7 billion of its stock.
Robinhood Markets gained 13 percent after it reported a profit for the latest quarter, when analysts were expecting a loss. The stock and crypto trading platform also said its total net revenue rose 24 percent, more than analysts expected.
On the losing end, Akamai Technologies dropped 8.2 percent after it reported mixed results. Its profit for the latest quarter topped analysts' forecasts, but its revenue fell short.
Shares of the online vacation rental booker Airbnb slipped 1.7 percent after it reported losing $ 349 million in the fourth quarter because of an income tax settlement with Italy. Analysts had been expecting a profit.
The company forecast first-quarter revenue that would meet or beat Wall Street expectations; however, Airbnb said the pace of bookings growth was likely to "moderate" from the fourth quarter into the first.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
