Bitcoin has not yet reached its previous record high -- $ 68,789.63 -- but investors are watching as it gets tantalizingly close. On Friday morning, its price hovered around $ 62,000.
The comeback is a reversal of fortune from more than a year ago, when the value of cryptocurrency cratered as Sam Bankman-Fried's exchange, FTX, collapsed almost overnight. Many investors who had long been bullish on cryptocurrency lost billions. And intensified government scrutiny of the industry fueled doubts about its existence. Some wondered again: If digital currency isn't backed by another asset, is it really worth anything?
Recently, a new financial product tied to Bitcoin has generated renewed enthusiasm among investors. In January, the Securities and Exchange Commission authorized nearly a dozen financial firms, including BlackRock and Fidelity, to offer exchange-traded funds that track Bitcoin's price. An E.T.F. is essentially a basket of assets broken up into shares, allowing investors to buy shares in the basket rather than owning the assets directly. For investors, that means the ability to gain exposure to the cryptocurrency without entrusting large amounts of money to volatile or sketchy firms.
The price of Bitcoin immediately shot up after the S.E.C. approvals and has continued to climb since. But courts are still considering larger questions about whether digital currencies should be treated like stocks and bonds -- and subject to the same rules -- and are weighing in on lawsuits that may determine the future of crypto companies in the United States. Those decisions could bring an end to investors' euphoria.
"I would welcome them with open arms, put them up in a hotel and try my damnedest to get them plugged into our community, because we do have the need."
Steve Snyder, a business agent for Plumbers and Steamfitters Local 157 in Lafayette, Ind., said his union was desperate for new members, including immigrants, to help meet local labor demands.
"I can see consumers becoming more and more aware of the existence of shrinkflation."
Jun Yao, a marketing lecturer at Macquarie University in Australia, on companies downsizing their products without reducing prices.
"OpenAI has been transformed into a closed-source de facto subsidiary of the largest technology company, Microsoft."
Elon Musk, in a lawsuit accusing the artificial intelligence company, which he helped create, of breaching a contract by giving priority to profit and commercial interests over the public good.
