The venture is aimed at designing computers that are far more powerful than today's supercomputers and that can solve a variety of problems.
Modern computers are not unlike the looms of the industrial revolution: They follow programmed instructions to weave intricate patterns. With a loom, you see the result in a cloth or carpet. With a computer, you see it on an electronic display.
Now a group of physicists and computer scientists who are financed by Microsoft are trying to take the analogy of interwoven threads to what some believe will be the next great leap in computing, so-called quantum computing.
If they are right, their research could lead to the designing of computers that are far more powerful than today's supercomputers and could solve problems in fields as diverse as chemistry, material science, artificial intelligence and code-breaking.
They met here this past weekend to explore an approach to quantum computing that is based on "braiding" exotic particles known as anyons -- what physicists describe as "quasiparticles" that exist in just two dimensions rather than three -- to form the building blocks of a supercomputer that exploits the physical properties of subatomic particles.
The proposed Microsoft computer is mind-bending even by the standards of the mostly hypothetical world of quantum computing.
Conventional computing is based on a bit that can be either a 1 or a 0, representing a single value in a computation. But quantum computing is based on qubits, which simultaneously represent both zero and one values. If they are placed in an "entangled" state -- physically separated but acting as though they are connected -- with many other qubits, they can represent a vast number of values simultaneously. And the existing limitations of computing power are thrown out the window.
In the approach that Microsoft is pursuing, which is described as "topological quantum computing," precisely controlling the motions of pairs of subatomic particles as they wind around one another would manipulate entangled quantum bits. Although the process of braiding particles takes place at subatomic scales, it is evocative of the motions of a weaver overlapping threads to create a pattern.
By weaving the particles around one another, topological quantum computers would generate imaginary threads whose knots and twists would create a powerful computing system. Most important, the mathematics of their motions would correct errors that have so far proved to be the most daunting challenge facing quantum computer designers.
First proposed by the physicist Richard Feynman in 1982, quantum computing has mostly been of interest to academics, the National Security Agency and the Pentagon's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
But in recent years, quantum computing has caught the attention of the corporate world. Microsoft established a significant quantum computing research effort in 2006, creating the Station Q research group at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Since then, IBM, Northrop Grumman and BBN Technologies have also begun quantum computing research focused on earlier efforts to create qubits based on measuring the spin of an electron or the polarization of a photon.
While scientists have created individual qubits, they are extremely fragile, and creating the arrays of hundreds or thousands of circuits necessary to build a useful quantum computer has proved daunting.
D-Wave Systems, a Canadian company that has had support from NASA, Google and Lockheed Martin, has made claims that it has been able to speed up some computing problems based on what it describes as "the first commercial quantum computer."
On Thursday, however, an independent group of scientists reported in the journal Science that they had so far found no evidence of the kind of speedup that is expected from a quantum computer in tests of a 503 qubit D-Wave computer. The company said through a spokesman that the kinds of problems the scientists evaluated would not benefit from the D-Wave design.
Microsoft's topological approach is generally perceived as the most high-risk by scientists, because the type of exotic anyon particle needed to generate qubits has not been definitively proved to exist.
That may change soon. The company has been spending heavily and is contributing to 10 of the roughly 20 academic research groups exploring a long-hypothesized class of subatomic particles known as Majorana fermions. Beyond being a scientific advance, proving the existence of the Majorana would mean that it was likely they could be used to form qubits for this new form of quantum computing.
Microsoft supported research that was led by the physicist Leo Kouwenhoven at the Kavli Institute of Nanoscience at the Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands, and that in 2012 produced the strongest evidence that the long-predicted particles exist.
Ensembles of these particles that can be precisely controlled inside exotic materials at extremely low temperature can be used to construct qubits in the topological computing model that was proposed by the mathematician Michael Freedman and the physicists Chetan Nayak and Sankar Das Sarma in 2005.
Microsoft began supporting the effort after Dr. Freedman, who has won both the Fields Medal and a MacArthur Fellowship and is widely known for his work in the mathematical field of topology, approached Craig Mundie, one of Microsoft's top executives, and convinced him that there was a new path to quantum computing based on ideas in topology originally proposed in 1997 by the physicist Alexei Kitaev.
For some time, many thought quantum computers were useful only for factoring huge numbers -- good for N.S.A. code breakers but few others. But new algorithms for quantum machines have begun to emerge in areas as varied as searching large amounts of data or modeling drugs. Now many scientists believe that quantum computers could tackle new kinds of problems that have yet to be defined.
Indeed, when Mr. Mundie asked Dr. Freedman what he might do with a working quantum computer, he responded that the first thing he would program it to do would be to model an improved version of itself.
