Industry leaders attending the conference were asked about artificial intelligence, the economy, international relations and more.
At last week's DealBook Summit in New York City, leaders in business, tech, media, law and other disciplines were invited by The New York Times to lead conversations about pressing issues in their fields. Ahead of the summit, The Times sent questions to each of the Groundbreakers. Their answers have been edited and condensed.
Neil Blumenthal: Co-founder and Co-C.E.O., Warby Parker
Groundbreaker Topic: Shaping Consumer Brands for the Long Term in an Uncertain Economic Landscape
As a leader, how do you manage the new normal of volatility in the retail landscape?
In an increasingly unpredictable world, a leader's role is to serve as a shock absorber. At best, volatility distracts teams, and at worst, it scares them. The best leaders not only prepare teams for sudden swings in the business and geopolitical landscape but also help them maintain focus on their mission and the work at hand. At Warby Parker, we have a clear objective to provide vision for all -- and we can adapt more quickly when we stay focused on that goal. While volatility can foster self-doubt and lead to task switching, a thoughtful and stable strategy still wins in the long run.
Sharon Brous: Founder and senior rabbi, IKAR
Groundbreaker Topic: Repairing the Torn Fabric of Our Communities With Compassion
What is one act we can do as citizens or community members to bridge that which seems to divide our communities?
We are suffering from a widespread curiosity deficit. Through reclaiming curiosity and wonder, we rehumanize ourselves and one another. A society of lonely, atomized people is one at risk of falling into patterns of dehumanization that leave us susceptible to conspiracy theories, ideological extremism and political violence. It is precisely when these conditions emerge, as they have in our time, that genuine, openhearted curiosity is equal parts counterintuitive and urgent. The sacred recognition of one another's humanity is no substitute for equitable policies, accountability or systemic change. But it will be the foundation of any just society.
Steve Case: C.E.O., Revolution
Groundbreaker Topic: Reviving the American Dream Beyond Silicon Valley
Why do you believe the innovation gap poses a threat to the future of the American economy?
In the recent election, states that voted for President-elect Donald J. Trump received 16 percent of 2023 venture capital dollars while blue states received a whopping 84 percent. Venture-backed companies are significant drivers of economic growth and among the country's biggest job creators. It's hard to pitch the promise of technology as a good thing to the half of the U.S. population that has been systematically shut out from the innovation economy. And it's hard to bring together a country when some people see almost limitless potential and others feel the American dream slipping away. We must create more opportunity in more places by building a more inclusive tech and venture ecosystem. America's unity and future as the reigning global tech leader depends on it.
Ron Conway: Founder, SV Angel
Groundbreaker Topic: Silicon Valley and the Importance of Civic Engagement With a New Administration in Washington
What should Trump's team's posture toward the tech industry be? And what should the industry do?
It is critical that federal policies and regulations allow our entrepreneurs to innovate and lead the world in industries like A.I., digital currencies and biotech. I'm committed to helping founders navigate the policy and regulatory landscape as they build products that have a positive effect on society.
Katie Couric: Co-founder, Katie Couric Media
Groundbreaker Topic: The Changing Landscape in Journalism and Media
What is the best tool a person has to combat misinformation today?
There are many remedies for combating misinformation, but sadly getting rid of Section 230 and requiring more transparency by technology companies may not happen. As a result, it's mostly up to the individual to be vigilant about identifying misinformation and not sharing it. This will require intensive media literacy, which will help people understand the steps required to consider the source. That means investigating websites that may be disseminating inaccurate information and understanding their agendas, second-sourcing information, and if it's an individual, learning more about that person's background and expertise. Of course, this is all time-consuming and a lot to ask of consumers, but for now, I ascribe to the Sy Syms adage: "An educated consumer is our best customer."
Lynn Forester de Rothschild: Chairwoman, E.L. Rothschild, and founder and co-chair, the Council for Inclusive Capitalism
Groundbreaker Topic: Re-leveling the Playing Field Between Work and Capital
What is an achievable step to reduce the income gap between chief executive and worker pay?
The president, whose election was powered by the working class, cannot leave working Americans behind in favor of his rich friends. The best policies for employees are those that promote direct employee ownership. While existing structures, like employee stock 0wnership plans, provide tax benefits to public companies, these laws should be expanded to provide greater deductions for deeper employee ownership and worker voice opportunities. In the private equity sector, employee ownership has been shown to improve financial returns as well. The business community should champion these changes on the grounds that lower levels of inequality will lead to greater overall economic growth and stability.
Karla Gallardo: Founder and C.E.O., Cuyana
Groundbreaker Topic: The Delicate Balance Between Growth and Profit
What are you seeing as the biggest drivers of growth in Cuyana?
Since launch, we've been hyperfocused on establishing a deep understanding of our customer and have maintained an unwavering commitment to creating products that serve a purpose for our community. Providing a curated assortment of thoughtfully designed items is not only integral to our brand ethos of fewer, better, but has also proven to be a key driver of Cuyana's consistent growth by fostering consumer trust and loyalty. In today's rapidly changing landscape where brands are often driven by trends, building an authentic, values-driven brand that constantly exceeds customer expectations is critical to withstanding the test of time.
Ryan Gellert: C.E.O., Patagonia
Groundbreaker Topic: Purpose-Driven Leadership in a Shifting Landscape
What are the new ways you are working to address climate change today at Patagonia?
Even if the government never mandates doing what's necessary to address the climate and nature crisis, companies can play an outsized role in finding solutions or minimizing environmental impacts. Our future depends on it. We simply cannot run a business in a world in constant climate chaos where customers are fleeing from rising seas or fires, supply lines fail, and infrastructure collapses. At Patagonia, roughly 95 percent of our carbon emissions come from our supply chain. We're investing in scalable programs to reduce our carbon footprint and supporting environmental nonprofits on the front lines of this crisis.
Adam Grant: Organizational psychologist, the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and author and host of "WorkLife"
Groundbreaker Topic: Rethinking Effective Leadership in the Workplace
What's the change you recommend to leaders that offers the most dramatic impact in the workplace?
Recognize that many of your best practices were designed for a world that no longer exists. In the face of rapid change, past patterns don't predict the future. A key to adapting is to think like a scientist: Treat strategies as hypotheses and decisions as experiments. Research reveals that when entrepreneurs learn to think like scientists, compared to a control group a year later, their revenue is 40 times higher. Instead of searching for reasons why they must be right, they consider reasons why they might be wrong. That accelerates their ability to abandon bad ideas in favor of better ones.
Jonathan Greenblatt: C.E.O. and national director, the Anti-Defamation League
Groundbreaker Topic: The Rise (and Hopefully Fall) of Antisemitism in the 2020s
How can corporations be a more effective partner in combating antisemitism?
Corporate leadership is crucial in combating hate and antisemitism across society. Many corporations have signed ADL's Workplace Pledge, but amid an unprecedented increase in antisemitism after Oct. 7, many more need to step up. With antisemitism surging, all companies must take meaningful action to protect Jewish employees and customers. This includes using their bully pulpits to strongly and forcefully condemn antisemitism. And to ensure workplaces remain safe and welcoming for Jewish employees, employers should also offer educational programs, update religious accommodations and support Jewish employee resource groups. Anything less is unacceptable.
Chris Hadfield: Astronaut, commander of the International Space Station, combat fighter/test pilot and author
Groundbreaker Topic: The Global Space Race, the Mission to the Moon and Beyond to Mars
How is returning to the moon consequential in attaining the exploration of Mars?
In real estate, the three main things to consider are location, location and location. And often, on Earth, people want sunny waterfront. As we now transition from exploration to settlement on the moon, it's the same. There is eternal solar power and local water available only in select locations near the poles. China has clearly stated its goal to have people there by 2030, and the smooth landing spots are rare. If we want access to the moon's vast untapped resources and strategic location, with international rules we support, we have to be there, too. It's the historic moment.
Jonathan Haidt: Author and the Thomas Cooley Professor of Ethical Leadership at New York University's Stern School of Business
Groundbreaker Topic: The Impacts and Implications of a Phone-Based Childhood on Society, Democracy and the Economy
What is the best motivation parents can use to get children off their phones?
Teens and preteens are intensely focused on what their peers think of them. They are very afraid of being cut off, being "the only one" without a phone or an Instagram account. So make sure they are not the only one. Coordinate with the parents of your child's friends. They probably share your concerns. If you have not given your child a smartphone yet, delaying that fateful day until the start of high school is the best single thing you can do. If you already have given a smartphone, set clear boundaries, such as all screens out of the bedroom by 9:30 p.m., no phones at the table and, ideally, no smartphone use at home at all. (Almost everything can be done on a laptop, which is less addictive.)
Sarah Harden: C.E.O., Hello Sunshine and Candle Studios
Groundbreaker Topic: Content Is King, but Creativity Is Queen
Where do you see the industry's appetite for content in 2025? Better, worse, the same?
We are anticipating a market in 2025 that's largely flat to 2024 appetite -- so, more of the same. An improved interest rate environment feels like it should add wind to everyone's backs but I don't feel optimistic that this will translate quickly to an uptick in content spending versus what we are seeing in 2024. I think late 2025 and into 2026 we will see more robust growth.
Sherrilyn Ifill: President and director-counsel emeritus, the N.A.A.C.P. Legal Defense Fund
Groundbreaker Topic: Corporate Citizens as Critical Institutions of a Healthy Democracy
What are the obligations you believe a company owes to the democracy in which it exists?
Democracy is not the same as partisan politics. Far too many corporate leaders confuse the two. Whatever the partisan interests of individual corporate leaders, clients or consumers, corporations have an obligation to support the infrastructure that maintains the health of our democracy. This means support for core values: the rule of law, free and fair elections, the peaceful transfer of power, equal justice, and protection against state-sanctioned seizures and violence against citizens.
Walter Isaacson: Author
Groundbreaker Topic: A.I. and the Data
How can one best protect their intellectual property being used against their wishes for A.I. systems?
In order to be accurate and reliable, A.I. systems will depend on training data that are accurate and reliable. Much of this information is produced by reporters, writers, publishing houses and publications that create this content. These media producers got cut out of a lot of the revenue that flowed to search engines beginning in the 1990s. In order to encourage the creation of high-quality content in the future, media companies and writers need to find ways -- both legal and technological -- to require a revenue share when their content is used as A.I. training data. That is why I have become involved with two companies working on this issue: Created By Humans and ProRata.AI.
Neal Katyal: Former U.S. acting solicitor general
Groundbreaker Topic: The Future of the Supreme Court, the Rule of Law and the War on "Woke"
Is it realistic to expect the legislative branch to take a more muscular role in the absence of the federal courts? Is this a fair expectation?
At the time of writing, it looks like all the political branches -- the House and Senate along with the presidency -- are going to be under one-party control. History teaches that one-party government is often destructive to the nation's interests, so let us hope that elected officials vote for good policy, not for the good of any particular political party.
Karlie Kloss: Entrepreneur and founder, Kode With Klossy
Groundbreaker Topic: Gender Equity in STEM: Progress, Setbacks and the Road Ahead
As there are currently more women in college than men, is there the same sense of urgency as there once was? Where are you directing your efforts today?
While we've made incredible progress in total college enrollment, we have to look at what fields and demographics are not captured by these figures. Despite greater gender equity across majors, women constitute just 35 percent of the STEM work force. And although the tech industry has ballooned in the past 10 years, the percentage of women in computer science roles has remained at just 25 percent. These numbers are much lower for Black, Latina and Indigenous women. Kode With Klossy continues to feel a sense of urgency in our mission as we work toward true gender equity in STEM.
David Miliband: President and C.E.O., the International Rescue Committee
Groundbreaker Topic: Previewing the International Rescue Committee's 2025 Emergency Watchlist and How Tech Is Innovating to Help the World's Most Vulnerable
What are the most promising areas of humanitarian response where A.I. innovations can make a substantial difference? Are there barriers to those in poverty being able to utilize these advances?
As global risks mount and geopolitics fragments, the worst off are left further behind. Many say we live in a flammable world -- and in the I.R.C.'s 2025 Emergency Watchlist, which has guided the I.R.C.'s emergency preparedness efforts for over a decade, we have the proof. While the challenges in Watchlist countries are complex, I.R.C.'s experience shows that there are ways to reach those most in need. Properly and safely leveraged, A.I. can open new frontiers in humanitarian action -- in scale, speed and reach. In 2025, the benefits of the A.I. revolution must accrue to the poorest in the world.
Sara Moonves: Editor in chief, W Magazine
Groundbreaker Topic: Print Is Not Dead
What is the new argument for print editions, when convention is pushing toward digital-only products? Why do think W is finding success this way?
After years of consuming virtually everything on our screens, a magazine feels like a luxury product. W has always celebrated fashion, art, film and photography on glossy oversized pages; by focusing on long, meaningful stories and photo portfolios, we stand apart from the disjointed, blink-and-you-missed-it content of the digital world. We approach each of our six volumes as a keepsake for our readers, curated to stand the test of time. This approach resonates with our business partners, who still want to see their advertisements in print; in fact, we often hear from them that print feels more special than ever.
Hartmut Neven: Founder and lead, Google Quantum AI
Groundbreaker Topic: Quantum Leaps
What do you think are the first few practically useful things we will see as a result of quantum computing? And when will we see them?
We expect the first game-changing applications of quantum computing to be in chemistry, pharmacology and materials science. Quantum computers excel at simulating molecules and their interactions, and will provide computing power for problems that are even beyond supercomputers. Today's early quantum processors are already used for scientific discovery. As quantum computing systems are developed toward fully error-corrected quantum computers, which could take five-plus years to realize, they will be capable of running increasingly complex algorithms for breakthroughs in areas such as medical imaging, battery design or nuclear fusion.
Michael Oren: Former Israeli ambassador to the United States and author
Groundbreaker Topic: The Future of the Middle East
What do you believe America's fundamental policies toward Iran should be? How should they shift?
Since the advent of the Obama administration in 2009 -- with the exception of the first Trump administration -- America has sought rapprochement with Iran. The policy was based on the belief that, if treated with respect and sufficiently incentivized, Iran would become a responsible regional power. The opposite happened. Iran expanded its regional influence, enhanced its support for terror and enabled the current Middle East war. The United States must recognize this reality and move from a policy of reconciliation with Iran to one of confrontation and deterrence. Full backing must be given to America's allies in the region and a credible American military option returned to the table.
Ai-jen Poo: President, the National Domestic Workers Alliance
Groundbreaker Topic: Take Good Care
What are the keys to unlocking affordable care while also providing living wages to caregivers?
The key to unlocking affordable care and living wages for caregivers is to treat it like other essential infrastructure. Some of us need a bridge to get to work, others need care. The government should build care infrastructure by extending Medicare to cover home care, investing in Medicaid home and community based services, and tying funding to wage standards for care workers. As boomers age and we all live longer, the United States must catch up to our shared need for care. Rather than leaving individual families to shoulder the rising costs alone, it should be a shared, national priority.
Steve Rattner: Chairman and C.E.O., Willett Advisors
Groundbreaker Topic: The Big Economic Policy Issues Facing the New Administration
What's your assessment of the health of the economy as we head into 2025?
The state of the economy is a two-edged sword. On the one hand, unemployment is steady at a modest 4.1 percent. Growth remains brisk and steady. Inflation has subsided, almost to the Federal Reserve's 2 percent target. Yet 75 percent of Americans rate the economy as "fair" or "poor." What gives? Income inequality continues to rage and for the first time in memory, the American dream -- the notion that each generation will do better than the previous one -- is in jeopardy. Adjusted for inflation, just half of Americans born in 1980 earned more at age 30 than their parents did.
Eric Ripert: Chef and co-owner, Le Bernardin
Groundbreaker Topic: The Relevance, the Challenges and the Future of Fine Dining
What does a restaurant do for you that makes it feel like a truly special experience? Is there a recent example you can share that surprised you?
There is nothing like feeling a genuine warmth and welcome when you first enter a restaurant. For me, this is always the first step that makes the experience memorable. Of course, the quality of the food, the energy and décor is very important too. The other day I went to a new restaurant. They did not have my reservation in the books, though I did have one. A gentleman came over and introduced himself as the owner. He was incredibly warm and very personable and I felt welcomed. But I knew his demeanor was not just because of who I am as a chef; I could tell he would be like that for any guest. He kept checking in on us throughout the night and it felt very authentic. Even though we had a very simple meal, he was able to create a certain magic.
Liev Schreiber: Co-founder, BlueCheck Ukraine, and actor
Groundbreaker Topic: The People of Ukraine (Still) Need You
What do you say to those who think Ukraine should "just make a deal" with Russia, give up some land and end the war?
Completely separate of the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine is the geopolitical issue of democracy and the rising trend toward autocracy, dictatorships and authoritarianism generally. For me the war in Ukraine has always been a vivid reminder of just how precarious and vulnerable our own democracy is. Does anyone really believe that after acquiring Crimea, Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson, Mykolaiv and Zaporizhzhia, Putin is actually going to stop? Is Ukraine enough? If Putin succeeds in Eastern Europe, what are the implications for Western Europe, Asia, Africa, and perhaps more importantly to us in the United States, what are the implications on our own democracy?
Rajiv Shah: President, the Rockefeller Foundation
Groundbreaker Topic: Energy Transitions as the Common Denominator in Solving Global Crises
How do energy transitions affect poverty?
Research shows that 99 percent of people considered energy poor also experience at least one additional poverty indicator. Especially in the modern digital economy, electricity access determines a person's ability to get a job, start a business, or access education, health care and more. When we change energy, we change lives. We can also change the trajectory of climate change. Because the countries where energy access is lowest could produce as much as 75 percent of emissions by 2050, connecting people in those countries to clean energy is the only way to end poverty and end climate change.
Priscilla Sims Brown: President and C.E.O., Amalgamated Bank
Groundbreaker Topic: Closing the Wealth Gap in our Financial Institutions
What is Amalgamated Bank doing that's different to allow people access to credit that wasn't previously available to them?
Small businesses are the backbone of the American economy and fostering entrepreneurship is key to wealth creation and reducing income inequality. While small businesses play a crucial role in local economies, access to capital remains a challenge, especially for minority-owned businesses (approximately 47 percent report unmet financing needs). Amalgamated Bank, founded in 1923 to make a positive impact through banking, believes a key component of bridging the financing gap is re-evaluating credit scoring. By including nontraditional data (rent and utility payments), business owners' credit scores can benefit from the inclusion of additional key indicators of credit worthiness.
Tim Wu: The Julius Silver Professor of Law, Science and Technology, Columbia Law School, and former special assistant to the president for technology and competition policy
Groundbreaker Topic: What to Expect in the Next Administration's Tech Policies
Are you concerned about the wealth-creating capabilities of the A.I. revolution? Why? Should anything be done to address this?
Over history some big inventions -- like the farmer's plow -- created a broad wealth. Others, like the cotton gin, created new wealth but concentrated it -- in that case, in the southern plantation. The benefits of technological growth depend on economic structure. A.I. could go either way. It could spread wealth by empowering startups, small and medium-sized businesses. But it might also reinforce extractive business models by marginalizing actual humans or by giving the tech platforms the power to extract from the rest of the economy. We should try for broader creation of wealth -- for reasons of political stability, if nothing else.
Esther Manheimer: Mayor, Asheville, N.C.
Groundbreaker Topic: Real-Time Assessment of Asheville and Western North Carolina's Recovery from Hurricane Helene
What are the best ways people can support Hurricane Helene's recovery efforts?
The best way to support Asheville and western North Carolina's recovery from Hurricane Helene is through direct contributions. You can make a vital difference by donating to relief funds supporting small businesses and households, such as those listed at WNC Strong. Support our online and e-commerce retailers, buy gift cards for future use, and directly donate to businesses, artists, and nonprofit organizations through the Love Asheville From Afar initiative. Finally, jump-start our economy by visiting W.N.C. We welcome millions of visitors annually, so your patronage of local restaurants and creative venues keeps our work force thriving as we recover.
Suzanne P. Clark: President, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Groundbreaker Topic: Business Implications of the New Administration
What are the drivers of economic growth you want to see in the next presidential administration?
We released our Growth and Opportunity Imperative this summer, outlining key policies to achieve 3 percent growth annually. Our plan includes: preventing the expiration of 2017 tax cuts to avoid the largest tax hike in U.S. history; rolling back Biden-era regulations and reducing government overreach; defending trade as a principal driver of growth; harnessing A.I. to drive innovation; adopting an all-of-the-above energy strategy; expanding and upskilling the work force.
These are some of the most important steps we can take to achieve the growth that will help improve people's lives.
Michael C. Bush: C.E.O., Great Place to Work
Groundbreaker Topic: Leadership, Ethics and A.I. Integration in the Modern Workplace
What are the key elements companies can do to build trust with their employees today?
Companies need people leaders who create a high-trust experience for all employees, full stop. The problem is, 62 percent of all people leaders don't want to lead people but they like the perks that come with it. Employees tell us about this every day across all industries, all around the world. If leaders don't want to work on their humility, curiosity, compassion, no problem, but they should be highly paid individual contributors. Benefits and flexibility matter, but people will trade these things for an experience where they feel their people leader has high expectations for them and wants them to succeed at work and in life.
Photograph PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GUERIN BLASK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; ERIK TANNER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; REUTERS) (F13); PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GUERIN BLASK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; ERIK TANNER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; ALEX WELSH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; GETTY IMAGES) (F14); PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GUERIN BLASK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; ERIK TANNER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; JUSTIN J. WEE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; ASSOCIATED PRESS; EPA; GETTY IMAGES; REUTERS) (F15)
