A series of cryptic social media posts was all it took to push GameStop to its highest valuation of the year, temporarily breathing life into the otherwise struggling video game retailer. GameStop shares were worth $ 48.75 on May 14, their peak for the year, up nearly 180 percent since Jan. 1.
But just as quickly as the price shot up, it plunged. GameStop shares closed at $ 18.32 on Thursday, down more than 60 percent from their peak. In just a little over a week, much of the billions of dollars in market value that the company had gained was lost.
GameStop's wild ride can be traced to Keith Gill, the trader known as "Roaring Kitty," who returned to social media on May 12 after a nearly three-year hiatus. Mr. Gill led the "meme stock" craze that inflated GameStop's stock in 2021. And he led the smaller market-shaking craze this month.
Meme stocks are shares that surge in price for reasons other than their company's performance. The prices are often pushed up by banter and social media posts on forums like Reddit and YouTube, the platforms where Mr. Gill rose to prominence.
Other companies also benefited from the meme craze. AMC Entertainment, a struggling movie theater chain, saw its stock shoot up at the same time as GameStop. It took advantage of the storm and swapped $ 164 million of its debt for its stock.
Many who trade meme stocks have a specific goal: causing headaches for Wall Street traders they see as predatory. Hedge funds, which often bet against embattled companies, can lose millions of dollars when poor performing companies unexpectedly go up in value.
Retail traders with less market savvy, on the other hand, stand to make thousands or even millions of dollars. But the rally is typically short-lived, so those who don't pull their money out can lose big, too.
"It is time for fans and artists to stop paying the price for Live Nation's monopoly."
Merrick B. Garland, the attorney general, in announcing a Justice Department lawsuit that accuses the company of leveraging its sprawling empire to dominate the entertainment industry.
"No community should have to experience the trauma inflicted upon the residents of East Palestine."
Michael S. Regan, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, announcing Norfolk Southern's $ 310 million settlement with the federal government to settle claims from the 2023 derailment of a train carrying hazardous materials in East Palestine, Ohio.
"The next industrial revolution has begun."
Jensen Huang, Nvidia's chief executive, in a conference call with analysts. The company, which is at the center of the artificial intelligence boom, reported soaring profits.
