Trevor Winkfield
Through Sunday. Tibor de Nagy Gallery, 15 Rivington Street, Manhattan; 212-262-5050, tibordenagy.com.
Born in Britain in 1944, Trevor Winkfield has lived in New York since 1969 and exhibited here almost as long. For decades, he has cultivated a style of Formalist Pop Surrealism that balances between fine and commercial art. His precedents include the proto-Pop paintings of Gerald Murphy; Paul Outerbridge's advertising photography; and Picabia's mechanical portraits which Mr. Winkfield might be said to have fleshed out.
Mr. Winkfield's paintings are built to always look new -- both fresh and unfamiliar. Their complex palette of brilliant, compelling colors (seldom straight from the tube), their smooth surfaces and their locked-in compositions push everything to the brink of abstraction. He keeps the optical heat on by using bright yellows -- when he wants to lighten up -- and virtually banning white.
But his totemic figures built from half-recognizable insignia and symbols pulse with narrative implication, relationships and innuendo. This is especially the case in "Saints, Dancers and Acrobats," a group of compact yet airy canvases from the last five years that form one of Mr. Winkfield's best shows. The prevailing composition here is of two figure-like totems facing forward as if standing at attention. In "Signals," one totem seems ready to spin, while the other has open triangles that evoke arms akimbo. It brings to mind "Signals," Merce Cunningham's landmark dance from 1970.
Mr. Winkfield's cryptic symbols and hyped-up color is itself a precedent for the flat representational styles of younger painters like Caitlin Keogh, Derrick Adams and Orion Martin. It's great to see Mr. Winkfield's work on the youth-oriented Lower East Side, at Tibor de Nagy, a gallery that has just moved here, after a long life uptown.
ROBERTA SMITH
Isa Genzken
Through April 7. David Zwirner, 533 West 19th Street, Manhattan; 212-727-2070, davidzwirner.com.
The beguiling sense of freedom in Isa Genzken's aptly named "Sky Energy," a show of new additions to several of this German sculptor's best-known and longstanding series, starts with its installation. In a large single room of David Zwirner's 19th Street gallery, she has arranged nine concrete sculptures; two discrete groups of mannequins, one arranged around a living room set; a 10-foot tower of medium-density fiberboard boxes and paint drips; and two more towers covered in mirror foil, like disco retreads of the old World Trade Center. Hanging on the walls are brash collages, heavy on colored adhesive tape, as well as an X-ray of the artist's skull.
But the gallery doesn't feel crowded, because this maximalism is executed with such a light touch that it feels like a kind of minimalism. Two mannequins, thrown on top of each other on a beat-up leather sofa, might be having sex, but they also might be garbage, and the same goes for those wearing avant-couture plastic-bag ponchos.
For me, though, Ms. Genzken's effortless fusion of opposites is most exciting in her "loudspeakers," narrow monoliths perforated with off-center holes, and her "screens," double door-frame shapes connected with metal hinges -- because, in them, she makes concrete look like Styrofoam that looks like concrete.
WILL HEINRICH
Sarah Crowner
Through April 21. Casey Kaplan, 121 West 27th Street, Manhattan; 212-645-7335, caseykaplangallery.com.
Painters often find their styles by setting narrow limits on their work. But things usually get really interesting when they start working against their own rules. Sarah Crowner, known over the last decade for stitching together cutout shapes of plain or painted canvas to form rectilinear abstract paintings, is sticking to first principles. Yet she's messing with them so vigorously that "Weeds," her fifth solo gallery show in New York, has the feeling of a breakthrough.
Ms. Crowner has complicated her compositions, strewing them with tipsy curves, ellipses and parts of circles suggestive of orange sections. Her arrangements borrow from the history of abstraction without accruing too great a debt. Matisse's cutouts and Ellsworth Kelly's signature curves, which were often kissing, or stacked like those in the letter B, are repeatedly folded into the flux.
Color is no longer necessarily solid and flat. Some shapes are brushy; others fade a bit, as if catching light from somewhere. There are even tiny glimpses of white canvas, like the bit of possible moon glow in "Opening Blues." Elsewhere, variations of a single solid color are juxtaposed: close but different tones of, say, yellow ("Sliced Bouquet") or pink ("Rotated Pink," whose other main color is a dark green that slides toward textured chartreuse). The unruly blacks and grays of "Folded Greens" result from a combination of visible brushwork, uneven staining and shifts in tone. And throughout, what appear to be shades of black turn out to be the darkest blues.
Ms. Crowner's sewn-canvas technique continues to give her colors a satisfying separateness. But now she is increasing contrasts and pushing toward a greater, also satisfying sense of difference and interaction. The works' new subtle busyness becomes them. Once again, she has also altered the gallery's floor with a series of six-and-a-half-inch-high platforms, both small and large, in plywood with a pine veneer. They bring the paintings' curves into real space. Neither your feet nor your eyes can take anything for granted.
ROBERTA SMITH
Zach Blas
Through April 21. Art in General, 145 Plymouth Street, Brooklyn; artingeneral.org.
Smart, stylish and apocalyptic, Zach Blas's "Contra-Internet" at Art in General uses sculpture and moving images to critique the internet as a tool of capitalism and oppression, and to imagine its messy demise. The centerpiece, "Jubilee 2033," is a 28-minute video featuring an animated robot from the future sent to assist humans. Actors play those champions of capitalism, Ayn Rand and Alan Greenspan, and the transgender performance artist Cassils stars as Nootropix, a fictional prophet of artificial intelligence.
"Jubilee 2033" borrows its title and opening sequence from Derek Jarman's punk-cult film "Jubilee" (1978) and is shown in a dark gallery with futuristic elements: a bright green geometric emblem projected on the floor and blown-glass orbs resting on pedestals. In the video, the promise of the internet has failed and we see cities burning -- or campy digital images of conflagration -- as well as a copy of the hippie-utopian "Whole Earth Catalog." Nootropix appears near the end of the video, its body painted silver, spouting ideas couched in queer and feminist theories of technology and science fiction and dancing to an opera aria while a petro-looking liquid shoots out of a glowing blue faux phallus.
"Contra-Internet" also includes a single-edition book titled "The End of the Internet (As We Knew It)" with a bibliography of "Works Plagiarized" from the theorists Fredric Jameson and Beatriz Preciado and the Zapatista revolutionary Subcomandante Marcos, among others. The exhibition also gains traction from its location in Art in General's space in Dumbo, one of New York's Silicon Valley-like hot spots. After leaving the show I spied a cafe nearby with the slogan "you code, we cook" printed on its window, addressed to the minions toiling for digital overlords in Dumbo's pre-post-contra-internet work spaces. I was sort of waiting for Nootropix to appear inside, specterlike, in full prophet mode.
MARTHA SCHWENDENER
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph Above, a film still from Zach Blas's "Jubilee 2033" (2018), a 28-minute video featuring an animated robot from the future sent to assist humans, at Art in General. Left, Sarah Crowner's "Opening Blues," at left, from 2018, with hints of possible moon glow, and "Half Moons," right, from 2017, at Casey Kaplan. Below, from left: "Untitled" (2018), an installation from Isa Genzken's "Sky Energy" show, at David Zwirner; and Trevor Winkfield's "The First Dance" (2017), at the Tibor de Nagy Gallery. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GASWORKS, LONDON; ART IN GENERAL, NEW YORK; AND MU, EINDHOVEN; CASEY KAPLAN; ISA GENZKEN/ARTISTS RIGHTS SOCIETY (ARS), NEW YORK; DAVID ZWIRNER, NEW YORK AND GALERIE DANIEL BUCHHOLZ, COLOGNE; TIBOR DE NAGY GALLERY, NEW YORK)
