Wall Street's split widened Thursday, as smaller stocks and other formerly downtrodden areas of the market rose up while superstar big tech stocks gave back more of their stellar gains.
A swirling day of trading left the S&P 500 with a loss of 0.5 percent following its slide from the day before, which was its worst since 2022 and led to a wipeout for financial markets around the world.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 0.2 percent, while the Nasdaq composite sank 0.9 percent.
Weighing on Wall Street were continued losses for Nvidia and most of the handful of technology stocks that have been primarily responsible for the S&P 500's run to records this year. They had tumbled a day earlier after profit reports from Tesla and Alphabet underwhelmed and raised concerns that the market's frenzy around artificial-intelligence technology had sent prices too high.
Whether the handful of stocks known as the "Magnificent Seven" are rising or falling makes a huge impact on Wall Street because they've grown so mammoth in market value. That gives their stock movements extra sway on the S&P 500 and other indexes.
But Thursday's drops for six of the Magnificent Seven masked a market where the majority of stocks rallied. A surprisingly strong report on the economy raised hopes for profits at smaller stocks and other formerly unloved areas of the market.
It is a flip of the leaderboard from earlier this year, when strength for big tech masked weakness for other stocks, which struggled with high interest rates.
The economy's growth accelerated to an estimated 2.8 percent annual rate from April through June, double the rate from the prior quarter. A continuation would help drive more sales for companies. Perhaps just as importantly for Wall Street, the report wasn't so hot that it fanned worries about upward pressure on inflation.
Because inflation has largely resumed its slowdown, the widespread expectation is for the Federal Reserve to begin cutting its main interest rate from the highest level in more than two decades. Following Thursday's report, traders still see a 100 percent probability that the Fed will begin doing so in September, according to data from CME Group.
The Russell 2000 index of smaller stocks jumped 1.3 percent, doing better than other market indexes. It is up 8.6 percent this month, versus a loss of 1.1 percent for the big stocks in the S&P 500.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury slipped to 4.25 percent from 4.28 percent late Wednesday. It is down significantly from its perch of 4.70 percent reached in April, which gives a strong boost to stock prices.
IBM was one of the biggest reasons for the Dow's climb: It rose 4.3 percent after delivering stronger profit and revenue than expected for the last quarter. It also raised its forecast for how much cash it will generate this year, saying its A.I. business has been strong.
ServiceNow was one of the strongest forces pushing upward on the S&P 500. The company, whose platform helps businesses connect seemingly disjointed systems, jumped 13.4 percent after delivering stronger profit and revenue than expected. It also raised its forecast for subscription revenue this year.
Airline stocks leaped after American Airlines Group and Southwest Airlines both reported profits for the spring that topped analysts' expectations. Southwest also announced a break from a tradition of 50 years: It will start assigning seats and selling premium seating for customers who want more legroom.
American Airlines climbed 4.2 percent, and Southwest Airlines rose 5.5 percent.
On the losing side of Wall Street was Ford Motor, which tumbled 18.4 percent after reporting profit that fell short of expectations. Its net income fell in part on rising warranty and recall costs.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
