THE N.C.A.A. men's basketball tournament started Thursday, but for most Americans the real action began days before, as they pored over brackets, competing to make the most accurate predictions -- for money, or just office glory. These days, when statistical algorithms can figure out what breakfast cereal you want based on your browser history, stats-minded hoops fans have thrown lots of complex analysis at the problem of picking winners.
But what's the best method? Last year a company called Kaggle, which offers predictive modeling services, held a competition in which more than 200 teams of data scientists threw the best statistics they could at the problem, in pursuit of a $15,000 top prize. It turned out that, for all the intricate calculations people like to use to complete their bracket, some pretty simple math goes a long way.
The winning team, "One Shining Moment Generating Function" (nerds love puns), consisted of two young math professors, Michael Lopez of Skidmore College and Gregory Matthews of Loyola University Chicago, whose paper about their work came out last week in the Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports.
Some competitors tried to gain advantage by factoring in lots of external information, like travel distance, seeding and performance in previous tournaments. Professors Lopez and Matthews kept it simple. Their algorithm used just two data sources for each game: the Las Vegas point spreads for the N.C.A.A. matchups and a set of offensive and defensive efficiency ratings developed by Ken Pomeroy, an independent basketball analyst. "Using the right data was much more important to our models' performing well than using more sophisticated models," Professor Matthews said in an interview afterward. It's not that things like excess travel didn't affect performance; it's that those effects were already baked into the Vegas numbers.
Professors Lopez and Matthews didn't use any of the au courant methods in data science circles, either: no deep learning, no hierarchical clustering, no compressed sensing; just a good old model called logistic regression, which turns a number (like a point spread) into an estimated probability that team A will beat team B.
The professors looked at 10 years of college basketball results, regular season and tournament games alike. As you might expect, teams that were favored by the Las Vegas bookies won more frequently than teams on the short side of the spread. Running that data through the logistic regression gives you a sense for the numerical extent to which one ought to favor the Vegas choice.
The job of a regression is to find a simple formula that fits the data as well as possible. In this case, the regression's output was exp(0.17 x) / (1+exp(0.17 x)), where x is the point spread and "exp" is the exponential function. Wichita State, for example, was a first-round 5.5-point favorite against Indiana; plugging in 5.5, you find that the Lopez-Matthews model gives the Shockers a 72 percent chance of winning that game. The source of that judgment is the fact that, historically speaking, teams favored by about 5.5 points have won their matchups about that frequently. And indeed, when the two teams met on Friday, Wichita State won by five points, 81 to 76.
You can carry out a similar regression using Mr. Pomeroy's efficiency ratings, which, in contrast with the Vegas spreads, don't involve human judgment at all -- they just measure the number of points scored and points allowed by each team per possession. Right now, Wisconsin has the top-ranked offense on Mr. Pomeroy's scale, while Virginia comes out tops for defense. Among numbers-minded basketball fans, the Pomeroy stats are the gold standard for on-court performance, much better than win-loss records or the much-mocked Ratings Percentage Index, or R.P.I., the N.C.A.A. uses as part of its seeding mechanism. The professors then combined the two estimates to get an overall probability score for the outcome of each game.
Wait -- shouldn't we just use whichever of the two estimates does a better job? Why combine them? This is still a bit mysterious, but in practice, such "hybrid" prediction algorithms often do better than their components do alone. The winning algorithm in the Netflix Prize, a competition to predict users' movie ratings, was a composite of more than 100 individual programs.
For March Madness, Professors Lopez and Matthews found that a mix of two parts Pomeroy to one part Vegas gave the best results -- though an alternate attempt that was three-quarters point spreads and one-quarter Pomeroy was no slouch either, finishing fourth in the Kaggle competition.
Can you guarantee yourself top-dogship in your bracket pool by following the Lopez-Matthews formula? Unfortunately, it's not that easy. The probability that a team like Wichita State beats a team like Indiana is just that -- a probability, not a certainty. Professors Lopez and Matthews ran 10,000 simulated tournaments to check how much of their success was a result of skill and how much was plain luck. They found that, even if all their probabilities were exactly right, they won the contest only one in six times, and finished out of the top 10 more often than not.
The math can boost your chances of scoring high; but in bracketology, as in life, there are no guarantees.
AuthorAffiliation JORDAN ELLENBERG Jordan Ellenberg is a professor of mathematics at the University of Wisconsin and the author, most recently, of "How Not to Be Wrong: The Power of Mathematical Thinking."
Illustration Drawing (Drawing by Olimpia Zagnoli)
