The new processor, developed by researchers at IBM, attempts to mimic the way brains recognize patterns, relying on webs of transistors similar to the brain's neural networks.
Inspired by the architecture of the brain, scientists have developed a new kind of computer chip that draws no more power than a hearing aid and eventually may excel at calculations that stump today's supercomputers.
The new processor, named TrueNorth, was developed by researchers at IBM and detailed in an article published on Wednesday in the journal Science. The chip attempts to mimic the way brains recognize patterns, relying on densely interconnected webs of transistors similar to the brain's neural networks.
The new chip's electronic "neurons" are able to signal others when a type of data -- light, for example -- passes a certain threshold. Working in parallel, the neurons begin to organize the data into patterns suggesting the light is growing brighter, or changing color or shape.
The TrueNorth has one million "neurons," about as complex as the brain of a bee.
The processor may be able to recognize that a woman in a video is picking up a purse, or reaching into a pocket and pulling out a quarter. Humans are able to recognize these acts without conscious thought, yet computers and robots struggle to interpret them.
The chip contains 5.4 billion transistors, yet draws just 70 milliwatts -- or 70 thousandths of a watt -- of power. By contrast, modern Intel processors in today's personal computers and data centers may have 1.4 billion transistors and consume far more power -- between 35 watts and 140 watts.
Today's conventional microprocessors and graphics processors are capable of performing billions of mathematical operations per second. But the new chip system's clock makes its calculations about a thousand times per second. Because of the vast number of circuits working in parallel, though, it is still capable of performing 46 billion operations per second per watt of energy consumed, according to IBM researchers.
"It is a remarkable achievement in terms of scalability and low power consumption," said Horst Simon, deputy director of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
He compared the new design to the advent of parallel supercomputers in the 1980s, a transition that he recalled as being like moving from a two-lane road to a superhighway.
The new approach to design, referred to variously as neuromorphic or cognitive computing, is still in its infancy, and the IBM chips are not yet commercially available. But the design has already touched off a vigorous debate over the best approach to speeding up the neural networks increasingly used in computing.
The idea of that neural networks might be useful in processing information occurred to engineers in the 1940s, before the invention of modern computers. Only recently, though, as computing has grown dramatically in both memory capacity and processing speed, have they proven to be powerful computing tools.
In recent years companies like Google, Microsoft and Apple have turned to pattern recognition that employs neural networks to dramatically improve the quality of services like speech recognition and photo classification.
But Yann LeCun, director of artificial intelligence research at Facebook and a pioneering expert in neural networks, said he was skeptical that IBM's approach would ever outpace today's fastest commercial processors.
"The chip appears to be very limited in many ways, and the performance is not what it seems," he wrote in an email distributed to journalists. In particular, he said there had been inadequate testing of the chip's ability to detect moving pedestrians and cars.
"This particular task won't impress anyone in computer vision or machine learning," he wrote. While special-purpose chips running neural networks might be useful for a range of applications, he said, he remained skeptical about the design that IBM had chosen.
But several neuroscience researchers and computer scientists disputed Mr. LeCun's critique.
"The TrueNorth chip is like the first transistor," said Terry Sejnowski, director of the Salk Institute Computational Neurobiology Laboratory. "It will take many generations before it can compete, but when it does, it will be a scalable architecture that can be delivered to cellphones."
