Michelle Obama travels to Africa for her Let Girls Learn initiative. "Lip Sync Battle" begins Season 3 with a blast from the past. And Jonathan Demme shoots Justin Timberlake and the Tennessee Kids on the final performance of their world tour.
What's on TV
WE WILL RISE: MICHELLE OBAMA'S MISSION TO EDUCATE GIRLS AROUND THE WORLD 9 p.m. on CNN, CNN International and CNN.com/go. In this documentary about the need for global female education, the first lady, the actors Meryl Streep and Freida Pinto and the CNN correspondent Isha Sesay visit Morocco and Liberia to meet with girls fighting to stay in school. Andra Day's anthem "Rise Up" is the theme song. "In my own life, I know that losing heart is the most dangerous thing," Ms. Streep tells girls assembled to discuss the obstacles they confront. "And so you take your strength from your friends, from that one person in your life who had said, 'You are capable.' You only need one."
LIP SYNC BATTLE 9 p.m. on Spike. This Season 3 opener goes old school as Ben Kingsley channels Elton John in "Rocket Man" and John Cho makes like Rod Stewart in "Da Ya Think I'm Sexy?" Jimmy Fallon and Dwayne Johnson duel at 9:30.
LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT 9 p.m. on NBC. After a sexual assault an athlete faces the revelation of a double life that could destroy her future Olympic bid.
SOUTH PARK 10 p.m. on Comedy Central. The boys of South Park Elementary School stand up for their rights.
What's Streaming
JUSTIN TIMBERLAKE + THE TENNESSEE KIDS on Netflix. Jonathan Demme captures Mr. Timberlake and his band on the final night, in January 2015, of their 20/20 Experience World Tour at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas.
EX MACHINA (2015) on Amazon and iTunes. Alicia Vikander portrays Ava, an exquisite embodiment of artificial intelligence and the latest creation of a tech mogul (Oscar Isaac) living off the grid in wilderness splendor. But can Ava think for herself? The mogul intends to find out by luring a young employee (Domhnall Gleeson) into his lair. Alex Garland's futuristic thriller is "a smart, sleek movie about men and the machines they make, but it's also about men and the women they dream up," Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times.
SLIDING DOORS (1998) on Netflix. Will she make or miss her subway train? And how will that affect her life? Gwyneth Paltrow plays Helen, a comely Londoner who, depending on those pesky doors, may or may not sit next to a stranger, James (John Hannah), and strike up a conversation, only to return home to find her boyfriend (John Lynch) in bed with his ex-girlfriend (Jeanne Tripplehorn). "In any case, there's no real doubt about Helen's rosy future," Stephen Holden wrote in The Times of Peter Howitt's rom-com. "If you're a late-'90s It Girl, a bird among birds, nothing really terrible can happen, at least nothing that can't be reversed in a quick-fix substitute future."
Photograph From Left, Freida Pinto, Isha Sesay, Michelle Obama and Meryl Streep. (Photograph by Amanda Lucidon/the White House); a Scene From "South Park." (Photograph by Comedy Central); Alicia Vikander (Photograph by A24)
