SRI International, a research institute, is hoping to bring the concept of virtual personal assistants closer to reality with a program that supplies news articles by learning what the user likes to read.
The film "2001: A Space Odyssey" presents a dramatic vision of a future where sentient robots double as secretaries, performing daily tasks and simple services for their human masters.
Now, SRI International, a research institution, is hoping to bring the concept of virtual personal assistants closer to reality -- without the malevolent malfunctions, of course.
"We are looking to augment human capability," said Norman Winarsky, vice president of licensing and strategic programs at SRI. "But with artificial intelligence."
Established in 1946 by Stanford University, SRI created early prototypes of the computer mouse and the technologies involved in ultrasound and high-definition television.
Although SRI does about 80 percent of its work for the U.S. government, many of its technologies have been adapted for commercial purposes. Recently, the institute has set its sights on the mobile phone and Web market, especially on creating applications that perform personal functions.
"We have companies in every space: drug discovery, flexible circuits, new medical devices, solar, clean tech," said Mr. Winarsky, who oversees the establishment of companies that are spun off from SRI. "But right now, half of the companies we're thinking of creating are strongly related to virtual personal assistants."
SRI's newest venture is a Web-based personalized news feed, Chattertrap, that monitors what people are reading to learn what they like and then serves up articles and links that suit their interests.
Another project is a mobile application, Siri, that allows people to perform Web searches by voice on a cellphone. Siri users can speak commands like "find a table at an Italian restaurant for six at 8 p.m.," and the application can translate the request and use global positioning systems and search algorithms to find an answer. Over time, Siri's software can even remember whether someone prefers places that serve Northern Italian cuisine or Sicilian and make recommendations around that preference.
The application has already been a big hit; in April, Apple purchased Siri for a price rumored to be as high as $200 million. But some analysts wonder whether SRI will be able to duplicate this kind of success. Variations on the virtual personal assistant concept have been around for a while. Two services, for example -- Remember the Milk and Jott -- are electronic crutches intended to help users be more efficient at ticking off items in their daily to-do lists.
But SRI hopes that its expertise in artificial intelligence will help make software that can break away from the pack.
SRI has high hopes that Chattertrap will be as successful as Siri.
"The popular news sites aren't always the most interesting," said Gary Griffiths, one of the two entrepreneurs SRI recruited to helm Chattertrap. "But by using technology to evolve with you as you use it, watching what you're doing and giving more of what you like and less of what you're ignoring we can create a very personal information service."
Although Chattertrap is in limited testing, SRI hopes to allow more users later this summer and release the product in its entirety by the end of the year.
Chattertrap has already caught the attention of Li Ka-shing, the Hong Kong billionaire who has invested in Facebook and the music-streaming service Spotify. Mr. Li has led a $1.5 million round of venture funding into the Chattertrap project.
Each year, SRI tests out the marketability of about 2,000 different technology ventures, but typically only three or four are ever established as independent businesses.
Charles Golvin, an analyst with Forrester Research, who follows the mobile industry, said SRI was tapping into the mobile market at a time when the need to simplify searching was greater than ever.
"The old paradigm of having a desktop computer in front of you with a large screen to search around for what you want is going away," Mr. Golvin said. "More and more, the information you want online is coming from the palm of your hand."
Since most mobile phones have small, cramped screens and tiny keyboards, voice-activated search and speech recognition becomes much more powerful, Mr. Golvin said.
"It's a very compelling offer for a mobile company," he said.
In addition, many handset manufacturers like Apple and Google are sizing up the market opportunity for location-based search and the potential advertising opportunities that come with it, said Brent Iadarola, director of mobile research at Frost and Sullivan.
"When you're in a mobile environment there's a higher propensity to spend and tying that into mobile advertising could be lucrative," he said.
