VENTURE CAPITAL
A.I. Start-Up Cohere
Valued at About $ 2 Billion
Cohere, a Toronto artificial intelligence start-up, has raised $ 250 million in new funding, two people with knowledge of the situation said, in yet another sign of feverish interest in a new kind of A.I. technology.
The deal values Cohere at about $ 2 billion, the people said. Investors include the internet software giant Salesforce, the chip maker Nvidia, the Toronto venture capital firm Inovia Capital and the Silicon Valley firm Index Ventures.
The start-up, which was founded in 2019, previously raised $ 170 million from investors including Index, Tiger Global and the well-known A.I. researchers Geoffrey Hinton, Fei-Fei Li and Pieter Abbeel.
Cohere builds technology that other businesses can use to deploy chatbots, search engines and other A.I.-driven products. It is among a small group of companies -- including the tech industry's giants and a handful of start-ups -- that are building technology that could rival systems under development at OpenAI, the San Francisco start-up that kicked off the generative A.I. boom in November with the release of the chatbot ChatGPT.
Cohere was founded by Aidan Gomez and Nick Frosst, two Canadian researchers who had worked on artificial intelligence at Google, and Ivan Zhang, a Toronto entrepreneur. Mr. Gomez was among the Google researchers who published a key research paper that helped lead to ChatGPT and similar technologies.
ChatGPT has captured the imagination of millions of people with its ability to do things like answer questions, write term papers and poetry, and generate computer code. CADE METZ
EARNINGS
Pfizer Tops Forecasts;
Vaccine Sales Slide
Pfizer beat first-quarter forecasts as revenue took an expected dip, but the drugmaker predicted a sales rally later this year.
The pharmaceutical giant said Tuesday that total revenue dropped 29 percent in quarter, as sales tumbled for its market-leading Covid-19 vaccine, Comirnaty. The vaccine brought in $ 3 billion in the first three months of 2023 compared with more than $ 13 billion in last year's first quarter, when virus cases were soaring.
Both analysts and Pfizer had predicted the drop as the drugmaker shifts this year from supplying governments through big contracts to selling the vaccine on the commercial market.
The company said Tuesday that it also expects significantly lower sales from its vaccine and Covid treatment, Paxlovid, in the second quarter compared with the first. But commercial sales are expected to kick in later this year, after leftover government inventory is absorbed.
Both the vaccine and treatment have generated billions in revenue for Pfizer and have easily become the drugmaker's top sellers. But Pfizer also produces other vaccines and is expanding its cancer treatments.
Sales grew 4 percent to $ 1.6 billion in the first quarter from Pfizer's Prevnar vaccines for preventing pneumonia and related bacterial diseases. Sales of Eliquis, which is used to prevent blood clots and strokes, also grew 5 percent to $ 1.87 billion.
Overall, Pfizer's net income sank 30 percent to $ 5.54 billion in the quarter on $ 18.28 billion in revenue. Adjusted earnings totaled $ 1.23 per share. Analysts expected earnings of 98 cents per share on $ 16.61 billion in sales, according to FactSet.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Cade Metz and Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DADO RUVIC/REUTERS)
