SAN FRANCISCO -- YouTube will disable comments on most videos that include children 13 and younger after coming under fire for failing to keep pedophiles from posting suggestive remarks on such videos, the company said on Thursday.
YouTube, which is owned by Google, said in a blog post that over the next few months, it would suspend comments on videos of young minors -- those 13 and under -- and older teenagers that may risk "attracting predatory behavior."
The move is a response to the latest content-related crisis to confront YouTube: a video documenting how pedophiles have used comments on videos of children to guide other predators. After the video highlighting the practice went viral, several companies whose advertisements had appeared in the videos at issue said they would boycott YouTube.
In general, the videos did not violate YouTube's standards and showed mostly innocent behavior like young girls doing gymnastics or playing Twister. But the comments posted below the videos became overrun with suggestive remarks directed at the children.
YouTube said last week that it had disabled comments on tens of millions of videos featuring children under 13. The company said it planned to alter its algorithm over the next several months to create a blanket policy.
"Recently, there have been some deeply concerning incidents regarding child safety on YouTube," Susan Wojcicki, company's chief executive, wrote in a post on Twitter announcing the move. "Nothing is more important to us than ensuring the safety of young people on the platform."
The company said it would make an exception for a small number of channels on the site that feature content considered to be at less risk for attracting pedophiles, such as toy-review videos; the channels will be required to actively moderate comments.
YouTube said it would use a new machine-learning system to identify and remove predators' comments. The company, which has said it removes hundreds of millions of comments from videos every quarter for violating its rules, estimated that the new approach would double the number of comments flagged for removal.
YouTube has struggled to keep up with pedophiles' sometimes subtle methods for leaving suggestive remarks on videos of children.
Rather than making flagrantly sexual statements, commenters have posted time stamps directing others to moments in videos that can appear compromising when paused, like a girl's backside or bare legs. In some instances, the commenters in question simply posted strings of sexually suggestive emojis.
AuthorAffiliation Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka. Photograph Susan Wojcicki, YouTube's chief executive, said that the decision to disable comments on most videos featuring young children was a step to ensure their safety. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER PRATO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
