TECHNOLOGY
Justice Beefs Up Its Focus On the Misuse of A.I.
The Justice Department is stepping up its focus on artificial intelligence, with officials warning Thursday that companies and people who deliberately misuse the technology to advance a white-collar crime like price fixing, fraud or market manipulation will be at risk for a harsher sentence.
Deputy Attorney General Lisa Monaco said the Justice Department will take into account how well a company is managing the risks of AI technology each time it assesses a corporate compliance program. Such a program is a set of policies and procedures designed to detect misconduct and to ensure that executives and employees are following the law.
The comments from the Justice Department's No. 2 leader underscore the extent to which law enforcement officials are concerned about how the rapidly developing technology could be exploited, by foreign adversaries to harm the U.S. ASSOCIATED PRESS
GROCERIES
Aldi to Add 800 Stores Across the United States
Aldi plans to add 800 of its discount grocery stores across the U.S. in a five-year expansion plan as it looks to capitalize on cost-conscious Americans feeling the pinch at grocery stores.
Inflation has led many consumers to change the way they shop. Tired of prices that remain about 19 percent, on average, above where they were before the pandemic, consumers are seeking new avenues to cut down on spending. In grocery stores, they're shifting away from name brands to store-brand items, switching to discount stores or simply buying fewer items like snacks or gourmet foods.
Pricing is also being eyed by the federal government, with the Federal Trade Commission suing last month to block a proposed merger between the grocery giants Kroger and Albertsons, saying that the $ 24.6 billion deal would eliminate competition and lead to higher prices. ASSOCIATED PRESS
ECONOMY
Americans' Net Worth Surged, Aided by Stocks
Household wealth rose to a record of roughly $ 156.2 trillion at the end of 2023 thanks to a surging stock market that offset a drop in property market values, the Federal Reserve said on Thursday.
Household net worth rose about 3.2 percent in the period from October through December from $ 151.4 trillion at the end of the third quarter, the Fed said in its quarterly snapshot of the balance sheets of households and businesses.
The value of equities held directly or indirectly through mutual funds, life insurance policies or retirement accounts rose by $ 4.7 trillion to $ 47.6 trillion from $ 42.9 trillion, the Fed said. In the fourth quarter of 2023, the benchmark S&P 500 index delivered a total return of 11.7 percent and market gains have continued into the start of 2024 with stocks closing out February at record highs.
The gains offset real estate values that declined by $ 0.6 trillion to about $ 49 trillion. REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY TOBY MELVILLE/REUTERS)
