This year might have forever changed shopping for American consumers, store workers and retailers.
This article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.
America's upended shopping habits are a glimpse at how we've been altered by this pandemic-scarred year.
More of us are getting goods delivered, and we're buying more cars, exercise equipment and ham and spending less on plane tickets and restaurant meals.
For the week that traditionally kicks off the holiday shopping season, I spoke with Sapna Maheshwari, who writes about retail for The New York Times, about how the pandemic might alter Black Friday and permanently change shopping in America.
Shira: What was the biggest surprise in our shopping habits from the pandemic?
Sapna: The drastic increase in online shopping was perhaps a predictable shift, but there are surprises when you dig into the details.
There is a whole population -- older people especially, including my parents -- who tried and liked things like ordering online for in-store pick up from places like Target or Panera. There are plenty of people who will go back to shopping in person, but some of those habits will stick. Where curbside grocery pickup is available, why wouldn't you take back the hour you used to shop for groceries and instead have a store employee put together your order and put the items in your car trunk for no extra cost?
What have those shopping changes meant for retail store workers?
I started the year writing about employees of the collapsed department store Barneys New York, and they told me about the lists they kept of clients, the types of merchandise they sold and their commissions. It was a career with a high level of customer interaction.
Compare that with store workers this year assembling orders placed online. That might reduce the virus risk now, but it's more solitary and transactional, like a warehouse job. Store workers are interacting less with customers, and some people miss that. The work may also be more physically demanding, and some employees fear they'll be measured by how fast they can grab items off store shelves.
Do you expect delays and chaos for holiday packages ?
Retailers tried to start Black Friday deals in October to help limit store crowds and spread out online holiday orders to make them manageable, but I think many people waited. It's hard to break consumers out of something they've done their whole lives.
It's hard to get retailers to talk about it, but they're constantly negotiating with FedEx and UPS about the shippers' holiday delivery capacity and costs. For smaller businesses, it's going to be expensive to fulfill the shipping demands of holiday shoppers. Any problems will benefit stores that can offer online ordering for in-store pickup right up to Christmas.
Confess your pandemic purchasing habits. And what will stick?
I've bought almost no new apparel this year, and I've been wearing a small portion of items in my closet. In the future I can see myself buying fewer but nicer items of clothing and paying for tailoring because I've become more conscious of each garment I'm wearing.
People want to feel cozy, and slippers and candles have been big sellers this year. I have bought so many candles. For some reason my anxiety-related purchases have included paper planners, journals and a to-do checklist notebook. I've also bought more alcohol because I'm not going to bars. That won't last. I'm looking forward to when it's safe to be in a crowded bar and waiting impatiently for a stupidly expensive cocktail.
Our shopping is not monolithic
One lesson to me from the shake up in pandemic shopping is that there's more than one way to successfully sell stuff to Americans.
Not every retailer, in short, has to be Amazon and be gigantic, sell every product imaginable and deliver orders fast to people's homes.
Sapna and I talked about retailers whose sales have climbed during the pandemic, and it's not always the names you might have predicted. Amazon, Walmart and Costco have done well, yes. But so have store chains like Home Depot, Dick's Sporting Goods and Williams-Sonoma that sell stuff to make home life more pleasant and also figured out curbside pickup of online orders or ways to make in-store shopping feel safer in a pandemic.
Sapna has also written about the resilience of local stores like a running gear store in Connecticut that quickly revamped its business, including delivering purchases to people's homes. (This is also a spot for me to remind readers that even during the pandemic, only about 15 percent of Americans' retail spending is online.)
And we should never underestimate the allure of shopping as a treasure hunt. Compared with other stores that mostly sell clothing, the T.J. Maxx chain has held up well this year, even though it doesn't put a lot of attention on online shopping.
Like T.J. Maxx, the e-commerce site Wish capitalizes on our love for bargains and shopping as a game. It lets people dig through an online grab bag of mostly unnecessary and often weird products that are typically delivered slowly. The company disclosed finances on Friday that showed its sales have climbed this year.
For stores that cater to our needs, the keys to surviving this year have been both luck and finding ways to adapt to meet what we want to buy and how.
Before we go ...
Chinese state surveillance, with help from American technology: Paul Mozur and Don Clark write for The New York Times about the Chinese government analyzing data from its extensive digital monitoring of the Muslim minority in Xinjiang with one of the world's fastest supercomputers. It was built with American microchips. Paul's Twitter thread also has more details about his reporting.
These people aren't real: My colleagues Kashmir Hill and Jeremy White have this great demonstration of technology that generates eerily realistic images of nonexistent people. Kash writes that the artificial intelligence software behind computer-generated people, virtual voice assistants and facial recognition technology is both amazingly powerful and reflects human flaws because "we are behind all of it."
He made mixing paint exciting. Then he got fired: BuzzFeed News has the tale of a college student who worked part time at Sherwin-Williams and made popular TikTok videos about blending paint colors. (One of the videos involved mixing blueberries into a paint can.) The company said he violated its rules and fired him, BuzzFeed reported.
Hugs to this
This article about two strangers forging a bond after a misdirected text message will make you feel good about humans.
We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you'd like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.
If you don't already get this newsletter in your inbox, please sign up here .
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY Annie Jen FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
