Some student-athletes in the N.C.A.A. tournament take the student part of the description quite seriously.
It was a good day for smart kids at the N.C.A.A. tournament. For the future lawyers and doctors-in-training, for the future Wall Street executives and potential judges, for the soon-to-be leaders of science. For those overachievers -- in this case, the student-athletes from Yale and Duke -- and for their overachieving classmates who watched them win their first-round games.
The two top-tier academic institutions will meet in the round of 32 on Saturday in Providence, R.I., and that matchup will surely be a thrill for the alumni who have degrees from Yale and Duke on their walls. The ex-Blue Devils are most likely used to this; the Yalies are probably not.
But before the madness really does take over March, before fans start weeping or rejoicing over their brilliant or bombed-out brackets, I'd like to pause and consider the student part of these student-athletes who will entertain us for the next few weeks.
You remember that these athletes are also students? It's hard, I know. Because, at this time of year, the thrill of the games gets in the way.
Yet throughout this tournament, there will be papers to write and midterms to study for and books to read and projects to complete, all while the pressure mounts, the nation watches and some games go late into the night.
Some of Temple's players, for example, were facing midterms just as they were to face Iowa, a No. 7 seed, on Friday in Brooklyn. Obi Enechionyia, a starting forward for the 10th-seeded Owls, has a midterm on Monday in financial accounting and another in business law later that day, then yet another in marketing on Tuesday.
Matt Ryan, a freshman forward for Notre Dame, has Italian to practice and maybe a lecture or two to watch online. Then there's that big project due Wednesday in his anthropology class called Hacking Life: From Cyber Crime to Human Creativity; for that, Ryan must write a dozen or so pages on how artificial intelligence applies to combat.
You don't see that on his stat sheet.
"We knew what we were getting into when we signed up for this," said Ryan, who this month was named to the Atlantic Coast Conference's all-academic basketball team. "Yes, some teams have a reputation for not paying much attention to academics, but Notre Dame isn't one of those. For me, it's all about balancing school and basketball because they're both important."
You could feel sorry for these students, pulled in two directions by books and basketball in exchange for a scholarship -- well, except for Yale's, since Ivy League schools don't give athletic scholarships. But it's supposed to be hard.
Still, some players make this tough job look simple. Take Jarrod Uthoff, Iowa's soft-spoken star. Uthoff's grade point average last semester was a 4.0; overall it is 3.42.
"You do your work, and you get a good grade," Uthoff said, laughing. "It's not that hard."
Still, that academic resume, plus his equally impressive one in basketball, was the reason this month he was named the academic all-American of the year in Division I men's basketball. His teammate, point guard Mike Gesell, was named to the second team. (Ally Disterhoft, who plays for the Iowa women's team, won the top women's honor, giving Hawkeyes fans even more to be proud of.)
But those awards don't mean a thing on the basketball court. Or do they? Uthoff, who is in graduate school for sports management, admits that he has debated his teachers and his coaches, challenging assumptions and preconceptions about the way Iowa goes about things.
"Jarrod doesn't just blindly accept what coaches tell him, and always questions things, always wants to know how to get better," Kirk Speraw, one of Iowa's assistant coaches, said Thursday. "He's always using that mind of his, and sometimes he even comes up with better ways to do things."
Balancing schoolwork with his sport, and finding ways to learn and grow, are
all part of the college experience for Uthoff. He added that he considered a college experience to be much more than just scoring, rebounding and blocking shots in basketball, all of which he does spectacularly well. There's plenty of time in the day for everything -- including fishing outings -- if you just plan for it, he said.
There are times, though, when even the 6-foot-9, 221-pound Uthoff slips. Like the time he forgot that he had a paper to write, and remembered only hours before a midnight deadline. He was on a basketball trip, and it was already 10 p.m., but he sat down and cranked it out.
When asked what grade he received, Uthoff shrugged.
"I don't remember," he said.
Prodded, he fessed up.
"Probably an A," he said, blushing.
If only the games were that easy.
