Amazon is by far the largest e-commerce player. Six hundred smaller fry gathered in Chicago last week to work out strategies for competing with the giant.
For all of the noise and hype (Drones! One-hour delivery! Get more toilet paper painlessly!), e-commerce is showing the first signs of maturing as a business in the United States. Figures from the research firm eMarketer predict that the rate of domestic growth will fall to 11.6 percent in 2018 from 14.2 percent this year and 16.5 percent in 2013. By that point, e-commerce in the country will still represent less than 10 percent of all retail.
"Not a lot of new e-commerce users in the U.S. these days," said Dan Marcec, a spokesman for eMarketer. "Plus, we still love to shop and buy in stores. Retailers are trying to leverage mobile usage not only to push mobile commerce, but also -- and maybe even more aggressively -- to get people information to encourage buying in-store."
That was one theme of the 11th annual Internet Retailer Conference and Exhibition, held in Chicago last week. Those who make products were once content to let someone else sell them online. Now they increasingly realize they will be much better off capturing the customer themselves. The benefits: They retain more margin without a middleman; they have tighter control over packaging and shipping -- the box promotes them, not the retailer; and, most important, they have the name and email address of someone who likes what they make.
The problem is how to get that customer to the brand's site. The point of Amazon, Overstock or eBay is that one account means one-stop shopping. Amazon Prime, which has tens of millions of customers for its $100-a-year shipping program, is doing all it can to build an ecosystem where the exit doors are hard to find.
If many of the exhibitors at the conference were trying to avoid Amazon, a few were taking it on directly. Justin Singletary said he had spent $500,000 a few years ago to buy the Fulfillment.com web domain from eBay.
"We saw a void in the marketplace -- an opening to take care of the merchants themselves, rather than the merchants' customers," he said. Asked who the merchants were, he declined to say, noting that they operated under nondisclosure agreements. With about 60 employees and one domestic warehouse, Fulfillment.com is still an early-stage start-up.
By comparison, Newegg, founded in 2001, says it is the second-largest online retailer in North America, with 28 million registered customers, about a one-tenth the number of Amazon.
"Amazon wants to do everything," said Claire Lin, a spokeswoman for Newegg. "We want to be really good at one thing: selling tech products."
The final realization at the convention was an inescapable lesson for the Age of Twitter and Facebook: Big or small, you have to blow your own horn.
"Look at Apple," said Eitan Zimerman of the Act Bold Media Group, a consultant shop. "Everything about them is bold."
Robots not a real threat
There is no shortage of angst about the relentless advances of digital technology and what they mean for the work force, if not humanity. Dire warnings have come from Elon Musk, Stephen Hawking and Bill Gates. "Summoning the demon" was Mr. Musk's evocative phrase used to describe the potential danger posed by artificial intelligence.
A group of academics, Silicon Valley venture capitalists and executives acknowledged the issue last week when they posted an open letter in an effort to start a national discussion on modernizing policy for the digital economy. Past waves of technological change, they noted, delivered new jobs and higher wages. "This time around," they wrote, "the evidence is causing some people to wonder if things are different. Or, to paraphrase many recent headlines, will robots eat our jobs?"
Not necessarily, according to two new entries to the technology-and-labor debate. One is a lengthy cover article in the June issue of The Harvard Business Review, "Beyond Automation: Strategies for Remaining Gainfully Employed in an Era of Very Smart Machines." The other is a study published last week by the McKinsey Global Institute, the research arm of the consulting firm McKinsey & Company, "A Labor Market That Works: Connecting Talent With Opportunity in the Digital Age."
The McKinsey study analyzes and forecasts the potential effect of so-called digital talent platforms. The report looks at three types of such platforms: job-finding and employee-seeking websites (such as Monster.com and LinkedIn); marketplaces for services (Uber and Upwork, for example); and data-driven talent discovery tools (like Evolv and Knack).
By 2025, McKinsey estimates, these digital talent platforms could add $2.7 trillion a year to global gross domestic product.
And the digital tools, the report said, could benefit as many as 540 million people in various ways, including better matches of their skills with jobs, higher wages and shorter stints of unemployment.
Companies that make efficient use of the digital platforms, McKinsey says, can increase their productivity by up to 9 percent by hiring the right workers for jobs more often and more quickly.
In the "Beyond Automation" article, Thomas H. Davenport and Julia Kirby concede the advance of automation, especially as data-fueled artificial intelligence moves into knowledge work. But, they write, "Instead of seeing work as a zero-sum game with machines taking an ever greater share, we might see growing possibilities for employment. We could reframe the threat of automation as an opportunity for augmentation."
"In an era of innovation," they write, "the emphasis has to be on the upside of people. They will always be the source of next-generation ideas and the element of operations that is hardest for competitors to replicate."
Coupang gets infusion
SoftBank, the multinational media and telecom conglomerate, said last week that it had invested $1 billion in the Korean e-commerce start-up Coupang, in one of the largest private tech investments of 2015.
The deal is the latest in a string of big e-commerce investments in Asian markets, including the $1.7 billion raised last year by the Indian company Flipkart. Coupang began in 2010 as a daily deal service and became a full-service e-commerce company.
With the investment, Coupang is valued at $5 billion, according to a person with knowledge of the matter who spoke on condition of anonymity.
