YVES BÉHAR C.E.O. & founder, Fuseproject While artificial intelligence touches so much of what we do today, the current thinking behind A.I. is too limited. To reach A.I.'s potential, we need to think beyond what it does for search, social media, security, and shopping -- and beyond making things merely "smarter." Instead, we should imagine how A.I. can be both smart and compassionate, a combination that can solve the most important human problems. Good design can lead the way by infusing an approach centered around the user and the real needs that A.I. can address. We should be thinking about A.I. in new contexts -- the newborn of the overworked parent, the cancer patient who needs round-the-clock attention, and the child with learning and behavioral difficulties. A.I. holds great promise for them.
NILS GILMAN
Vice president for programs at the Berggruen Institute
We stand on the cusp of a revolution, the engineers tell us. New gene-editing techniques, especially in combination with artificial intelligence technologies, promise unprecedented new capacities to manipulate biological nature including human nature itself. The potential could hardly be greater: whole categories of disease conquered, radically personalized medicine, and drastically extended mental and physical prowess. However, at the Berggruen Institute we believe that strictly engineering conceptions of these new technologies are not enough to grasp the significance of these potential changes. So profound is the potential impact of these technologies that they challenge the very definition of what it is to be human. Seen in this light, the development and deployment of these technologies represent a practical experiment in the philosophical, today conducted primarily by engineers and scientists. But we need a broader conversation.
STEPHANIE DINKINS
Artist & associate professor of art, Stony Brook University; fellow, Data & Society Research Institute; Soros Equality Fellow; 2018 resident artist, Eyebeam
Because A.I. is no single thing, it's difficult to speak to its overarching promise; but questions abound. What happens when an insular subset of society encodes governing systems intended for use by the majority of the planet? What happens when those writing the rules -- in this case, we will call it code -- might not know, care about, or deliberately consider the needs, desires, or traditions of people their work impacts? What happens if the codemaking decisions are disproportionately informed by biased data, systemic injustice, and misdeeds committed to preserving wealth "for the good of the people I am reminded that the authors of the Declaration of Independence, a small group of white men said to be acting on behalf of the nation, did not extend rights and privileges to folks like me -- mainly black people and women.
ANDRUS ANSIP
European Commission vice president for the digital single market
In health care today, algorithms can beat almost all but the most qualified dermatologists in recognizing skin cancer. A recent study found that dermatologists could identify 86.6 percent of skin cancers, while a machine using artificial intelligence (A.I.) detected 95 percent. In Denmark, when people call 112 -- Europe's emergency number -- an A.I.-driven computer analyzes the voice and background noise to check whether the caller has had a heart attack. A.I. is one of the most promising technologies of our times. It is an area where several European Union countries have decided to invest and research, to formulate a national strategy or include A.I. in a wider digital agenda. We encourage all our countries to do this, urgently, so that the E.U. develops and promotes A.I. in a coordinated way. This should be a Pan-European project, not a series of national initiatives that may or may not overlap.
LILA IBRAHIM
Chief operating officer, DeepMind.
Artificial intelligence offers new hope for addressing challenges that seem intractable today, from poverty to climate change to disease. As a tool, A.I. could help us build a future characterized by better health, limitless scientific discovery, shared prosperity and the fulfillment of human potential. At the same time there's a growing awareness that innovation can have unintended consequences and valid concern that not enough is being done to anticipate and address them. Yet for A.I. optimists, this increasing attention to risks shouldn't be cause for discouragement or exasperation. Rather, it's an important catalyst for thinking about the kind of world we want to live in -- a question technologists and broader society must answer. Throughout history few, if any, societal transformations have been preceded by so much scrutiny and speculation about all the ways they could go wrong. A sense of urgency about the risks of A.I., from unintended outcomes to unintentional bias, is appropriate.
Drawing (Drawing by Eoin Ryan)
