Silicon Valley companies still worry that state lawmakers are jumping the gun on regulating a still-unproven technology.
California lawmakers have amended a bill that would create new restrictions for artificial intelligence, paving the way for first-of-their-kind safety rules that could set new standards for how tech companies develop their systems.
The State Assembly's Appropriations Committee voted on Thursday to endorse an amended version of the bill, S.B. 1047, which would require companies to test the safety of powerful A.I. technologies before releasing them to the public. California's attorney general would be able to sue companies if their technologies caused serious harm, such as mass property damage or human casualties.
The bill has sparked fierce debate in the tech industry, with Silicon Valley giants, academics and investors taking sides on whether to regulate a nascent technology that has been hyped for both its benefits and its dangers.
Senator Scott Wiener, the author of the bill, made several concessions in an effort to appease tech industry critics like OpenAI, Meta and Google. The changes also reflect some suggestions made by another prominent start-up, Anthropic.
The bill would no longer create a new agency for A.I. safety, instead shifting regulatory duties to the existing California Government Operations Agency. And companies would be liable for violating the law only if their technologies caused real harm or imminent dangers to public safety. Previously, the bill allowed for companies to be punished for failing to adhere to safety regulations even if no harm had yet occurred.
"The new amendments reflect months of constructive dialogue with industry, start-up and academic stakeholders," said Dan Hendrycks, a founder of the nonprofit Center for A.I. Safety in San Francisco, which helped write the bill.
A Google spokesperson said the company's previous concerns "still stand." Anthropic said it was still reviewing the changes. OpenAI and Meta declined to comment on the amended bill.
Mr. Wiener said in a statement on Thursday that "we can advance both innovation and safety; the two are not mutually exclusive." He said he believed the amendments addressed many of the tech industry's concerns.
The Democratic-majority Legislature is expected to pass the bill by the end of the month. It would then go to Gov. Gavin Newsom, who has not said whether he supports it.
If the bill is signed, California will again be a step ahead of the federal government on tech regulation. California's Legislature has helped shape U.S. tech consumer protections with a 2020 privacy law that curbed the collection of user data and a 2022 child online safety law.
Opponents of the A.I. bill have argued that it would discourage tech giants from sharing the software code underlying their artificial intelligence with other businesses and software developers -- a practice known as open source. They believe this would choke the progress of smaller A.I. companies.
While the amendments alleviated some issues and improved on the earlier version, "the open source software community still rightly has concerns that this will be a damper on A.I. development," said Chris Nicholson, a partner with Page One Ventures, a venture capital firm.
Several candidates for mayor in San Francisco, where much of the A.I. start-up community is based, have questioned the bill.
"San Francisco's reputation as a leader in technology and innovation is because we embrace new ideas and serve as a sanctuary for research and development, and S.B. 1047 clearly threatens our brand and leadership," said Mark Farrell, a former interim mayor and current candidate.
Lauren Wagner, an investor and researcher who has worked for both Google and Meta, said the amended version of the bill was an improvement. But she argued that regulation of A.I. should be a federal issue, not something for state lawmakers.
"This seems like something the federal government should take on," she said. "This is not light touch."
Illustration
