On Dec. 27, The New York Times became the first major American media organization to sue OpenAI and Microsoft, the creators of ChatGPT and other popular artificial intelligence platforms, over copyright issues associated with its written works. The lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, contends that millions of Times articles were used to train A.I. technologies, like ChatGPT, that now compete with the news outlet as a source of reliable information.
The move came as a surprise to Kevin Roose and Casey Newton, the hosts of the Times technology podcast "Hard Fork." On a recent episode, Mr. Roose said they had no prior knowledge of the lawsuit and learned of it alongside the "rest of the world." They are covering the news "as if this were some other company's lawsuit," he said.
OpenAI said last week that the suit was "without merit" and that using copyrighted works to train its technologies was "fair use" under the law. The fair use doctrine in intellectual property law, which allows creators to transform copyrighted work within certain parameters, is central to the case.
During the episode, Mr. Roose and Mr. Newton discussed the contours of the lawsuit and what's at stake. In the excerpt below, which has been edited and condensed, they speculated about one possible outcome.
KEVIN ROOSE Recently, Casey, you wrote that you think publishers may end up getting paid, no matter how this case rules, based on the precedent created by deals between publishers and companies like Google and Meta. Explain that.
CASEY NEWTON We saw a kind of analogous case with Google and Meta over the past handful of years, where publishers felt, because of Google and Facebook in particular, they were losing a lot of ad revenue. Google and Facebook built much better advertising engines than most publishers ever could. Publishers started to shrink as a result.
They started to complain. They got regulators' attention. What happened, first in Australia, was regulators said, OK, if you're Google or Facebook and you want to show a link to a news publisher's website, we are going to force you to negotiate with publishers for the right to do that. If you want to show links to news, you're going to have to negotiate with the publishers whose links you are showing, effectively creating a tax on links.
I didn't think this was a great idea, because this felt like it was breaking the principle of the open web, which is that people can link to things for free. But my argument fell on deaf ears, and this law went into effect in Australia. It was then copied in Canada, and it has been discussed in other countries as well. Now publishers are basically lining up at the trough, and they are passing these link taxes.
How is all of this relevant to OpenAI? Well, one of the things that OpenAI does when it returns a result is show you a link. It might even show you a link to The New York Times. It's easy for me to imagine these same regulators saying, You know what? We're going to bring OpenAI under our little link tax regime, and if they want to be able to show these links, they'll have to negotiate with publishers.
Even in the case where The New York Times doesn't win this one, I do think there will be sympathy for publishers, because it is clear that journalism is legitimately threatened in a scenario where A.I. companies are able to extract all of the value out of journalism, repackage it and sell it under their own subscriptions.
ROOSE I think this is a very compelling way to look at it, because in the case of social media and search engines, publishers actually got, I would argue, a pretty good deal out of those technologies -- millions more eyeballs that are potentially going to land on one of their links to their website, where they can put ads and monetize and maybe get people to subscribe.
NEWTON Just to underline that point, publishers got more value out of their links being on Facebook than Facebook got value out of publishers having their links on Facebook.
ROOSE Well, I would disagree with that in the abstract, but I think your point is that the publishers had a reason to want to be on Google and on Facebook. There was something in it for them. I think it's harder to make the case that publishers are benefiting to the same degree from having their data used to train these A.I. systems.
In the end, I do think there's going to have to be some kind of fair value exchange between publishers and A.I. companies. I do not think that the current model -- just slurping up everything they can find on the internet, and then claiming that fair use protects them from any kind of criticism on copyright grounds -- is likely to stand up. I think we just have to decide as a society how we want these A.I. models to be treated when it comes to copyright.
A few months ago, we had Rebecca Tushnet from Harvard Law School on the show to talk about a different set of A.I. legal cases, and her point was: We don't need new copyright laws to handle this. We already have robust copyright laws. This is not some magical new technology that demands a rewriting of our existing laws.
I'm certainly not challenging her expertise, because I'm not a copyright lawyer. But it feels bizarre to me that when we talk about these A.I. models, we're citing case law from 30, 40, 50 years ago. It feels like we don't quite yet have the legal and copyright frameworks that we would need, because what's happening under the hood of these A.I. models is actually quite different from other kinds of technologies.
The Times has accused OpenAI of copyright infringement. In a blog post, OpenAI said using copyrighted works to train its tech was fair use. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SASHA MASLOV FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
