COULD the Easter Bunny and Santa Claus be friends? On a grander scale, could they be superheroes? These questions inspired "The Guardians of Childhood," stories from the writer and illustrator William Joyce, in which these figures ally with the Sandman, the Tooth Fairy and the Man in the Moon as the Guardians, who protect the hopes and dreams of kids everywhere.
The premise, with its visual possibilities and holiday connections, seemed obvious for this season. So while Mr. Joyce was creating more books in his series, DreamWorks Animation worked with him to develop "Rise of the Guardians," due Nov. 21. The playwright David Lindsay-Abaire ("Rabbit Hole") wrote the adaptation, and Peter Ramsey, a former storyboard artist on live-action films like "A.I.: Artificial Intelligence," was brought on to direct.
While the tales of fairies, tooth and otherwise, are involved, Mr. Ramsey and his team sought to structure the film less like a fairy tale and more like an adventure. "We were going for a light epic fantasy tone," he said during a recent interview in New York. "At its heart it's a superhero movie, where the superheroes get their powers from belief. It all depends on a kind of magic that is created by children themselves."
The Guardians' environments are rich, varied and textured, and surprisingly distinct from Mr. Joyce's illustrations. Mr. Ramsey and the production designer, Patrick Hanenberger, who helped develop the look of "Monsters vs. Aliens," were influenced by the resonant children's book illustrations of Edmund Dulac, among others, and sought a fantastical yet practical look for each Guardian's world.
Below, Mr. Hanenberger and Mr. Ramsey offer a closer look and explain how Buddhism and American Indian beliefs factored into a movie with Santa Claus and the Easter Bunny.
Cool Blues for the Haunt of Jack Frost
Jack Frost is among the first characters to appear in the film, but he is invisible to most of the people in the town where he wanders. His sadness about his isolation, and his yearning for something more, is reflected by the dark gray colors in the opening scenes, depicted here by a concept painting and a still of Jack from the finished film. Before the animating process got under way, Mr. Hanenberger and Mr. Ramsey made what is called a color script, a contact sheet of paintings and photographs broadly laying out the entire film.
"We wanted to have very strong visuals, with the opening of the movie being dark and cold, and the end of the movie being light, bright and warm," Mr. Hanenberger said, speaking by phone from the DreamWorks Animation campus in Glendale, Calif. This idea, conveyed in subtle ways throughout the movie, was inspired by the film "The Wizard of Oz." Jack Frost's world is more akin to the real world, with less color, while the homes of the other Guardians are color intense.
A Toy Maker's North Pole Workshop
To the production designer the biggest challenge was creating the North Pole home and workshop of Santa Claus, or North, as he's known in the film. Mr. Hanenberger said he didn't want to rely on a standard holiday look but didn't want to abandon it altogether.
"It had to feel Christmas enough that you would get that it's the birthplace of Christmas, but it's not hitting you over the head with hundreds of Christmas trees and candy canes everywhere," he said.
Since red is the color most associated with the holiday, that was played up in tapestries and carpets, as seen in an image with the Guardians gathered in North's home. And because North is Russian, Mr. Hanenberger turned to Russian Orthodox churches and the Kremlin. (North's Russian heritage was retained from the Joyce books, unlike his big-eared, small-statured toy-making companions, who provide comic relief.) The space, in the production design above, includes tall ceilings and lots of light. And because the character has a bold, masculine aspect, the filmmakers wanted to reflect that in the architecture, using thick, interlocking pieces of wood to hold the structure together.
A Garden Ideal for Dyeing Easter Eggs
The home of the Easter Bunny is a large, subterranean garden with a river of dye in which to bathe eggs.
"We wanted it to be an oasis of life, or springtime beneath the earth," Mr. Ramsey said. "We also wanted it to be an homage to" the Japanese animator "Hayao Miyazaki and his design sensibility. So the whole place took on a kind of Japanese moss garden kind of feel." Bold greens, bright plants and a range of flowers emphasize the natural focus. Mr. Hanenberger also studied cultures that have a close connection to nature.
"We looked at Buddhism, Native American spirituality, Celtic and Scottish cultures," he said. "We looked at totems, shrines and temples that are embedded in nature." The world includes giant stone egg sculptures that come to life and, along with the bunny, help shepherd the small eggs upto the surface on their big day.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph (Photographs From Dreamworks Animation/Paramount Pictures)
