From masterpieces looted by the Nazis to maritime paintings and works by gay artists, a wide variety of art in a wide variety of media will be on display.
This article is part of our latest special report on Museums , which focuses on reopening, reinvention and resilience.
With summer on the horizon after a long pandemic winter, museums are throwing their doors open to tell every kind of story. Whether they make subtly abstract sculptures or paint colorful scenes of their own lives, the artists have one thing in common: a belief in art's power to heal.
New York
UTICA
"Emma Amos: Color Odyssey"
June 19 to Sept. 12
Emma Amos (1937-2020) was a pioneering figural artist who once said that as a Black woman, just walking into the studio was "a political act." An Atlanta native who went north to New York to pursue an art career, she participated in many key groups and movements of her age, from the Spiral collective of Black artists to the feminist crusaders of the Guerrilla Girls. This show, organized by the Georgia Art Museum at the University of Georgia, features more than 60 works, some of them showing her technique of incorporating weaving and collage in her art. Museum of Art, Munson-Williams-Proctor Arts Institute, mwpai.org
BRIDGEHAMPTON
"Affinities for Abstraction: Women Artists on Eastern Long Island, 1950-2020"
Through July 18
Artists have been flocking to the Hamptons since the late 19th century, and abstract painting in particular has flourished there in more recent decades. This survey includes 42 women painters (who all lived there, or at least visited and made work locally) including canonical greats like Helen Frankenthaler, represented by her 1965 "Yellow Vapor," Joan Mitchell and Lee Krasner. Contemporary makers like Amy Sillman, who painted "C" (2007), and Jacqueline Humphries and Virginia Jaramillo are included, too, delineating the connections among generations. Parrish Art Museum, parrishart.org
NEW YORK CITY
"Safe/Haven: Gay Life in 1950s Cherry Grove"
Through Oct. 11
Back when hardly anybody was out of the closet, the Fire Island community of Cherry Grove was a safe space for gay men and lesbians, and anyone who did not fit prevailing norms of gender and sexuality. It started in the 1930s, and by the 1950s, the era depicted in this show, the tiny town had developed a distinct character, much of which it retains today. The bulk of the show is photography, including the image "Men on the Beach" (circa 1950). New-York Historical Society, nyhistory.org
NEW YORK CITY
"Lynn Hershman Leeson: Twisted"
June 30 to Oct 3
The artist and filmmaker Lynn Hershman Leeson is most famous for being someone else: her alter ego, Roberta Breitmore. From 1973 to 1978, the fictional character of Ms. Breitmore had her own life, even her own credit cards and psychiatrist, with Ms. Leeson documenting parts of it along the way. Ms. Leeson has always been ahead of the pack in terms of media, adopting and mastering technology for her own ends, up to more recent work with artificial intelligence. This is her first solo museum show. New Museum, newmuseum.org
NEW YORK CITY
"Gregg Bordowitz: I Wanna Be Well"
Through Oct. 11
Activism has fueled the more than 30-year career of the artist and writer Gregg Bordowitz, a native New Yorker now having his biggest solo museum show yet. The exhibition's title, taken from a 1977 Ramones song, also refers to the decades Mr. Bordowitz has lived with H.I.V., and his work with Act Up (AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power). The nearly two dozen works in the show include the video "Some aspect of a shared lifestyle" (1986). MoMA PS1, moma.org/ps1
Southwest
PHOENIX
"Fearless Fashion: Rudi Gernreich"
Through Sept. 26
"Gender fluid" was not a term in use in the 1960s, but Rudi Gernreich's designs were just that. This exhibition of more than 80 ensembles, organized by the Skirball Cultural Center of Los Angeles, looks at the man most famous for creating the "monokini" topless swimsuit and various unisex looks. The Austrian designer fled the Nazis as a teenager and ended up in Los Angeles, where he changed the course of fashion history. Phoenix Art Museum, phxart.org
HOUSTON
"Three Centuries of American Art: Antiquities, European and American Masterpieces from the Fayez S. Sarofim Collection"
June 27 to Sept. 6
Fayez S. Sarofim is not only a major patron of the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, having given more than $ 75 million with his wife, Susan, for a major campus expansion completed last year; he is also a lifelong collector who has amassed quite a trove of art. This show of more than 200 works focuses on American art by the likes of Winslow Homer, John Singer Sargent and Georgia O'Keeffe, and finds room for Navajo blankets for good measure. Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, mfah.org
Southeast
ATLANTA
"Calder-Picasso"
June 26 to Sept. 19
What more do you need than a big show of two beloved artistic titans? Conceived by the artists' grandsons, this exhibition features more than 100 works by Alexander Calder (1898-1976) and Pablo Picasso (1881-1973), with an eye to how each artist harnessed negative space and voids in his work. They were of the same generation and took on similar subjects in their indelible ways; witness the dynamism of Calder's wire sculpture "Acrobats" (circa 1927) and Picasso's 1930 oil "Acrobat." High Museum of Art, high.org
NEW ORLEANS
"The Pursuit of Salvation: Jain Art from India"
Through May 15, 2022
Covering nearly 2,000 years from the second century A.D. to the 19th, this exhibition features 63 objects related to the Jain faith in India, little known in the United States despite being older than Buddhism. Many of the sculptural figures depict the Jinas, spiritual teachers meant for veneration, including "Standing Jina," made in the third century out of mottled red sandstone. The ink and watercolor drawings are standouts, too. New Orleans Museum of Art, noma.org
BENTONVILLE, ARK.
"Crystal Bridges at 10"
July 10 to Sept. 27
Recently, the museum founded by the Walmart heiress Alice Walton announced a major expansion that will nearly double its size. That is a couple of years from being completed, but in the meantime the institution takes a victory lap by looking at its first decade, with an exhibition featuring about 130 works by Thomas Eakins, Jordan Casteel, Alice Neel and others. It is part of an overall celebration that includes a self-portrait exhibition for which students in kindergarten through 12th grade can submit their own art. Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art, crystalbridges.org
MIAMI
"Dalton Gata: The Way We'll Be"
Through Nov. 21
The Cuban-born, Puerto Rico-based Dalton Gata was trained as a fashion designer but made a turn toward art, and this is his first solo museum show. Mr. Gata has a flair for playing with color, scale and surreal elements, as with "Next in Line" (2021), a painting depicting a row of people, animals and fantastical creatures. The show's six works were made for the exhibition and have not been on display before. Institute of Contemporary Art, Miami, icamiami.org
Midwest
KANSAS CITY, MO.
"Testimony: African American Artists Collective"
June 5 to March 27
A major Kansas City institution looks to its own backyard for this locally focused show, featuring 36 painters, sculptors, photographers and others in the African American Artists Collective, established there in 2014. Exploring the idea of truth-telling and bearing witness, the exhibition includes two oil portraits in very different styles: Harold Smith's "Friday Night Blues" (2021) and Dean Lamont Mitchell's "Mr. Dan Bradford" (2020-21). Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, nelson-atkins.org
CHICAGO
"Landscape in Light: The Tiffany Window at the Art Institute of Chicago"
From May 29
A new permanent feature is arriving at the top of a grand staircase near one of the museum's entrances: a 48-panel stained glass work designed in 1917 by Agnes F. Northrop for Tiffany Studios. The "Hartwell Memorial Window" was commissioned for a Rhode Island church, where it lived until 2018; it depicts the waterfall-dotted landscape around the Hartwell family's New Hampshire home. The congregation decided that a museum could best preserve it and sold the work, which has been extensively conserved, including repairing cracks and removing grime. Art Institute of Chicago, artic.edu
CLEVELAND
"Private Lives: Home and Family in the Art of the Nabis, Paris, 1889-1900"
July 1 to Sept. 19
During the pandemic, people have been at home more than ever before, so a show of around 160 domestic-themed paintings by great French masters is timely indeed. This exhibition looks at the work of the four most famous artists in the group known as the Nabis: Pierre Bonnard, Édouard Vuillard, Maurice Denis and Félix Vallotton. All were inspired by Paul Gauguin but all took their own approach to complex and colorful interior scenes. And as Vallotton's uneasy picture "The Lie" (1898) demonstrates, home life may be rich, but it is often complicated, too. Cleveland Museum of Art, clevelandart.org
CINCINNATI
"Paintings, Politics and the Monuments Men: The Berlin Masterpieces in America"
July 9 to Oct. 3
The Nazis looted some of Europe's greatest art treasures, and, starting in 1943, it was the job of the "Monuments Men" from the Monuments, Fine Art, and Archives program to find them and return them. This show of 26 works has some blockbusters to offer: Fra Filippo Lippi's "Madonna and Child" (circa 1440) and Sandro Botticelli's "Ideal Portrait of a Lady (Simonetta Vespucci)" (1475-80) among them, as well as works by Oskar Kokoschka and Claude Lorrain. Cincinnati Art Museum, cincyart.org
New England
BOSTON
"Virgil Abloh: Figures of Speech"
July 3 to Sept. 26
Best known as a fashion designer, Virgil Abloh -- the artistic director of Louis Vuitton men's wear and founder of the label Off-White -- has several parallel careers, including architect and artist. In this show, works by Mr. Abloh in many different media are mixed with pieces by other artists, including Arthur Jafa. The museum's atrium holds a work in the form of a black flag, "PSA" (2019), emblazoned with white words that could sum up Mr. Abloh's whole approach to culture: "Question Everything." Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston, icaboston.org
SALEM, MASS.
"In American Waters: The Sea in American Painting"
May 29 to Oct. 3
For summer, an exhibition of maritime paintings has a distinctly breezy appeal. This show of about 90 works covers more than 200 years of watery images, from historical artists like Michele Felice Cornè -- represented by two works, including "Dropping Astern" (1812) -- up to present-day makers like Amy Sherald, famed for her portrait of Michelle Obama, and Kay WalkingStick. Until May 31, you also can catch a thematically overlapping contemporary show, "Alexis Rockman: Shipwrecks," that looks at maritime disasters through an ecological lens. Peabody Essex Museum, pem.org
ANDOVER, MASS.
"Mel Kendrick: Seeing Things in Things"
Through Oct. 3
The New York-based sculptor Mel Kendrick, now in his 70s, has devoted his working life to abstraction, somehow mining emotion from complex shapes with round holes, sharp angles, and myriad twists and turns. His materials are basic -- wood, rubber, concrete, paper -- and his aesthetic is just as effective when he puts his signature geometries into woodblock prints. This show, at the museum of the prep school Phillips Academy, features about 60 sculptures as well as photographs, prints and intriguing tabletop pieces that Mr. Kendrick considers to be 3-D sketches, helping the viewer understand his process. As a bonus, the museum commissioned two large outdoor sculptures in concrete. Addison Gallery of American Art, addison.andover.edu
RIDGEFIELD, CONN.
"Lucia Hierro: Marginal Costs"
June 7 to Jan. 2, 2022
A Dominican-American artist raised in the New York neighborhood of Washington Heights, Lucia Hierro brings a citified Pop sensibility to works like her "Mercado" series of oversize sculptures of grocery bags, full of household products and food that might be bought at an uptown bodega. The show, with 14 works, also features Ms. Hierro's largest mural to date, "Marginal Costs," which depicts life amid the culture of the Caribbean diaspora and addresses the impact of the coronavirus. Aldrich Contemporary Art Museum, thealdrich.org
Mid-Atlantic
BALTIMORE
"Tschabalala Self: By My Self"
Through Sept. 19
This small show of 13 works by a New York-based painter and sculptor may have a big impact for fans of figurative art. Tschabalala Self gives deceptively simple titles to her works -- like "Sock" and "Horse," two works in the show from 2018 -- and their richness comes from their depiction of Black life and the sensitivity to rounded human forms. Her process combines mechanical methods, including stenciling, with collagelike additions of fabric scraps and other material. Baltimore Museum of Art, artbma.org
HAMILTON, N.J.
"Bruce Beasley: Sixty Year Retrospective, 1960-2020"
Through Jan. 9, 2022
The Oakland, Calif.-based sculptor Bruce Beasley has been a prolific maker of abstract forms for decades. His work is in dozens of museum collections and he was commissioned to make a 17-by-17-foot stainless steel sculpture, "Gathering of the Moons," for the 2008 Beijing Olympics. This show will have indoor exhibition components as well as outdoor works spread over the 42-acre landscaped grounds, including several from his "Torqueri" series. Grounds for Sculpture, groundsforsculpture.org
West Coast
SEATTLE
"Monet at Étretat"
July 1 to Oct. 17
This small show features 10 paintings by the beloved Impressionist Claude Monet, and five by other artists, as well as photography and ephemera; there's also a gallery about the conservation of such works. In the 1880s, Monet visited the Normandy seaside village of Étretat and made about 80 works depicting fishing boats, the ocean and the area's famed chalk cliffs, catching the changing mood of light on all. Seattle Art Museum, seattleartmuseum.org
SAN FRANCISCO
"Wangechi Mutu: I Am Speaking, Are You Listening?"
Through Nov. 7
The Kenyan-American artist Wangechi Mutu, who splits time between Nairobi and New York, has made many museum appearances, including in the 2019 Whitney Biennial, but this is among her biggest solo exhibitions. About 20 works, many of them large sculptures, have been placed in spaces inside and outside the building, an arrangement intended to address colonialism in a museum replete with Eurocentric art. Her monumental sculptural figures that combine both animal and human, like the showstopper "Mama Ray," will start conversations. Legion of Honor Museum, famsf.org
LOS ANGELES
"Yoshitomo Nara"
Through July 5
Wide-eyed children in their many emotional states are the primary subject for the Japanese artist Yoshitomo Nara, who depicts them relatively simply but forcibly in paintings, drawings and sculptures. This large show covers his career from the 1980s to the present, with a focus on one of his primary interests, music, even finding room to display the record collection that inspired him. Beckoning visitors from outside the museum on Wilshire Boulevard is a 26-foot-tall painted bronze sculpture, "Miss Forest." Los Angeles County Museum of Art, lacma.org
LOS ANGELES
"Power, Justice and Tyranny in the Middle Ages"
Tuesday to Aug. 15
Politics is a popular topic for contemporary art, but power and its uses and abuses have fueled creative expression from the beginning, including the period from 500 to 1500 that we know as the Middle Ages. This small show of 19 illuminated manuscripts invites you to think small, and to get close and peer at the artistry of a distant age on the page. The greens, blues and reds of "Saint Leonard Liberating a Child from Prison" (circa 1460) are remarkably well preserved. We do not know the name of the Italian maker, but the act of beneficence depicted still resonates. Getty Center Museum, getty.edu
Photograph "C" (2007) by Amy Sillman is part of a show of female painters with ties to the Hamptons. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA PARRISH ART MUSEUM); "Acrobat" by Pablo Picasso (1930). (PHOTOGRAPH BY ESTATE OF PABLO PICASSO/ARTISTS RIGHTS SOCIETY (ARS), NEW YORK; VIA FABA); The dancers Loretta Livingston and Kurt Weinheimer in 1976 wearing a "duotard" costume designed by Rudi Gernreich. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL ESGRO, VIA PHOENIX ART MUSEUM); "Wangechi Mutu: I Am Speaking, Are You Listening?" includes many large sculptures placed in spaces indoors and outdoors. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA WANGECHI MUTU AND GLADSTONE GALLERY, NEW YORK AND BRUSSELS; GARY SEXTON/THE FINE ARTS MUSEUMS OF SAN FRANCISCO)
