ECONOMY
Economist Is Picked
To Lead St. Louis Fed
Alberto Musalem, an economist and former member of the New York Federal Reserve's staff, has been tapped to become the new president of the St. Louis Fed, the regional bank said on Thursday.
Mr. Musalem, 55, succeeds James Bullard, who led the St. Louis Fed from 2008 until he announced in July that he was leaving to become the dean of Purdue University's business school.
Mr. Musalem will bring extensive market, public policy and central bank experience to the St. Louis Fed.
He recently served as co-chief investment officer and co-founder of Evince Asset Management and was also an executive vice president at the New York Fed between 2014 and 2017, focusing on the financial sector and broader policy issues. He also was a partner and managing director at Tudor Investment Corporation and worked as an economist at the International Monetary Fund. REUTERS
EARNINGS
Walgreens Cuts Dividend
To Free Up More Capital
Walgreens is chopping its dividend nearly in half as the drugstore chain looks to strengthen its balance sheet.
The health care giant said Thursday that reducing its quarterly payout to shareholders to 25 cents per share will help free up capital to spend growing its pharmacy and health care businesses.
Tim Wentworth, the new chief executive, said in a statement that company leaders believe such growth "will ultimately improve shareholder value."
The new dividend compares to a 48 cents per share payout the company announced in October.
Walgreens also announced on Thursday a better-than-expected fiscal first quarter.
Walgreens Boots Alliance runs a network of around 13,000 drugstores globally. Most of its locations are in the United States, where its locations are becoming growing sources for care. ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
Apple and Disney
Must Bow to A.I. Votes
Apple and the Walt Disney Company cannot avoid shareholder votes about their use of artificial intelligence put forward by the A.F.L.-C.I.O., the Securities and Exchange Commission has ruled.
In notices dated Wednesday, the S.E.C. rejected requests by Apple and Disney to exclude calls for reports on their use of A.I. from their annual meetings.
At Apple, a pension trust of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. asked for a report on the company's use of A.I. "in its business operations and disclose any ethical guidelines that the company has adopted regarding the company's use of A.I. technology." In a similar request, it also asked Disney to report on its board's role overseeing A.I. use.
Brandon Rees, deputy director of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s office of investment, said the S.E.C.'s decisions could bring agreements with Apple and Disney that would bring them into line with the A.I. disclosures of companies like Microsoft. REUTERS
Credit: By Reuters and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW KELLY/REUTERS)
