Andrew Yang's message is remarkably similar to Elizabeth Warren's and Bernie Sanders's -- the American economy is not working for enough Americans, and it's going to require structural change to do better, proposals that are far more than incremental. Where Mr. Yang differs -- beyond his almost complete lack of government or political experience -- is in his prescriptions, including his signature Freedom Dividend. ¶ Mr. Yang previously ran a successful test prep company and created the nonprofit Venture for America, which he argues is a strength, offering him fresh perspective and critical distance from the workings of Washington.¶ In an interview on Dec. 4, it was clear that Mr. Yang has done his homework, traveling across the country and listening closely. "He really seemed to have an almost emotional sense of what people have been going through and what the problems are," a board member said afterward. "His portrait of the fundamental economic problems were more moving than Bernie's, and Bernie has been selling this for 30 years."¶ He articulated a vision for the future of work, education and technology for the nation. The board also delved into Mr. Yang's approach to foreign policy and military intervention, and learned of his fascination with aliens and fear of flying vacuum cleaners.¶ Here are excerpts from the 90-minute discussion's annotated transcript.
Kathleen Kingsbury: Wonderful. Thank you. Yeah. So I have a serious question to ask you, but first we wanted to ask, were you wearing a helmet while you were biking here? Andrew Yang: I was wearing a helmet. I have a staffer with the helmet as proof. Jesse Wegman: Is the inside of the helmet warm? My team then had me take the helmet off and then tried to make my hair look good. So that's why I didn't show up with the helmet. KK: It looks sharp. I commented to one of my team members, I feel like running for president is at least a glimpse into what it's like to be a professional woman because I feel like I care about my appearance more now than I ever did. And there are people that are always like looking after ---- Brent Staples: Scrutinizing you. Scrutinizing, looking after it, because I'm just like, "What? My hair? Who cares? No one." And then people are like, "No, no," and they have to put time in, smooth it out. (1) KK: So let's get into it. We have about 90 minutes together. In your assessment, what are the policy breakdowns that lead to Americans still being hungry today? Wow, I love this question. There are many causes of poverty, and the fact that we're not able to put food into people's houses and on their tables is a structural problem. My campaign's based upon the premise that we're going through this profound economic transformation, the fourth industrial revolution. And one of the major problems is that we still pretend we're in the economy of the '70s or '80s. (2) In the 70s or '80s, your labor and overall productivity were more or less in lock step. And we still pretend that if someone wakes up in the morning and says, "Hey, I need to put food on the table," he can go out to his main street, he can sell his time for money at some hourly rate, and then he'll be able to make a good enough living so he can feed his family, raise kids and the rest of it. That has become progressively less true over the last 40 years, unfortunately, where wages have stagnated while productivity has gone up and up, and that's going to accelerate because of the convergence of capital and technology now, in unprecedented ways. (3) Especially for people who are at the lower end of the skills ladder, which is most Americans. Only 33 percent of Americans will graduate from college, 42 percent if you include twoyear degrees. So you're looking at a nation of high school graduates. And what do high school graduates do for a living? The top five occupational categories are retail and administrative, which includes call center work, retail, food service and food preparation, transportation, primarily truck driving, and attendant supportive jobs and manufacturing still. We all know that we have gutted many of these industries, and their labor bases have shrunk. So for a high school graduate in America to get by, if you have one health problem or car breakdown, it can take a very tenuous financial situation and send it in a downward spiral. Then how do you put food on the table? In theory, there are nonprofits and food pantries that would see to this, but we all know that they're dramatically underresourced relative to the need. And so when you look at the causes of food poverty, to me the best solution is instead of trying to create organizations that will put food into people's hands, which we should do obviously, we should just put money into Americans' hands and then they would be able to procure food to provide for themselves and their families. (4) KK: So I assume you're referring to [your] universal basic income plan. Your campaign platform, you have tons and tons of proposals, everything from U.B.I. to universal daylight saving time. Plans don't really mean anything unless you have priorities. What would you do immediately when you enter office? What would be first on your agenda? What would you want to accomplish in the first 100 days? (5) To me, the economic imbalances are causing many of our other problems. If you look up and down the line, health problems, poor educational attainment and results, even political polarization, they stem from the fact that we have this pervasive financial insecurity where 78 percent of Americans are living paycheck to paycheck. Almost half can't afford an unexpected $ 400 or $ 500 bill. If you can't pay next month's rent, it's very hard to worry about climate change. I come and talk to you and say, "Hey, we need to fight climate change." And you look up and say like, "I'm worried about next month. Next year, next decade has to wait in line." And that's probably a generous response. Some of the responses would be worse than that. So if you get the boot off people's throats, then you can start making progress on our health, on our educational outcomes, on our political polarization. Everyone knows my flagship proposal is this Freedom Dividend of $ 1,000 a month for every American adult, which is not a new idea. And it's not my idea. Thomas Paine was for it at the founding of the country. Martin Luther King fought for it and was fighting for it when he was assassinated. So after I'm the nominee and I defeat Donald Trump, everyone will know that I'm in the White House because of the Freedom Dividend. Democrats and progressives will be so thrilled to have defeated Donald Trump, they will love the fact that we're going to put buying power into families' hands, make children stronger and healthier. But here's the great thing: The Republicans will look up and say, "Wait a minute, do I hate the Freedom Dividend?" And they look up, and they notice only one state's had a dividend for almost 40 years, and it's Alaska, a deep red conservative state, that was passed by a Republican governor. The reason I am drawing, in some polls, 10 percent or more of Donald Trump voters to my campaign is that Republicans and conservatives do not Next, the board discussed foreign policy... Serge Schmemann: About your responsibilities as president. One of the heaviest ones would be waging war. When you look back on the conflicts into which recent presidents have put us, would you support this? Is this something you would have done in Syria, in Libya, in Kosovo? Would you have sent troops there?So I have a three-part test for sending troops into harm's way. No. 1, it needs to advance a vital American interest or avert a humanitarian catastrophe. No. 2, it has to have a clearly defined timeline where we can look troops in the eyes and say, "It's going to take this long and you're going to be able to accomplish our mission and then you're going to be able to come home." And not some boardroom self-delusion, like you actually believe that you're going to get it done and then be able to bring them home in that time frame. And No. 3, we're not going in alone; there are allies joining us in the mission. If those three things are in place, then I would consider sending our troops into harm's way. Generally speaking, I think we have become overly aggressive and optimistic about what we can accomplish in various foreign theaters. I've signed a pledge to end the forever wars because I don't believe it's the will of the hate economic buying power in citizens' hands. What they hate is a giant bureaucracy making everyone's decisions. So you ask what my main priority will be as president, it will be to get the Freedom Dividend across the finish line and get buying power into Americans' hands, which will then lead us to be able to solve many other problems much more quickly. (6) KK: Have you spoken to Republican lawmakers about the Freedom Dividend? I haven't sat down with a lot of sitting senators and congressmen and women, but I've talked to literally thousands of people who supported Donald Trump in the last election who say they are now supporting me. I've talked to many folks who are Republicans who say they are, at least, sympathetic to my message, in large part because they understand the numbers. American people for us to be in a constant state of armed conflict in foreign theaters for years and even decades at a time. Our Constitution says that it's in Congress's hands to declare war, but Congress has completely ceded this authority through the A.U.M.F. [Authorization for Use of Military Force] and then just said, "Hey, executive branch, you can do what you want." And now they want nothing to do with it, and that is not the will of the American people, and it's not the will of the Constitution. So we should repeal the A.U.M.F. and say, "Look, Congress, if we want to authorize armed conflict, it should be on you and it should be the will of the people." (7) SS: Concretely, would you have sent troops, say, to Syria? No. I'd have to look at the facts at the time that that decision was being made. Jim Dao: Can I pose a future hypothetical? If the Chinese government were to flood Hong Kong with military troops after you were president and impose a violent crackdown, similar to, say, Tiananmen Square in 1989, what would you do? I have family in Hong Kong. I spent a semester there in college, and so when I see those streets wracked with riots and violence, I actually remember being on those streets. And so it's incredibly jarring, and it's an extraordinary situation because of Hong Kong's status as this semiautonomous region that's being reintegrated back into China. Our best path forward with China is to try and have them continue to show restraint, but also see that the costs to human rights abuse is not just in Hong Kong, but with their ethnic minorities and the Muslim population of Uighurs, that the costs are higher than their perceived benefits of maintaining social order and stability. In order to have those costs feel real to the Chinese, we can't just moralize and say, "Hey, do the right thing." Because at this point they're looking at us and saying like, "Keep your opinions and value statements to yourselves." We have to be working toward China's second main priority, which is maintaining robust economic growth. So there are two goals. There are two primary goals that are sometimes in tension, of maintaining social order and maintaining robust economic growth. And the best way we can try and contain their behavior in Hong Kong is to say, "Look, the economic costs are going to be very, very high." And the best way we can do that is to build global consensus around certain norms and behaviors. At the last debate, I proposed a world data organization, because to me, China's in position to leapfrog us in artificial intelligence. They're investing tens of billions in a way that our government is not. It's a national effort. And they've now separated their technology ecosystem from the West's and they're trying to sell their software and operating systems to other countries with very limited success right now, but this parallel tech universe, to me, is something that we can actually use to bring China back to the table. That's why something like world data organization is so vital. When they had to join the W.T.O. [World Trade Organization], they realized this was going to be vital to their economic growth, so they're going to have to make some decisions and compromises in order to join the world order. We can create an analogous situation for data and technology and then use that to try and curb some of their worst abuses and behaviors. Now, is this going to happen in time to help Hong Kong? I certainly hope so. I mean, I certainly hope that they don't flood the streets of Hong Kong with troops any time in the next number of days or weeks. (8) KK: And do you think President Xi is a dictator? I think he meets just about every conventional definition of dictator. Yes. Charlie Warzel: You were talking about data and that's a good segue into some of the -- I mean, you're probably the candidate who sort of runs on understanding the internet better than anyone right now. And I'm curious first about this worldwide data organization. For someone like China, wouldn't it actually be better for them to sort of hoard that data and hoard that information and keep that closed system? (9) So this is the carrot and the stick. So imagine if you had data standards that were endorsed by the U.S., the E.U., and Japan, and it had certain technology protocols associated with it. Then China said, "Hey, I don't want to adhere to that." Because like you said, they like to hoard data, and one of the reasons why they're in position to leapfrog us is they have more data than we do and they have essentially nonexistent privacy rights or regulations. They have complete surveillance. That's one reason why they've banned masks in Hong Kong, so that their surveillance technology can pick up who the protesters are. So China has its own vast hoard of data. But for them the challenge is not even what's happening internally. The challenge is whether or not they can get developing countries on board with their technology standards to be able to roll them out internationally. So if you're a third party, let's say you're a developing country in Africa or Latin America, then you have a choice essentially between the global standard and the Chinese standard. And if you're the Chinese, you do not want a standard that only you are using over time, because that's going to curb your economic upside to all of the software that you're building. One of the reasons why our tech companies are so successful is that they export it to virtually the entire rest of the world, and China does not want to be in the opposite position.
Credit: By The Editorial Board
Photograph Andrew Yang in the spin room after the Democratic debate in Detroit. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MADDIE MCGARVEY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (TP13)
