The speed at which these weapons move and make their calculations will make them increasingly difficult for humans to control, critics say.
CORRECTION APPENDED
On a bright fall day last year off the coast of Southern California, a United States Air Force B-1 bomber launched an experimental missile that may herald the future of warfare.
At first, pilots aboard the plane directed the missile, but halfway to its destination it severed communication with its operators. Alone, without human oversight, the missile decided which of three ships to attack, dropping to just above the sea surface and striking a 260-foot-long unmanned freighter.
The test was deemed a success. But the design of this new missile and of other weapons that can pick targets on their own has stirred protests from some analysts and scientists, who fear that an ethical boundary is being crossed.
Weapon makers, they say, are taking the first steps toward developing robotic war machines that rely on software, not human instruction, to decide what to target and whom to kill. The speed at which these weapons move and make their calculations will make them increasingly difficult for humans to control, critics say -- or to defend against.
And some scientists worry that by promising to reduce indiscriminate killing and to automate armed conflict, these weapons one day could make war more thinkable, even more likely.
Conventional drones are operated by remote pilots, and heat- and radar-seeking missiles are aimed by humans. But now Israel, Britain and Norway are deploying missiles and drones that carry out attacks against enemy radar, tanks or ships without direct human control.
After launch, they rely on artificial intelligence and their own sensors to select targets and to initiate an attack.
Britain's "fire-and-forget" Brimstone missiles, for example, can distinguish among tanks, cars and buses, and can hunt targets in a predesignated region without oversight. The Brimstones also communicate with one another, dividing up their targets.
Arms with even more advanced self-governance -- so-called autonomous weapons -- are on drawing boards, though the details are usually kept secret. "An autonomous-weapons arms race is already taking place," said Steve Omohundro, a physicist and artificial intelligence specialist at Self-Aware Systems, a think tank in California. "They can respond faster, more efficiently and less predictably."
On Thursday, representatives from dozens of nations will meet in Geneva to consider whether development of these weapons should be restricted by the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. Christof Heyns, the United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, has called for a moratorium on them.
The Pentagon itself has issued a directive requiring high-level authorization for developing weapons capable of killing without human oversight. But fast-moving technology already has made the directive obsolete, some scientists say.
"Our concern is with how the targets are determined, and more importantly who determines them," said Peter Asaro, a co-chairman of the International Committee on Robot Arms Control, a group of scientists that seeks restrictions on the use of military robots. "Are these human-designated targets? Or are these systems automatically deciding what is a target?"
Weapons makers in the United States were the first to develop advanced autonomous weapons. An early version of the Tomahawk cruise missile had the ability to hunt for Soviet ships without direct human control. It was withdrawn in the early 1990s following a nuclear arms treaty with Russia.
In 1988, the Navy test-fired a Harpoon antiship missile that employed an early form of self-guidance. The missile mistook an Indian freighter that had strayed onto the test range for its target. The Harpoon, which did not have a warhead, hit the bridge of the freighter, killing a crew member.
Despite the accident, the Harpoon became a mainstay of naval armaments and remains in wide use.
Technological advances in three particular areas have made self-governing weapons a real possibility.
New types of radar, laser and infrared sensors are helping missiles and drones better calculate their position and orientation. "Machine vision," resembling that of humans, identifies patterns in images and helps weapons distinguish important targets.
This nuanced sensory information can be quickly interpreted by sophisticated artificial intelligence systems, enabling a missile or drone to carry out its own analysis in flight. And computer hardware hosting it all has become relatively inexpensive -- and expendable.
The missile tested off California, the Long Range Anti-Ship Missile, is under development by Lockheed for the Air Force and Navy. It is intended to fly for hundreds of kilometers, maneuvering on its own to avoid radar and out of radio contact with human controllers.
In a 2012 directive, the Pentagon drew a line between "semi-autonomous" weapons, whose targets are chosen by a human operator, and fully autonomous weapons that can hunt and engage targets without intervention.
Weapons of the future, the directive said, must be "designed to allow commanders and operators to exercise appropriate levels of human judgment over the use of force."
The Pentagon nonetheless argues that the antiship missile is only semi-autonomous and that humans are sufficiently represented in its targeting and killing decisions. But officials at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, which initially developed the missile, and at Lockheed declined to comment on how the weapon decides on targets, saying the information was classified.
"It will be operating autonomously when it searches for the enemy fleet," said Mark Gubrud, a physicist and an early critic of so-called smart weapons. "This is pretty sophisticated stuff that I would call artificial intelligence outside human control."
"It's valid to ask if this crosses the line," said Paul Scharre, a weapons specialist now at the Center for New American Security who led the working group that wrote the Pentagon directive.
Some arms control specialists say that requiring only "appropriate" human control of these weapons is too vague, speeding the development of targeting systems that automate killing.
Mr. Heyns, the United Nations rapporteur, said nations with advanced weapons should agree to limit their weapons systems to those with "meaningful" human control over the selection and attack of targets. "It must be similar to the role a commander has over his troops," Mr. Heyns said.
Systems that permit humans to override their decisions may not meet that demand, he added. Weapons that make their own decisions move so quickly that human overseers soon may not be able to keep up. Yet many of them are explicitly designed to permit human operators to step away from controls. Israel's anti-radar missile, the Harpy, loiters in the sky until an enemy radar is turned on. It then attacks and destroys the radar installation on its own.
Norway plans to equip its fleet of advanced jet fighters with the Joint Strike Missile, which can hunt, recognize and detect a target without human intervention. Opponents call it a "killer robot."
Military analysts like Mr. Scharre argue that automated weapons should be embraced: Warfare guided by software may result in fewer mass killings and civilian casualties. Autonomous weapons, they say, do not commit war crimes.
On September 16, 2011, for example, British warplanes fired two dozen Brimstone missiles at a group of Libyan tanks that were shelling civilians. Eight or more of the tanks were destroyed simultaneously, according to a military spokesman, saving civilian lives.
It would have been difficult for human operators to coordinate the swarm of missiles with similar precision.
"Better, smarter weapons are good if they reduce civilian casualties or indiscriminate killing," Mr. Scharre said.
CORRECTION:
As published in the International New York Times
An article on Nov. 12 about automated weapons paraphrased incorrectly from comments by Paul Scharre, a weapons specialist now at the Center for a New American Security. His position is that smarter weapons, which are more accurate, should be embraced because they may result in fewer mass killings and civilian casualties. He does not think that autonomous weapons, which make targeting and killing decisions without human guidance, should be embraced for that reason. This correction was delayed because editors did not follow through on the complaint.
Friday, February 20, 2015
