The struggles and dangers that refugees from Syria endure before reaching safe havens are now well known. For the second part of their insightful and often moving long-term look at Syrian refugees in Canada, Jodi Kantor and Catrin Einhorn were in Toronto, where they found an additional stress factor that newcomers faced after they arrived at their new homes.
As they sorted out and rebuilt their lives in Canada, many refugees were also receiving desperate pleas from family members who were still in Syria and Lebanon.
"Previous generations of refugees often ached for any information about relatives, but now messages zipped back and forth around the world on free apps," Ms. Kantor and Ms. Einhorn wrote. "The joy of such regular communication came at a steep cost: constant updates on the misery of relatives left behind, intensifying worry and impeding progress for those trying to carve out a new life."
Those pleas also challenge Canadian refugee sponsors to consider the limits of their generosity.
If you missed it, be sure to read the first installment of the series as well. Ms. Kantor and Ms. Einhorn are now working on their third chapter.
New hope in a new arena. After a long, miserable hockey dry spell, there's a new buzz in Edmonton, Alberta, as the N.H.L. season gets underway -- and it's not just because of the sometimes contentious new home of the Oilers.
Connor McDavid will lead the team this season, making him, at 19, the youngest team captain in N.H.L. history.
After spending time in Edmonton, Ben Shpigel, The New York Times's hockey reporter, found that he "conjures the greatest Oiler of them all, Wayne Gretzky."
Shocking reversal. Families in Woodstock and London, Ontario, learned this week that relatives who they believed had died in nursing homes from disease or old age may have been murdered.
The police have charged a former nurse with eight counts of first-degree, or premeditated, murder over a period of seven years when she worked at two nursing homes.
Woodstock is a small city where farming and industry mix. At one entrance to town, motorists are greeted by a life-size statue of Springbank Snow Countess, a cow that died in 1936 while holding the title of world champion lifetime butterfat producer. To the east is an immense white Toyota factory where RAV4 sport utility vehicles are assembled.
While I was in Woodstock this week, I found that the shock and grief in the community over the news of the nursing-home killings was compounded by bafflement. Conflicting theories about the possible motive behind the killings abound. But no one other than the killer, and perhaps the police, really knows why they happened.
Belgian turmoil. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau was supposed to be in Brussels this week, signing a free-trade deal between Canada and the European Union. But those plans were upset when the regional parliament of Wallonia, the mainly French-speaking part of Belgium, seemed to have killed the pact.
It had been negotiated by the former Conservative government of Prime Minister Stephen Harper, and the national government of Belgium had agreed to it along with all the other members of the European Union. But the approval of Belgium's regional assemblies was also required, and when Wallonia objected last week, Canada's international trade minister, Chrystia Freeland, walked out of the talks in Brussels with some undiplomatic, emotional language.
This week, European Union leaders found a way to mollify the Walloons that was also acceptable to Canada. The Wallonian assembly voted Friday morning to approve the agreement, and by the end of the day it was announced that the pact's near-death experience had passed and Mr. Trudeau would travel to Belgium for a signing ceremony on Sunday.
Of course, something could still go wrong before the deal is signed, sealed and delivered. But if everything does work out and Mr. Trudeau is able to make his European trip after all, an analysis by Aaron Wherry of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation suggests that Ms. Freeland's dramatic walkout may have played an important role in forcing Europe to work things out. Mr. Wherry noted that it echoed a similar episode in the 1980s, when Canada was hashing out a trade agreement with the United States.
Here are some articles from The Times, not necessarily related to Canada, that I found interesting this week:
Lucia Perillo, a poet who used "humor and piercing emotion" to write about her life with multiple sclerosis, died at 58.
The American military has put artificial intelligence at the center of a multibillion-dollar program to create weapons that, like the Terminator, can think and kill on their own.
Britain is moving to pardon men who were criminalized for being gay. That's not sitting well with George Montague, a World War ll veteran, father, grandfather and entrepreneur. Forty-two years after he was convicted of gross indecency, he's also seeking an apology.
A native of Windsor, Ontario, Ian Austen was educated in Toronto, lives in Ottawa and has reported about Canada for The New York Times for over a decade. Follow him on Twitter at @ianrausten.
Tell us what you think at CanadaToday@nytimes.com. And, using the link above, please subscribe to the email newsletter version.
