As compiled by editors of the International Herald Tribune.
Black Heart on the Appalachian Trail
By T.J. Forrester. 195 pages. Simon & Schuster. $15. Trail books like Cheryl Strayed's "Wild" and Bill Bryson's "A Walk in the Woods" tend to mix in common ingredients: offbeat characters, funny anecdotes, well-chosen details, warm epiphanies. This is not that kind of book. Mr. Forrester is a novelist whose characters survive on the margins. They hustle, deal, do a little time, pick up work here and there, enjoy booze and drugs, kick booze and drugs, relapse. Taz Chavis is a young man doing a short stretch for selling coke. While in prison he reads books about the Appalachian Trail and he decides to walk it to the end. A couple of days ahead of him is Simone Decker, a young woman with a troubled psyche and a fiance she's ready to ditch. The third player is Richard, an older man who claims American Indian heritage. All three are hiking as a kind of very long cleanse. Then the first murder victim shows up. Taz and Richard discover the lifeless body of an elderly hiker caught in a tree at the foot of a high cliff. They don't suspect foul play. More dead people turn up. But Taz and Richard are so bereft of wit and clue that they don't notice the bodies hailstoning around them until their last day on the trail. I suspect Mr. Forrester has the experience to write with great feeling and depth about the Appalachian Trail and the hardy souls who go Georgia-to-Maine. "Black Heart," though, never quite clicks.
A Working Theory of Love
By Scott Hutchins. 328 pages. The Penguin Press, $25.95; Penguin Books, Pounds 12.99. You could argue that the fundamental question behind all literature is: "What does it mean to be human?" Some people have even argued that storytelling itself is what makes us more than just monkeys with iPhones -- that Homer created the modern consciousness, or that Shakespeare invented the human identity. In recent years, however, literature has lost a lot of ground on that score to evolutionary psychology, neurobiology and computer science, and particularly to the efforts of artificial intelligence researchers. So as we wait for the Singularity, when our iPhones will become sentient and Siri will start telling us what we can do for her, many of the savvier fiction writers have begun to come to grips with the fact that the tutelary spirit of the quest for the human may not be Dante or Emily Dickinson or Virginia Woolf, but Alan Turing, the British mathematician who helped start the revolution in computing. This clever, funny and very entertaining first novel puts Turing at the center. The novel's wisecracking narrator is Neill Bassett Jr., a 30-something native of Arkansas who now lives in San Francisco. He makes up one-third of a tiny computer start-up in Menlo Park, alongside an Indonesian programmer named Laham and their boss, an elderly European genius named Henry Livorno, who are working to create an artificial intelligence for a planned Turing test. Meanwhile, the novel also chronicles Neill's feckless quest for love in San Francisco. He's just gone through a divorce, and as the novel starts, he's coming to the end of a period of revolving-door hookups. That's not all, and there's a lot of ground to cover, so it feels a bit as if Mr. Hutchins has given short shrift to its most original and exciting element: the philosophical struggle with the Turing test. A novel is itself a kind of advanced Turing test, in which a writer tries to convince readers that lifeless signs on a page are not just real intelligences moving through the real world, but actual human beings. As this novel demonstrates, part of the challenge of giving a machine a truly human intelligence is making it sound humanly unreasonable.
