India bans Facebook's free apps
Feb. 8, 2016
Regulators block the social network's Free Basics program, a suite of apps that Facebook had hoped would expand internet access in the country and establish the company as a dominant platform. Nikhil Pahwa, journalist and activist: For us, this was a fight for freedom: Why should Facebook decide what people can and cannot see?
We worked with a comedy troupe called All India Bakchod to simplify the concepts with a video. We positioned Free Basics as one entity that was impacting the freedom of the internet, and most importantly, calling it the internet when it wasn't the internet.
We set up a site, SavetheInternet.in, which the video directed people toward, to send comments to the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. The video just went viral. We were quite enthused about how many people seemed to care about an issue that they had no clue about.
This was the first pushback against a Facebook product anywhere in the world at this scale. This was also Facebook's first global public policy loss, where they went up against citizens.
What we did has been vindicated by, for example, what we've seen subsequently in Myanmar and Philippines -- where for most people, Facebook is the internet and its algorithms end up prioritizing content. That is not necessarily good for democracy. As told to VINDU GOEL A court orders Apple to unlock an iPhone
Feb. 16, 2016
The Justice Department asks a federal court to order Apple to help unlock the encrypted iPhone of the gunman in a mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., setting off a battle of privacy versus security. David Bowdich, head of the F.B.I.'s Los Angeles office: We received reports of an active shooter, so I went immediately to San Bernardino. There was a device that was found, an Apple phone, and it belonged to the County of San Bernardino. The county said, "You do whatever you need to do with it." Bruce Sewell, Apple's general counsel: We have a hotline that law enforcement can call and say, "We have a phone; what should we do with it?" The first call came in about 3 a.m. the day after the massacre. They said, "What can you do to help us?"
The F.B.I. had allowed the phone to power down and had tried to reset the Apple ID. Both made it almost impossible for any kind of easy access to the data. It was clear there wasn't going to be any way short of creating a back door. Mr. Bowdich: We were told, "We're only going to do what the law requires us to do." Mr. Sewell: We've been working with the F.B.I. for a long time, and it had always been incredibly civil. But it became clear that this one was different.
The standoff leads to the court order. Kiran Raj, senior counsel for the deputy attorney general: The F.B.I. had found on the gunman's Facebook page pledges to Al Qaeda and ISIS. It was an intense investigation.
The shooting took place Dec. 2, 2015. About two and a half months later, the U.S. attorney's office filed to get the judge to order Apple to unlock the phone. Mr. Sewell: What the government did was file a very aggressive complaint. It essentially said: Apple is in cahoots with terrorists because they will not help us. It was a smart move by the government, but it was really aggressive.
As soon as we received that, we knew that immediately we needed to start communicating our message. We worked through the night on the statement.
In its statement, Apple says the court order would set a dangerous precedent and put the public's privacy at risk. Mr. Sewell: The entire company's brand was on the line. We had people like Trump standing up on the stump saying, "Let's boycott Apple phones." We had people saying Apple's a non-American company. I was getting calls at my house with people going, "How dare you do this?" Mr. Bowdich: There are victims on the other end. So I was surprised that we did not receive more cooperation.
On the eve of a March hearing in the case, things turn. Mr. Sewell: The teams on both sides had moved to the trial site. Then at about 5 o'clock, we got a call from the U.S. attorney saying they had asked to postpone the hearing. They thought they had a way of accessing the phone. Mr. Bowdich: A company came with a solution. The techs looked at it and said, "You know what? This one works." Mr. Raj: The encryption issue is much more nuanced and more complicated than it has been portrayed. Unfortunately, with this particular case, people felt like they had to choose a side. As told to JACK NICAS A.I. beats a champion at Go March 9, 2016
DeepMind, an artificial intelligence lab owned by Google, puts AlphaGo, a machine it developed to play the ancient and complex game of Go, up against Lee Se-dol, the best Go player of the decade. Demis Hassabis, co-founder of DeepMind: At the time we announced we were going to play Lee Se-dol, we were definitely nowhere near strong enough to beat him.
So we were relying on the power of extrapolation and statistics to get us there. We could see the performance curve improving. But you don't know, right? It was quite a risky thing for us to try. That's actually why Lee Se-dol wasn't so worried about it.
The matches are played in South Korea.
I don't think we quite understood, actually, how big it was going to be in Korea. We knew it was going to be big, and we knew Lee Se-dol was a legend, and I knew that Go was huge there, and I knew they loved A.I. and technology. But we didn't quite expect it to bring the country to a standstill, which it almost did. Or it felt like it did.
When I got off the plane, there were like 20 reporters waiting for me, as if I was David Beckham or something.
And then there was all the top brass there from Google. We were still quite new to Google at that point. Barely two years in, and we were promising pretty crazy stuff like beating the world champion at Go.
I met Lee Se-dol for dinner with his family on the day before the match started. He's got this incredible nobility and elegance about him as a human being and as someone who's mastered an art.
AlphaGo wins the first three games. Mr. Lee wins the fourth and AlphaGo the fifth.
I really felt for him. I felt it would be appropriate if he won a game -- for his soul and for the soul of the game. Fortunately, he was able to -- and I'm really pleased that it was due to some brilliance from him. As told to CADE METZ BuzzFeed blows up a watermelon April 8, 2016
The website posts a Facebook Live video called "Watch Us Explode This Watermelon One Rubber Band at a Time!" The 45-minute video, featuring two BuzzFeed staff members in hazmat suits stretching 682 rubber bands around a watermelon until it bursts, is a viral sensation with nearly one million simultaneous viewers at its peak. Jonah Peretti, BuzzFeed's chief executive: The watermelon wasn't just a weird lark. We built our way toward the watermelon.
The first experiment was when one of our executives was in a meeting, and someone who worked for him put a family of goats in his office, and then started broadcasting on Facebook Live. We saw the number of concurrent viewers go up and up and up and up while people were waiting for the boss to come back. We had this theory that people anticipating something and sharing something together is the thing that was working.
And so the watermelon was designed as a way of testing that theory. Chelsea Marshall, a BuzzFeed senior writer: At the time, I was writing for the site, and that day, my co-worker was like, "Do you want to explode a watermelon?" I was just, "Yeah, sure, it will probably take like five minutes." So James and I went and started putting rubber bands on the watermelon. Mr. Peretti: There was a giddy feeling in the office. All the way up on the 15th floor, you could hear laughing in the canteen a few floors down. Ms. Marshall: In the middle of it, someone was like, "How many people do you think are watching this?" And I was like, "I don't know, two? Our moms?" There hadn't been a huge thing on Facebook Live yet. Mr. Peretti: They were running around at Facebook trying to make sure they could keep the feed up, because at that point they had never had a live stream with that many concurrents. Ms. Marshall: We had our hazmat suits on, and goggles, because I had personally never exploded a watermelon before. There were crowds forming around us in the office, but it didn't really occur to me or James that it was going viral while we were doing it.
It just kept going so much longer than either James or I thought it would. Right before, I think I could tell, "Oh, it's going to blow up really soon." And then obviously it exploded everywhere. Mr. Peretti: It was a more utopian time where people were more optimistic about the future and change, and the world transforming for the better. People coming together to share a moment that was completely nonpolitical, silly, fun, lighthearted -- that was pretty typical of the time. Ms. Marshall: Afterward, my husband had to put Band-Aids on my fingers for me because I couldn't even bend them. So, I guess if anyone does that again, wear gloves. As told to KEVIN ROOSE Moore's Law ends May 18, 2016
The principle, which refers to a prediction made in 1965 that engineers would pack twice as many transistors onto a computer chip every 18 months, slows. The end comes when Google starts building its own computer chip, called the TPU, because standard chips can no longer keep pace with the rise of artificial intelligence. Gordon Moore, co-founder of Intel, who coined Moore's Law: We ran out of gas sometime during the last decade. We couldn't continue to shrink things anymore. I have been amazed that the engineers have been able to keep it moving as long as they have.
All of a sudden, the barriers that we were tackling were coming to a fundamental limit. They had to live with the fact that transistors are made of atoms.
That was a prediction that Stephen Hawking made during one of his visits to Silicon Valley. Somebody asked him what the fundamental limits would be. He said the velocity of light and the atomic nature of matter, both of which are fundamental. John Hennessy, board member of Google: We're probably about seven to 10 years into a slowdown on Moore's Law. We've strayed away from Gordon's original prediction. And we're beginning to see the effects of this.
One complication is energy efficiency. If you think about an Intel microprocessor, it currently generates, let's say, 135 watts. Imagine something, some tiny object that is about a centimeter and a half on a side, that's generating more heat than a 100-watt light bulb.
You have to get the electricity in, and then you have to get the heat out. That's become a major limitation in our ability to build chips, particularly in the mobile space, because you care about battery life. You also don't want your phone to be so hot that it's burning holes in your pocket.
Imagine you're only a little bit behind on Moore's Law. What would you do? You put more transistors on -- perhaps not twice as many as you had in the previous generation, but perhaps 1.5 times as many -- and then you'd try to figure out how to use those transistors to make the CPU faster.
The problem is, if you put transistors on that chip and you activate them, you're going to burn up too much power. You're not going to be able to get the power out. We have already reached this regime where these things are limiting the ability to use even what remains of Moore's Law.
Artificial intelligence is also speeding the end of Moore's Law. Mr. Hennessy: Why do computers need to be fast? The answer to that is the rise of artificial intelligence and machine learning. Your home speaker, whether it's a Google Home or an Alexa or whatever, offers speech recognition. The best speech recognition in the world is based on machine learning.
When Google adopted its "A.I. first" strategy, which was probably seven, eight years ago, we quickly did a computation that said that if we were going to use conventional, general-purpose processors, two things would happen. One was: We couldn't afford the energy. And we probably couldn't afford to buy all the processors that we would need to do everything we needed to do.
That's what motivated our thinking with the TPU. We had to think about really trying to improve efficiency dramatically. The result is, you can get about a factor of 100 in terms of computational power per watt of power. That's like giving you an extra seven years on Moore's Law. As told to CADE METZ Pokemon Go makes the real world a game
July 6, 2016
The app is an instant global hit. In an update of the old-fashioned scavenger hunt, players use augmented reality to capture creatures from the Pokemon video game franchise in the physical world. John Hanke, chief executive of Niantic, the game's developer: I grew up loving board games, outside games like tag and cops and robbers, video games like Pong, and everything that came later. I was attracted to the idea of making games as well as playing them. I worked at Google on Google Maps and Google Earth, so I had an opportunity to bring together the map of the world and game playing.
I was also thinking about technology that would be directly beneficial to me and my family. Rather than camping out in front of the TV with my oldest son, I wanted to marry my interest in getting him outside, exploring the places where we lived and at the same time play a game.
Our business plan with Pokemon Go was to slowly ramp up over a period of six months. We immediately surpassed that goal.
The full impact of the game's popularity hit me when I was on a trip to Japan. I took my oldest son with me. We went to the bamboo forest in Kyoto, a very tranquil place.
Then I got a call from my wife in Oakland, who said, "You don't understand what is going on with this game. Packs of kids are roaming through the town. All the parks are full."
Pokemon Go was the first digital game of any kind of scale that brought people together in the real world. It was self-propelling. As people came out to play and saw other people playing, they got even more excited. It was a kind of real-world virality. As told to DAVID STREITFELD India gets $ 2-a-month mobile internet access
Sept. 5, 2016
Reliance Jio, a mobile carrier created by Mukesh Ambani, India's richest man, begins offering free calls and 1.5 gigabytes of wireless data a day for $ 2 a month, opening the internet to hundreds of millions of Indians. Mathew Oommen, executive at Reliance Jio: We sincerely believed India needed a digital revolution and not just another carrier. All the incumbents were quite happy with the high margins from delivering vanilla voice with very high data rates.
We looked at not voice, not just connectivity, but data as the fundamental building block to the new economy. And that's what got ignored by the incumbents.
One pundit made a statement in June 2016: "There are 25 million 4G phones in India. How does Mr. Ambani plan to reach 100 million subscribers in one year?"
We looked at this and said this was not a lack of demand. This is absolutely a lack of affordable and quality supply.
Jio spent six years building a 4G wireless network, including writing new apps, installing towers in rural areas and designing inexpensive new phones that worked with its technology.
We were doing over 700 towers a day. We introduced the JioPhone. It was a $ 22 device, but we gave it for $ 10.
From 2011 to launch, we built connectivity, we built content, we built apps, we built devices, we built programmability with intelligence, because all of these were fundamental building blocks to our platform.
In 171 days, we had over 100 million subscribers -- the fastest-growing company in any sector across any technology company anywhere in the world. As told to VINDU GOEL Facebook helps sway the 2016 election Nov. 10, 2016
Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook's chief executive, says the notion that the social network played a role in putting Donald J. Trump in the White House is "a pretty crazy idea." Russian agents are later found to have used Facebook to spread inflammatory posts. Alex Stamos, Facebook's chief security officer: I saw a clip of Mark having that conversation, and it became clear to me that the work that we were doing in the run-up to the vote, and the internal briefings that we were giving a number of executives at the company about what we had found around Russian activity, had not made it up to him. Zeynep Tufekci, professor of information science at the University of North Carolina: I saw the remark and immediately thought that it didn't make sense. If you were actually using Facebook at the time, you knew there was a lot of false political stories on it and a lot of misinformation. Mr. Stamos: At that time, we had a dedicated threat intelligence team whose job it was to track government activity on the platform meant to cause harm. We did not have a team in 2016 dedicated to disinformation, and I'm pretty sure no other tech company had one. And I'm pretty sure that the American intelligence community didn't either. Dr. Tufekci: Social media was drowning in these conspiracies. Some of it was just for ad money; some of it we later learned was Russia; some of it were just domestic people doing it for the LOLs. Mr. Stamos: Mark's statement set the expectation with the world that Facebook just didn't care, which is just not true. Dr. Tufekci: People saw his statement and saw that one of the richest people on earth was trying to wriggle out of his responsibility by making this claim that contradicted everything his company had previously said to politicians, advertisers and businesses about their ability to reach and sway people through Facebook. As told to SHEERA FRENKEL
PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAHESH KUMAR A./ASSOCIATED PRESS; BUZZFEED) (BU11); PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JUSTIN METZ; SANJIT DAS/BLOOMBERG) (BU12)
