PBS gears up for Rio with "The Boys of '36," about the working-class American rowers who took the gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympics. "Sliding Doors," starring Gwyneth Paltrow in her It Girl prime, comes to Netflix. And Season 3 of "Silks," the BBC series in which barristers fight for the right to wear big wigs , has its debut on Hulu.
What's on TV
AMERICAN EXPERIENCE: THE BOYS OF '36 9 p.m. on PBS. Inspired by Daniel James Brown's best seller "The Boys in the Boat," this documentary recounts how nine working-class rowers from the University of Washington beat not only Ivy League teams but also Hitler's German athletes to become the underdog heroes of the 1936 Berlin Olympics. "The Nazi Games -- Berlin 1936," which examines how Germany and the International Olympic Committee turned a small, elitist sporting competition into a global spectacle, leads in at 8; "T-Rex: Her Fight for Gold," an "Independent Lens" documentary about Claressa Shields, who won the first Olympic gold medal for women's boxing in 2012 at age 17, follows at 10.
What's Streaming
SLIDING DOORS (1998) on Netflix. Will she make or miss her subway train? And how will that affect her life? Gwyneth Paltrow plays Helen, a comely Londoner who, depending on those pesky doors, may or may not take a seat next to a stranger named James (John Hannah) and strike up a conversation, only to return home to find her boyfriend (John Lynch) in bed with his ex-girlfriend (Jeanne Tripplehorn). "In any case, there's no real doubt about Helen's rosy future," Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times of Peter Howitt's rom-com. "If you're a late-'90s It Girl, a bird among birds, nothing really terrible can happen, at least nothing that can't be reversed in a quick-fix substitute future."
EX MACHINA (2015) on Amazon and iTunes. Alicia Vikander portrays Ava, an exquisite embodiment of artificial intelligence and the latest creation of a tech mogul (Oscar Isaac) living off the grid in wilderness splendor. But can Ava think for herself? He intends to find out by luring a young employee (Domhnall Gleeson) into his lair. Alex Garland's futuristic thriller is "a smart, sleek movie about men and the machines they make, but it's also about men and the women they dream up," Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times.
SILK on Hulu. It's called "taking silk": the merit-based appointment of a British lawyer as Queen's Counsel, which confers the right to wear a specially designed silk gown in court (and, for ceremonial occasions, an even bigger wig). Seasons 1 and 2 of this BBC series follow Martha Costello, a sharp-witted defense barrister in London played by a crackling Maxine Peake, as she strategically overloads on cases that could bolster her reputation. Rupert Penry-Jones is the charmingly cunning Clive Reader, her competition in the quest for justice and professional prestige. Season 3, which starts on Tuesday, concludes their story. The legal procedures may be foreign to American viewers, but the Machiavellian machinations and moral ambiguity -- which Peter Moffat, the drama's creator, culled from his own experiences at the bar -- are universal.
Photograph Olympic Contenders: The 1936 Varsity Crew Team From the University of Washington. (Photograph by University of Washington Libraries, Special Collections, Via Pbs; Gwyneth Paltrow (Photograph by Alex Bailey/Miramax Films); Alicia Vikander (Photograph by Liam Daniel/A24)
