We're following major developments in the markets throughout the day. Check below for the latest updates. Amazon Hits $1,000
Amazon's share price briefly topped $1,000 in early trading on Tuesday, a symbolic milestone for Jeff Bezos' e-commerce company. Amazon's stock is up sharply over the last three months, the latest surge in a climb that has lasted two decades.
Another big tech stock is also near the $1,000 mark: Alphabet, the parent company of Google, is trading around $996 a share, having also risen sharply in recent months.
Amazon is making itself indispensable on a number of fronts, most notably e-commerce and cloud computing. It is also expanding into areas like artificial intelligence and entertainment services. Our tech columnist recently wrote that of the big five tech companies -- Amazon, Alphabet, Apple, Facebook and Microsoft -- the one he would have the hardest time giving up was Amazon.
Among the many things Amazon has going for it:
After years of unprofitability, it is reliably turning in profit.
Long the runaway leader in e-commerce, Amazon has tens of millions of subscribers for its Prime service.
The company is getting serious about drone delivery.
It has a surprise hit with the Echo, its artificial-intelligence-powered personal assistant.
It continues to dominate the book-selling industry, and -- in a move rich with irony -- is opening its own physical bookstores.
Bookstores aren't all. It has ambitious plans to expand further into brick and mortar retail.
It is exploring new ways to expand in retail, including filing a patent for a custom clothing manufacturing system.
It is pushing further into entertainment services, including a recent deal to stream National Football League games.
Its original television and film programming is good and getting better. The series "Transparent" is already a major hit, and the company just struck a deal to adapt Colson Whitehead's novel, "The Underground Railroad," into a film directed by the Oscar winner Barry Jenkins.
All this, and it is adding jobs -- this year, Amazon said it would add 100,000 jobs to meet demand on a number of fronts.
And those are just headlines from the last six months.
What to Watch For: Deutsche Bank Conference
Deutsche Bank's annual global financial services conference in New York began on Tuesday and runs for two days. The lender's chief executive, John Cryan, opened the event and participated in a keynote conversation with Laurence D. Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock.
Don't forget to read the DealBook Morning Agenda.
Credit: THE NEW YORK TIMES
