Katrina Lake is staring at the ceiling, trying to remember the last time she bought clothes in a store.
Ms. Lake is impeccably dressed, in crisp navy pants, tan sandals and a semi-sheer white cotton top. Simple bangles and an elegant gold necklace top off her look. She obviously shops, but in recent years, all her clothes shopping has happened online. She thinks others are ready to shop online just as much -- they just need a helping hand.
That is why she started Stitch Fix, a women's clothing retailer that sends its customers boxes of clothes that are picked by a combination of personal stylists and big data. It is one of a handful of start-ups making aggressive bets that highly personalized online shopping, in which sites choose items for you based on your preferences and their algorithms, can deliver a better e-commerce experience.
Trunk Club, for example, is similar to Stitch Fix, but it is for men and is more expensive. Club W tailors wine to its monthly subscribers, who fill out a "palate profile" when they sign up. And Birchbox, a beauty store, delivers monthly installments of sample-size goods tailored to your needs for $10 for women or $20 for men.
"At a mall or online, the choices are overwhelming," Ms. Lake said. "Then if you buy something and you want to return it, it takes a long time. People just expect a more personalized experience now."
The sort of shopping offered by Stitch Fix is still a tiny slice of the overall e-commerce pie, which the research company eMarketer predicts will increase by 20 percent in 2014, to $1.5 trillion globally. With this kind of rapid growth, many tech entrepreneurs see room for opportunity, and some traditional retailers are picking up on the trend, too. Late last month, Nordstrom said it had agreed to buy Trunk Club.
With these new personalized shopping sites, the magic comes from data. The sites learn about you and then compare your information with profiles of thousands of other people like you to predict what you might want to buy.
People using Birchbox tell the company their skin color, hair type, age and favorite types of products, for example. The company compares that information with other profiles, sees what those people are most likely to buy, then fills a box with beauty samples that match those preferences. Full-size versions of the products can be bought on the site.
Stitch Fix hired Eric Colson, its chief analytics officer, from Netflix, where he was responsible for TV and movie recommendations based on what customers previously watched. A computer program used by Stitch Fix helps filter a huge catalog of clothing and accessories.
The program then matches items to a separate, and also huge, collection of information about people, including their sizes, shapes, color preferences, style habits and current trends.
"I think there's way more data science at work here than people may realize," said Bill Gurley, a general partner at the venture firm Benchmark, an investor in Stitch Fix, who is on the company's board. "There's a 15-page profile, there are over 66 characteristics tracked and there's a predictive heat score for every single item against every single user," meaning a way to determine the likelihood that a customer will keep an item.
Ultimately, though, a human stylist chooses items from the computer-edited list and packages them into a nice little box with a description of each one and a personal note explaining what you have received and how you might wear it.
Ms. Lake said her concept for personalized online shopping came out of a desire to combine the upside of in-store help with the convenience of e-commerce. "In traditional retail, they have the benefit in that they have real people that in theory could offer a very personalized experience," she said. "So, how do you bring the experience that people are having online, and how do you personalize and get to know someone well?"
That sort of real-person interaction might still happen at high-end physical stores like Nordstrom. However, physical shopping is increasingly a transaction of convenience, often involving something researched online before being bought.
"Over 90 percent of commerce still takes place in the brick-and-mortar store," said Bill Martin, founder of ShopperTrak, which uses Nielsen-like tracking devices to monitor shoppers' visits to stores and malls. "But 60 to 70 percent of purchases are now researched online."
Retailers big and small are trying to personalize shopping in physical stores, too, say retail analytics companies like CQuotient. These efforts include loyalty programs that let sales employees easily pull up account histories of their customers' purchases, and even in-store beacons that communicate with a shopper's cellphone and can send relevant offers and coupons if the shopper uses the store's app.
Westfield, which owns 87 large shopping malls around the world, has a two-year-old digital arm, Westfield Labs, which is trying to create a more high-tech shopping experience in its physical centers.
Westfield has teamed up with services that will deliver shoppers' purchased items so they don't have to be lugged to the office, hotel or car. Over the holidays last year, it installed digital kiosks from eBay, Sony, Toms Shoes and Rebecca Minkoff where shoppers could browse giant touch screens, choose items and check out on their phones.
The company even has an exploratory app for its food courts that lets nearby workers order ahead and check out without going through the long lunchtime lines.
Retailers like Urban Outfitters, Mango and Zara appeal to their mobile-friendly young shoppers with apps that offer benefits like exclusive access, rewards and even, in the case of Urban Outfitters, a streaming radio station that evokes its hip shopping experience.
But none of those options, as yet, direct shoppers to personalized selections. That is something Birchbox is hoping to achieve, in addition to its online option, with its recently opened first physical store in New York's SoHo district.
Inside the store, current customers can tell store employees their email addresses and be directed to items that are most relevant to them. New customers can fill out a version of the Birchbox questionnaire to find the products they are most likely to appreciate. They can try out products at their leisure, to avoid a situation in which the personal touch feels more like a hard sell.
"There is still this desire to work with somebody that you really trust," said Katia Beauchamp, a founder and chief executive of Birchbox. "You probably trust the consumers and the overwhelming number of consumers who are like you, and who are then buying something."
Will a virtual personal shopper really fill the void? The act of shopping -- going to the mall, browsing the aisles -- is still a powerful cultural and social draw. And it's still easier, sometimes, to discover new items hanging on a mannequin or even tucked away on the sale rack.
Also, the cost of multiple personalized subscription services for beauty products, wine or clothing adds up quickly.
But personalized selection could make e-commerce accessible for people who might find pages and pages of online shopping both overwhelming and impersonal -- and who find the mall the same way. In this case, though, it's the web and not the stores that provide the personal touch.
"We realized that shopping online, if you know exactly what you want -- it's fast, it's so simple, it's cheaper," Ms. Beauchamp said. "But it's not about the enjoyment, the hobby, the sport."
"We use curation and personalization," she said, "as a way to make the Internet have some of those fun and satisfying elements of shopping."
Personalized Shopping From a Keyboard
Birchbox
Birchbox.com
A beauty product subscription service started in 2010 that delivers boxes of samples. New customers fill out a survey so that products are customized to their skin, hair, age and other factors. A women's box is $10 a month and a men's box is $20. Members can buy full-size products from the site.
Club W
ClubW.com
A subscription wine club that delivers monthly selections at a relatively low price: three bottles of wine for $45 a month. New customers fill out a six-question "palate profile" that includes questions like, "How do you like your coffee?" or "Do you like citrus?" Customers can review wines to help refine the selection.
Stitch Fix
StitchFix.com
Computers combined with human stylists choose a personalized box of clothes for female customers. Customers fill out a detailed style profile when they sign up and then receive orders on a fixed schedule or whenever items are needed. Prices vary depending on the items included, but average about $50 to $55. An order contains five items of clothing or accessories, and postage-paid return packaging.
Trunk Club
TrunkClub.com
A high-end personal stylist service for men. Customers work directly with a stylist who asks for their measurements, discusses style options and then chooses a personalized box of clothing. They pay only for what they keep. Shirts generally cost $100 to $200, jeans are $170 to $250 and sweaters are $100 to $300.
MTailor
MTailor.com
A digital tailor that makes custom shirts for men. Customers use an iPhone or iPad camera to take measurements digitally, and can then customize shirts by collar, cuff and fabric and by whether they want to wear the shirt tucked or untucked. Shirts start at $69 and the company will replace shirts free if they do not fit.
True & Co
TrueandCo.com
A service that finds or makes custom-fit bras. New customers fill out a detailed questionnaire and are categorized into one of several fit types. The site then displays items customized for that type. Customers can order a box of up to four bras to try on at home, with free returns. Bra prices vary but hover around $50. Customers are charged $20 if they do not provide feedback on the items they received.
Photograph Katrina Lake, Right, Chief Executive of Stitch Fix, and Brittany Busacca, Styling Manager. Below, a Box of Beauty Products From Birchbox. (Photographs by Peter Dasilva for the New York Times; Tony Cenicola/the New York Times) (B1); Katia Beauchamp, Left, and Hayley Barna, Cofounders of Birchbox, at Last Month's Opening of a Store in Soho. Above Left, Brittany Busacca of Stitch Fix Setting Up a Photo Layout at Company Headquarters in San Francisco. Left, Jodi Frank, Center, and Michelle Laszlo Doing a Custom Fitting for a Customer, Bill Rogers, at the Trunk Club Showroom in Chicago. (Photographs by Cindy Ord/Getty Images for Birchbox; Peter Dasilva for the New York Times; Nathan Weber for the New York Times) (B9)
