The economist-approved way to make hard choices is to maximize your expected “utility” (pleasure, benefit), which involves a complex weighing of the pros and cons of each option, including the likelihood of each one actually happening. That can be a tough slog, though, even if all you’re trying to do is choose between the meat lovers’ omelet and the spanakopita.
What most of us do most of the time is “satisfice,” to use a word coined by the Nobel laureate Herbert Simon in 1956. To satisfice is to satisfy and suffice — to make a quick, easy decision that, while maybe not perfect, is good enough.
One quick-and-dirty way to make decisions is to consider a single criterion at a time, rather than trying to weigh all the criteria at once. Let’s say you’re choosing between job offers. Your first criterion might be salary and your second might be distance from home. In that case, you’ll automatically pick the job that pays the most without even looking at how far it is from home. Only if two or more jobs pay the same amount will you move on to the second criterion, distance from home, as a tiebreaker.
This is known as lexicographic ordering because it’s similar to the way we alphabetize words. All the words starting with the letter A go in the front of the dictionary. Moving on to the second letter, “aardvark” comes before “abacus,” and so on.
Once you start thinking about lexicographic ordering, you see it everywhere. At an intersection, a police officer’s hand signals take absolute priority over what the traffic light says. Our numbering system works that way, too — 9,000 is bigger than 8,999 even though the second number has more big digits. Even the Internal Revenue Service uses a lexicographic approach to decide which parent can claim a child for tax purposes.
Making decisions using lexicographic ordering has the benefit of simplicity and speed, but you can see how it could go badly. It would lead you to pick a job that pays $1 more per year but is 500 miles farther from home. That’s a bad decision.
There’s a way to deal with that drawback, though: Build some flexibility into your criteria. In the job offer example, require a salary to be significantly higher. If it isn’t, move on to distance as the tiebreaker.
Last week I interviewed one of the world’s leading advocates of simple rules of thumb, or “heuristics,” such as lexicographic ordering. He is Gerd Gigerenzer, a psychologist who is a director emeritus of the Max Planck Institute for Human Development in Berlin. His latest book is “How to Stay Smart in a Smart World: Why Human Intelligence Still Beats Algorithms” (2022).
Expected utility theory, the traditional economic model of decision-making that aims to carefully factor in each and every detail, is “highly limited,” Gigerenzer said. “It works only if all possible future states of the world, their outcomes and their probabilities are known.” That makes it a precious but fragile bauble.
Two other problems: The economists’ theory doesn’t work when the things you value are incommensurable — that is, not reducible to one metric, such as money. And it doesn’t work when the calculation is simply too complex — “intractable,” in Gigerenzer’s phrase. Chess is intractable in that sense. Even the best players fall back on rules of thumb because evaluating every possible outcome is impossible.
In such cases, rules of thumb aren’t just satisfactory. They’re ideal. “Our results suggest that fast and frugal robust heuristics may not be a second-best option but rather ‘rational’ responses in complex and changing macroeconomic environments,” the Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz and four other authors wrote in a 2020 article in the journal Economic Inquiry.
In 2012, a Bank of England regulator named Andrew Haldane gave a widely noted speech called “The Dog and the Frisbee” that, he wrote in a footnote, was partly inspired by conversations with Gigerenzer. Speaking at a central banking conference in Jackson Hole, Wyo., Haldane said bank regulators should behave more like dogs, which are really good at catching Frisbees in spite of not understanding the physics involved; they use a simple mental model to adjust their course and zero in on the flying disc. Now, Gigerenzer says he’s working with the Bank of England on a simplified method of bank regulation that considers one metric at a time.
The textbook theory of expected utility does have one considerable virtue, which is that it’s easy to explain in textbooks. If consumers behave according to expected utility theory, they’ll trade away a certain number of their oranges in exchange for a certain number more apples. You can use that information to figure out how many of each fruit the economy is going to produce given its production possibilities. But the calculation can’t be done if people don’t actually make trade-offs that way and will, say, stubbornly choose the bag containing more oranges regardless of how few apples are in it.
Expected utility theory has been around in one form or another for a couple of centuries. As evidence has mounted that it doesn’t describe the real world very closely, there have been two responses. One is to preserve as much of the theory as possible by saying that people do try to maximize their expected utility but have certain behavioral kinks that affect their choices, such as valuing gains and losses differently depending on how they’re framed. This is the approach of Daniel Kahneman, who won a Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 2002 despite being a psychologist.
Gigerenzer has taken the other approach, which is to chuck the whole intellectual construct. For example, in a 2006 paper, he and two co-authors came up with what they called a priority rule, a variant of lexicographic ordering that they used to evaluate which lottery someone should prefer to enter. They concluded that the priority rule came closer to duplicating the choices that real people make than any of the other decision methods under study, including the “cumulative prospect theory” that was cited in Kahneman’s Nobel award.
Some computer scientists are using lexicographic approaches for machine learning and artificial intelligence. Shlomo Zilberstein of the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, has worked with the Air Force, General Motors, NASA and Nissan. He told me that sometimes rigid lexicographic ordering is exactly the right solution. If you’re flying somewhere, getting to the airport on time is a must, not something you want to trade off against another criterion. If you need to pass a course to graduate, you’ll choose a project that will certainly earn you a B rather than a more ambitious but riskier project that will probably get you an A+ but just might cause you to flunk out.
For situations where rigidity isn’t the best solution, Zilberstein is working on building some slack into the system. If minimizing travel time is the primary criterion, the system might nevertheless pick a route that’s a few minutes longer if it’s considerably more scenic.
I also interviewed Özgür Şimşek, who has collaborated with Gigerenzer and is a professor of artificial intelligence at the University of Bath in England. She said the beauty of fast and frugal rules of thumb such as lexicographic ordering is that they produce good results even when they don’t have much data to go on and when the world isn’t stable — when the present is unlike the past.
“Humans are very good at certain things,” Şimşek said. “In machine learning and artificial intelligence, we love creating new models that are technically complex. But sometimes a model that is very simple, and that people have been using for a long time, can be the best.”
Number of the Week
4.0 percent
This is where the Bank of Canada is expected to set its target overnight rate at its meeting on Oct. 26, according to the median estimate of economists surveyed by FactSet. The overnight rate, which is the equivalent of the federal funds rate in the United States, was set at 3.25 percent on Sept. 7.
Quote of the Day
“The three fundamental Rules of Robotics … One, a robot may not injure a human being, or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm … Two … a robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict with the First Law … three, a robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Laws.”
— Isaac Asimov, “I, Robot” (1950)
Have feedback? Send a note to coy-newsletter@nytimes.com.
Crédito: By Peter Coy
