Last year, more than 4,600 Google employees signed a petition urging the company to commit to refusing to build weapons technology. A response to Google's work with the military on an artificial intelligence-based targeting system, the petition made a powerful and seemingly simple moral statement: "We believe that Google should not be in the business of war." Similarly, Microsoft employees in February demanded that their company withhold its augmented reality HoloLens headset technology from the Army, saying they did not want to become "war profiteers."
As a Marine who has been in harm's way a few times, I am glad that my peers in the tech industry have initiated this discussion. America is long overdue for a conversation about how we engage in war and peace; the difference between the decision to go to war and decisions about what happens on the battlefield during warfare; and what it means to fight, die and kill for our country.
My job has put me in places where I have witnessed and taken part in significant battlefield decisions. From my experience, I have learned that working with the military to develop systems would actually support the tech workers' goal to reduce harm in warfare. (I need to note here that I am speaking for myself, and my views do not necessarily reflect those of the Department of Defense.)
Tech workers might not realize that their opposition to the work their companies do on military technology does not change the decision-making of the American leaders who choose to go to war, and therefore is unlikely to prevent any harm caused by war. Instead, it has the unintended effect of imperiling not only the lives of service members, but also the lives of innocent civilians whom I believe these workers want to protect.
My first deployment, in 2009, was to an area known as the "Sunni triangle" in Iraq. Another young officer and I each led a police training team of about a dozen Marines through some famously hostile towns: Falluja, Ramadi, Habbaniya. People frequently threw objects of all sizes at our vehicles in anger and protest. Aside from roadside bombs, the biggest threat at the time, particularly in crowded areas, was an armor-piercing hand-held grenade. It looked like a dark soda can with a handle protruding from the bottom. Or, from a distance and with only an instant to decide, it looked just like many of the other objects that were thrown at us.
One day in Falluja, at the site of a previous attack, an Iraqi man threw a dark oblong object at one of the vehicles in my sister team. The Marine in the turret, believing it was an armor-piercing grenade, shot the man in the chest. The object turned out to be a shoe.
In another case, a Marine I knew, with two Purple Hearts from wounds in combat, shot into the cab of a speeding truck approaching his position like the vehicle-borne suicide bombs that were prevalent at the time. Afterward, he discovered that it was a father rushing his young daughter to the hospital, and that he had shot and killed her. That Marine's physical wounds healed, but like so many who experienced "moral injury" or a "bruise on the soul," as Pulitzer Prize-winning war correspondent David Wood describes it, overcoming the emotional damage was even more difficult.
These Marines were not bloodthirsty killers. They were young men, college age, sent overseas by their country, trying to defend themselves and make life-or-death decisions under harrowing conditions with imprecise information.
The military's goal in warfare isn't to kill as many people as possible, but to accomplish missions that our country sends us to accomplish while minimizing harm to civilians. As an institution, we emphasize the rules that protect civilians -- known as the law of war -- and always focus on the need to retain honor in combat so that we can come home whole. I experienced this not only in Iraq, but also on two special operations task forces in Afghanistan, where I was part of a decision tree that frequently let known terrorists live in order to avoid harming civilians.
When I think about A.I. and weapons development, I don't imagine Skynet, the Terminator, or some other Hollywood dream of killer robots. I picture the Marines I know patrolling Falluja with a heads-up display like HoloLens, tied to sensors and to an A.I. system that can process data faster and more precisely than humanly possible -- an interface that helps them identify an object as a shoe, or an approaching truck as too light to be laden with explosives.
We need tools that enhance situational awareness, provide information that overcomes fear and fatigue, and enable fast, effective and precise combat decisions for both commanders and individuals. If tech companies work with the military, then technologies from applications of A.I. to augmented reality would save innocent lives and reduce suffering.
For me, it's hard to understand why tech employees would not want to help their fellow Americans survive on the battlefield and accomplish their missions in the safest and least damaging way possible. Not because our wars are a good or bad idea, but because, although not everyone does the fighting, these wars belong to all of us.
While I did choose to dedicate my life to our common defense, I did not and do not choose when and where to go to war. Each time I went to war, it was because my fellow Americans -- including engineers in Silicon Valley -- chose, through our democratic institutions, to send me there.
Unlike militaries in authoritarian regimes, the American military does not decide to go to war or to kill people. Civilian leaders in Congress, the White House, and the Pentagon -- who are wholly accountable to the people of this country -- make that decision. It is called common defense because it is shared by all of us.
I think -- well, hope, really -- that when tech workers protest working with the military, it is because they are opposed to the wars we have engaged in, rather than because they are opposed to reducing suffering in warfare. Drawing that distinction is hugely important: Employees at Google, Microsoft and other large tech companies who believe American wars are unjust, imperialistic or otherwise objectionable are in a strong position to affect decisions about when and where this country uses force. I would encourage engagement on that front, rather than handicapping our common defense and increasing the danger to those who provide it.
Five of the biggest six companies in the world are United States tech companies. With that size comes the opportunity -- and ability -- to influence; the tech industry has a veritable army of lobbyists in Washington. Instead of pressuring their leadership to withdraw support from the American service member, tech workers could pressure them to add the just application of American power to their list of lobbying efforts that includes retaining extensive access to their fellow citizens' private data and tightening their monopoly grip on the dissemination of information.
That may come across a little sour, but I believe that tech employees need to take a good look in the mirror. Engineers at tech platforms designed their "engagement" algorithms in ways that promoted extreme content and disinformation. Not only that, but the clickbait algorithms and advertising strategy of several of these tech platforms have decimated institutional journalism -- the kind of journalism that could actually make a case with the American people against an unjust war. I'm terrified by how this click-driven and disinformation-prone atmosphere they've created will affect decision-making in a crisis, and how it could lead us into an ill-fated conflict.
Instead of promoting divisive content to drive interest, tech employees could tweak their algorithms to generate comparative articles on the cost of war when it makes sense. The next time there is a salacious article about political dogfighting over the impossibility of finding $ 4.5 trillion to transition to a fully renewable electric grid or $ 2 trillion to modernize infrastructure, the algorithm could pair it on a landing platform with a report about how the Iraq and Afghanistan wars have cost $ 5.9 trillion so far and will cost $ 8 trillion more in debt financing. This would illustrate the opportunity cost of going to war. Tech employees can even submit their thoughts and ideas on A.I. and national security to the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, which is actively seeking them right now!
Tech companies and their employees have immense power and knowledge in this country. Using those assets to create a real discussion about when America uses force would be a much more enduring legacy than withholding technology that could enable the men and women we throw unto the breach to do their job in a way that preserves innocent lives, their own lives and their dignity.
Lucas Kunce is a Marine who served in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .
Illustration DRAWING (DRAWING BY WOODY HARRINGTON)
