Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry , offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. This week, Farhad Manjoo, also a technology columnist, makes a return to the roundup as well. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here .
Farhad: Hello, Kevin! I've been off for three months to write a book. What'd I miss?
Kevin: Tons! Let's see. There was the G.D.P.R. rollout, the continued Facebook privacy freakout and the civil war at Google over using A.I. to target drone strikes.
Oh, and speaking of A.I., this is a little awkward but ... our bosses spent the past three months training a neural network to replace you as the author of this newsletter. DeepFarhad isn't quite ready yet, but our engineers are confident that it will attain Farhad-level insights fairly soon.
But while you're still here in human form, let's talk about the year's biggest overarching tech narrative: the "techlash" against companies like Facebook and Google over issues like privacy, data protection and antitrust concerns. As someone who has been mercifully spared from every twist and turn of the techlash, does it feel like a lot has changed since you left?
Hearings! Presidential tweets! And yet ...
Farhad: You know what's weird? Though there was a lot of drama when I was gone -- a tech C.E.O. on Capitol Hill! -- I'm struck by how little has changed, really.
When I left, Facebook was under the gun, Amazon was getting hit by President Trump, and Apple and Google were trying to stand clear of the fallout. Three months later, Facebook is still under the gun, the president still regards Amazon as a pariah, and Apple and Google still would very much like to be excluded from these narratives.
I'm not saying I was expecting wholesale structural change among entrenched businesses over the course of a season. But, still: For all the fireworks in Washington, there's been little movement on regulation or legislation to curb some of the excesses in tech. I don't see much of an advance toward stricter antitrust scrutiny of the large tech firms. And their most recent earnings reports show they're all going gangbusters; Americans may harbor growing worries about the power of tech companies, but not enough to make us quit them.
Which isn't to say the techlash isn't real, just that change will come slowly. We're all living in a world where most communication and commerce is ruled by a handful of nearly unregulated oligopolies. That sort of thing doesn't change quickly, I guess.
Kevin: Yeah, it's definitely been a slow roll. And all of the scrutiny seems to be affecting companies' public images more than their business models. I was curious, so I looked at the movement in the stock prices of Facebook, Google/Alphabet, Amazon and Twitter since you left on March 1. Facebook is up 8.5 percent, Alphabet is up 7 percent, and Amazon is up 13.6 percent. Twitter is up a whopping 24 percent. [Editor's note: Maybe because Farhad tweeted less?]
Techlash indeed!
Apple wants you to use your phone less
Farhad: Let's turn to this week. On Monday morning I went to WWDC, Apple's annual developer conference, which usually brings a slew of previews of the stuff Apple is working on. This year's keynote was a muted affair. There were no announcements about Apple's hardware -- though this is usually a show about software, Apple often uses it to preview some new devices, too -- and even the changes to Apple's apps and operating systems weren't that flashy.
This was on purpose, for good reason. Every few years, Apple takes a break from releasing a bunch of new features and instead focuses on fixing up what's under the hood of its software. This year, it is promising substantial speed improvements in its next version of iOS. It's also outlining a plan to let developers port their iOS apps to the Mac, which could either be awesome or totally useless -- we'll see.
And then there was the bit about how we're all staring at our phones too much. The tech industry has been consumed recently by new worries over "tech addiction," and both Facebook and Google recently announced plans to tackle digital "well-being." Now Apple's jumping in, too. In the next version of iOS, your phone will give you detailed stats about how often you use your phone and what you do on it, and it will even let you block yourself and your children from using certain apps.
The features looked great to me. I can't wait to use them. But I do wonder how effective they will be; as I wrote this week, Apple's stop-using-your-phone announcements were awkwardly surrounded by announcements (like its new augmented reality system) that will only make your phone more irresistible. I'm not sure we can resist.
Kevin: Me, either. The irresistibility of smartphones is the reason that, despite being eligible for an upgrade for years, I have stuck with my horrible iPhone 7, which has a cracked screen and hilariously short battery life. The awfulness of my phone is the only thing that prevents me from staring at it 24/7.
I'm also curious about whether Apple will continue to escalate its feud with Facebook. I was stunned that during the demos at Apple's developer conference, they showed a new privacy feature in Safari that blocked ad trackers from Facebook.com. It's a subtle, passive-aggressive tweak, but by Silicon Valley standards, it seemed like a huge insult.
It seems slightly opportunistic to kick a social network while it's down, but Apple's aggressive criticism also highlights the real and growing philosophical differences between the two companies. Facebook is an advertising-supported communications conglomerate aimed at the masses, and dead set on remaining free so that all seven billion humans on Earth can eventually be connected (and monetized) through its platform. Apple is predominantly a high-end hardware business that caters to an increasingly privacy-conscious consumer base, and thinks that security will be a differentiating factor when people choose which smartphones, tablets and laptops to buy.
Maybe it was inevitable that these two giants would clash, but to a tech writer who lives for drama, it's still interesting to watch.
Microsoft buys GitHub. Do we care?
Farhad: Did any other tech news catch your eye this week? I suspect you've got a lot to say about Microsoft's acquisition of GitHub, right?
Kevin: I do! As a journalist, I use GitHub ... [checks browser history] ... never. But I loved Paul Ford's essay in Businessweek about what it represents within the world of software engineering. He writes that "GitHub made the social dynamics of software development easier to manage and track," and that for Microsoft, the GitHub acquisition could be a turning point in its historically fraught relationship with open-source developers. It's also a sign that Microsoft -- the boring, drama-free tech giant that often seems to be forgotten about these days -- is still very much in the game.
Farhad: Oh, it is. In fact, speaking of stock prices: While I was gone, Microsoft's market value beat that of Alphabet, Google's parent company. Microsoft is now the third most valuable company in America, behind Apple and Amazon. Who'd have guessed?
Anyway, that's all for now. Here's hoping that DeepFarhad is ready for next week's newsletter.
Kevin: Bye!
Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer at large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose. Farhad Manjoo writes a column called State of the Art. You can follow him on Twitter here: @fmanjoo.
