CATEGORY
Amazon Shifting Packaging To Recycled Paper
text text
Amazon is shifting from the plastic air pillows used for packaging in North America to recycled paper because it's more environmentally sound, and it says paper just works better.
The company said Thursday that it's already replaced 95% of the plastic air pillows with paper filler in North America and is working toward complete removal by year's end.
"We want to ensure that customers receive their items undamaged, while using as little packaging as possible to avoid waste, and prioritizing recyclable materials," Amazon said.
It is the company's largest plastic packaging reduction effort in North America to date and will remove almost 15 billion plastic air pillows from use annually.
Almost all customer deliveries for Prime Day this year, which happens next month, will contain plastic no air pillows, according to Amazon.
The e-commerce giant has faced years of criticism about its use of plastic from environmental groups, including a nonprofit called Oceana, which has been releasing its own reports on Amazon's use of plastic packaging.
Matt Littlejohn, senior vice president of strategic initiatives at Oceana, said that Amazon's efforts to reduce plastic packaging is welcome news, but that there's still more that the company can do.
"While this is a significant step forward for the company, Amazon needs to build on this momentum and fulfill its multiyear commitment to transition its North America fulfillment centers away from plastic," Littlejohn said in a prepared statement. "Then, the company should expand these efforts and also push innovations like reusable packaging to move away from single-use packaging everywhere it sells and ships."
There has also been broad support among Amazon investors who have urged the company to outline how will will reduce waste.
The company disclosed the total of single-use plastic across global operations for the first time in 2022 after investors sought more details on plans to reduce waste. The company said that it used 85,916 metric tons of single-use plastic that year, an 11.6% decrease from 2021.
Amazon began transition away from plastic air pillows in October at an automated fulfillment center in Ohio. The company said that it was able to test and learn at the center there, which helped it move quickly on transitioning to recycled paper filling.
The transition process included changing out machinery and training employees on new systems and machines.
Amazon discovered through testing that the paper filler, which is made from 100% recyclable content and is curbside recyclable, offers the same, if not better protection during shipping compared with plastic air pillows, the company said.
Christian Garcia, who works at Amazon's fulfillment center in Bakersfield, California, said in a release that the paper filler is easier to work with and that the machinery gives staff more space so that it's easier to pack orders.
Ongoing efforts to reduce waste include a campaign to ship items without any additional packaging, the company said. In 2022, 11% of all of Amazon's packages shipped worldwide were without added delivery packaging.
Other efforts include piloting new technology with artificial intelligence and robotics company Glacier to use AI-powered robots to automate the sorting of recyclables and collect real-time data on recycling streams for companies. It's also partnering with the U.S. Department of Energy on new materials and recycling programs. Associated Press
ECONOMY
Hedlyne Goes For Maximum of Two Lines
text text - Kroger struck a cautious tone on Thursday on consumer spending in the near term as it reaffirmed its full-year same-store sales and profit forecasts despite topping first-quarter estimates.
Kroger posted a 5.3% drop in first-quarter adjusted profit to $ 1.43 per share, but still topped estimates of $ 1.35.
"As inflation moderates, we expect customer sentiment to continue improving, but near-term many customers are managing economic uncertainty," said CEO Rodney McMullen.
American shoppers have been searching for more deals and discounts due to strained household budgets and depleting pandemic-era savings, prompting many to purchase more affordable and lower-priced items at one-stop retailers such as Walmart .
However, Kroger's identical sales, excluding fuel, rose 0.5% in the first quarter, compared with analysts' estimate for 0.13% growth, according to LSEG data.
McMullen said the company saw a positive momentum from budget-conscious households in the quarter.
Customer visits were up 5.1% year-over-year on average between February and May this year, according to data from Placer.ai.
Kroger has been offering promotions and lowering grocery prices in a bid to attract more consumers, while also investing in its online business and adding products to its private-label portfolio to boost sales.
Yet, it has continued to deal with expenses linked to paying wages to its employees, even as its supply chain costs have now come down from their peaks.
"Kroger's performance remains anemic ... the figures show a clear picture of a company that is struggling to generate meaningful growth," said Neil Saunders, managing director of GlobalData.
Kroger said it was prepared to defend its merger with smaller rival Albertsons, which is currently under antitrust review.
Reuters)
INTERNATIONAL
The E.U.'s Top Court On Advertising for Disinfectants
The European Union's top court said Thursday that products such as disinfectants can't be advertised as "skin friendly."
The European Court of Justice issued its ruling after a German federal court sought its opinion in a case against a drugstore chain that sold a hand, skin and surface disinfectant with a label that, among other things, declared it "skin friendly."
In that case, the German Association for Protection against Unfair Competition argued that drugstore chain dm failed to comply with an EU regulation on biocidal products. The court said the regulation prohibits promoting such products by calling them a "low-risk biocidal product," "nontoxic," "harmless," "natural," "environmentally friendly" or "animal friendly" -- "or any similar indication."
The EU court found that "skin friendly" has positive connotations that avoid suggesting any risk, and may imply that the product could be beneficial for the skin.
"Such an indication is of a misleading nature which justifies the prohibition of its use in the advertising of the biocidal product at issue," the court said in a statement. Associated Press
Credit: By Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROGELIO V. SOLIS/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
