Groceries
Trader Joe's Wine Shop Closes in New York City
Trader Joe's only wine store in New York State closed without warning last week, sending some shoppers of the grocery store chain with a cult following into a minor tailspin.
"We have been operating our small wine shop in the Union Square neighborhood for over 15 years, and we thank you for your business and support throughout the years," a posted sign read. Theories about the reason for the closing abounded: the impacts of the pandemic, the end of a lease, a new location.
The sign read: "It is now time for us to explore another location that will allow us to optimize the potential of our one and only license to sell wine in the state of New York."
The company said it planned to "offer an even better wine shop experience" to New York customers, and added that staff members at the location would be paid through Aug. 28 and presented with opportunities to move to another store location in New York City. MELINA DELKIC
Social Media
Facebook Fails to Detect Misinformation in Brazil
Facebook failed to detect blatant election-related misinformation in ads ahead of Brazil's 2022 election, a new report from Global Witness found, continuing a pattern of not catching material that violates its policies.
The advertisements contained false information about the country's upcoming election, such as promoting the wrong election date, listing incorrect voting methods and questioning the integrity of the election -- including Brazil's electronic voting system.
It was the fourth time that Global Witness, a London-based nonprofit, had tested Meta's ability to catch blatant violations of the rules of its most popular social media platform -- and the fourth such test Facebook has flubbed.
In the three prior instances, Global Witness submitted advertisements containing violent hate speech to see if Facebook's controls -- either human reviewers or artificial intelligence -- would catch them. They did not. AP
Cosmetics
Morgan Stanley Purchases Sharply Lift Revlon Stock
Shares of the bankrupt cosmetics company Revlon soared nearly 27 percent on Monday after Morgan Stanley revealed in a filing that it had purchased 400,650 shares in the company over the last quarter.
The purchase increased Morgan Stanley's stake by approximately 1,793 percent, according to its filing, known as a 13F.
Shares of Revlon are up 582 percent from their mid-June low, lifted by hopes the company can replicate the success of shareholders in the car-rental company Hertz, who were rewarded when Hertz was rescued from bankruptcy by a group of investors.
Revlon's rebound has come alongside rallies in other so-called meme stocks popular with retail investors such as AMC Entertainment Holdings and GameStop, which were hit hard in the first half of the year.
Revlon filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in June after saying that its high debt load had left it too cash-poor to make timely payments to vendors.
Despite the recent rally, Revlon's shares are down 30 percent for the year. REUTERS
Credit: By Melina Delkic, Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON SZENES/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)
