In a major speech, France's president returned to a familiar theme, warning that "Our Europe is mortal" if it does not become more self-sufficient.
Challenged by the extreme right and perhaps more vulnerable than at any time in his presidency, Emmanuel Macron of France sought renewed momentum on Thursday through a sweeping speech on the need for a more assertive Europe, a theme that he has pressed with urgency since Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2022.
The nearly two-hour speech reflected Mr. Macron's conviction that only a reinforced and "sovereign" European Union -- a "Europe power," as he puts it -- can save the continent from irrelevancy in an unstable world that is dominated by the United States and China and confronting wars in Europe and the Middle East.
"We must be lucid about the fact that our Europe is mortal," Mr. Macron declared before an audience of government ministers, European ambassadors and other dignitaries. "It can die. It can die and whether it does depends entirely on our choices."
The speech, at the Sorbonne University in Paris, was a follow-up to one that Mr. Macron gave in the same location in September 2017. Then, Mr. Macron discussed the future of Europe as a young, recently elected and disruptive president still enjoying a political honeymoon.
Today, without an absolute majority in Parliament, and with his popularity falling after seven years in office, he has struggled over the past two years to give direction to his second term.
Coming less than two months before elections to the European Parliament on June 9, Mr. Macron's decision to speak out was widely seen as a bid to bolster his centrist Renaissance party, which is placing a distant second in the latest polls behind the far-right National Rally party led by Jordan Bardella. Mr. Macron's party is polling at about 17.5 percent of eligible voters; Mr. Bardella's has about 30 percent.
Mr. Macron described a world at "a turning point," in which a Europe that could no longer depend on America for its security, on Russia for its energy and on China for its industrial production must become more strategically autonomous, technologically innovative and militarily resilient.
"We are too slow and not ambitious enough," he said, proposing that only through "power, prosperity and humanism" could Europe set out a distinctive model for the world, including by investing massively in its own defense industry, in green technology and in new fields like artificial intelligence.
Europe, he said, should "never be a vassal of the United States."
"The ideas, on the whole, didn't feel new," said Georgina Wright, head of the Europe Program at the Institut Montaigne, a French think tank. "But there was a sense of urgency that wasn't there in 2017."
There have been significant advances toward greater European integration since Mr. Macron's first speech, which was in some ways prescient. The Covid pandemic saw Germany break a longstanding taboo and back the issuing of European joint debt, and the war in Ukraine has spurred increased European spending on defense, something Mr. Macron has long called for to reduce reliance on American military power.
Always impatient with what he considers lazy thinking, as when he described NATO as suffering from "brain death" in 2019 because it had not adjusted to a changed world, Mr. Macron has irked some of his European partners with his bold declarations. Not everyone in Europe is convinced that it is Mr. Macron's role to lead the 27-member union to a different future.
"The ideas themselves are gaining more traction" in European capitals, said Mujtaba Rahman, the managing director for Europe at Eurasia Group, a consultancy. But "the fact that Macron is the messenger often works to his disadvantage," he added.
Recently, the always difficult relationship between Mr. Macron and Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany has been roiled by disagreements. Mr. Scholz was incensed by Mr. Macron's suggestion that the deployment of Western troops in Ukraine could not be ruled out, a statement the president said on Thursday that he "stands by absolutely."
"The essential condition of our security is that Russia not win its war of aggression against Ukraine," Mr. Macron said.
Despite their differences, Mr. Scholz's first reaction to Thursday's speech was positive. "Together, France and Germany want Europe to remain strong," Mr. Scholz said on X, telling Mr. Macron that "your speech contains good ideas on how we can achieve this."
Mr. Macron reiterated support for the creation of a European "rapid deployment" force of about 5,000 military personnel to respond to external crises, which is expected to be fully operational in 2025. He also called for the creation of a "European military academy" to improve coordination between European armies.
These are familiar themes from the president, who has struggled to overcome an image of aloofness. It was far from clear that his lofty visions, at a time of economic difficulty for many French people, would do anything to dent the popularity of Mr. Bardella, the far right's 28-year-old prodigal son.
The longtime barrier against the far right coming to power, built around the broad conviction that it was a danger to the republic, has collapsed as the National Rally has become the largest single opposition force in Parliament.
Mr. Bardella's themes -- anti-immigration rhetoric, the need for greater security and the fight against inflation -- have resonated with an anxious France.
"Never before have citizens been so far removed from the major decisions that have such a tangible impact on their daily lives," Mr. Bardella said at a news conference on Thursday. He called Mr. Macron's speech a "self-congratulatory session."
Mr. Bardella, a member of the European Parliament, is the protégé of Marine Le Pen, the perennial far-right candidate for the presidency. His popularity has increased the chances that she may succeed Mr. Macron, who is term-limited, in 2027, or even that he become a presidential candidate himself.
Taking aim at the extreme right, Mr. Macron said that "liberal democracy is not a given" and that the rule of law, an independent press, free universities, the rights of minorities and the separation of powers were being "denied" in too many European countries. He celebrated Poland as an example of an E.U. member turning its back on illiberalism, after its recent election that saw a centrist victory over the governing nationalist party.
Mr. Macron also said that he hoped to see the right to abortion enshrined in the European Union's charter of fundamental rights. France last month became the first country in the world to protect access to abortion in its Constitution.
Aides to Mr. Macron insisted that the Sorbonne was not a campaign stop for the French leader's party but a way to influence the European Union's overarching strategic agenda for the next five years, which is expected to be decided by E.U. leaders after the June elections.
Still, "if there is a 15-point gap on June 9, it will be seen as a major defeat for Macronism," said Mr. Rahman, of Eurasia Group.
French voters often use European elections to vent against the government regardless of European issues, he said, adding that Mr. Macron's speech "will probably have more impact in E.U. capitals than it will on the French electorate."
Anxiety is widespread in Europe that former President Donald J. Trump could prevail in the American presidential election in November with an "America First" program and skepticism over NATO. For Mr. Macron, these developments have been a form of vindication of his seven-year-old warnings that Europe must master its own destiny.
Christopher F. Schuetze contributed reporting from Berlin.
Christopher F. Schuetze contributed reporting from Berlin.
Photograph President Emmanuel Macron of France delivered a lengthy speech about Europe on Thursday at the Sorbonne in Paris. (POOL PHOTO BY CHRISTOPHE PETIT TESSON); Jordan Bardella is the president of the far-right National Rally party, which leads Mr. Macron's party in the latest polls. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GUILLAUME HORCAJUELO/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)
