U.S. stocks climbed on Monday as Wall Street pulls closer to its record heights after a roller coaster of a summer.
The S&P 500 rallied 1 percent for its eighth-straight gain. That clinched its longest winning streak since November and followed up on the index's best week of the year. It's back to within 1 percent of its high after falling close to 10 percent below the mark this month.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 236 points, or 0.6 percent, and the Nasdaq composite jumped 1.4 percent.
Advanced Micro Devices helped drive the market after saying it would buy ZT Systems, a supplier in the cloud computing and artificial-intelligence industries, in a cash-and-stock deal valued at $ 4.9 billion. The chip company's stock rose 4.5 percent.
Another chip company, Nvidia, was the single strongest force pushing the S&P 500 upward after it rose 4.4 percent. It has clawed back most of its sharp losses from earlier in the summer, which were triggered by worries that investors had sent its stock price too high amid their frenzy around artificial-intelligence technology.
They helped offset a 4.8 percent drop for Guess? Inc., which said its chief financial officer is stepping down to pursue another opportunity. The apparel and accessories company said it has begun a search for its next chief financial officer and appointed an interim.
All told, the S&P 500 rose 54.00 points to 5,608.25. The Dow gained 236.77 to 40,896.53, and the Nasdaq composite jumped 245.05 to 17,876.77.
Trading was quiet elsewhere, including in the bond market. Treasury yields held relatively steady ahead of what's likely to be financial markets' main event for the week: a speech on Friday by Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell.
The setting for the speech in Jackson Hole, Wyo., has been home to some big policy announcements by the Fed in the past. Expectations aren't that high this time around, with nearly everyone already expecting the Fed will begin cutting interest rates next month.
That would be the first cut since the Fed began hiking rates drastically in early 2022, hoping to slow the economy by enough to stifle inflation but not so much that it causes a recession. With inflation slowing from its peak above 9 percent two summers ago, Fed officials have already hinted that cuts to rates are coming. The biggest question is whether the economy just needs the Federal Reserve to remove the brakes or if it needs more acceleration and deeper cuts.
A surprisingly weak report on hiring by U.S. employers last month raised worries that the Fed has already kept interest rates too high for too long. Such worries combined with concerns that Nvidia and other highly influential Big Tech stocks got too expensive, along with other factors, to send markets globally through a scary couple weeks. That included the worst day for Japan's market since the Black Monday crash of 1987.
But an ensuing assurance from the Bank of Japan on interest rates there has helped calm the market. Several recent reports on the U.S. economy have also come in stronger than expected, covering everything from inflation to sales at U.S. retailers, which bolstered optimism.
This week doesn't have as many economic reports on the schedule. A preliminary report on U.S. business activity could be the highlight of the week, arriving on Thursday.
More action will likely come from corporate earnings reports. Most companies have turned in better profits for the latest quarter than analysts expected.
With more than 90 percent of companies in the S&P 500 having already turned in their reports, they're on track to deliver growth of nearly 11 percent in earnings per share from a year earlier, according to FactSet. That would be the best growth since the end of 2021.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
