REGULATION
U.S. Vows Crackdown
On Illegal A.I. Practices
The government will "not hesitate to crack down" on harmful business practices involving artificial intelligence, the head of the Federal Trade Commission warned Tuesday in a message partly directed at the developers of widely used A.I. tools such as ChatGPT.
Lina Khan, the F.T.C. chair, joined top officials from civil rights and consumer protection agencies to put businesses on notice that regulators are working to track and stop illegal behavior in the use and development of biased or deceptive A.I. tools.
Much of the scrutiny has been on those who deploy automated tools that amplify bias in decisions about who to hire, how worker productivity is monitored or who gets access to housing and loans.
But Ms. Khan also raised the possibility of the F.T.C. wielding its antitrust authority to protect competition, adding that the commission would watch for "unfair, deceptive practices or unfair methods of competition." ASSOCIATED PRESS
EARNINGS
PepsiCo Beats Forecasts,
Helped by Price Increases
PepsiCo raised its annual forecasts on Tuesday after price increases undertaken to offset higher costs and steady demand helped the company's first-quarter results beat estimates.
The results pointed to a resilient consumer and followed similar quarterly performances by Coca-Cola and Nestlé. PepsiCo's shares rose more than 2 percent in trading on Tuesday.
Sales in the North America beverage unit, PepsiCo's largest business, rose 8 percent in the quarter. Net revenue rose 10 percent to $ 17.85 billion, topping estimates of $ 17.22 billion. Adjusted profit of $ 1.50 per share also beat estimates of $ 1.39. Average prices jumped 16 percent in the first quarter, PepsiCo said.
PepsiCo expects 2023 revenue to rise 8 percent, compared with its prior forecast of 6 percent.
Global consumer goods companies have raised prices since the pandemic to battle a jump in costs of raw materials, labor and shipping. PepsiCo also plans to raise prices in some regions, in contrast to an earlier decision to hit a pause. REUTERS
EARNINGS
McDonald's Customers
Buoy Sales in Quarter
McDonald's reported higher-than-expected sales in the first quarter as store traffic grew despite higher prices.
Global same-store sales rose 12.6 percent compared to the January-March period last year, the Chicago burger giant said Tuesday, well above the 8.7 percent increase analysts forecast.
Good weather in January helped increase sales. There was also a steady recovery in China after Covid restrictions were lifted, McDonald's said.
Marketing campaigns, like a McSpicy chicken sandwich promotion with a streetwear brand in China, and a Valentine's Day meal promotion in the U.S. with rappers Offset and Cardi B, also buoyed the chain's performance.
Chris Kempczinski, the chief executive, said McDonald's was starting to see price resistance. Customers may not add fries to an order, for example, and delivery orders have slowed, he said.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARIO ANZUONI/REUTERS)
