FOOD SAFETY
57 Tons of Beef Recalled Over Fears of E. Coli
The federal government says a meat company in Georgia has recalled tons of ground beef for possible contamination with E. coli bacteria. The bacteria is an unusual strain that has sickened 156 people in 10 states, hospitalizing 20 of them. Ground beef had been described as the likely source. However, officials say they're still testing to see whether the recalled beef is related to the outbreak. A recall notice from the United States Department of Agriculture's Food Safety Inspection Service says K2D Foods is recalling about 56.7 tons (51.4 metric tons) of meat. K2D does business as Colorado Premium Foods of Carrollton, Georgia. The meat is in 48-pound boxes labeled "ground beef puck" for institutional use. Calls to the company's headquarters in Greeley, Colo., were not immediately returned. ASSOCIATED PRESS
LEGAL
Bayer Asks Court to Toss Verdict on Weed Killer
Bayer asked a California appellate court on Wednesday to throw out a $ 78 million judgment it was ordered to pay to a school groundskeeper who claimed the company's weed killers gave him cancer. In a filing in California's Court of Appeal, First Appellate District, the company said that there was "no evidence" that glyphosate, a chemical found in the company's Roundup and Ranger Pro products, could cause cancer. The widely used weed killers are made by Monsanto, which Bayer acquired last year for $ 63 billion. The company said that if the court did not rule in its favor, it should at least order a new trial, arguing that a lower court judge had improperly prevented jurors from hearing evidence that the United States Environmental Protection Agency and foreign regulators had deemed glyphosate not likely carcinogenic to humans. A lawyer for the groundskeeper, Dewayne Johnson, could not immediately be reached for comment. REUTERS
FINANCE Wirecard Lands $ 1 Billion From Japan's SoftBank
Japan's SoftBank Group will invest around 900 million euros, or $ 1 billion, in Wirecard in a convertible bond deal that could give it a 5.6 percent stake in the German digital payments company. The investment by the world's biggest private technology company is a vote of confidence in Wirecard's business as it defends itself against allegations of fraud, and will allow the Munich-based firm to expand its operations in Asia. Wirecard, founded in 1999, ousted Commerzbank from Germany's leading share index last year as it benefited from an accelerating global trend toward digital payments driven by e-commerce. The two companies also unveiled a strategic partnership in which SoftBank will help Wirecard expand in Japan and South Korea, and provide opportunities to work with other companies in its portfolio in areas such as data analytics, artificial intelligence and digital financial services. Other SoftBank investments in its Vision Fund range from ridesharing giants including Uber, DiDi, Grab and Ola to new financial and business services such as WeWork. REUTERS
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Credit: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS and REUTERS
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY YVES HERMAN/REUTERS)
