A start-up called Siri has created a virtual personal assistant for the iPhone that uses speech-recognition technology, GPS and a set of algorithms to search for the answers to requests.
The pop-culture record shows that most artificially intelligent assistants do not work out too well for their human masters. There's the comically codependent -- and largely unhelpful -- duo from Star Wars, C-3PO and R2-D2. And who could forget HAL 9000, from "2001: A Space Odyssey," with its murderous malfunction?
A start-up called Siri, based in San Jose, California, hopes to do a slightly better job by bringing a virtual personal assistant to your pocket -- more specifically, to your iPhone.
Recently, the company closed a $15.5 million Series B round of venture financing, led by Li Ka-Shing, the Hong Kong billionaire who has also invested in Facebook and the music streaming service Spotify. Previously, the company raised $8.5 million from Menlo Ventures and Morgenthaler Ventures.
Various riffs on the virtual personal assistant concept have been around for some time. Where Siri breaks away from the pack, says Dag Kittlaus, co-founder and chief executive of the company, is that it is "speech recognition with a brain."
"This is the first version of a computer assistance that understands language, has the ability to delegate tasks and learn," Mr. Kittlaus said.
First, users speak a command, like "Find a table for two at 9 p.m.," "Get two tickets to Crazy Heart at 8 p.m.," "Send a taxi to my house," or even "What kid-friendly events are going on in New York this weekend?" Using GPS and speech-recognition technology powered by Nuance, the application translates the spoken command and uses a set of algorithms to search for the answer.
Mr. Kittlaus describes the application as the "mother of mash-ups" because the company has partnered with several companies, including OpenTable, MovieTickets, StubHub, CitySearch and TaxiMagic, to generate results.
Siri is a "do engine rather than a search engine," Mr. Kittlaus said.
Siri, which was founded in 2007, was incubated in the Stanford Research Institute, as part of an artificial intelligence project called CALO, or Cognitive Agent that Learns and Organizes, funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. As a result, Mr. Kittlaus said, Siri will learn more about its user and tailor its results based on preferences over time.
The application is available free for download.
"This is intended for everyone to help in their menial tasks," said Mr. Kittlaus, "not just for someone in a corner office."
To make money, the company says it receives a small fee from any monetary transactions, like purchasing movie tickets, that are conducted through the Siri application. Currently, Siri is only available for the iPhone, but company intends to also offer versions compatible with Android phones and the BlackBerry. The company also hopes to introduce features that will allow users to send requests to Siri via e-mail and instant message.
