As part of a multibillion-dollar investment spree over the past year, SoftBank of Japan has bet on companies as diverse as the graphics chip maker Nvidia, an artificial intelligence software maker and an indoor farming start-up. Now, the Japanese conglomerate has chosen to bet $4.4 billion on WeWork, a fast-growing startup that provides shared work spaces.
SoftBank and its $93 billion Vision Fund said on Thursday that they were investing in WeWork. Most of the investment, or $3 billion, will go to WeWork itself. The remaining $1.4 billion will go toward expanding the start-up's operations in China, Japan, South Korea and Southeast Asia more broadly.
The investment values the seven-year-old WeWork at about $17 billion, excluding the new investment, according to people briefed on the deal, who were not authorized to speak publicly.
More than half of the $3 billion investment in WeWork will come from the Vision Fund, according to one of the people briefed on the deal. And slightly more than half of the investment will be used to buy shares from existing investors, while the remainder will go toward buying newly issued stock from the company.
The news reflects the enormous financial firepower that SoftBank has amassed over the past year -- and proved willing to spend. Softbank's founder, Masayoshi Son, has never been shy about his ambition to seize upon the future of technology through investments and acquisitions.
That is why he was willing to buy ARM Holdings, the British semiconductor designer whose chips underpin modern smartphones, for $32 billion last year. And why he has invested billions of dollars in ride-hailing companies around the world.
And it is why he has raised $93 billion so far for the Vision Fund, an investment behemoth whose backers include the kingdoms of Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi as well as Apple and Qualcomm. With those resources, Mr. Son is now able to deploy more money in one deal than most venture capital firms can dream of spending in years.
At first blush, WeWork's connection to the future of technology appears more tenuous than, say, the British virtual reality start-up Improbable, which SoftBank poured $500 million into in May.
Founded in New York, the company leases real estate and then offers desk space to both individual members and companies like Microsoft.
WeWork now claims about 150,000 members across its 160 locations around the world, who pay to make use of shared office environments and services like conference rooms and mail handling. In the United States, the rate for a "hot desk," a guaranteed work space in a common area, starts at $220 a month, while a private office starts at $400 a month.
Though the privately held company does not disclose its financial report, one of the people briefed on the deal said that it expected to generate $1 billion in revenue this year.
WeWork already counted among its investors Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and the venture capital firm Benchmark.
In its announcement on Thursday, SoftBank said only that it believed in WeWork using "its own proprietary data systems to radically transform the way people work."
Mr. Son added, "We are thrilled to support WeWork as they expand across markets and geographies and unleash a new wave of productivity around the world."
WeWork's co-founder and chief executive, Adam Neumann, said, "This support from SoftBank and the Vision Fund will provide even more opportunities for creators as we set out to humanize the way people work and live."
As part of the deal, two SoftBank directors, Ronald D. Fisher and Mark Schwartz, will join WeWork's board.
Softbank's Founder, Masayoshi Son, has Raised Tens of Billions for the Company's Vision Fund. (Photograph by Shizuo Kambayashi/Associated Press)
