The reductions come just two weeks after Election Day, when The A.P. played a key role in calling races across the United States.
The Associated Press said Monday that it was cutting its staff by 8 percent as part of a plan to adapt to fast-changing conditions in the media industry.
The news organization said the cuts, which would be done through buyouts, were part of a plan to meet "the evolving needs of our customers." The cuts will affect both news and business employees.
"This is about ensuring AP's important role as the only truly independent news organization at scale during a period of transformation in the media industry," The Associated Press said.
In a note to employees Monday, the AP News Guild said the cuts were the result of revenue declines and would affect the organization's global bureaus and administrative staff. The note said as many as 121 employees would be eligible for a buyout package, adding that managers said the buyouts aimed to avoid layoffs.
The Associated Press -- a news cooperative that licenses its content to member organizations -- has come under financial pressure over the last year as some news organizations have abandoned the service.
Gannett, the publisher of USA Today and the largest newspaper company in the United States, announced in March that it would stop using reports provided by The Associated Press. McClatchy, the newspaper chain that owns The Sacramento Bee and The Kansas City Star, followed soon after.
Still, The A.P. is among a dwindling number of news organizations that cover the entire globe. Periodic belt-tightening has stretched the ranks of international correspondents ever thinner over the years, even as crackdowns on press freedoms have made foreign reporting more hazardous.
The cuts come two weeks after Election Day, when The Associated Press played a key role by calling races across the United States. The wire service temporarily increased its staff for the election, bringing aboard thousands of contractors to cover the results.
Like other traditional news organizations, The Associated Press has turned to philanthropy to shore up eroding finances. The news cooperative said in June that it was setting up a nonprofit to raise money for statewide and local funding. The A.P. was also among the first news organizations to strike a deal with Open AI to license its news content to the artificial intelligence giant.
Daisy Veerasingham, the chief executive of The A.P., said in a statement that employees eligible for the buyouts would be notified by the end of the day, adding that fewer than half the cuts would be coming from the news division.
"I know this is difficult news, and there will be a period of uncertainty as we work through these changes," Ms. Veerasingham wrote.
Illustration
