Last month, an anonymous music producer by the name of "ghostwriter" used artificial intelligence to impersonate the musicians Drake and the Weeknd. The resulting track, "Heart on My Sleeve," quickly went viral on platforms such as TikTok and Spotify before it was taken down. In a recent article, the culture reporter Joe Coscarelli wrote that the song's success raised new questions about the legal and creative ownership of A.I.-generated works. Mr. Coscarelli joined "The Daily" to discuss how record labels are responding to the rise of A.I. with the episode's host, Sabrina Tavernise. Read an edited and condensed excerpt below.
Drake's record label, Universal Music Group, got Spotify to take the song down. How is Universal thinking about A.I.?
Universal didn't address this song specifically. They never mentioned Drake or the Weeknd, and they certainly didn't want to give any attention to ghostwriter. But they did release a statement the day the song got taken down.
The statement asked people in the music industry who might use A.I. which side of history they want to be on -- the side of artists, fans and human creative expression, or the side of deep fakes, fraud and denying artists their due compensation.
Can labels control the rise of A.I. in music?
They can try. A lot of people have compared the rise in A.I. music to file sharing, to Napster. These were issues for the labels back in the day where they got caught a little bit flat-footed. Every time there's a rise in new technology, the labels want to find a way to get in on it. In the meantime, they are getting their partners, like Spotify, YouTube and Apple Music, to take down songs that come from copyrighted material.
At the same time, they're trying to work with these A.I. companies behind the scenes and say, "Your machines can learn from our catalog. You just have to pay us." Labels like Universal are trying to invest in their own A.I. innovation. They're OK with using A.I., as long as it's authorized.
Broadly, how is A.I. used to make music?
There's a few different categories of what we're calling generative A.I. music.
Songwriters could use a chatbot like ChatGPT to come up with lyrics in the style of another artist. Or a producer could use A.I. technology to create little loops of a guitar riff, for instance, a drumbeat or a horn sound.
One example that gained some popularity even before the Drake track was one by the French D.J. David Guetta, who had used A.I. to make an Eminem song. He used a chatbot to come up with lyrics in the style of the rapper Eminem, and then he has a track that sounds as if it features Eminem. But the key distinction is that David Guetta wasn't trying to sell his song. He sees this as an artistic experiment.
What do artists like Eminem or Drake, who are being used in this way, think about this?
Drake hasn't commented specifically on ghostwriter's "Heart On My Sleeve." The Drakes, the Weeknds and Eminems of the world know how big their fan bases are and how intense the connection can be between listeners and their favorite artists.
They're not sweating just yet. At the same time, there are other artists who see this as a creative possibility. They think it's cool for people to try their voice on as another instrument in their tool kit. You have independent singers, like Grimes or Holly Herndon, who I spoke with for my piece, who are saying, "Go ahead. Use this tool. Use my voice however you want. You have my permission."
They were OK giving away their voice?
I think they realize that this is happening, whether they like it or not. They want to see what people can pull off. It reminds me of the beginnings of sampling in hip-hop, where disco records all of a sudden become the basis for a completely new genre.
At the time, that felt pretty radical.
Innovation often comes out of people breaking the rules or doing things that make people or corporations feel uncomfortable. But Grimes is saying that if people do make money off her voice, she should be paid a cut. She's trying to get ahead of the business problems. I think the risks come when you realize that with Grimes's voice as a tool, you could make it sound like she's saying or feeling anything you want. This raises all sorts of questions about identity, creativity and cultural appropriation. A white artist could record a song and then make it sound as if Kanye West is rapping their words.
In its most extreme form, there are critics who see these vocal fakes as yet another form of digital blackface. You can put the words of a white creator into the mouth of a Black artist. The history of American popular music is full of appropriation, specifically, white artists who take, borrow and steal from Black artists.
The uncomfortable thing about this technology is that it could allow for a much easier way of impersonating people. One thing an artist brings to the table is their identity, culture and biography. To just be able to try on that voice like a costume raises a lot of complicated questions.
Listen to the episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.
Listen to the episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADAM RIDING FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
