The coronavirus pandemic shook the U.S. economy. But American families' bank accounts thrived from 2019 to 2022, in the largest jump in their wealth on record, according to a report from the Federal Reserve that is considered the gold standard for household economic data.
The median net worth climbed 37 percent over those three years after adjusting for inflation, lifted by pandemic stimulus money, a booming job market, rapid wage growth, and climbing stock and home prices. It was the biggest jump since 1989, when the Fed began tracking the financial circumstances of households in its Survey of Consumer Finances.
The rise in wealth has buoyed Americans' spending in 2023, even as inflation made everyday life more expensive and the Fed raised interest rates at an aggressive pace to try to tame the surging prices. That spending has helped the economy grow at a solid pace and kept alive the possibility that the central bank will be able to slow the economy without causing a recession. The jump in net worth and incomes has also helped Americans shore up their savings and pay down credit card debts.
But while families of all tax brackets got a boost -- and poor families saw the largest percentage of growth -- the biggest gains in net worth in dollar terms were toward the top, since the rich hold a large share of financial assets in America. That means the chasm of wealth inequality became wider over those three years of the pandemic.
"Their approach is basically: I've done some magic. I'm not going to tell you what it is."
Ali Farhadi, the chief executive of the Allen Institute for AI, referring to Meta's model of artificial intelligence, which he says does not go far enough in democratizing A.I.'s development.
"We dug our own grave with Cybertruck."
Elon Musk, Tesla's chief executive, in acknowledging the company's challenges in mass producing the pickup truck.
"Oof."
Sam Bankman-Fried, the founder of the cryptocurrency exchange FTX, in early November in response to a text that millions of dollars in withdrawal requests had come in.
