LONDON -- As it aims to build driverless cars and the next generation of robots, Google said on Monday that it had acquired the British artificial intelligence developer DeepMind.
A Google spokesman confirmed the deal but declined to provide the transaction's cost or more information on how Google planned to use DeepMind's projects, which include applications for simulations, e-commerce and games.
The company, which is based in London, was founded by Demis Hassabis, a computer game designer, neuroscientist and former child chess prodigy, and his partners, Shane Legg and Mustafa Suleyman.
On its website, DeepMind describes itself as combining "the best techniques from machine learning and systems neuroscience to build powerful general-purpose learning algorithms."
"This partnership will allow us to turbo-charge our mission to harness the power of machine learning tools to tackle some of society's toughest problems and help make our everyday lives more productive and enjoyable," Mr. Hassabis said in a statement. "We've built a world-leading team here in the U.K. and we're looking forward to accelerating the impact of our technology with Google."
ReCode, the digital news website venture started by Walter S. Mossberg and Kara Swisher, the founders of All Things Digital, first reported the deal on Sunday, saying Google had agreed to pay $400 million for the firm.
The deal is the latest in a series of acquisitions for Google, which has moved beyond its roots as an Internet search and email provider to a developer of smartphones and cars that drive themselves.
Last year, the company bought seven companies related to the development of advanced robotics, including Boston Dynamics, the maker of Big Dog, a robot that can travel across rough terrain, and Makani Power, which makes airborne wind turbines.
Google announced this month that it was purchasing Nest Labs, which makes thermostats and smoke alarms that are connected to the Internet and learn a home owner's preferences, for $3.2 billion.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
