At a clandestine center called Google X in the San Francisco Bay Area, Google is tackling a list of 100 shoot-for-the-stars ideas.
CORRECTION APPENDED
In a top-secret laboratory in an undisclosed San Francisco Bay Area location where robots run free, the future is being imagined.
It is a place where your refrigerator could be connected to the Internet, so it could order groceries when they ran low. Your dinner plate could post to a social network what you are eating. Your robot could go to the office while you stay home in your pajamas. And you could, perhaps, take an elevator to outer space.
These are just a few of the dreams being chased at Google X, the clandestine lab where Google is tackling a list of 100 shoot-for-the-stars ideas. In interviews, a dozen people discussed the list; some work at the lab or elsewhere at Google, and some have been briefed on the project. But none would speak for attribution because Google is so secretive about the effort that many of its employees do not even know the lab exists.
Although most of the ideas on the list are in the conceptual stage, nowhere near reality, two people briefed on the project said one product would be released by the end of the year, although they would not say what it was.
"They're pretty far out in front right now," said Rodney Brooks, a professor emeritus at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's computer science and artificial intelligence lab who is founder of Heartland Robotics. "But Google's not an ordinary company, so almost nothing applies."
At most Silicon Valley companies, innovation means developing online apps or ads, but Google sees itself as different. Even as Google has grown into a major corporation and technology start-ups are biting at its heels, the lab reflects its ambition to be a place where groundbreaking research and development are happening, in the tradition of Xerox PARC, which developed aspects of the modern personal computer in the 1970s.
A Google spokeswoman, Jill Hazelbaker, declined to comment on the lab but said that investing in speculative projects was an important part of Google's DNA. "While the possibilities are incredibly exciting, please do keep in mind that the sums involved are very small by comparison to the investments we make in our core businesses," she said.
At Google, which uses artificial intelligence techniques and machine learning in its search algorithm, some of the outlandish projects may not be as much of a stretch as they first appear, even though they defy the bounds of the company's main Web search business.
For example, space elevators, a longtime fantasy of Google's founders and other Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, could collect information or haul things into space. (In theory, they involve rocketless space travel along a cable anchored to Earth.) "Google is collecting the world's data, so now it could be collecting the solar system's data," Mr. Brooks said.
Sergey Brin, a Google co-founder, is deeply involved in the lab, said several people with knowledge of it, and came up with the list of ideas along with Larry Page, Google's other founder, who worked on Google X before becoming chief executive in April; Eric E. Schmidt, its chairman; and other top executives. "Where I spend my time is farther-afield projects, which we hope will graduate to important key businesses in the future," Mr. Brin said recently, though he did not mention Google X.
Mr. Page, who returned as the company's chief executive in April, has at the same time cut 25 programs that he had deemed not popular enough to keep, a move that some employees said could eat into the company's reputation for innovation.
It was not clear whether any of the programs involved Google X, where the company may turn one of the ideas -- the driverless cars that it unleashed on roads in California last year -- into a new business. Google could sell navigation or information technology for the cars, and theoretically could show location-based ads to passengers as they zoomed by local businesses.
Robots figure prominently in many of the ideas. They have long captured the imagination of Google engineers, including Mr. Brin, who has already attended a conference through a robot instead of in the flesh. Fleets of robots could assist Google with collecting information, replacing the humans that photograph streets for Google Maps, say people with knowledge of Google X.
Other ideas involve what Google referred to as the "Web of things" at its software developers conference in May -- a way of connecting objects to the Internet. Every time anyone uses the Web, it benefits Google, the company argued, so it could be good for Google if home accessories and wearable objects, not just computers, were connected.
Google said in May that by the end of this year another team planned to introduce a Web-connected light bulb that could communicate wirelessly with Android devices.
A leader at Google X is Sebastian Thrun, one of the world's top robotics and artificial intelligence experts, who teaches computer science at Stanford University and invented the world's first driverless car. Also at the lab is Andrew Ng, another Stanford professor, who specializes in applying neuroscience to artificial intelligence to teach robots and machines to operate like people.
Johnny Chung Lee, a specialist in human-computer interaction, came to Google X from Microsoft this year after helping develop Kinect, the video game player that responds to human movement and voice.
Because Google X is a breeding ground for projects that could turn into colossal failures or Google's next big business -- and it could take years to figure out which -- just the idea of these experiments terrifies some shareholders and analysts.
"These moon-shot projects are a very Google-y thing for them to do," said Colin W. Gillis, an analyst at BGC Partners. "People don't love it, but they tolerate it because their core search business is firing away."
CORRECTION:
As published in the International Herald Tribune
An article on Tuesday about Google's secret engineering lab erroneously attributed a distinction to Sebastian Thrun, a leader at the lab. Though Mr. Thrun developed a driverless car, he was not the first to do so. Others, including the German engineer Ernst Dickmanns, have done pioneering work in developing the robotic automobile.
Saturday, November 19, 2011
