The company's interim C.E.O. has been managing the development and distribution of ChatGPT and DALL-E for years.
For years, Mira Murati has worked behind the scenes at OpenAI, overseeing the development and delivery of revolutionary products such as ChatGPT and DALL-E. Now, she is stepping into the limelight as its interim chief executive.
Ms. Murati, 34, was elevated to the top position at the high-profile company on Friday when OpenAI's board of directors ousted Sam Altman, the company's co-founder and chief executive. The company said that Ms. Murati had a "unique skill set" and would provide "a seamless transition while it conducts a formal search for a permanent C.E.O."
Though she has carried the title of chief technology officer since last year, current and former employees said Ms. Murati had been functioning as the company's head of operations. She made sure that its engineers developed versions of ChatGPT on schedule. She also handled the company's relationship with Microsoft, an investor and partner who has deployed OpenAI's technology, and she helped shape its artificial intelligence policy in Washington and Europe.
"She has a demonstrated ability to assemble teams with technical expertise, commercial acumen and a deep appreciation for the importance of mission," Satya Nadella, Microsoft's chief executive, wrote in a piece about her for Time magazine. "As a result, Mira has helped build some of the most exciting A.I. technologies we've ever seen."
Born in Albania and educated in Canada, Ms. Murati is a mechanical engineer by training who built a hybrid racecar as an undergraduate student at Dartmouth College. She joined OpenAI in 2018 after stints at Tesla, where she played a key role in the development of the Model X car, and Leap Motion, a start-up that developed a computing system to track hand and finger motions.
Ms. Murati said that her work at Tesla exposed her to A.I. and inspired her to look for a job in that field. OpenAI hired her as its vice president of applied A.I. and partnerships. At the time, the company was a nonprofit organization dedicated to ensuring that artificial general intelligence benefited all of humanity. It later restructured itself as a for-profit company so it could raise the huge amounts of money needed to build its A.I. technologies.
"I thought that fundamentally if you're building intelligence, it's such a core unit in the universe that it affects everything," Ms. Murati said in August during an event hosted by Andreessen Horowitz, a Silicon Valley venture capital firm. "What else is there to do more inspiring than elevate and increase collective intelligence of humanity?"
OpenAI was overseen by a group of senior leaders that included Mr. Altman; Greg Brockman, its former chairman; and Wojciech Zaremba, a Polish-born A.I. researcher who was also among the company's founders. Ms. Murati, who was a member of the leadership team, would execute the team's decisions across the company.
She assumed responsibility for distribution of the image generator, DALL-E, and text generator, ChatGPT, which attracted hundreds of millions of users after its introduction last year. As ChatGPT and DALL-E took off, she made appearances on "The Daily Show," Bloomberg TV and at several conferences.
"It's very important to bring the public along, bring these technologies in the public consciousness, but in a way that's responsible and safe," Ms. Murati told "The Daily Show" host Trevor Noah last year.
Photograph Mira Murati steps into OpenAI's chief executive role after leading parts of its product development. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PATRICK T. FALLON/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
