CORRECTION APPENDED. Andrew Carnegie didn't give money away like this. But then, Carnegie didn't play a Stratocaster guitar.
The Microsoft billionaire Paul Allen has given over $100 million in the last year to battle Ebola in Africa, visiting doctors who are on the front lines. He works on animal conservation there, too.
Mr. Allen has allocated much of his giving -- which so far exceeds $2 billion of a $17 billion fortune -- to his hometown, Seattle. His interests are diverse, including creating museums devoted to rock music and vintage computers, as well as building institutes devoted to learning about the human cell, brains and artificial intelligence.
He celebrated the 10th anniversary of the Allen Institute for Brain Science with his band, the Underthinkers, playing rhythm guitar on his vintage Strat.
"It always comes back to what you are passionate about," said Mr. Allen, 62. Through philanthropy, he said, "you are transmitting your hopes, and keeping them going in the future."
Most of history's richest givers have mined their lives, looking for the most effective ways to donate money. Their charity has shaped large parts of our world, and served as a powerful marker of their times.
A long time ago, kings gave alms to win merit somewhere beyond their chance-ridden worlds. Industrialists created a kind of industrial philanthropy, creating durable institutions and seeking a kind of mass-scale moral betterment akin to a factory output of better people.
In our age of software-based technological disruption, digital billionaires look for breakthroughs that will transform society and reward individual creativity. The results are mixed, but the donors seem dedicated to their models, the same way a venture capitalist keeps funding a hopeful start-up.
Mr. Allen, who last month got a medal from the Carnegie Corporation for his giving, says he'll give away most of his money eventually, aiming for something perhaps as programmatic as Microsoft, but as inspirational as a great guitar riff.
"The past few years I've felt I'm on a path," he said in an interview. "I'm trying to transmit the visions of creativity and build institutions that are incredibly catalytic to their fields."
While many people seek to leave their mark on the world, philanthropists can do it in the means and method of their giving. Biography can inform the style and impact of the giving itself, with significant consequences for society.
"Personalization is enormously important," said Karl Zinsmeister, author of "The Almanac of American Philanthropy" and an executive at the Philanthropy Roundtable, a nonprofit network of charitable donors. "Passion and instincts for how you change the world are as important as a checkbook. But it is double-edged: People can come with experience in one field, and they think it applies to all the rest."
Andrew Carnegie was self-educated and pious, in the style of his times. The nearly 3,000 free public libraries he built worldwide were, like the 7,000 church organs he donated during his lifetime, aimed at a kind of moral betterment that he felt would elevate the individual and society. Mr. Allen sees music as personally inspiring. But in Carnegie's time, music elevated the masses.
John D. Rockefeller developed the first modern multinational corporation in Standard Oil. His namesake Rockefeller Foundation seems informed by that experience; in funding and scale, it became the first mission-driven multinational personal charity, treating millions around the world for hookworm, yellow fever and other diseases.
Unlike refineries and steel plants, the software and biological businesses of the information age arise from small teams of gifted individuals who don't require a lot of infrastructure to get rich. Their products get big fast.
This has led to a mentality of shock and awe, or so-called venture philanthropy, which seeds with relatively small amounts of money projects that seem as if they could make an outsize difference.
"If you want the charitable equivalent of making a lot of money, you should be in 30 ventures, without guessing which one is going to take off," said Steve Kirsch, a 59-year-old Internet entrepreneur who estimates he has given $20 million to various medical researchers over the last decade. "No breakthroughs yet," he says of this giving, "but you hope for the best."
In a similar big bet approach, the XPrize Foundation, supported by a number of tech companies and millionaires (as well as some more traditional givers), describes itself as "an innovation engine" working "for the benefit of humanity."
Taking a cue from the prize Charles A. Lindbergh won by crossing the Atlantic in a solo aircraft, sponsors have established a Google-funded XPrize for someone to put a robot on the moon and a prize to build a "Star Trek"-like medical tricorder, a multifunctional hand-held device. Making everyone on the globe literate and quantifiably improving the world's net happiness are among other XPrize goals.
Besides donating to charity, Pierre Omidyar, who founded eBay, runs a network that funds businesses that he thinks have a high potential. Manoj Bhargava, who gave the world the 5-Hour Energy drink beloved by programmers, has created Stage 2 Innovations, a lab and investment fund dedicated to bringing clean water and electricity to poor nations.
The foundation formed by Mr. Allen's onetime business partner, Bill Gates, along with his wife, Melinda, is more programmatic. It attacks global health problems and education with immense amounts of data, goals and metrics. His senior executives include a chief digital officer.
"Bill frequently reads reports on the state of polio in Afghanistan," said Mr. Allen. "He's taking on education and big epidemiological problems, huge and worthy goals."
Mr. Allen's institutions have separate locations and staffs, like a modern diversified portfolio. Funded in some cases with more than $100 million, the ones that show the greatest potential are likely to get the bulk of Mr. Allen's estate (like many ultrarich people, Mr. Allen is a signatory to "the Pledge" to give most of his wealth away).
This may also be a good way for an aging geek to have fun.
"Paul showed up for a whole day of our science advisory board meeting," said Oren Etzioni, the chief executive of Mr. Allen's A.I. institute. He contrasts the involvement of Mr. Allen with Warren E. Buffett, "who says he'll just give his money to the Gates Foundation."
The institute recently released a search engine for scientific researchers that will scan studies for relevant information. The first set, for computer science, has three million papers and is free to use.
The idea is to speed research regardless of location, perhaps helping a lone genius. He also supports such individual efforts with Allen Distinguished Investigators awards, a grant program for researchers following unorthodox ideas.
Mr. Allen, a science fiction fan, has launched rockets into space. He owns the Portland Trail Blazers and the Seattle Seahawks, which are entertaining ways to make money. As with many billionaires, his boundaries of public, private and profit endeavors do not delineate crisply.
Mr. Allen joined in a lawsuit in 2014 to force the Interior Department to better account for the environmental impact of mining coal on public land. While not a charitable effort, the lawsuit is a kind of social activism, informed by scientific concerns.
"Something that is characteristic of me is the breadth of my interests," he said. "I'm trying to show people that they can activate their own passions, and find their own path."
Correction: November 7, 2015, Saturday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Page F8 this weekend about Paul Allen's philanthropy misidentifies the research institute at whose anniversary celebration Mr. Allen performed with his band, the Underthinkers. It is the Allen Institute for Brain Science, not the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence.
Photograph Paul Allen at Home in Manhattan. He Says Philanthropy Is a Way to Project One's Hopes Into the Future: "It Always Comes Back to What You Are Passionate About." (Photograph by Joshua Bright for the New York Times)
