Comfort is important, because the main reason for being at the snowy resort town is to meet up with clients and prospective clients.
By David Gelles
Even before dealmakers descended on Davos for the World Economic Forum, they were making an important decision: how to protect their feet from the elements.
"What shoes to wear is one of the most important questions," said Jeffrey Rosen, deputy chairman of Lazard. A regular at Davos, Mr. Rosen is well accustomed to the mix of unpredictable winter weather in the Alps, long walks from the Congress Center to various hotels, fancy dinners and casual meetings that makes zeroing in on footwear a particular challenge for attendees.
It might seem mundane. But comfort is important because, for investment bankers, the main reason for being at the snowy resort town this week is not to linger over presentations about artificial intelligence or to schmooze at the chalet soirees. The point is to meet up with clients and prospective clients. As many as their endurance will allow.
"I'll have between 25 and 30 meetings," said David Solomon, co-head of investment banking at Goldman Sachs. "It would take me a number of months to travel around the world and see all those people."
With thousands of attendees from many of the world's largest companies all convening in the mountain town for four days, Davos offers dealmakers a unique opportunity to see dozens of clients in one setting. But with the event occurring over just three full days, that amounts to a unique sort of corporate speed dating.
Many bankers are known to hole up in hotel suites for the duration of the conference, taking back-to-back meetings and foregoing the official program entirely.
"We'll use Davos to have a large number of meetings, which are normally 20 to 30 minutes and can be more productive than those where you spend weeks scheduling, travel a long ways, and see someone for an hour," said Mr. Rosen.
Dealmakers are not necessarily finalizing term sheets amid the snowdrifts. But Davos gives bankers and executives a chance to rub elbows and have informal, sometime serendipitous meetings that often lead to deals down the road.
"It's not that you go there to cut a deal," said Daniel Pinto, the chief of JPMorgan's investment bank. "You go there to build relationships."
Some conversations begun in Davos do lead to deal announcements down the road. The failed merger between Omnicom and Publicis had its roots in a conversation between the companies' two chief executives at Davos in 2013. And Mr. Solomon said he was currently working on a project with one chief executive that had its origins in talks that began in Davos four years ago.
"Business and political decisions are taken based on the face-to-face discussions people have at Davos," said John Studzinski, global head of Blackstone's advisory business and a regular at the event.
The investment bankers will have plenty to talk about this year. After years of sluggish mergers and acquisitions activity, dealmaking took off last year. More than $3 trillion in deals were announced last year, the most since the financial crisis.
To prepare for the round-robin meetings, bankers cram, brushing up on old clients and refreshing their pitch decks. "There's no question that you have homework to do," said Mr. Solomon.
Beyond reconnecting with clients, the chance to confer with foreign officials, regulators, and representatives from sovereign wealth funds makes a few days in Davos different than an average workday in London or New York.
For those bankers who do manage to roam the halls of the Congress Center, an intellectual feast awaits. Hundreds of panels will take place on topics ranging from politics to in the Middle East to the volatility in oil prices.
From these discussions, dealmakers who make time for them can attempt to divine new insights that might be applicable to whatever it is they're working on at the moment.
"People are there trying to get the big picture, and at the same time there's something quite immediate," said Franck Petitgas, global co-head of investment banking at Morgan Stanley.
"On the one hand there is immense concentration of time and space and debate. And on the other hand there is a lot of perspective and distance."
And while much of the agenda focuses on high-level topics like climate change and globalization, participants make a point of tying those themes to their current mandates back at the office. "The macro topics get down to a business level in a lot of discussions," said Mr. Solomon.
What is more, bankers have the chance to hear from a cross-section of economists and government officials that may not otherwise be on their radar.
"Davos provides an opportunity to build trust and forge relationships, but also to do some very powerful listening," said Mr. Studzinski. "As much as Davos sets the agenda, it is also a mirror to what's happening in the world."
That said, Davos is no crystal ball. Longtime participants of the World Economic Forum noted that for all the brainpower there in past years, those at the event did not predict major upheavals in recent years -- like the financial crisis or the Arab Spring or the Russian takeover of Crimea.
Instead of predicting the future, the value of Davos is, for many, in the spontaneous conversations that are impossible to plan.
"You have these epiphany moments where someone describes what's happening in he world in a way that you hadn't thought about, and it gives you an entirely new perspective that makes sense," said Mr. Rosen of Lazard.
Besides the panel discussions and luncheons, participants keep busy in ways befitting the eclectic group gathered in the Alps. Daily meditation sessions begin each day, and a slew of parties hosted by the likes of the billionaire George Soros and the JPMorgan chief executive, Jamie Dimon, stretch into the evening.
And for those who can escape the back-to-back meetings, insightful sessions on new technologies and biotechnology await.
"I like the sessions on robotics and genetic engineering," said Mr. Rosen. "It gives you a sense of the future."
Which brings us back to footwear. To cover all that ground, the right shoe is crucial.
Some dealmakers, whether men or women, take a risk with their regular business shoes. But many senior financiers forego fashion in favor of utility. Mr. Rosen, along with several other senior bankers who asked not to be named, said that after years of experience it was clear that rubber-soled boots, preferably with wool lining, were the best option.
"They do keep the sidewalks pretty well groomed," said Mr. Rosen. "But you can get wintry conditions, and the snow can accumulate."
