The artificial intelligence technology that has moved furthest into the mainstream is computer understanding of human speech.
"Hi, thanks for coming," the medical assistant says, greeting a mother with her 5-year-old son. "Are you here for your child or yourself?"
The boy, the mother replies. He has diarrhea.
The assistant asks the mother about other symptoms, including fever ("slight") and abdominal pain ("He hasn't been complaining").
She turns to the boy.
"Has your tummy been hurting?"
Yes, he replies.
After a few more questions, the assistant declares herself "not that concerned at this point." She schedules an appointment with a doctor in a couple of days. The mother leads her son from the room, holding his hand. But he keeps looking back at the assistant, fascinated, as if reluctant to leave.
Maybe that is because the assistant is the disembodied likeness of a woman's face, in black and white, on a computer screen -- a no-frills avatar. Her words of sympathy are jerky, flat and mechanical. But she has the right stuff -- the ability to understand speech, recognize pediatric conditions and reason according to simple rules -- to make an initial diagnosis of a childhood ailment and its seriousness. And to win the trust of a little boy.
For decades, computer scientists have been pursuing artificial intelligence: the use of computers to simulate human thinking. But in recent years, rapid progress has been made with machines that can listen, speak, see, reason and learn, in their way. The prospect, according to scientists and economists, is not only that artificial intelligence will transform the way humans and machines communicate and collaborate, but also that it will eliminate millions of jobs, create many others and change the nature of work and daily routines.
The artificial intelligence technology that has moved furthest into the mainstream is computer understanding of what humans are saying.
People increasingly talk to their cellphones to find things, instead of typing. Both Google and Microsoft search services now respond to voice commands. More drivers are asking their cars to do things like find directions or play music.
The number of U.S. doctors using speech software to record and transcribe accounts of patient visits and treatments has more than tripled in the past three years to 150,000. The progress is striking.
A few years ago, supraspinatus, a rotator cuff muscle, got translated as "fish banana." Today, the software transcribes all kinds of medical terminology letter perfectly, doctors say. It has more trouble with other words and grammar, requiring wording changes in about one out of every four sentences, doctors say.
So the outlook is uncertain for medical transcriptionists and workers in call centers.
THE DIGITAL ASSISTANT
"Hi, are you looking for Eric?" asks the receptionist outside the office of Eric Horvitz at Microsoft.
This assistant is an avatar, a time manager for office workers.
Behind the female face on the screen is an arsenal of computing technology including speech understanding, image recognition and machine learning. The digital assistant taps databases that include the boss's calendar of meetings and appointments going back years and his work patterns. Its software monitors his phone calls by length, person spoken to, time of day and day of the week. It also tracks his location and his computer use by what applications he uses -- e-mail, writing documents or browsing the Web -- for how long and at what time of day.
When a colleague asks when Mr. Horvitz might finish a meeting or phone call, the avatar reviews that data, looking for patterns.
The avatar has a database of all the boss's colleagues at work and relationships, from research team members to senior management, and it can schedule meetings. Mr. Horvitz has given the avatar rules for the kinds of meetings that are more and less interruptible.
As part of the project, the researchers plan to program the avatar to engage in "work-related chitchat" with colleagues who are waiting.
Computers with artificial intelligence can be thought of as the machine equivalent of idiot savants. They can be extremely good at skills that challenge the smartest humans, playing chess like a grandmaster or answering "Jeopardy!" questions like a champion. Yet those skills are in narrow domains. Far harder for a computer are common-sense skills like understanding the context of language and social situations when talking -- taking turns in conversation, for example.
The Microsoft projects are only research initiatives, but they suggest where things are headed. And as speech recognition and other artificial intelligence technologies take on more tasks, there are concerns about the social impact of the technology and that too little attention has been paid to its limitations.
SMARTER DEVICES
"I'm looking for a reservation for two people tomorrow night at 8 at a romantic restaurant within walking distance."
That spoken request seems simple enough, but for a computer to respond intelligently requires a ballet of more than a dozen technologies.
A host of companies -- AT&T, Microsoft, Google and start-ups -- are investing in services that hint at the concept of machines that can act on spoken commands. They go well beyond voice-enabled Internet search.
Perhaps the furthest along is Siri, a Silicon Valley company offering a "virtual personal assistant," a collection of software programs that can listen to a request, find information and take action.
For the restaurant reservation, Siri, presented as an iPhone application, sends the spoken request for a romantic restaurant as an audio file to computers operated by Nuance Communications, the largest speech-recognition company, which convert it to text. The text is then returned to Siri's computers, which make educated guesses about the meaning.
Apple is so impressed that it bought Siri in April in a private transaction estimated at more than $200 million.
In cars, too, speech recognition systems have vastly improved. In just three years, the Ford Motor Company, using Nuance software, has increased the number of speech commands its vehicles recognize from 100 words to 10,000 words and phrases.
Systems like Ford's Sync are becoming popular options in new cars. They are also seen by some safety specialists as a defense, if imperfect, against the distracting array of small screens for GPS devices, smart phones and the like.
Later this summer, a new model of the Ford Edge will recognize complete addresses spoken in a single phrase, and respond by offering turn-by-turn directions.
TO THE CUSTOMER'S RESCUE
"Please select one of the following products from our menu," the electronics giant Panasonic used to tell callers seeking help with products from power tools to plasma televisions.
It was not working. Callers took an average of two and a half minutes merely to wade through the menu, and 40 percent hung up in frustration. "We were drowning in calls," recalled Donald Szczepaniak, vice president of customer service. Panasonic reached out to AT&T Labs in 2005 for help.
The AT&T researchers worked with thousands of hours of recorded calls to the Panasonic center, in Chesapeake, Virginia, to build statistical models of words and phrases that callers used to describe products and problems, and to create a database that is constantly updated.
The goal of the system is to identify important words in a person's spoken phrases and sentences, so that an automated assistant can intelligently reply.
Simple problems, like product registration or where to take a product for repairs, can be resolved in the automated system alone.
That technology has improved, but callers have also become more comfortable speaking to the system. A surprising number sign off by saying, "Thank you."
Some callers, especially younger ones, also make things easier for the computer by uttering a key phrase like "plasma help," Mr. Szczepaniak said. "I call it the Google-ization of the customer," he said.
The speech technology's automated problem sorting has enabled Panasonic to globalize its customer service, with inquiries about older and simpler products routed to its call centers in the Philippines and Jamaica. The Virginia center focuses on high-end Panasonic products like plasma TVs and home theater equipment. And while the center's head count of 200 is the same as it was five years ago, the workers are more skilled. Those who have stayed have often been retrained.
