Andrea Elizabeth Snavely and Lewis Ziruo Liu were married Oct. 18 at Islington Town Hall in London. Heather Dsenisi, a deputy registrar, officiated. On Oct. 21, the Rev. Dushan Croos, a Roman Catholic priest who is the senior Catholic chaplain at Oxford University, led a religious ceremony at Merton Chapel at Merton College in Oxford, England.
The bride, 34, is an associate in the investment banking division at HSBC, the London bank, where she works on mergers and acquisitions for financial institutions. She graduated from Stanford, received an M.B.A. from London Business School, and has a master's degree in East Asian studies focusing on Tibet from Harvard.
The bride is a daughter of Dr. Sharon La Forge Snavely and John G. Snavely of Mission Hills, Kan. Her father is the chief executive officer there of ALC Global Partners, an import-export family business of distilled spirits, beer and soda in Mission Hills. Her mother, an internal medicine and infectious diseases doctor, works at Statland Clinic Medical Group, a group practice, part of Health Corporation of America, in Overland Park, Kan.
Mr. Liu, 30, is a founder and the chief executive officer of Eigen Technologies in London, an artificial intelligence company with clients in the legal, finance and insurance sectors. He is also a senior adviser at Linklaters, the London law firm. He graduated with a joint-degree in visual and environmental studies and physics from Harvard, from which he also received a master's degree in physics. He earned a doctorate in atomic and laser physics from the University of Oxford.
The groom is a son of Ling Lu Liu and Hengzhong Liu of Short Hills, N.J. Until February 2015, his mother worked as a data scientist in the advanced technology division at AT&T Shannon Labs in Middletown, N.J. His father is a managing director in the risk division at Bank of America Merrill Lynch in New York. He is also the author of two books on Chinese economic reform and development.
The couple met in 2009 in London through a mutual friend.
Photograph (Photograph by Pippa Mackenzie)
