TECHNOLOGY
For $ 700 Million, NvidiaAcquires Start-Up, Run:ai
The chipmaker Nvidia has completed its acquisition of the Israeli A.I. firm Run:ai, a start-up, after antitrust scrutiny over the buyout, Run:ai said on Monday.
The European Commission granted unconditional approval this month to Nvidia's $ 700 million bid for Run:ai, which helps developers optimize infrastructure for artificial intelligence. The commission said in October that the deal would require antitrust clearance by the European Union.
The E.U. antitrust watchdog had warned that the deal threatened competition in the markets where the companies operate.
Its inquiry into the deal focused on practices that could strengthen Nvidia's control over the market for graphics processing units, the sought-after chips often employed in A.I.-linked tasks.
Nvidia dominates the market for A.I. graphics processors and commands about 80 percent of its share.
But the European Commission concluded this month that Run:ai's acquisition, originally announced in April, would not raise competition concerns.
The U.S. Department of Justice is also investigating the chip giant's buyout of Run:ai on antitrust grounds, Politico reported in August.
Regulators on both sides of the Atlantic have recently stepped up their scrutiny of tech giants' acquisitions of start-ups on concerns that such deals may shut down potential rivals.
Run:ai plans to make its software open-source, it said in a blog post. "While Run:ai currently supports only Nvidia G.P.U.s, open sourcing the software will enable it to extend its availability to the entire A.I. ecosystem," it said. REUTERS
REAL ESTATE
Pending Sales of Homes Rise More Than Expected
Contracts to buy previously owned homes in the United States rose more than expected in November, notching a fourth straight month of gains as buyers focused on taking advantage of improved inventory despite stubbornly high mortgage rates.
The National Association of Realtors said on Monday that its Pending Home Sales Index, based on signed contracts, rose 2.2 percent last month to 79.0, the highest since February 2023, from 77.3 in October. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast that contracts, which become sales after a month or two, would rise 0.9 percent after increasing 1.8 percent in October.
Pending home sales rose 6.9 percent from a year earlier. The Midwest, South and West saw monthly increases while contract signings slipped in the Northeast. All four regions posted annual gains.
The rise in contract signings in November dovetailed with a second straight rise in existing home purchase completions last month reported previously by the association. That earlier report showed the inventory of homes for sale in November was up by nearly 18 percent from a year earlier.
"Consumers appeared to have recalibrated expectations regarding mortgage rates and are taking advantage of more available inventory," said Lawrence Yun, the association's chief economist. REUTERS
Credit: By Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEFF CHIU/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
