LODGING
In Crackdown, Airbnb Removes Fake Listings
Fake listings have emerged as a major problem for Airbnb, threatening to scare off consumers and prompting the short-term rental service to use artificial intelligence in an effort to crack down on fraudsters.
Airbnb says it has removed 59,000 fake listings and prevented another 157,000 from joining the platform this year.
Fake listings and high cleaning fees are among several issues that Airbnb said its users highlighted in a company survey. Others included high cleaning fees and a desire for lower prices.The San Francisco company said more than 260,000 listings have lowered or removed cleaning fees this year, since it gave consumers the means to sort listings in order of all-in pricing.
Airbnb says the change in how prices are displayed discourages hosts from touting low prices but piling on extra fees. However, only about one-third of Airbnb renters are using it. ASSOCIATED PRESS
EARNINGS
General Mills Exceeds Sales and Profit Forecasts
General Mills topped first-quarter sales and profit estimates on Wednesday as higher prices for its breakfast cereals, snack bars and pet food products helped offset slowing demand.
Packaged food makers have increased prices multiple times over the last year to counter the spiraling impact from higher labor and input costs.
The higher prices have helped expand top-line and margins, volumes have taken a hit as customers have been less willing to spend on expensive food items and shifted to cheaper private label alternatives.

Organic sales at North America retail segment grew 4 percent as it saw a "modest" rebuild of retailer inventory in the quarter after being hit by weaker demand in the previous quarter.
General Mills reported net sales of $ 4.91 billion compared with expectations of $ 4.88 billion, according to LSEG data. REUTERS
EXECUTIVES
Ex-Chief of Qantas Leaves With Windfall
Australia's Qantas Airways said its former chief executive took a pay increase of 872 percent as he collected years' worth of longterm incentives on the way out, but added that it was cutting and withholding hefty bonuses amid damaging lawsuits.
Alan Joyce, who retired this month after a regulator lawsuit accused Qantas of selling tickets on thousands of already-canceled flights, took home 21.4 million Australian dollars ( $ 13.9 million) in the 2023 financial year, according to the company's annual report, published on Wednesday
Most of the amount was sharebased incentives that Mr. Joyce was allowed to cash in after they vested, according to the report.
Qantas cut an additional shortterm bonus for Mr. Joyce by onefifth of the 2.7 million Australian dollars available and withheld it pending the outcome of two lawsuits that may result in hefty fines and further reputational turbulence, the report added. REUTERS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW KELLY/REUTERS)
