TECHNOLOGY
Intel Names 2 to Board Amid C.E.O. Search
Intel on Thursday named two chip industry veterans to its board on Thursday, as the struggling semiconductor firm looks for a new top boss after the recent ouster of Pat Gelsinger.
The chipmaker said Eric Meurice, former C.E.O. of chip-making equipment provider ASML, and Steve Sanghi, interim C.E.O. of Microchip Technology, are the new additions to its board. Both previously worked at Intel.
Intel has struggled to keep up with advanced chip-making, falling well behind rivals such as Nvidia in designing chips that power artificial intelligence and TSMC in making smaller and more efficient semiconductors.
Mr. Gelsinger, whose removal as C.E.O. was announced on Monday, was supposed to restore Intel's lead in chip-making, but his costly bet on contract manufacturing has seen the company shrink to a market value more than 30 times smaller than Nvidia. REUTERS
EARNINGS
Kroger Beats Estimates,
But Its Outlook Narrows
Kroger topped quarterly same-store sales expectations on Thursday, benefiting from a surge in customers shopping at its stores and online.
The grocer, which competes with giants like Walmart and Amazon.com, has been ramping up its e-commerce investments to keep pace with customers who prefer shopping online.
Kroger rivaled Walmart's Thanksgiving deals with its own holiday offers. It sold Thanksgiving meals for less than $ 5 and launched a 12-day deal offering.
Kroger's third-quarter identical sales, excluding fuel, rose 2.3 percent, beating expectations of a 1.77 percent rise, according to data compiled by LSEG, while its adjusted earnings per share of 98 cents was in line with estimates.
But the chain narrowed its annual forecasts, saying annualized sales will be about $ 3 billion lower because of the sale of its specialty pharmacy unit. REUTERS
AUTOMOBILES
E.V. Reliability Improves, But Lags Gas Models
The reliability of electric vehicles and plug-in hybrids has dramatically improved, narrowing a wide gap with gas-powered automobiles, according to the latest survey by Consumer Reports.
But vehicles with internal combustion engines and gas-electric hybrids are still far more dependable, the survey found.
Consumer Reports subscribers, who filled out surveys during much of 2024, reported that electric vehicles had 42 percent more problems than gas autos on average. But that was down from 79 percent more in the 2023 survey. The survey released Thursday measured reliability of vehicles mainly from the 2022, 2023 and 2024 model years.
Plug-ins had 70 percent more problems than gas vehicles, but that was less than half the difference found in last year's survey.
Consumer Reports said its survey found that Subaru was the most reliable brand for the first time. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Reuters and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY NIC ANTAYA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
