TECHNOLOGY
Misinformation Sites Benefit From Ad Networks
Websites publishing coronavirus-related misinformation are being supported financially by tapping into internet advertising networks owned by Google and Amazon, according to a new Oxford University study.
Google and Amazon operate two of the world's largest internet advertising networks and serve as central repositories for millions of ads that are distributed to websites around the world. But because the systems are largely automated, they are vulnerable to abuse, said Philip Howard, director of the Oxford Internet Institute, who co-wrote the study.
Social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter and YouTube have been widely criticized as being the primary tool for sharing coronavirus-related misinformation. But the researchers said the advertising networks provide the financial oxygen to websites that are publishing much of the dubious and misleading information about the pandemic.
Mr. Howard, who previously assisted the Senate investigation into Russian disinformation efforts, said Google and Amazon should consider developing a blacklist that blocks website with a history of sharing false and misleading information about the pandemic from being able to use their advertising networks.
He said the pandemic had spawned a niche world of websites that "preys on people's insecurities." Many of the sites sell products promising to cure or prevent the disease. Even though the sites have a relatively low audience, they muddy the information ecosystem and undermine the broader public health response.
"They are hucksters, fraudsters, peddling misinformation," he said. "It would be a public service to take them down."
Amazon and Google did not respond to requests for comment. -- Adam Satariano
SMALL BUSINESS
C.E.O.s Ask Treasury Secretary for More Relief
More than 100 current and former chief executives called for more aid to small businesses in the United States in a letter sent to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin on Monday.
The letter was organized by the former Starbucks chief Howard Schultz with the support of Senator Michael Bennet, Democrat of Colorado, and Senator Todd Young, Republican of Indiana. It is signed by the likes of Walmart's Doug McMillon, Alphabet's Sundar Pichai and Disney's Bob Chapek.
The letter states:
"We cannot stress enough the urgent need to act. Every day that passes without a comprehensive recovery program makes recovery more difficult. By Labor Day, we foresee a wave of permanent closures if the right steps are not taken soon. Tens of millions of Americans have already lost their jobs in this pandemic. Allowing small businesses to fail will turn temporary job losses into permanent ones. By year end, the domino effect of lost jobs -- as well as the lost services and lost products that small businesses provide -- could be catastrophic."
The chief executives call for "federally guaranteed loans, at favorable terms, that will enable small businesses to transform and sustain themselves through 2020 and well into 2021." -- Jason Karaian
VENTURE CAPITAL
Pandemic Changes Fund-Raising
The coronavirus has made it more difficult for entrepreneurs to raise money. But for many companies -- from established businesses to smaller start-ups -- the pandemic hasn't prevented them from finding investors willing to open their wallets.
TransferWise recently raised $ 319 million in a secondary deal, in which existing shareholders will sell some of their holdings in the European fintech company. The transaction values TransferWise at about $ 5 billion, a nearly 43 percent bump from last year. Kristo Kaarmann, the company's chief executive, said that TransferWise, which was founded in 2011, didn't need to raise money, since it has been profitable for three years now. But it saw an opportunity for older investors and long-tenured employees to sell some of their stakes.
Smaller companies aren't afraid to embark on fund-raising either, even if the pandemic has changed the way they court potential investors. Ro, a telehealth start-up, said last week that it had raised $ 200 million in new funding. Gro Intelligence, which uses artificial intelligence to gather agricultural data, is in the process of raising an "opportunistic" Series B round with a target of $ 50 million, its founder and chief executive, Sara Menker, said.
It has taken time for investors to get comfortable, well, investing. Venture deals in the second quarter in the United States, Europe and Asia were all down from the same time last year, but up from the previous quarter, according to PWC and CB Insights. "There's obviously a lot more gun-shyness," Ms. Menker of Gro Intelligence said, with many venture capitalists initially focused on protecting existing portfolio companies rather than striking new deals. -- Michael J. de la Merced
Credit: By The New York Times
