Sundar Pichai is the chief executive of Google and Alphabet and serves on Alphabet's board of directors. Last week, he discussed topics including search, artificial intelligence and competitors. Following is an excerpt of his conversation with Andrew Ross Sorkin. It has been edited and condensed.
ANDREW ROSS SORKIN I think one of the great challenges that people talk about all the time is you have this enormous business called the blue link economy: search. And you do not want to hurt or cannibalize that business. Do you say to yourself as you're thinking about these different A.I. possibilities and other things, you know, we've got to be a little bit slower because we've got to protect this other thing over here?
SUNDAR PICHAI Well, I think we applied A.I. the most aggressively, if anything in the company, in search, right? The gaps in search quality were all based on transformers. We made search quality improvements. We were improving the language understanding of search. That's why we built transformers in the company, right? If you look at the last couple of years, with A.I. overviews, Gemini is being used by over a billion users in search alone. And I just feel like we are getting started.
Search itself will continue to change profoundly in 2025. I think we are going to be able to tackle more complex questions than ever before. You know, I think you'll be surprised, you know, in early '25 the kind of newer things search can do compared to where it is today. When you're running in technology there's some version of innovators' dilemma somewhere. There's only one answer to innovators' dilemma every time -- you lean into that moment, right? Anything else, you won't be around in a few years' time.
SORKIN Do you think you've leaned in enough? I'm going to read you something, and it's a little tough, and you've probably read it: Christopher Mims in [The Wall Street Journal]. And he says: "The company's core business is under siege. People are increasingly getting answers from artificial intelligence." And he's talking not necessarily about Gemini. And he's saying, "Younger generations are using other platforms to gather information." And in the longer term, he suggests that some of the results that are going to be delivered by search engines, the value of them is going to be deteriorating because the web is going to be flooded with A.I.-generated content.
PICHAI Look, there are multiple parts to the question. In a world in which you're flooded with, like, a lot of content, sifting and providing people, you know, if anything I think, you know, something like search becomes more valuable. In a world in which you're inundated with content you're trying to find trustworthy content, content that makes sense to you, in a way reliably you can use it. I think it becomes more valuable.
To your previous point about there's a lot of information out there, people are getting it in many different ways -- look, information is the essence of humanity. We've been on a curve on information. When Facebook came around, you know, people had an entirely new way of getting information -- YouTube, Facebook, [TikTok] -- I can keep going on and on. You know, I think the problem with a lot of those concepts is they're zero-sum in their inherent outlook, right? They just feel like people are consuming information in a certain limited way, and people are all dividing that up. But that's not the reality of what people are doing, right?
SORKIN So if you were going to stack-rank the competition now, if you were to sit on a Monday morning with a whiteboard and say, "You know what? Not today, but 2025, '26, '27, this is who we need to worry about. This is what we think that they are capable of. And this is what we are capable of," what does that board look like to you?
PICHAI If you're on the cutting edge of technology, it is so dynamic. The answers, if you were writing it in the board, would keep changing, too. When I think about A.I., there are a few major labs which are investing a lot. So there are about five to six important companies; I think the names are obvious to most people.
SORKIN Let me ask you about that, by the way, because you say they're obvious. I don't know if they're obvious. I think ChatGPT, OpenAI, that's obvious. Anthropic is obvious. You're obvious. Increasingly maybe xAI.
PICHAI Wow, I think xAI, given Elon [Musk]'s track record, for sure. Meta has done a great job with Llama, right?
SORKIN Where do you put Apple and Amazon?
PICHAI These are extraordinary companies, right? These are companies with deep capabilities and deep access to capital, and an extraordinary track record of execution. Which shows how dynamic the moment is. But I think it's a mistake to think for the most profound technology we are going to work on as humanity, there aren't going to be a handful of companies working on it, right? The opportunity space is much bigger than most people can process it today.
Photograph "Search itself will continue to change profoundly in 2025," Sundar Pichai said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEENAH MOON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
