Massive open online courses, or MOOCs, are spreading rapidly -- some for profit, some not -- with participation by some of the top U.S. universities.
CORRECTION APPENDED
In late September, as workers applied joint compound to new office walls, hoodie-clad colleagues who had just met were working together on deadline. Film editors, code-writing interns and "edX fellows" -- graduate students and scholars versed in online education -- were translating videotaped lectures into massive open online courses, or MOOCs. As if anyone needed reminding, a row of aqua gummed notes gave the dates the courses would "go live."
The paint is barely dry, yet edX, the nonprofit start-up from Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has 370,000 students this autumn in its first official courses. That is nothing. Coursera, founded just last January, has reached more than 1.7 million and is growing "faster than Facebook," boasted Andrew Ng, who is on leave from Stanford University in California to run his for-profit online course provider.
"This has caught all of us by surprise," said David Stavens, who formed a company called Udacity with Sebastian Thrun and Mike Sokolosky after 150,000 signed up for Dr. Thrun's "Introduction to Artificial Intelligence" last autumn, starting the revolution that has higher education gasping. A year ago, he marveled, "we were three guys in Sebastian's living room and now we have 40 employees full time."
"I like to call this the year of disruption," said Anant Agarwal, president of edX, "and the year is not over yet."
Elite universities are forming partnerships with Coursera at a furious pace. It now offers courses from 33 of the biggest names in U.S. higher education, including Princeton, Brown, Columbia and Duke universities. In September, Google released a MOOC-building online tool, and Stanford unveiled Class2Go with two courses.
Traditional online courses charge tuition, carry credit and limit enrollment to a few dozen to ensure interaction with instructors. Massive open online courses are usually free and offer no credit.
Because anyone with an Internet connection can enroll, faculty members cannot possibly respond to students individually. So the course design -- how material is presented and the interactivity -- counts for a lot, as do fellow students. Classmates may lean on one another in study groups organized in their towns, in online forums or -- the prickly part -- for grading work.
The evolving form knits together education, entertainment and social networking. Unlike its antecedent, open courseware -- usually written materials or videotapes of lectures that make users feel as if they are spying on a class from the back of the room -- the MOOC is a full course made with the user in mind.
The medium is still the lecture. Thanks to Khan Academy's free archive of snappy instructional videos, MOOC makers have gotten the memo on the benefit of brevity: 8 to 12 minutes is typical. Then videos pause perhaps twice for a quiz to make sure the user understands the material or, in computer programming, to let the user write code. Feedback is electronic. Teaching assistants may monitor discussion boards. There may be homework and a final exam.
The MOOC certainly presents challenges. Can learning be scaled up this much? Grading is imperfect, especially for nontechnical subjects. Cheating is a reality. "We found groups of 20 people in a course submitting identical homework," David Patterson, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, who teaches software engineering, said in a tone of disbelief at such blatant copying. Udacity and edX now offer proctored exams.
Some students are also ill-prepared for the university-level work. And few stick with it. "Signing up for a class is a lightweight process," Dr. Ng said. Only 46,000 attempted the first assignment in Dr. Ng's course on machine learning last autumn. In the end, he said, 13,000 completed the class and earned a certificate -- from him, not from Stanford.
That is still a significant number of students. The hope is that free courses can bring the best education in the world to the most remote corners of the planet, help people in their careers, and expand intellectual and personal networks. Three-quarters of those who took Dr. Patterson's "Software as a Service" last winter on Coursera (it is now on edX) were from outside the United States, though the opposite was true of a course on circuits and electronics guided last spring by Dr. Agarwal. But both courses attracted highly educated students and both reported that more than 70 percent had degrees (more than a third had graduate degrees).
And in a vote of confidence in the form, students in both courses overwhelmingly endorsed the quality of the course: 63 percent who completed Dr. Agarwal's course as well as a similar one on campus found the MOOC better; 36 percent found it comparable, and 1 percent worse.
Ray Schroeder, director of the Center for Online Learning, Research and Service at the University of Illinois, Springfield, said that three things mattered most in online learning: the quality of material covered, engagement of the teacher and interaction among students. The first does not seem to be an issue -- most professors come from elite campuses, and so far most massive open online courses are in technical subjects like computer science and math, with straightforward content. But providing instructor connection and feedback, including student interactions, is trickier.
"What's frustrating in a MOOC is the instructor is not as available, because there are tens of thousands of others in the class," Dr. Schroeder said.
Many places offer MOOCs, and more will. But Coursera, Udacity and edX are defining the form as they develop their brands.
Coursera casts itself as a "hub" -- Dr. Ng's word -- for learning and networking. The learning comes gratis from an impressive roster of elite schools offering a wide range of courses, like computer science, philosophy and medicine. Not all are highbrow or technical; "Listening to World Music" from the University of Pennsylvania aims to broaden your iPod playlist.
While Coursera will make suggestions, Dr. Ng said, "ultimately all pedagogical decisions are made by the universities." Most offerings are adapted from existing courses: a Princeton Coursera course is a Princeton course. But the vibe is decidedly Facebook -- build a profile, upload your photo -- with tools for students to plan "meet-ups" with Courserians in about 1,400 cities worldwide. These gatherings may be bona fide study groups or social sessions. Membership may be large or sparse.
No one showed up at the meet-up that Stacey Brown, an information technology manager at a Hartford insurance company, scheduled for a Thursday after work, despite R.S.V.P.'s from a few classmates. He is taking three Coursera MOOCs, including "Gamification" from the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of business. In addition to the learning -- and letting bosses know he is taking a Wharton course -- Mr. Brown said, "I hope to get a network."
Others like the discipline a group offers. Kimberly Spillman, a software engineer, started taking seven MOOCs and completed three. "The ones I have study groups with people, those are the ones I finish," Ms. Spillman said.
Udacity has stuck close to its math and computer science roots and emphasizes applied learning, like "How to Build a Blog" or "Building a Web Browser." Job placement is part of the Udacity package. "The type of skills taught in computer science, even at elite universities, can be very theoretical," Dr. Stavens explained.
Udacity courses are designed and produced in-house or with companies like Google and Microsoft. In a poke at its university competition, Dr. Stavens said Udacity picked instructors not because of their academic research, as universities do, but because of how they teach. "We reject about 98 percent of faculty who want to teach with us," he said. "Just because a person is the world's most famous economist doesn't mean they are the best person to teach the subject."
Dr. Stavens sees a day when MOOCs will disrupt the way faculty members are attracted, trained and paid, with the most popular "compensated like a TV actor or a movie actor." He added that "students will want to learn from whoever is the best teacher."
CORRECTION:
As published in the International Herald Tribune
An article on Nov. 5 about massive open online courses misspelled the surname of a co-founder of another MOOC provider, Udacity. He is Michael Sokolsky, not Sokolosky.
Tuesday, November 13, 2012
