The 10-year strategy document outlines a focus on improving customer service and cracking down on tax evasion by corporations and the wealthy.
WASHINGTON -- The Internal Revenue Service on Thursday unveiled an $ 80 billion plan to transform itself into a "digital first" tax collector focused on customer service and cracking down on wealthy tax evaders. The move lays the groundwork for an ambitious 10-year overhaul of one of the most scrutinized arms of the federal government.
The effort is a key part of President Biden's economic agenda, which aims to reduce the nation's $ 7 trillion of uncollected tax revenue and use the funds to combat climate change, curb prescription drug prices and pay for other initiatives prized by Democrats.
The plan is also at the heart of the White House's goal of making tax administration fairer. The report indicates that more than half the new money will be dedicated to ensuring that rich investors and large corporations cannot avoid paying the taxes that they owe.
The $ 80 billion is the largest single infusion of funds in the agency's history and was included in the Inflation Reduction Act, the sweeping climate and energy legislation that Democrats pushed through last year.
According to the Biden administration, the investment will yield hundreds of billions of dollars in deficit reduction. But efforts to bolster the I.R.S. have drawn strong opposition from Republicans, who have long accused the agency of improperly targeting them.
The report released Thursday was requested by Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen, whose department oversees the tax agency.
In a memorandum to Ms. Yellen that accompanied the report, Daniel I. Werfel, the new I.R.S. commissioner, said he would focus new enforcement resources on "hiring the accountants, attorneys and data scientists needed to pursue high-income and high-wealth individuals, complex partnerships and large corporations that are not paying the taxes they owe."
The I.R.S. has about 80,000 full-time employees, about 20 percent fewer than it had in 2010 even though the U.S. population is now larger and the tax system more complex. The agency's resources have also declined over the years, as Republicans have sought to cut its funding and, in some cases, called for its abolition. The financial strain has led to backlogs of tax filings, delayed refunds, long waits for taxpayers who call the agency with questions and plunging audit rates.
In recent months, the I.R.S. has ramped up hiring to improve its customer service capacity and has been racing to complete the processing of old tax returns, most of which were filed on paper rather than electronically.
The plan released on Thursday details how the I.R.S. intends to become a "digital first" organization that provides "world class" service to taxpayers. That includes the replacement of antiquated technology and the introduction of systems that will allow taxpayers greater access to their financial information, easier communication with the I.R.S. and new ways to correct errors as returns are being filed.
The most sweeping and politically sensitive changes involve enforcement. The I.R.S. plans to introduce more data analytics and machine-learning technology to better detect cheating, and it aims to bolster its teams of revenue agents and tax attorneys so that the agency is not overwhelmed when auditing complicated business partnerships or corporations.
The I.R.S. plan repeatedly emphasizes that it will honor Ms. Yellen's directive that the new money not be aimed at increasing audit rates for taxpayers who earn less than $ 400,000 a year -- a pledge meant to align with Mr. Biden's promise not to raise taxes on low- and middle-income Americans. The plan echoes Ms. Yellen's assurance that those audit rates will not rise above "historical levels," but does not specify the levels, suggesting that audit rates could rise above their existing levels.
In a briefing for reporters on Thursday, however, Mr. Werfel said that in the near term, audit rates for those making less than $ 400,000 would not rise.
"We have years of work ahead of us, where we will be 100 percent focused on building capacity for higher-income individuals and corporations," he said.
But Janet Holtzblatt, a senior fellow at the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center, said it would be a challenge for the I.R.S. to determine whether taxpayers reporting an income under $ 400,000 were doing so legitimately, without being able to audit some of them initially. Ultimately, she said, the agency will need to decide on an acceptable audit rate for people under that income level.
Mr. Werfel acknowledged that the I.R.S. would have to be alert in instances when taxpayers earn, for example, $ 5 million in a given year and $ 399,000 a year later.
"We might take a second look at that," he said.
The plan lays out benchmarks for many of its goals, but it leaves unanswered questions.
The I.R.S. is in the midst of a $ 15 million study to determine if it can create its own system enabling more taxpayers to file their federal returns online at no cost. This idea has met resistance from lobbying groups representing the tax preparation industry.
The agency has faced criticism this year after the publication of a study that showed Black taxpayers are at least three times as likely as other taxpayers to face I.R.S. audits, even after the study accounted for the differences in the types of returns that each group is most likely to file. The plan includes using data to support "equity analyses" and says a key project will be developing procedures to evaluate the fairness of I.R.S. systems.
The Treasury Department said earlier that the investment in the I.R.S. would lead to the hiring of 87,000 employees over 10 years, and has suggested that with anticipated attrition its head count could top 110,000 by the end of the decade. But the operating plan does not give an estimate for the agency's eventual head count, and Wally Adeyemo, the deputy Treasury secretary, said on Thursday that I.R.S. did not want to be "locked in" to long-term hiring requirements before learning how new technology would affect its staffing needs.
Mr. Werfel batted down claims by Republican lawmakers that the I.R.S. would be hiring thousands of armed "agents" to scrutinize middle-class taxpayers and small businesses. He said that only 3 percent of the I.R.S. work force was in the criminal investigations division, which has access to weapons, and that there were no plans to increase that percentage. The plan projects that the I.R.S. will hire more than 7,000 new enforcement employees over the next two years.
Despite efforts to focus on technology and taxpayers services, the plan is likely to stoke criticism.
Erin M. Collins, the national taxpayer advocate, wrote in a blog post on Thursday that the plan had the potential to transform tax administration but that the money was disproportionately invested in enforcement.
"I believe Congress should reallocate I.R.S. funding to achieve a better balance with taxpayer service needs and IT modernization," Ms. Collins, who serves as a watchdog for the I.R.S., wrote.
The report notes that if the agency's annual funding is curtailed over the coming years, some of the $ 80 billion might be needed to maintain its basic operations. That would force the I.R.S. to scale back its overhaul.
House Republicans in January voted to pare the allocation, and Republican reaction to the report on Thursday indicated that the political fight over the I.R.S. will only intensify.
"The Democrats are further weaponizing the most-feared agency in all of the federal government: the IRS," Representative Mike Kelly, Republican of Pennsylvania and a member of the House Ways and Means Committee, said on Twitter. "Make no mistake -- we are using money from hardworking American taxpayers to go after hardworking American taxpayers."
Former Gov. Nikki Haley of South Carolina, a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, said on Twitter, "Does anyone believe the IRS won't go after middle America?"
Photograph Daniel I. Werfel, the new I.R.S. commissioner, said the overhaul was intended to help collect unpaid taxes from the wealthy and big corporations. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHURAN HUANG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A14)
