Some years are defined by a single event or person -- a pandemic, a recession, an insurrection -- while others are buffeted by
a series of disparate forces. Such was 2023. The economy, inflation and the war in Ukraine remained front of mind until the war
in Gaza grabbed headlines and the world's attention -- all while Donald Trump's candidacy loomed in the background.
Inflation Fell, Incomes Rose
Americans fretted about rising prices even as inflation subsided significantly. In fact, the prices of some goods actually fell. Gasoline dropped to an average of $ 3.12 a gallon from a high of $ 5.02 a gallon in June 2022. By November, real incomes were 2.7 percent above their January 2021 levels. Moreover, inequality narrowed as those at the bottom saw their wages rise faster than those at the top.
The Economy Exceeded Expectations
Americans were also not moved by the surprising abundance of positive economic news. The economy was projected to lose 10,400 jobs a month. It gained an average of 232,000 a month instead. More than 80 percent of economists predicted that 2023 would end in a recession. Instead, the economy is likely to have expanded by a remarkable 3 percent.
Workers Struck Back
The combination of the robust American jobs machine and rising prices led workers to demand better pay to an extent not seen in more than two decades. From actors to hotel employees and autoworkers, Americans took to the picket lines. Through November, workers spent almost 17 million days on strike. While the disputes were mostly about pay, other concerns bubbled up, principally around potential job losses from technological advances.
Poor Presidential Approval
Usually a strong economy buoys an incumbent president. Not during 2023. President Biden's approval rating ended the year at just 39 percent, the lowest of any modern incumbent at this point in his tenure. Why? Two of many complex reasons stand out to me. First, for two-thirds of voting-age Americans, the recent inflation is the highest of their adult lifetimes. And second, two decades of subpar income growth threatens the idea that each successive generation will live better than the previous one.
Trump's Multiple Indictments
Of course, Donald Trump remained a dominant political figure, despite his indictments on 91 counts. His dominance of the field of Republican presidential aspirants increased to 61 percent in the most recent polls, up from 45 percent at the beginning of the year. And each round of indictments brought a surge of fund-raising receipts. For example, Mr. Trump raised a stunning $ 13 million in the seven days after his New York indictment.
G.O.P. Chaos
Congress set a new low bar for itself. In the House of Representatives, Kevin McCarthy fought through 15 ballots -- the most since the years before the Civil War -- to become speaker and then lasted just 270 days in the role. That contributed to Congress notching its most unproductive year in modern history, with just 27 bills clearing both chambers and the White House. In comparison, the previous Congress passed more than 70 bills in its first year, and the Trumanera "Do Nothing" Congress approved almost 400 bills in its first few months.
The Hottest Year on Record
Global temperatures notched another record high in 2023. From flooding in California to hailstorms in Texas, there were a record number of billion-dollar disaster claims in the United States. Farther afield, Antarctic sea ice hit a record low. In the U.S., passage of the biggest climate package ever in 2022 spurred a jump in construction of renewable energy facilities. But emissions continued to rise globally, largely from faster-growing developing countries, particularly China and India.
Israel and Gaza
Economics and politics notwithstanding, the most significant event of the year was the war in the Middle East, which after just three months may be the deadliest Arab-Israeli conflict since 1948. Israelis and nonIsraelis alike were staggered by the ability of Hamas to launch such a sophisticated surprise attack and by Israel's intense military response against Gaza. Public opinion in America, squarely on the Israeli side at the outset, began to shift, particularly among the young.
Surge at the Border
The flood of migrants seeking to cross our southern border surged to record levels, creating a political crisis for Mr. Biden. Misinformation added to the commotion. The 2.5 million "encounters" in the 2023 fiscal year cited in press reports were the number of migrants apprehended by U.S. Customs and Border Protection. Roughly one million of them were released inside the U.S. to await hearings in our underfunded and backlogged immigration courts, creating challenges for New York and other cities to which many traveled.
A.I. Got (a Lot) Smarter
After the debut of OpenAI's ChatGPT in late 2022, artificial intelligence went mainstream. Concerns quickly emerged, ranging from job losses to accidental nuclear war. Still, I think A.I. has the potential to accelerate our flagging productivity growth, raising the prospect of lifting lagging wage growth. The A.I. revolution showed no sign of slowing: The first version of GPT, developed in 2018, had 117 million parameters; GPT-4, released last year, had a trillion, according to a report by Semafor.
Mr. Rattner was counselor to the Treasury secretary in the Obama administration. Ms. Maggiacomo is a graphics editor in Times Opinion. Eric Krebs provided research.
Illustration
