U.S. stock indexes drifted lower Tuesday in the run-up to the highlight of the week for the market: the latest update on inflation that's coming on Wednesday.
The S&P 500 dipped 0.3 percent, a day after pulling back from its latest high. They're the first back-to-back losses for the index in nearly a month, as momentum slows after a big rally that has it on track for one of its best years of the millennium.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 154 points, or 0.3 percent, and the Nasdaq composite slipped 0.3 percent.
The tech titan Oracle dragged on the market, sinking 6.7 percent after reporting growth for the latest quarter that fell just short of analysts' expectations. It was one of the heaviest weights on the S&P 500, even though its chief executive, Safra Catz, said the company saw record demand related to artificial-intelligence technology for its cloud infrastructure business, which trains generative A.I. models.
A.I. has been a big source of growth that's helped many companies' stock prices skyrocket. Oracle's stock had already leaped more than 80 percent for the year coming into Tuesday, which raised the bar of expectations for its profit report.
In the bond market, Treasury yields ticked higher ahead of Wednesday's report on the inflation that U.S. consumers are feeling. Economists expect it to show similar increases as the month before.
Wednesday's update and a report on Thursday about inflation at the wholesale level will be the final big pieces of data the Federal Reserve will get before its meeting next week, where many investors expect the year's third cut to interest rates.
The Fed has been easing its main interest rate from a two-decade high since September to take pressure off the slowing jobs market, after bringing inflation nearly down to its 2 percent target. Lower rates would help give support to the economy, but they could also fuel inflation.
Expectations for a series of cuts through next year have been a big reason the S&P 500 has set so many records this year.
Trading in the options market suggests traders aren't expecting a very big move for U.S. stocks after Wednesday's report, according to strategists at Barclays. But a reading far from expectations in either direction could quickly change that.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 4.23 percent from 4.20 percent late Monday.
Even though the Fed has been cutting its main interest rate, mortgage rates have stubbornly remained high and have been volatile since the autumn. That has hampered the housing industry, and the homebuilder Toll Brothers' stock fell 6.9 percent even though it delivered profit and revenue for the latest quarter that topped analysts' expectations.
The chief executive, Douglas Yearley Jr., said the luxury builder has been seeing strong demand since the start of its fiscal year six weeks ago, an encouraging signal as it approaches the beginning of the spring selling season in mid-January.
Alaska Air Group soared 13.2 percent after raising its forecast for profit in the current quarter. The airline said demand for flying around the holidays has been stronger than expected. It also approved a plan to buy back up to $ 1 billion of its stock.
Boeing climbed 4.5 percent after saying it's resuming production of its best-selling plane, the 737 Max, for the first time since 33,000 workers began a seven-week strike that ended in early November.
Vail Resorts rose 2.5 percent after the ski resort operator reported a smaller first-quarter loss than analysts expected in what is traditionally its worst quarter.
In stock markets abroad, indexes were mixed in China after the world's second-largest economy said its exports rose by less than expected in November. Stocks rose 0.6 percent in Shanghai but fell 0.5 percent in Hong Kong.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
