Hoping to bring imaging technology to medical diagnosis capabilities, IBM is buying Merge Healthcare for $1 billion.
IBM is adding medical images to the health data its Watson artificial-intelligence technology can mine to help doctors make diagnoses.
The company announced Thursday morning that it was buying Merge Healthcare, a medical-imaging software company, for $1 billion. When IBM established its Watson health business in April, it began with a couple of smaller medical-data acquisitions, as well as partnerships with Apple, Johnson & Johnson and Medtronic.
Last week, IBM announced a partnership with CVS Health, the large pharmacy chain, to develop data-driven services to help people with chronic ailments like diabetes and heart disease better manage their health.
But the purchase of Merge Healthcare is both a sizable investment and an additional resource for IBM's new Watson health unit. "We're bringing Watson and analytics to the largest data set in health care -- images," said John Kelly, IBM's senior vice president for research, who oversees the Watson business.
Images like CT scans, X-rays and mammograms, IBM researchers estimate, represent about 90 percent of all medical data today. The images and a patient's electronic health records are typically separate. So, for example, a radiologist might examine thousands of patient images a day, but is looking only for abnormalities on the images themselves rather than also taking into account a person's medical history, treatments and drug regimens.
"Watson will be able to understand both," Mr. Kelly said.
The Watson artificial-intelligence technology has mainly been applied to analyzing text in documents and on the web.
It employed this natural-language processing capability initially in its highly publicized demonstration project, beating human champions in the question-and-answer game "Jeopardy!" in 2011.
But for the last two years, Mr. Kelly said, IBM researchers at its labs in Yorktown Heights, N.Y., and in San Jose, Calif., have been training Watson's artificial-intelligence engine in image recognition. "We've been giving Watson eyes, so to speak," he said.
Merge Healthcare, based in Chicago, specializes in software for storing, viewing and sharing medical images. Its technology is used by a wide array of health care providers and imaging-equipment makers, and its rights to use the archived images varies according to customer requirements, and state and federal health privacy rules.
Merge Healthcare is the third medical data company IBM has acquired since setting up the Watson health business. In April, it agreed to buy two start-ups: Explorys, a spinoff from the Cleveland Clinic, whose data on 50 million patients is used to spot patterns in diseases, treatments and outcomes; and Phytel, a maker of software to manage patient care and reduce readmission rates to hospitals.
