Stocks rose Tuesday after a cooler reading on inflation cemented Wall Street's bets for the Federal Reserve to hold off on raising interest rates this week.
The S&P 500 ended 0.7 percent higher, ticking further into heights it hasn't touched since April 2022. The Dow Jones industrial average was up 0.4 percent, while the Nasdaq composite was 0.8 percent higher.
The stock market has been on a roll as investors hope the economy can avoid a severe recession and inflation will fall enough for the Federal Reserve to take it easier on its rate increases. Tuesday's report showed that food, fuel and other prices for consumers were 4 percent higher in May than a year earlier, the latest slowdown from its peak above 9 percent last summer.
The data pushed traders to immediately amp up bets for the Fed on Wednesday to announce no change to interest rates. If it does, that would be the first meeting in more than a year where it doesn't raise rates.
The Fed has already pulled its benchmark short-term rate up to its highest level since 2007, which has slowed inflation but has also helped cause several U.S. bank failures and a contraction in the manufacturing industry.
Oracle was one of the biggest forces pushing the S&P 500 higher after it reported stronger profit for the latest quarter than expected. It climbed 1.1 percent, as it also announced plans to develop artificial-intelligence services for organizations.
A rush into A.I. has pushed a select group of stocks to huge gains this year, driving much of the stock market's rally. Nvidia rose 3.2 percent Tuesday to raise its gain for the year to 178 percent. That has raised concerns about a possible bubble, though supporters say A.I. is the next revolution to remake the economy.
A survey of global fund managers by Bank of America found the majority believe widespread adoption of A.I. in the next two years would increase profits, according to a BofA Global Research report.
That survey, though, also said the majority of fund managers believe the Fed is still not done increasing interest rates. Many traders expect the Fed to resume raising rates in July, even if it holds steady this week.
Tuesday's inflation report showed that not only is overall inflation still too high, so are prices underneath the surface. The Fed prefers to look at inflation after stripping out food, fuel and housing costs, hoping to get a better view of where the trend is heading. Such "supercore" inflation is still above the Fed's comfort level.
The worry is that additional increases by the Fed will mean more pressure on the banking system when it has already cracked under the weight of much higher rates. Bank customers are pulling their deposits in search of higher yields at money-market funds. At the same time, high rates are knocking down the values of bonds that banks bought and other investments they made when rates were low.
Three high-profile bank failures since March have shaken confidence in the system, and that has caused some banks to make it tougher for households and businesses to get loans. That puts additional brakes on the economy, raising the risk of a recession.
Zions Bancorp fell 2.1 percent after it appeared to cut its forecast for upcoming net interest income to "decreasing" from "moderately decreasing."
Just two weeks remain until the start of the third quarter of the year. Many investors came into this year predicting a recession would hit by the third quarter, yet the job market has remained remarkably resilient and propped up the economy.
In the bond market, yields initially dropped after the inflation report, but later recovered. The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 3.76 percent from 3.74 percent late Monday. It helps set rates for mortgages and other important loans.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
