As London Fashion Week picks up steam this weekend, with all its traffic, sharp elbows and celebrities, one woman is going to come in for unusually serious scrutiny: her every facial twitch parsed, outfits obsessively chronicled, show schedule observed.
Tanned and lithe, with a close crop of mahogany curls, she is Yasmin Sewell, the 40-year-old Australian-born, London-based fashion director of Style.com, Condé Nast's multimillion-dollar foray into e-commerce.
You couldn't have picked a better poster girl if you'd Photoshopped her from Vogue.
The former wife of a movie star (her last name is thanks to a brief marriage to the British actor Rufus Sewell in the 1990s), she has more than 100,000 followers on Instagram and a social circle of fellow street-style stars like the editors Caroline Issa and Laura Brown, not to mention the designers Roksanda Ilincic and Jonathan Saunders.
Ms. Sewell lives in the London Fields section of Hackney with her husband, Kyle Robinson, and their young sons, Knox and Renzo; fits in the odd yoga and Pilates session when she can; and says her favorite hobby is "getting people together, cooking and hosting big dinners."
Like Sarah Rutson, the vice president for global buying at Net-a-Porter, whose impeccable wardrobe and original style are a major inspiration for the wealthy, fashion-conscious demographic for whom she shops, Ms. Sewell is the idealized-yet-accessible embodiment of the retail brand she now represents.
It's a crucial role because the new Style.com is a reconfigured version of the much-loved old Style.com, the encyclopedic digital home of all Condé Nast runway coverage.
And though the site debuted to fanfare in Britain earlier this month, with the rollout set to continue in Europe and the United States later this year, it is an untested addition to the e-commerce landscape. It potentially blurs the already eroding line between editorial and commercial in a discomfiting way, but also could serve as a model for other publishing companies.
"We are very different from the original Style.com, of course, but I think fans of the old site will see that core motivation has remained the same," Ms. Sewell said. "It's just we have made the focus shopping instead."
Ms. Sewell, a known (or at least oft-photographed) quantity to many of the site's users, demystifies the change and gives it literal shape and personality.
"Yasmin is a distinctive voice in the fashion world, with a wide follower base and strong pre-existing relationships with lots of designers and brands," Franck Zayan, the president of Style.com and a former head of e-commerce at the Parisian luxury department store Galeries Lafayette, said in a telephone interview last week. "She is a prototype of the sort of shopper we are looking to attract."
Turns out she thought so, too. Mr. Zayan initially approached her about some part-time branding work, but "I was just very upfront with him. I said straight out, 'Do you need a fashion director?'" Ms. Sewell said over lunch in North London a few days before the site's debut.
Clad in ripped Vetements jeans, Prada platforms and a graphic Herculie white T-shirt, she was full of polished enthusiasm. "For a while they weren't sure, and if anything I was almost pursuing them," Ms. Sewell said. "But then the offer came and it was full-time and I thought, 'My life has just completely changed.'"
Ms. Sewell moved to Britain from Sydney at the age of 20 and two years later, in 1999, started a Soho boutique called Yasmin Cho, attracting celebrities like Madonna and Kylie Minogue and attention from rivals. But while her creative instincts were honed, she lacked commercial experience; the store closed and she retreated home to Australia.
A call from Joan Burstein, the owner of the London concept store Browns and a doyenne of the luxury buying scene, brought her back to run Browns Focus, a younger, edgier sibling to the main store. Later, she became the main store's buying director.
In 2009 she went freelance, consulting for J. W. Anderson and Moda Operandi, among others, and four years ago she and her husband introduced their own clothing label, Être Cécile, all Parisian-inspired tees, tanks and sweatshirts. She has now stepped back from its day-to-day operations, however, as she has other issues on her plate.
At Style.com, Ms. Sewell is responsible for everything from selecting the brands featured (now around 150, though notable omissions, like Prada, Versace and Alexander McQueen, caused more than a few raised eyebrows at the site's unveiling and still prompt whispers) to identifying key seasonal trends, and for compiling articles from Condé Nast's magazines for the site.
Currently the only titles involved are British Vogue and GQ -- screen-grab-style shots of their pages sit on the slick, monochrome Style.com site, which a user can click through to find products. But in time Ms. Sewell hopes to feature all of the group's publications, broadening offerings beyond fashion to include food, wine and travel.
Her team also can select brand-created content to feature, and is developing collaborations with partners including Burberry, Chloé and Vetements. And hefty investment has gone into incorporating artificial intelligence tools into the site, which will, over time, "learn" what each shopper wants to see and then make specific recommendations, à la Netflix or Spotify.
But unlike its rival Net-a-Porter, Style.com doesn't hold any inventory. (Style.com gets a cut of the sale price, though it would not specify how much, and the amount varies from brand to brand.)
"Content can be bolder and braver when we don't handle stock," Ms. Sewell said. "But it is also fantastic for brands whose online businesses are still small, who don't have access to the clients we do, or can't afford to create the content. Because we're owned by Condé Nast, there is this trust there that the product will be shown in a beautiful, credible way."
But therein also lies the rub. Questions have surfaced around what this means for the credibility of the articles on the site, since if an e-commerce business gets a slice of a sale, the bigger the sale, the bigger its profits. That could create pressure for magazines to feature pricier goods in order to bolster the bottom line.
"When it comes to Vogue or GQ, I have absolutely no say on what they do or who they talk about," Ms. Sewell said. "I have no influence whatsoever on their editorial strategy," she added, her smile tightening, as she reached for her sunglasses.
With increased competition from new digital publications over the last decade, alongside an industrywide plunge in advertising spending, it is little surprise that Condé Nast is intent on cultivating new revenue streams. In recent years it has widened its focus, from magazine publishing to more varied media initiatives, with minority stakes in several fashion e-commerce start-ups, including Vestiaire Collective, Rent the Runway and Farfetch.
But Style.com is its first fully owned venture, with 50 percent held by the United States-based Condé Nast and the other half by the British-based Condé Nast International. Concerns were raised after the site's introduction was repeatedly pushed back, and there were rumors of repeated personnel changes circling around London's tech scene.
Now that it's finally live, the big question is: Will it work?
Lauren Kaufman Witten, the vice president for retail and luxury at L2, a research and advisory firm for consumer brands, is not sure. "It is not an easy business to scale," she said.
"No one has the answers, but it's an exciting time to be in fashion," Ms. Sewell said. "The entire industry is in an intense period of flux. In 20 years in the business, I have never known anything like it. But you've got to be game for change, haven't you? I'm not nervous at all. Bring it on."
Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion and Weddings) and Instagram.
Credit: By ELIZABETH PATON
