1. Damar Hamlin, a safety for the Buffalo Bills, collapsed after making a tackle during a Monday night game. What did the N.F.L. do in response?
Announced a new policy banning tackling
Canceled the remainder of the season
Continued the game after 30 minutes
Ordered broadcasters not to air footage of the tackle
Postponed and then canceled the game
2. Representative Matt Gaetz, a Florida Republican, said the following this week. Whom was he referring to? "Maybe the right person for the job of speaker of the House isn't someone who wants it so bad."
Donald Trump
Hakeem Jeffries, a New York Democrat
Kevin McCarthy, a California Republican
Liz Cheney, a Republican former congresswoman
Nancy Pelosi
3. Before this week, when was the last time the House of Representatives failed to elect a speaker on the first ballot?
1776
1856
1923
1995
2021
4. The police arrested a suspect last week in the killings of four students in which college town?
Ames, Iowa
Eugene, Ore.
New Haven, Conn.
Madison, Wis.
Moscow, Idaho
5. A Ukrainian rocket strike killed dozens of Russian soldiers on New Year's Day. What did Russian officials blame for revealing the troops' position?
A newly launched Turkish satellite
An American spy who infiltrated the platoon
Cigarette smoke spotted from a distance
Discarded wrappers from field rations
The use of cellphones by their own soldiers
6. A former pope (pictured above), born Joseph Ratzinger in 1927, died last Saturday at 95. Which name did he adopt as pope?
Anthony II
Benedict XVI
Francis
Henry VIII
John Paul III
7. Which show is closing after a 29-year run in New York City's East Village?
"Avenue Q"
"Blue Man Group"
"Sleep No More"
"Stomp"
"The Phantom of the Opera"
8. Several new state laws went into effect at the start of the year. Which of the following was not one of them?
California decriminalized jaywalking.
Massachusetts made it a crime to use ChatGPT on homework.
Ohio legalized sports betting.
Oregon legalized adult use of "magic" mushrooms.
Pennsylvania legalized the possession of switchblade knives.
9. The Food and Drug Administration said on Tuesday that U.S. retail pharmacies would be allowed to offer ___________ with a prescription. Fill in the blank.
Abortion pills
Alzheimer's drugs
Botox
Hair-loss treatment drugs
Paxlovid
10. The European Union fined Meta $ 414 million this week. What did the social media giant do that the bloc ruled to be illegal?
Facebook allowed children under 13 years old to purchase cryptocurrency.
Facebook and Instagram effectively forced users to accept personalized ads.
Facebook and Instagram sold users' images as stock photos.
Instagram deleted accounts of users who were critical of Prince Harry.
The company's Oculus VR hardware often burst into flames.
The News Quiz is published on Fridays in the Morning newsletter. To sign up, visit nytimes.com/themorning. Solutions: 1. E; 2. C; 3. C; 4. E; 5. E; 6. B; 7. D; 8. B; 9. A; 10. B.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOMENICO STINELLIS/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
