Stocks on Wall Street finished broadly higher Friday as the market closed out its fourth straight winning month with solid gains.
A late-afternoon rally helped stocks bounce back from a midafternoon slide. The S&P 500 rose 1 percent, with about 76 percent of the stocks in the index notching gains.
The benchmark S&P 500 closed August with a 2.3 percent gain for the month. It's now up 18.4 percent so far this year and is within 0.4 percent of the all-time high it set in July.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 0.6 percent, setting its fourth all-time high this week.
The Nasdaq composite ended 1.1 percent higher.
Wall Street spent the day mulling over encouraging reports on inflation, consumer spending and income.
The Commerce Department said its personal consumption and expenditures report showed prices rose just 0.2 percent from June to July, up slightly from the previous month's 0.1 percent increase. Compared with a year earlier, inflation was unchanged at 2.5 percent.
Economists had expected the PCE, which is the Federal Reserve's preferred measure of inflation, would to show that inflation edged up to 2.6 percent in July. It was as high as 7.1 percent in the middle of 2022.
The report confirms price increases are cooling, keeping the central bank on track to cut rates for the first time in more than four years at its upcoming meeting next month. The market is betting that the Fed will cut its benchmark rate by a full 1 percent by the end of the year.
"Weakening inflation gives the Fed plenty of room to begin cutting rates, while still resilient household spending is the recipe for a soft landing," said David Alcaly, lead macroeconomic strategist at Lazard Asset Management.
Bond yields were mixed in the Treasury market. The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 3.92 percent from 3.86 percent late Thursday.
Technology stocks led the market. Marvell Technology climbed 9.2 percent after its latest quarterly results hit Wall Street's sales and profit targets. Other chipmakers also rose. Broadcom added 3.8 percent and Nvidia gained 1.5 percent.
Dell also beat analysts' second-quarter forecasts, boosted by record server and networking revenue as companies continue to beef up their artificial intelligence infrastructure. Its shares rose 4.3 percent.
Mall-based cosmetics retailer Ulta Beauty fell 4 percent after its sales and profit fell short of expectations. Ulta also trimmed its guidance below analysts' forecasts. Warren Buffet's Berkshire Hathaway revealed it holds a stake in the company earlier this month.
All told, the S&P 500 rose 56.44 points to 5,648.40. The Dow rose 228.03 points to close at 41,563.08. The Nasdaq gained 197.19 points to 17,713.62.
Mostly solid U.S. earnings and economic growth updates capped off a month of encouraging reports for the broader economy. Data from various reports in August have shown that retail sales, employment and consumer confidence remain strong.
Friday's Commerce Department report also showed that Americans stepped up their spending by a vigorous 0.5 percent from June to July, up from 0.3 percent the previous month, and incomes rose 0.3 percent, faster in July than in the previous month.
The trends have encouraged Wall Street. Still, stocks have historically done poorly in September.
Investors will be looking for clues on the Fed's next move next Friday, when the government serves up its latest monthly jobs report. Economists polled by FactSet are expecting the economy added 155,000 jobs in August.
U.S. stock exchanges will be closed Monday for the Labor Day holiday.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
