MINING
Coal Giants Combine Their Western Operations
Two of the world's largest coal producers have announced they will combine mining operations in Wyoming and Colorado in an attempt to improve their competitiveness against natural gas and renewable energy sources.
Arch Coal and Peabody Energy are based in St. Louis and announced the joint venture on Wednesday.
It will be 66.5 percent owned by Peabody and 33.5 percent owned by Arch.
The companies say the deal requiring approval from regulators could save about $ 120 million annually in mostly operational costs over 10 years.
The plan involves the North Antelope Rochelle, Black Thunder, Caballo, Rawhide and Coal Creek mines in Wyoming and the West Elk and Twentymile mines in Colorado.
The mines employed about 3,300 workers in 2018.
The companies gave no guidance on future employment levels. ASSOCIATED PRESS
TRANSPORTATION
Harley-Davidson to Build Small Motorcycle in China
Harley-Davidson will partner with China's Qianjiang Motorcycle Company to build a smaller motorcycle, making good on promises to move more production outside the United States that have angered President Trump.
Mr. Trump threatened to impose higher taxes on Harley after it made plans to move some production overseas, part of a strategy for dealing with lower sales in the United States and higher costs because of tariffs.
The partnership Harley outlined on Wednesday is aimed both at taking a bigger chunk of China's huge motorcycle and moped market, while also cutting costs and sourcing half of all sales outside the United States by 2027.
The new motorcycle would have an engine displacement of 338 cubic centimeters, one of the smallest in the company's 116- year old history, and would be sold in China from the end of 2020. Harley's existing range of motorcycles generally come with high price tags and engine capacities of more than 601 cubic centimeters. REUTERS
EDUCATION
Blackstone Chief Donates $ 188 Million to Oxford
The head of the private equity firm Blackstone has pledged 150 million pounds, or $ 188.37 million, to Oxford University in England, the biggest single donation in its history, to fund a center for humanities that would also house an institute to study the ethics of artificial intelligence.
Stephen Schwarzman, the chief executive of Blackstone, which has about $ 500 billion in assets, said the donation would fund the Schwarzman Center that would support programs ranging from history to music.
The center will also house a new Institute for Ethics in Artificial Intelligence.
New facilities funded by the donation would include a 500-seat concert hall and a 250-seat auditorium.
Schwarzman has also donated to American universities, including $ 350 million to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and $ 150 million to Yale. He founded a $ 575 million international scholarship program in 2013 at China's Tsinghua University. REUTERS
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Credit: By REUTERS and THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY MATTHEW BROWN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
