The performance artist will take viewers to the moon as part of the Public Theater's next lineup of international artists.
It has been a point of interest for Galileo and Frank Sinatra, Wallace and Gromit and Damien Chazelle. And now, the moon will be the subject of two pieces featured on the lineup of the 2020 Under the Radar Festival, which was announced by the Public Theater on Thursday.
The festival runs Jan. 8-19 at the Public and other venues around the city. Among the works it will present are "To the Moon," an immersive piece by the musician, writer and performance artist Laurie Anderson and the artist Hsin-Chien Huang that gives viewers a virtual trip to the moon, and "Grey Rock," a play from the writer-director Amir Nizar Zuabi about a Palestinian man who decides to build a rocket in his shed, with the goal of reaching the moon.
Zuabi's play is one of many works from overseas that will be at the festival, which is known for bringing artists from around the globe.
"My goal each year is to keep it alive, keep it fresh," the festival's director, Mark Russell, said in a phone interview. "This year seemed to go in a more international direction than past years."
The Australian company Back to Back Theater will present "The Shadow Whose Prey the Hunter Becomes," a play about a group of activists with intellectual disabilities meeting to discuss subjects like automation, artificial intelligence and food production. The company has long presented work by artists with intellectual disabilities.
"Salt," a show written by the U.K.-based theater artist Selina Thompson, is the product of a trip Thompson took on the Atlantic Ocean, where she followed a route once navigated by slave ships.
And "Andares," from the Mexican company Makuyeika Colectivo Teatral, explores issues faced by indigenous people in Mexico.
The festival will also present "Susan," a performance from the American trumpeter and comic Ahamefule J. Oluo that blends music and stand-up, the Movement Theater Company's production of Aleshea Harris's dance-infused play "What to Send Up When It Goes Down" and much more.
This will be the 16th edition of the Under the Radar Festival, which is intended to be a platform for emerging artists.
"Most of them are honing their voices to talk about the future and the way that they're looking at the world," Russell said. "We rely on our artists to imagine a different world, imagine a world going forward. And that's what these artists are doing."
A full lineup is available at publictheater.org.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEROME FAVRE/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)
