1. After weeks of anticipation, Israel began its ground invasion into northern Gaza. What aspect of the war -- one that Israelis refer to as the "metro" -- did experts say may have contributed to the delay?
A black market within the Israeli military
An Egypt-Gaza border crossing
A malfunctioning fleet of Israeli armored vehicles
A public transit system in southern Israel
A tunnel network under Gaza
2. Which categories of people did an international agreement allow to leave Gaza this week? Select all that apply.
Foreign passport holders
Journalists
International organization workers
Refugees of the 1948 war
Seriously injured people
3. President Biden announced an attempt to govern the fast-moving world of artificial intelligence by doing what?
Issuing an executive order to set requirements for companies
Blocking a merger between OpenAI and Microsoft
Banning ChatGPT
Setting an age limit
Blocking the use of A.I. in schools
4. The Beatles released what they said was their final song, "Now and Then," with parts recorded over several decades. Which member recorded the vocals in the 1970s?
John Lennon
Paul McCartney
George Harrison
Ringo Starr
5. The Texas Rangers won the World Series, defeating the Arizona Diamondbacks. Who is the Rangers' star shortstop, this year's World Series M.V.P.?
Bryce Harper
Carlos Correa
Corey Seager
Shohei Ohtani
Trea Turner
6. Which model, famous for her annual Halloween bash in New York City, is pictured above?
Heidi Klum
Cindy Crawford
Bella Hadid
Kate Moss
Ashley Graham
7. The United Automobile Workers union reached tentative contract deals with Ford, General Motors and Stellantis. What did the union's president signal it should do next?
Endorse Donald J. Trump for president
Endorse President Biden for re-election
Reject the deals as insufficient
Return to the bargaining table next year
Seek to organize nonunion carmakers like Tesla
8. Which candidate dropped out of the 2024 presidential race last weekend?
Vivek Ramaswamy
Donald J. Trump
Nikki Haley
Mike Pence
Dean Phillips
9. Matthew Perry, the "Friends" star, died last week. How much did Perry and his co-stars eventually earn for their work on the show?
$ 500,000 per episode
$ 800,000 per episode
$ 1 million per episode
$ 2 million per episode
$ 5 million per episode
10. A panel of experts said on Tuesday that the first medical treatment to use the CRISPR gene-editing technology was safe enough for clinical use. What condition does it treat?
Covid
Sickle cell disease
Hemophilia
Ribose-5-phosphate isomerase deficiency
Benign essential blepharospasm
11. Elon Musk bought Twitter for $ 44 billion last year. What was the company, now called X, worth as of this week?
About $ 66 billion
About $ 44 billion
About $ 39 billion
About $ 19 billion
About $ 4 billion
The News Quiz is published on Fridays in the Morning newsletter. To sign up, visit nytimes.com/themorning. Solutions: 1. E; 2. A, C and E; 3. A; 4. A; 5. C; 6. A; 7. E; 8. D; 9. C; 10. B; 11. D.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTA SCHLUETER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
