Stocks clung to modest gains on Wall Street on Friday, enough to edge the S&P 500 index to another record high and its sixth winning week in the last seven. Weakness in some technology companies including Apple nudged the Nasdaq composite slightly lower. A pullback by travel-related companies also checked gains elsewhere in the market.
The S&P 500 inched up by less than 0.1 percent. The Nasdaq composite slipped 0.3 percent. The Dow Jones Industrial Average added 0.2 percent.
Intuitive Machines, the company that made the first U.S. lunar landing in more than 50 years, rose sharply.
A pullback by travel-related companies kept gains elsewhere in the market in check. Booking.com tumbled 10.5 percent, dragging other travel-related companies down. The online travel service beat Wall Street's fourth-quarter sales and profit targets but issued a lukewarm forecast that spooked investors. One of its rivals, Expedia Group, fell 1.9 percent.
Technology stocks were also a drag on the market in a reversal from Thursday. The sector has been a driving force of the market's rally, which started in October.
Nvidia, which crossed $ 2 trillion in market value earlier Thursday, rose 0.2 percent. A day earlier, it surged after reporting blockbuster demand for its semiconductors, which are used to power artificial intelligence applications.
Earnings remained the big focus. Ticket seller and concert promoter Live Nation rose 2.2 percent after beating analyst's revenue forecasts. Sleep Number, which sells beds and bedding products, surged 36.3 percent after beating beat Wall Street's revenue forecasts.
On the losing end, Warner Bros. Discovery fell 9.9 percent after reporting a bigger loss than Wall Street expected.
Outside of earnings, Intuitive Machines, the company that made the first U.S. lunar landing in more than 50 years, soared 19.5 percent.
Energy stocks were mostly lower as oil and natural gas prices fell. U.S. crude oil prices slumped 2.7 percent and natural gas prices fell 7.4 percent.
Treasury yields slipped. The yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 4.26 percent from 4.32 percent late Thursday.
Markets were mostly higher in Europe and Asia. Tokyo's markets were closed for a holiday, a day after they surged to an all-time high.
Investors have more big earnings to review next week as they try to get a better sense of where the economy is headed. Home improvement retailer Lowe's and discount retailer Dollar Tree will report results. Computer maker HP and electronics retailer Best Buy will also release results.
Analysts polled by FactSet expect companies in the S&P 500 to report earnings growth of just under 4 percent for the fourth quarter. Roughly 90 percent of companies in the index have already reported results. Analysts are forecasting earnings growth of 3.6 percent for the current quarter.
Wall Street will also get more economic data that could further clarify how consumers feel and whether inflation is still cooling. Business group The Conference Board will release its consumer confidence survey for February and the government will provide another update on gross domestic product during the fourth quarter.
The big focus will be on inflation data from the government's January report on personal consumption and expenditures. It is the Federal Reserve's preferred measure of inflation and is expected to cool to 2.4 percent. It peaked at 7.1 percent in June of 2022.
The Fed has been trying to tame inflation back to its target of 2 percent and data last week on consumer and wholesale prices came in hotter than Wall Street expected. That prompted Wall Street to push expectations for the central bank to start cutting its benchmark interest. Traders are now expecting the Fed to cut rates in June instead of March.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
