Stocks rallied Thursday in Wall Street's latest sharp swerve after a better-than-expected report on unemployment eased worries about the slowing economy.
The S&P 500 jumped 2.3 percent for its best day since 2022. The Dow Jones industrial average rose 1.8 percent, and the Nasdaq composite climbed 2.9 percent as Nvidia and other Big Tech stocks helped lead the way.
Treasury yields also climbed in the bond market in a signal investors are feeling less worried about the economy after a report showed fewer workers applied for unemployment benefits last week. The number was better than economists expected.
It was exactly a week ago that worse-than-expected data on unemployment claims helped inflame worries that the Federal Reserve had kept interest rates at too high of an economy-slowing level for too long in order to beat inflation. That helped send markets reeling, along with a rate increase by the Bank of Japan that sent shock waves worldwide by scrambling a favorite trade among some hedge funds.
At the worst of it, at least so far, the S&P 500 was down about 9 percent from its record high set last month. Such drops are regular occurrences on Wall Street, and "corrections" of 10 percent happen roughly every year or two.
What made this decline particularly scary was how quickly it happened. A measure of how much investors are paying to protect themselves from future drops for the S&P 500 briefly surged toward its highest level since the Covid crash of 2020.
Still, the market's swings look more like a "positioning-driven crash" caused by too many investors piling into similar trades and then exiting them together, rather than the start of a long-term downward market caused by a recession, according to strategists at BNP Paribas.
They said it looked more similar to the "flash crash" of 2010 than the 2008 global financial crisis or the 2020 recession caused by the pandemic.
"Today's jobless claims data may ease some of the concerns raised by last week's soft jobs report," said Chris Larkin, managing director, trading and investing, at E-Trade from Morgan Stanley. "But with inflation data due out next week and the stock market still working through its biggest pullback of the year, it's unclear how much this will move the sentiment needle."
In the meantime, big companies continue to turn in profit reports for the spring that are mostly better than analysts expected.
Eli Lilly jumped 9.5 percent to help lead the market after it delivered stronger profit and revenue than Wall Street had forecast.
Big Tech stocks also rose to claw back some of their sharp losses from the last month.
After a handful of them almost single-handedly drove the S&P 500 to dozens of record highs this year, the group known as the "Magnificent Seven" lost momentum last month amid criticism their prices soared too high in investors' frenzy around artificial-intelligence technology.
Nvidia, which has become the poster child for the AI trade, rose 6.1 percent to trim its loss for the week so far to 2.1 percent, and it was the day's strongest single force pushing upward on the S&P 500.
Gains of 1.7 percent for Apple and 4.2 percent for Meta Platforms were also big propellants, along with Eli Lilly.
They helped offset a drop of 11.3 percent for McKesson, which topped analysts' expectations for profit in the latest quarter but fell short on revenue. It said growth slowed in its medical-surgical business.
Bumble, the Texas-based dating app, lost more than a quarter of its value, 29.2 percent, after its forecast for revenue in the third quarter came in well below Wall Street's.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 3.99 percent from 3.95 percent late Wednesday.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
