When Trump Media began public trading in late March, its market value of close to $ 8 billion eclipsed corporations like Mattel and Alaska Airlines, promising to line the pockets of the former president, who is the largest shareholder. But the company's fortunes on Wall Street have since taken a turn: This past week, its share price slipped below $ 50, erasing more than $ 2.5 billion in a matter of days.
Now, many investors are lining up to bet on Trump Media's collapse via a practice known as "shorting." That method involves borrowing shares of a company and selling them into the market to buy them back later at a lower price, before returning the shares to the lender and pocketing the difference.
Based on its trading pattern, Trump Media looks a lot like a meme stock. Those stocks -- shares of companies whose investors may be influenced by the whims of social media -- are volatile by nature.
It is just the latest rough patch for Trump Media, the parent company of Truth Social -- the digital platform that has become Donald J. Trump's main outlet for reaching his supporters and attacking his critics -- whose path to the stock exchange has been full of twists and turns over nearly three years. Many of these challenges arose during the company's efforts to complete a merger with a special purpose acquisition company, or SPAC, to help take it public. That process involved a Securities and Exchange Commission investigation, an $ 18 million penalty and a lawsuit involving two early founders of the social media company that made its way to Delaware Chancery Court. (Not to mention two guilty pleas in an insider-trading scheme involving Trump Media's 2021 announcement about the merger.)
Mr. Trump, however, the presumptive Republican nominee for president, may have other worries on his mind. He recently had to post bonds in two separate cases, amounting to well over $ 200 million.
"Because of TikTok, I've created a community where people can feel safe asking questions about spirituality."
Sister Monica Clare, a nun in New Jersey, in an ad that is part of the social media platform's multimillion-dollar marketing blitz to oppose legislation threatening to ban it.
"Honestly, I don't like him as an individual at all. The attitude from the company definitely reflects the owner."
Raphaelle Cassens, a Los Angeles resident who gave up her Tesla Model Y last year and replaced it with an electric BMW model, partly because of her feelings about Elon Musk, Tesla's chief executive.
"The enthusiasm about large language models and ChatGPT has gone a bit overboard."
Robert Gordon, an economist at Northwestern University, who has expressed skepticism that artificial intelligence technology can give a lasting lift to productivity growth.
