Katharine Hepburn's brownies recipe in The New York Times's Cooking section holds a particular honor: A comment left on the article is the Times moderating team's all-time favorite. "This has been my go-to brownie recipe for 30 years," wrote Sydne Newberry. "In the '80s, an acquaintance in Germany to whom I brought some of the brownies, and who considered herself a great cook, asked for the recipe but was never able to get it to work. She kept asking me what she was doing wrong and I was never able to solve her problem. Eventually, she moved to the U.S. and stole my husband!"
Since late 2007, when The Times first opened comments on stories, moderators on the community desk have reviewed 16 million of them, with a current rate of about 12,000 daily, said Bassey Etim, who has been the community editor since 2014.
Every day, Mr. Etim, who oversees 12 moderators, and Marcia Loughran, the deputy community manager, decide on which articles comments should be enabled. When making that call, they take into account an article's news value and the likelihood it will generate thought-provoking reactions -- and the potential for comments that will guide reporters on other possible story ideas. "We'll try to pick stories where the comments are really going to teach you something," he said. Health stories are good bets -- "Everybody can talk about health care because everybody's been to the doctor" -- as well as contentious topics. "It helps when there can be two sides to the debate," Ms. Loughran said.
Comments sections often get a bad rap. They can be overrun by bots or trolls, devolve into personal attacks or provide a platform for conspiracy theorists. Many publications have closed them for these reasons, shifting their communities instead to social media. But with the help of its moderating team, The Times has maintained a space for thoughtful discussion.
To keep things civil, an F.A.Q. lays some ground rules: "A few things we won't tolerate: personal attacks, obscenity, vulgarity, profanity (including expletives and letters followed by dashes), commercial promotion, impersonations, name-calling, incoherence and SHOUTING." One-word comments are also unlikely to make the cut, but it is perfectly fine to criticize The Times, as long as the comment offers a cogent argument. Moderators are also told to avoid making moral judgments. Roughly 85 percent are approved.
Even with these guidelines, whether a comment should make it through isn't always clear, and the community desk uses a constantly evolving internal rulebook to interpret situations where the line is blurry. "For example, is referring to Obama as 'Obummer' in every reference name-calling, or not?" Mr. Etim said. "Don't get me wrong, insults are fine as long as they aren't about appearance, but name-calling is not, for anyone, public or private." ("Obummer" would be rejected.)
The team grappled recently with a prohibited word in an otherwise approvable comment that questioned whether "Republican prostitutes in power have sold themselves to the privileged few." One moderator thought using "prostitutes" as a noun was name-calling, said Rachel Harris, who joined the community desk in 2015. Another suggested it would be acceptable as a verb. A third argued that it would be "derogatory to use 'prostitute' in any way, because it's demeaning to prostitutes," she said. The comment was rejected.
Over time, the quality of the comments has improved as readers have become familiar with the way the community desk works, Mr. Etim said.
At the same time, with the deluge of political stories maligned as fake news, Mr. Etim has seen an uptick in the number of comments containing outright falsehoods, as well as a trend toward questioning facts. "The idea that calling something the truth is, by its very nature, a partisan assertion, has been on the rise," he said.
Managing the flow can feel exhausting. "I won't lie; there are days when I think, 'if I see the word 'Trump' one more time ...' It can get to be a slog," Ms. Harris said. "But you want to give each comment its due. We want people to be heard."
When reading through heartbreaking or graphic comments takes an emotional toll, Ms. Harris copes with yoga and by spending the evening with her infant son. "I do a little snuggling," she said.
The team now has some help from artificial intelligence, however: Last month, The Times started a new commenting platform that uses machine-learning technology to group similar comments, allowing human moderators to approve or reject them more efficiently. The system allows moderators to open 80 percent of articles to comments, up from 10 percent.
"It's been a huge success so far. Comment quality does not seem to have declined," Mr. Etim said. "As we continue to expand, it will be critical for us to be sure that we do not undermine the best part of our product: that it's a great place to hold a civil discussion about important issues."
DRAWING (DRAWING BY WREN McDONALD)
