Buzzy debuts (Chappell Roan, Evian Christ) and anticipated follow-ups (Jorja Smith, yeule) are due this season.
After a summer dominated by blockbuster tours by Taylor Swift and Beyoncé, this fall the music business gets back to the business of releasing albums. Longstanding acts are returning with new LPs (Dolly Parton, Wilco, Usher), and long-awaited follow-ups are arriving, too (the Streets, Sampha, Nicki Minaj). Dates and lineups are subject to change.
September
SAM RIVERS CENTENNIAL Amid the hardscrabble realities of 1970s New York, Studio Rivbea was a crucial crack in the pavement where creative life flourished. A downtown loft run by the esteemed saxophonist Sam Rivers and his wife, Beatrice, Rivbea -- and its resident big band -- gave musicians young and old a space to rehearse and perform on their own terms. Craig Harris, Joseph Daly and Steve Coleman all spent formative time there in the '70s, and they've come together to organize a big-band performance in recognition of Rivers, who would have turned 100 this month. (Sep. 22; Mt. Morris Ascension Presbyterian Church) -- Giovanni Russonello
SOUL REBELS One of New Orleans's best-known exports, the Soul Rebels carry forward the classic brass-band tradition by infusing it with plenty of modern-day flavor across the spectrum of Black American music. Their upcoming four-night stand at the Blue Note includes guest appearances from the golden-age rap eminences Rakim and Big Daddy Kane (Sept. 21); Ja Rule (Sept. 22); G-Eazy (Sept. 23); and a potpourri of contemporary-jazz heavyweights, including James Carter and Elena Pinderhughes (Sept. 24). -- Russonello
KYLIE MINOGUE For decades, Kylie Minogue has been making dance floor manna that pingpongs between curiosity and undeniability, This year, she released one of her best -- "Padam Padam," a gay nightclub anthem that spawned slang and memes and, over time, a pop crossover. Minogue's new album, on its heels, is "Tension." A Las Vegas residency will follow, starting in November. (Sept. 22; BMG) -- Jon Caramanica
CHAPPELL ROAN Over the past year, the pop singer Chappell Roan has been releasing a string of theatrically intimate singles that touch on relationship awkwardness with uncommon candor. The music on her debut album, "The Rise and Fall of a Midwest Princess" -- which touches on wobbly '80s new wave and '90s singer-songwriter pop-rock and '00s dance-pop -- suggests a singer less beholden to style than to ensuring she says the exact thing she needs to say. (Sept. 22; Amusement/Island) -- Caramanica
YEULE The songwriter, singer and producer yeule embraces extremes on "Softscars," the follow-up to "Glitch Princess," from 2022. Nothing is predictable on an album that holds guitar ballads, a piano waltz, bristling rock guitar riffs, gleaming electronics, hyperpop tweaks and bluntly distorted beats. The songs consider pain, love, technology and carnality, the experience of a 21st-century life that's simultaneously physical and virtual. (Sept. 22; Ninja Tune) -- Jon Pareles
JOHN ZORN'S NEW MASADA QUARTET Opportunities are few to hear the saxophonist, composer and downtown jazz doyen John Zorn simply throwing down, in the company of improvisers that elevate him. That's what happens when he gets together with the New Masada Quartet, which plays music from Zorn's 613-piece "Masada" songbook (composed based on aspects of Jewish folklore and theology) and features the guitarist Julian Lage, the bassist Jorge Roeder and the drummer Kenny Wollesen. (Sept. 26 through Oct. 1; The Village Vanguard) -- Russonello
CHERRY GLAZERR On the bluntly titled new album "I Don't Want You Anymore," Clementine Creevy, who leads the indie-rock band Cherry Glazerr, wrestles with a clearly toxic relationship. As the songs go style-hopping -- explosive grunge, chugging synth-pop, hints of funk and jazz -- the obsession persists. (Sept. 29; Secretly Canadian) -- Pareles
DARIUS JONES The avant-gardist Darius Jones has such a distinctive sound on the alto saxophone -- widely dilated, yet so rough it could peel paint -- he could make a living off his tone alone. But he also has a fiercely innovative streak as a composer. Now he returns with a wide-ranging new album showing off both sides of his talent, "Fluxkit Vancouver (Its Suite but Sacred)," with a string section in prickly repartee with Jones and the commanding drummer Gerald Cleaver. (Sept. 29; Northern Spy/We Jazz) -- Russonello
ONEOHTRIX POINT NEVER Daniel Lopatin has built a two-lane career: as a producer creating cavernous backdrops for hitmakers like the Weeknd, and recording on his own as Oneohtrix Point Never, exploring changeable, ambiguous soundscapes. His new Oneohtrix Point Never album, "Again," is largely instrumental, incorporating orchestral arrangements, glitchy electronics, stray vocal samples, artificial intelligence and countless other elements that are subject to change at whim in dynamic, inscrutable tracks. Lopatin has described the music as "crescendo-core." (Sept. 29; Warp) -- Pareles
JORJA SMITH "Falling or Flying" is only the second studio album by the English songwriter Jorja Smith, but she has been prolific as a collaborator with Kali Uchis, Burna Boy, Drake, FKA twigs and others. She's fond of minor chords and lean, moody grooves that hint at soul, jazz and Nigerian Afrobeats; they suit her aching but supple voice, as it projects both sympathy and resilience. (Sept. 29; Famm) -- Pareles
WILCO To make its 13th studio album, "Cousin," Wilco brought in an outside producer for the first time since 2007: the Welsh songwriter Cate Le Bon, who opens folk-rock into electronica. She encouraged Wilco to extend the sonic experimentation it opened up on its 2002 album "Yankee Hotel Foxtrot." As Jeff Tweedy sings about desolation, loss and obstinate hope, the music carries roots-rock into disorienting and illuminating territories but still sounds handmade. (Sept. 29; dBpm) -- Pareles
October
USHER Some of the most viral performance clips of this past summer have belonged not to Taylor Swift or Beyoncé, but to Usher, whose Las Vegas residency has been a celebrity magnet and also a showcase for grown-folks-business R&B. His new music continues to delve into the sticky-situation soul that helped make him a superstar two decades ago. (October; mega/gamma.) -- Caramanica
BUTCHER BROWN A spirit of generous communion runs through "Solar Music," the latest album from the Richmond-based hip-hop-jazz fusion quintet Butcher Brown. The album features guest appearances by the saxophonist Braxton Cook, the M.C.'s Pink Siifu and Nappy Nina and the trumpeter Keyon Harrold, among others. Butcher Brown will toast "Solar Music" at a concert Oct. 18 at Le Poisson Rouge. (Oct. 6; Concord Jazz) -- Russonello
SLAUSON MALONE 1 Slauson Malone 1 is the updated name for the recording project of Jasper Marsalis, a musician and artist who plays with myriad genres and styles, denaturing them well beyond their familiar contours. His new album, "Excelsior," is deeply ambitious, engaging and full of winning eccentricities. (Oct. 6; Warp) -- Caramanica
SUFJAN STEVENS Love -- physical, divine, longed-for, embattled, cherished -- is the subject on Sufjan Stevens' new album, "Javelin." Its songs usually start out folky, but they rarely stay that way; they expand and billow. Working alone at his home studio, Stevens orchestrated them all by himself, playing nearly every instrument. (Oct. 6; Asthmatic Kitty) -- Pareles
"BOSSA NOVA: THE GREATEST NIGHT" The United States was formally introduced to Brazil's bossa nova, or "new style"-- suave, understated, sophisticated -- with a concert at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 21, 1962 that included Antonio Carlos Jobim, João Gilberto, Sergio Mendes, Luis Bonfá and others. It's nearly a year late for a 60th anniversary, but a concert will bring together Brazilian stars including Seu Jorge and Carlinhos Brown along with Daniel Jobim -- Antonio's grandson -- to revisit the now-classic bossa nova repertory. (Oct. 8; Carnegie Hall.) -- Pareles
ROY HARGROVE By the time he died in 2018, at 49, Roy Hargrove had become the most impactful trumpeter of his generation. Back in 1993, he was still the new kid on the block when Jazz at Lincoln Center commissioned him to write and perform "Love Suite in Mahogany," with a septet. That performance is being released on record for the first time and a series of shows at Dizzy's Club will mark its release: The drummer Willie Jones III and the bassist Gerald Cannon will colead a sextet featuring alumni of Hargrove's bands Oct. 11-13, and the Roy Hargrove Big Band will appear Oct. 14-16. (Oct. 13; Blue Engine) -- Russonello
L'RAIN The songwriter Taja Cheek, who records as L'Rain, dissolves genre boundaries and explores mixed emotions on her third album, "I Killed Your Dog." The songs are lush and immersive, layered with instrumental patterns and vocal harmonies; they're also cryptic and open-ended, to be deciphered through repeated listening. (Oct. 13; Mexican Summer) -- Pareles
OFFSET Offset is the second Migos member to release a solo album in the wake of the killing of Takeoff, the group's third member and creative heart. The first single from "Set It Off" is "Jealousy," a collaboration with his wife, Cardi B, that suggests that the couple is willing to play their relationship and fame for laughs, and art. (Oct. 13; Motown) -- Caramanica
TROYE SIVAN It's been five years since Troye Sivan has released an album. His re-emergence in recent months, however, suggests the time away has been emboldening. As an actor, he was one of the standouts on "The Idol," the besieged HBO drama about the music business, and "Rush," the lead single from "Something to Give Each Other," his third album, is a remarkably confident assertion of carnal interest. (Oct. 13; Capitol) -- Caramanica
JIHYE LEE ORCHESTRA The composer and bandleader Jihye Lee is becoming well-known for her fluid integration of Western classical and big-band jazz techniques, and for arrangements in which heavily loaded horn parts move with apparent ease. At a Brooklyn show, her 18-piece orchestra will debut "Infinite Connections," a suite-length meditation on the bond Lee shares with her mother and grandmother. (Oct. 15; National Sawdust) -- Russonello
J.D. ALLEN A tenor saxophonist known for the hefty swing and raw intellect of his improvising, and the back-to-basics approach of his jazz trios, J.D. Allen has never before made an album featuring electronics. That will change this fall, when he releases "This," with Alex Bonney's dark and enveloping atmospherics wreathed around Allen's high-velocity horn playing and the thundering drums of Gwilym Jones. (Oct. 20; Savant) -- Russonello
EVIAN CHRIST A long-awaited debut album is finally arriving from the electronic music producer Evian Christ, who has been releasing shiver-inducing music for over a decade. The songs on "Revanchist" are chaotic and blissful, tactile and expansive -- all in all, a physical experience as much as an aural one. (Oct. 20; Warp) -- Caramanica
SAMPHA In the seven years between his own albums, the English songwriter Sampha has lent his richly melancholy voice to tracks by Kendrick Lamar, Drake, Frank Ocean and Alicia Keys. "Lahai" -- named after his grandfather, who was from Sierra Leone -- is an exploratory, ambitious album that contemplates time, love and transcendence with otherworldly electronics and thoughtful melodies. (Oct. 20; Young) -- Pareles
THE STREETS British rap's great literalist, the Streets (Mike Skinner) returns with "The Darker the Shadow the Brighter the Light," a new album that nods to various stripes of U.K. club culture while adhering firm to Skinner's keen-eyed storytelling. In conjunction with the album, the Streets will also release a clubland-themed murder mystery film of the same name. (Oct. 20; 679 Recordings/Warner Music UK Ltd) -- Caramanica
THE MOUNTAIN GOATS "All Hail West Texas," a sparsely arranged but lyrically vivid 2002 album released when the Mountain Goats was still a moniker for the solo music of John Darnielle, remains one of the most beloved entries in the group's vast discography. Now the band -- featuring the bassist Peter Hughes, the drummer Jon Wurster and the multi-instrumentalist Matt Douglas -- will release a sequel, "Jenny From Thebes," updating the fates of its characters and fleshing out its sound. (Oct. 27; Merge) -- Lindsay Zoladz
MIKE REED "The Separatist Party," the forthcoming album from the drummer, composer and Chicago jazz instigator Mike Reed, is Part 1 of a forthcoming three-album cycle meditating on solitude, loneliness and the elusiveness of community (surprisingly, he was already working on this project before pandemic lockdowns). The irony, though, is how much fun he seems to be having in the company of the multi-instrumentalist Ben LaMar Gay, the poet Marvin Tate and the three members of Bitchin Bajas, his compatriots on this LP, who surge through grimy post-rock or drift into ethereal, odd-metered, electrified airspaces with whiffs of Ethio-jazz. (Oct. 27; Astral Spirits/We Jazz) -- Russonello
DOJA CAT: THE SCARLET TOUR Though she's wowed audiences with ambitious awards show performances, the rambunctious rapper and pop star Doja Cat has not yet embarked upon an arena tour. (Tonsil surgery forced her to pull out of a slot opening for the Weeknd last year.) The Scarlet Tour -- which begins at San Francisco's Chase Center on Oct. 31 and makes stops at Brooklyn's Barclays Center on Nov. 29 and Newark's Prudential Center on Nov. 30 -- will give her a chance to command her largest stages yet and showcase music from her latest album, "Scarlet," due Sept. 22. The rising rapper Doechii and of-the-moment it-girl Ice Spice will open. (Oct. 31 through Dec. 13) -- Zoladz
November
CAT POWER Last November, Cat Power (the stage name of the smoky-voiced crooner Chan Marshall) played a song-for-song reimagining of her hero Bob Dylan's May 1966 Manchester concert -- the one at which an audience member, disgruntled by Dylan's departure from acoustic folk, infamously yelled out "Judas!" Now it is arriving as an album titled "Cat Power Sings Dylan: The 1966 Royal Albert Hall Concert." Marshall, a gifted interpreter of other musicians' material, structured the set to be half acoustic and half electric, just like Dylan's; a muted "She Belongs to Me" contrasts with a rollicking, full-band "Ballad of a Thin Man." (November; Domino) -- Zoladz
CODY JOHNSON "The Painter," the new song from Cody Johnson, one of mainstream country's sturdiest performers, extends his streak of music that's deeply earnest, unflashily produced, and a blend of emotionally stoic and trembling. It's the lead single from "Leather," his third studio album on a major label after a long and robust independent career. (Nov. 3; COJO Music/Warner Music Nashville) -- Caramanica
MYRA MELFORD'S FIRE & WATER QUINTET The pianist and composer Myra Melford's five-piece band of all-star creative improvisers is aptly named: There is something volatile and elemental about the music she makes with Ingrid Laubrock, the saxophonist; Mary Halvorson, the guitarist; Tomeka Reid, the cellist; and Lesley Mok, the percussionist. On "Hear the Light Singing," the group's second LP, Halvorson's effects-laden guitar comes in splashes and jolts, and Reid's cello moves in hurrying steps or generous waves. (Nov. 3; RogueArt) -- Russonello
LIZ PHAIR: 'EXILE IN GUYVILLE' 30th ANNIVERSARY TOUR Liz Phair's 1993 debut "Exile in Guyville" captured young adulthood in a wry, vivid voice and brought a refreshing female perspective to indie rock's boys club. Thirty years later, it continues to inspire younger musicians, including Kate Bollinger and Sabrina Teitelbaum (who records searingly honest music under the name Blondshell), both openers for Phair when she plays "Guyville" in its glorious entirety on an anniversary tour. The show comes to Brooklyn's Kings Theater on Nov. 24. (Nov. 3 through Dec. 9) -- Zoladz CAMP FLOG GNAW CARNIVAL The annual festival helmed by Tyler, the Creator continues to be one of the most innovatively programmed, in any genre. He is a headliner this year, along with SZA and the Hillbillies (Kendrick Lamar and Baby Keem). The deep lineup includes the corridos tumbados stars Fuerza Regida, various generations of dream-pop from Willow, Toro y Moi and d4vd, accessibly tough rapping from Clipse and Ice Spice and much more. (Nov. 11-12; Dodger Stadium Grounds in Los Angeles) -- Caramanica
NICKI MINAJ Reportedly, when Lil Uzi Vert was planning the release of his most recent album, "Pink Tape," Nicki Minaj reached out to him to ask, in essence, how he could release a pink-themed album and not include her. (He obliged.) Now, Minaj returns with "Pink Friday 2," her own album, on the heels of a pair of collaborations with Ice Spice, "Princess Diana" and "Barbie World," that have given her new spark. (Nov. 17; Republic) -- Caramanica
DOLLY PARTON Last year, when she was nominated for induction in the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame, Dolly Parton initially declined because she did not consider herself a rock artist. (She was eventually inducted anyway.) "This has, however, inspired me to put out a hopefully great rock 'n' roll album at some point in the future," she said in a statement. That future has now arrived: Dolly Parton's "Rockstar" is a sprawling, star-studded 30-track album that features originals (the stomping "World on Fire"), covers of rock classics ("Stairway to Heaven," "Let It Be"), and an impressive list of guests that include Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Debbie Harry and more. (Nov. 17; Butterfly Records/Big Machine Records) -- Zoladz
Dolly Parton's album of rock covers, originals and collaborations is due in November. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHARLIE RIEDEL/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Jorja Smith has become a frequent collaborator in the gap between albums. Her second LP, "Falling or Flying," arrives in late September. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEX PANTLING/GETTY IMAGES); Kylie Minogue got a boost from another club anthem this year, "Padam Padam." Her new album, on its heels, is "Tension." (PHOTOGRAPH BY DON ARNOLD/GETTY IMAGES); Offset will release his first album since the death of Migos's Takeoff, in October. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRIS PIZZELLO/INVISION, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS); Sufjan Stevens's new album, "Javelin," is devoted to love in all its forms. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PATRICK T. FALLON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (AR47); Chan Marshall (a.k.a. Cat Power) will release her live 2022 concert covering Bob Dylan, in November. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALBERTO PEZZALI/INVISION, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS); After some collaborations that have given her new spark, Nicki Minaj returns with her own album, "Pink Friday 2," in November. (PHOTOGRAPH BY THEO WARGO/GETTY IMAGES); After a seven-year gap, Sampha will release "Lahai" in October. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALBERTO PEZZALI/INVISION, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) (AR48)
