1. President Biden approved a project to extract 600 million barrels of oil from where?
Alaska
Brazil
Missouri
Ohio
Texas
2. A giant blob of seaweed is headed for the United States. Where is it expected to hit?
Florida
New York City
Northern California
The Outer Banks of North Carolina
The Upper Peninsula of Michigan
3. For the first time, the U.S. government will require utilities to remove from drinking water two toxic "forever chemicals," part of a class of chemicals known as PFAS. About how many Americans are estimated to be exposed to PFAS through tap water?
One million
10 million
50 million
100 million
200 million
4. The Biden administration told TikTok that it was considering a ban on the app unless ByteDance, its Chinese parent company, did what?
Blocked pro-China messages in the United States
Deleted all copyrighted music and videos
Gave the government access to its source code
Prohibited users under age 18
Sold the app to another company
5. The film "Everything Everywhere All At Once" dominated the Academy Awards on Sunday. Which two things are true about its Oscars haul?
It had the smallest budget of any best picture winner
It won the most above-the-line Oscars in history
It was the longest of any best picture winner
Its directors were the first duo to share the best director award
Its studio was the first to capture the top six awards in one year
6. Who designed the suit pictured above, and for whom?
Axiom Space for NASA
Demna for Balenciaga
James Cameron for a future project
Pyer Moss for the U.S. Space Force
Under Armour for the film "65"
7. The Shed, a nonprofit arts center in New York, plans to stage "Here We Are" this fall. What is notable about the show?
It's Stephen Sondheim's final musical.
It's the first show to use an all-animal cast.
The audience will wear V.R. headsets.
It's the first production of a play written by ChatGPT.
It's directed by Kyler Lincoln, Abraham Lincoln's only direct descendant.
8. Which likely 2024 Republican presidential candidate this week referred to Russia's invasion of Ukraine as "a territorial dispute"?
George Santos
Liz Cheney
Mike Pence
Chris Christie
Ron DeSantis
9. Unusual amounts of rotting garbage piled up in the streets of Paris this week. Why?
France offered most government workers a two-month sabbatical beginning this month.
Garbage bag supply chains were disrupted by the war in Ukraine.
Garbage workers went on strike to protest proposed changes to France's retirement age.
The city is in the middle of its largest influx of tourists in a decade.
The city launched a new composting program.
10. A U.S. surveillance drone crashed and sank into the Black Sea near Ukraine this week. According to the Pentagon, what happened?
A lightning strike short-circuited its engines.
A North Korean ballistic missile blew it up.
A Russian fighter jet clipped its propeller.
It collided with a Chinese spy balloon.
Ukrainian air defenses accidentally shot it down.
The News Quiz is published on Fridays in the Morning newsletter. To sign up, visit nytimes.com/themorning.Solutions: 1. A; 2. A; 3. E; 4. E; 5. B and E; 6. A; 7. A; 8. E; 9. C; 10. C.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID J. PHILLIP/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
