An education journalist makes the case against high-stakes standardized testing in America.
The Test. Why Our Schools Are Obsessed With Standardized Testing -- But You Don't Have to Be. By Anya Kamenetz. 262 pages. PublicAffairs. $25.99.
Teachers and their unions have resisted standardized testing since the early 20th century. Their critics have claimed they do so because they fear being held accountable for how much children learn. But over the past few years, on both the right and the left, in scattered suburbs and in urban neighborhoods, a small yet growing group of parents have begun to join teachers in denouncing standardized testing.
They complain about the narrowing of the school curriculum to the questions asked on high-stakes exams, the many hours and days -- sometimes up to a quarter of the school year -- spent testing and prepping for tests, and the stress that testing imposes on children. Some parents even have their children opt out of standardized testing altogether.
That movement now has a guidebook, Anya Kamenetz's "The Test." Its publication could hardly have been better timed. A 2014 poll by Phi Delta Kappa and Gallup found that only 31 percent of parents, and 38 percent of the general public, support the federal government's policy incentive driving all this testing: using children's test scores to evaluate teachers.
And there is evidence that policy makers are finally taking this discontent seriously. In August, Secretary of Education Arne Duncan, whose department is responsible for the testing push of the past five years, acknowledged that testing is "sucking the oxygen out of the room in a lot of schools."
Ms. Kamenetz is a longtime education journalist, currently for NPR, and the author of two other books. Although "The Test" mounts a somewhat familiar case against standardized testing, to characterize it as simply a polemic would be to overlook the sophistication of Ms. Kamenetz's thinking. She provides a short yet incisive history of testing, noting the ways various religions define intelligence (as originality, openness to experience, or even the ability to trick) and describing how the multiple-choice test was invented in 1914 by Frederick Kelly of Kansas State Teachers College, in an effort to tamp down on teachers' freedom to give subjective judgments of students' work.
From there Ms. Kamenetz looks at psychometry, or the science of testing, demonstrating its roots in the deeply held racism of the early-20th-century I.Q. movement. She shows why today's achievement tests, designed to evaluate ability on a specific day, typically at the end of the school year, are poor tools for helping either teachers or students improve their practices in real time.
"They conceptualize proficiency as a fixed quantity in a world where what's important is your capacity to learn and grow," she writes. "They are a 20th-century technology in a 21st-century world."
Ms. Kamenetz, the mother of a young child, encourages parents to have their children opt out of certain tests. She also offers tips to help parents manage their children's anxiety -- and their own expectations -- at those times when a standardized test is so important to a child's future that it cannot be avoided.
But the book's most urgent contribution is its exploration of how we might hold our schools, teachers and students accountable if we were to scrap high-stakes standardized testing entirely.
As in her previous book, "DIY U," Ms. Kamenetz is open to seemingly radical, technology-driven solutions. She reports on artificial-intelligence experts who would harness the addictive qualities of gaming to instruct and assess kids online; computer programmers who seek to perfect the flawed software currently used to grade essays and track student performance over time; and school administrators experimenting with new measures of social-emotional growth, like student surveys meant to evaluate a child's happiness and ability to persevere in the face of adversity.
Ultimately, Ms. Kamenetz advocates the kind of approach she observes in action at Bate Middle School in Danville, Ky., and the Urban Academy Laboratory High School in New York City.
Those schools assess students using long-term projects heavy with writing and public speaking. Their practices hark back to the "exhibitions" of early Republic schools, in which parents and the community observed children as they demonstrated newfound knowledge.
Ms. Kamenetz shows how fundamentally American it would be to turn toward a more holistic system of evaluating educational outcomes.
Many committed school reformers will greet this book with skepticism, if not outright hostility.
Today's proponents of test-driven accountability argue that standardized tests are an instrument of social justice, despite the roots of those tests in scientific racism.
In the 1960s, some civil rights advocates began to argue that widespread, easily comparable test data were necessary to make visible the achievement gap between black and white and poor and middle-class children, a gap those advocates blamed on subpar and racially biased teachers and schools.
Indeed, new economic research suggests that teachers who are good at raising students' test scores also help students avoid teenage pregnancy and earn slightly more money as adults.
Ms. Kamenetz does not deny the power of tests as research tools. But her book's implication is that we don't really need standardized testing to understand inequality. We can see it directly, in the number of American children living in poverty -- one in five -- and the fact that only 14 states attempt to equalize financing between public schools in poor and affluent neighborhoods.
Fixing those problems, alas, would be much tougher than creating yet another set of tests.
