Decide.com, a start-up that describes itself as "the next generation Consumer Reports," prides itself on using artificial intelligence and algorithms to make unbiased product recommendations to consumers without taking money from advertisers. In an effort to prove it is better than the venerable product evaluation magazine, which also doesn't take advertising, it hired a company that concludes it is better.
Published Tuesday, the report was conducted by Ant's Eye View, a part of PricewaterhouseCoopers. Not surprisingly, the authors found that recommendations made by Decide were more consistent and easily understood than those made by Consumer Reports. It says Decide.com reviews more and newer products than Consumer Reports.
In an interview, Decide's chief executive, Mike Fridgen, said that even though his company sponsored the study, its results were objective.
"I get the cynicism," he said. "We sponsored the study, and the results are positive. But I'd ask you to look at the results and look at the methodology and draw your own conclusion."
The study, though, is an apples-to-oranges comparison. Decide's main feature is its price predictions. It doesn't do its own testing, but pulls in data from reviews across the Web. So naturally it has a deeper product database than Consumer Reports, which buys its own products, even cars, to do its own testing.
Decide, a 30-person company in Seattle, has a lot of work to do if it really wants to compete with Consumer Reports. Mr. Fridgen declined to disclose the Web site's traffic and said it was not on par with Consumer Reports' audience. Compete.com, the analytics site, estimates that Decide has 50,000 regular visitors a month. Consumer Reports says it has 3.2 million Web subscribers and 4 million print subscribers.
Ken Weine, a spokesman for Consumer Reports, dismissed the study. He noted that Decide had recently pursued a partnership with Consumer Reports, a proposal that it rejected.
"Now, Decide.com has publicized a report that they paid consultants to write about themselves," he said in a written statement. "We remain unconvinced working with Decide.com makes sense for our readers, or more broadly consumers."
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph Oren Etzioni, Left, Who Developed the Decide.Com Site, and the Company's Chief, Mike Fridgen. (Photograph by Matthew Ryan Williams for the New York Times)
