Lego: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-lego-results/lego-sales-surge-as-housebound-families-turn-to-play-idUSKBN25T11Q
Virgin Atlantic: https://apnews.com/2ab64ec086bc1396a1212292df15e9a0
Intel: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-intel-chip/intel-releases-new-laptop-chips-to-confront-apple-rising-rivals-idUSKBN25T2LE
TOYS
Jump in Lego's Sales Interlocks With Lockdown
Sales of Lego jumped 14 percent in the first six months of the year as families under coronavirus lockdowns spent more time playing together at home, the Danish toymaker said on Wednesday
Family-owned Lego has returned to growth since 2017, when a decade of double-digit sales increases came to an abrupt halt.
Since then, the company has managed to outpace growth in the overall toy market, a trend that continued between January and June. Best known for its colorful plastic bricks, Lego competes for market share with the likes of the Barbie maker Mattel and Hasbro.
While consumer sales grew 14 percent in the period, revenue rose by only 7 percent to 15.7 billion Danish crowns, or $ 2.5 billion. The difference in revenue and consumer sales was a result of retailers drawing on existing inventory as Lego was forced to temporarily shut production in Mexico and China. Operating profit grew 11 percent to 3.9 billion crowns, Lego said. REUTERS
AIRLINES
High Court in London Backs Virgin's Rescue Plan
Virgin Atlantic's 1.2 billion-pound ( $ 1.6 billion) restructuring plan was approved Wednesday by the High Court in London, allowing the international airline to continue rebuilding its operations after the devastation caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
The deal, which has already been approved by creditors, must now be confirmed in U.S. courts.
The airline announced the refinancing package in July to ensure its survival after passenger numbers dropped 98 percent in the second quarter. It includes 600 million pounds of support from the airline's owners, Virgin Group and Delta Air Lines, 450 million pounds of deferred payments to creditors and 170 million pounds of financing from the United States-based Davidson Kempner Capital Management.
Virgin Atlantic, founded in 1984 by Richard Branson's Virgin Group, has already cut 3,550 jobs, shuttered operations at London's Gatwick Airport and announced plans to retire 11 aircraft as it seeks to weather the slowdown in air travel. ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
Intel's New Laptop Chips Are Challenge to Apple
Intel on Wednesday unveiled Tiger Lake, the 11th generation version of its flagship chip for laptops, which it hopes will help it regain lost market share and counter coming Apple machines with Apple-designed chips.
Intel said the chips used a new manufacturing technique and other improvements that make them more powerful at tasks like using artificial intelligence to reduce background noise during video calls.
The company said it worked with laptop makers including Dell and Samsung and that 50 machines from different makers would be available for the holiday shopping season.
The Tiger Lake processors come as Intel, one of the few chip companies that both designs and makes its own chips, has struggled with manufacturing delays. The company has started to lose market share to rivals like Advanced Micro Devices that use outside manufacturers. REUTERS
Credit: By Reuters and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY OLI SCARFF/AFP -- GETTY IMAGES)
