Our world is more connected than ever. But it's never been easier to find yourself shepherded into a comfortable herd made up of close friends or political allies, your social set or professional peers. And those herds are the perfect environment for groupthink to thrive, to allow dubious beliefs or weak arguments to masquerade as unquestionable truisms. ¶ columnists to debunk an idea -- big or small -- that has become conventional wisdom in their circles. We wanted to read about the arguments that start debates at dinner parties or make their friends roll their eyes. These are Times Opinion's unpopular opinions.
Many People Fear A.I. They Shouldn't.
A LOT OF my humanistic and liberal artsoriented friends are deeply worried about artificial intelligence, while acknowledging the possible benefits. I'm a humanistic and liberal arts type myself, but I'm optimistic, while acknowledging the dangers. I'm optimistic, paradoxically, because I don't think A.I. is going to be as powerful as many of its evangelists think it will be. I don't think A.I. is ever going to be able to replace us -- ultimately, I think, it will simply be a useful tool. In fact, I think that instead of replacing us, A.I. will complement us. In fact, it may make us free to be more human. Many fears about A.I. are based on an underestimation of the human mind. Some people seem to believe that the mind is like a computer. It's all just information processing, algorithms all the way down, so of course machines are going to eventually overtake us. This is an impoverished view of who we humans are. The Canadian scholar Michael Ignatieff expressed a much more accurate view of the human mind last year in the journal Liberties: "What we do is not processing. It is not computation. It is not data analysis. It is a distinctively, incorrigibly human activity that is a complex combination of conscious and unconscious, rational and intuitive, logical and emotional reflection." The brain is its own universe. Sometimes I hear tech people saying they are building machines that think like people. Then I report this ambition to neuroscientists and their response is: That would be a neat trick, because we don't know how people think. The human mind isn't just predicting the next word in a sentence; it evolved to love and bond with others; to seek the kind of wisdom that is held in the body; to physically navigate within nature and avoid the dangers therein; to pursue goodness; to marvel at and create beauty; to seek and create meaning. A.I. can impersonate human thought because it can take all the ideas that human beings have produced and synthesize them into strings of words or collages of images that make sense to us. But that doesn't mean the A.I. "mind" is like the human mind. The A.I."mind" lacks consciousness, understanding, biology, self-awareness, emotions, moral sentiments, agency, a unique worldview based on a lifetime of distinct and never to be repeated experiences. A lot of human knowledge is the kind of knowledge that, say, babies develop. It's unconscious and instinctual. But A.I. has access only to conscious language. About a year ago, the Ohio State University scholar Angus Fletcher did a podcast during which he reeled off some differences between human thinking and A.I. "thinking." He argued that A.I. can do correlations but that it struggles with cause and effect; it thinks in truth or falsehood but is not a master at narrative; it's not good at comprehending time. Like everybody else, I don't know where this is heading. When air-conditioning was invented, I would not have predicted: "Oh wow. This is going to create modern Phoenix." But I do believe lots of people are getting overly sloppy in attributing all sorts of human characteristics to the bots. And I do agree with the view that A.I. is an ally and not a rival -- a different kind of intelligence, more powerful than us in some ways, but narrower. It's already helping people handle odious tasks, like writing bureaucratic fund-raising requests and marketing pamphlets or utilitarian emails to people they don't really care about. It's probably going to be a fantastic tutor that will transform education and help humans all around the world learn more. It might make expertise nearly free, so people in underserved communities will have access to medical, legal and other sorts of advice. It will help us all make more informed decisions. It may be good for us liberal arts grads. Peter Thiel recently told the podcast host Tyler Cowen that he believed A.I. would be worse for math people than it would be for word people because the technology is getting a lot better at solving math problems than verbal exercises. It may also make the world more equal. In coding and other realms, studies so far show that A.I. improves the performance of less accomplished people more than it does the more accomplished people. If you are an immigrant trying to write in a new language, A.I. takes your abilities up to average. It will probably make us vastly more productive and wealthier. A 2023 study led by Harvard Business School professors in coordination with the Boston Consulting Group found that consultants who worked with A.I. produced 40 percent higher quality results on 18 different work tasks. Of course, bad people will use A.I. to do harm, but most people are pretty decent and will use A.I. to learn more, innovate faster and produce advances like medical breakthroughs. But A.I.'s ultimate accomplishment will be to remind us who we are by revealing what it can't do. It will compel us to double down on all the activities that make us distinctly human: taking care of each other, being a good teammate, reading deeply, exploring daringly, growing spiritually, finding kindred spirits and having a good time. "I am certain of nothing but of the holiness of the Heart's affections and the truth of Imagination," Keats observed. Amid the flux of A.I., we can still be certain of that.
Politicians Say We're More Divided Than Ever. It Could Be Worse.
A PRESIDENT REJECTING the results of the election he lost, inspiring a mob to overtake the Capitol and call for the hanging of the vice president, and then, four years later, emerging as his party's front-runner again and surviving a terrifyingly close assassination attempt. A pandemic that devolved into a polarized argument over most everything, even lifesaving vaccines. And research showing big partisan divides over a wide range of issues, with political violence on the rise. It's fashionable to say we are more divided than ever, and superficially, that sounds like hard-edge realism. However, there have been many periods in U.S. history when things were worse -- and we could end up there again. To see how bad it could get, there's no need to go all the way back to the Civil War. Just look at the 1960s and 1970s. Though the civil rights movement is celebrated now, at the time, it was deeply unpopular. In May 1964, the year after the March on Washington and Martin Luther King Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" speech, 74 percent of Americans thought that mass demonstrations were "more likely to hurt" the cause for racial inequality than to help. In 1966, in the last Gallup poll that asked about King before his assassination, his unfavorable rating was 63 percent. The country was also deeply divided over the Vietnam War, which would claim the lives of millions of Vietnamese and more than 50,000 Americans. In the pivotal year of 1968, the country was rocked with antiwar and civil rights protests that make today's campus conflicts look like mild disagreements. Political violence was on the rise, too. When King was assassinated, riots erupted across the country. Two months later, the assassination of Robert Kennedy upended the trajectory of the impending presidential election. The Democratic National Convention that August was thrown into turmoil as protesters and the police clashed for days in Chicago. Elected with a majority of less than 1 percent of the popular vote -- but a landslide in the Electoral College -- Richard Nixon, after years of America's secret bombing of Cambodia, announced a full-scale ground invasion of the country. Just days later, on May 4, 1970, the National Guard opened fire on an antiwar protest at Kent State University in Ohio, killing four students and sparking the largest nationwide student strike in the country's history. But a poll taken the day after the shootings showed that only 11 percent of the public blamed the National Guard for the deaths of the students. Later, Nixon tried to cover up his involvement in a thwarted scheme to wiretap the headquarters of the Democratic National Committee at the Watergate Hotel, a plot that ended with Nixon resigning in disgrace. At that time, radicalized groups adopted violent tactics. Bombs started going off seemingly everywhere -- the Pentagon, corporate offices, the U.S. Capitol, the State Department, Wall Street, the California Attorney General's Office. In Bryan Burrough's book "Days of Rage," the retired F.B.I. agent Max Noel put the total at 1,900 domestic bombings in 1972 alone -- an average of five a day. One lesson from this history is that polarized issues of yesteryear can look very different in retrospect. King and the civil rights movement are now justly celebrated. The Vietnam War is widely recognized as a historic error and a great moral failure. However, there are troubling signs for the future. In 2023, 33 percent of Republicans agreed that "American patriots may have to resort to violence in order to save the country," an uptick from previous years. (Thirteen percent of Democrats agreed, much lower, but that, too, was an uptick.) Most worryingly, Americans who wrongly believe that the 2020 election was stolen are more than three times as likely -- 46 percent to 13 percent -- to believe that "true American patriots" may have to resort to violence to save the country. So when my friends say "we're more divided than ever," I object. History reminds us that things could get worse, and the unthinkable is possible But all this shouldn't just be a downer. Historical awareness can even be empowering, inspiring "pessimism of the intellect but optimism of the will" -- an ethos attributed to the Italian revolutionary Antonio Gramsci. True optimism means we must first face reality, no matter how grim, to fix the problems we face. The history of violent political division really is a hopeful call to action! That sentiment sometimes cheers up my friends, which is when I remind them about what came after the 1970s: the 1980s, when the world came too close to nuclear annihilation a few times, a true threat to humanity that hasn't gone away. But that's a topic for another time, perhaps after I finish a column on my strategies for becoming a popular partygoer with a reputation for lighthearted small talk. People Say Queer People Are Born That Way. It's More Complicated.
LADY GAGA'S 2011 song "Born This Way" was an instant hit and an instant L.G.B.T.Q. anthem: It debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard Top 100, and Elton John called it "the new gay anthem." It was the dictum of a generation, three words operating with bumper sticker efficiency, conveying that queerness was natural and immutable, not a result of abuse, grooming or impairment. Queer people were not broken, and therefore in no need of fixing. Queerness was neither a choice nor a curse. It was not a "lifestyle" but a state of being. The phrase became a rhetorical workhorse that led the conversation around L.G.B.T.Q. issues. Although the idea of homosexual bioessentialism has a history that long predates the phrase, "Born This Way" matched the moment and captured the zeitgeist. As with most things in politics, it was about timing. Later that year, during remarks delivered at the Human Rights Campaign annual dinner, President Barack Obama joked to the gay rights group that "I also took a trip out to California last week, where I held some productive, bilateral talks with your leader: Lady Gaga." Obama was referring to meeting Gaga at a fund-raiser at which she raised the issue of bullying after one of her fans, the 14-year-old Jamey Rodemeyer, endured homophobic bullying before dying by suicide. Before the fund-raiser, Obama had repealed "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" in the military, allowing queer service members to serve openly, and soon after the fund-raiser, he would become the first president to declare his support for same-sex marriage. In the years after the song was released, Americans saying in polling that "being gay or lesbian is something a person is born with" began to consistently outnumber those who responded that being queer was "due to factors such as upbringing and environment." "Born this way," as a slogan, was a tremendous cultural and political success. The problem is that it isn't supported by science. The emerging scientific consensus is that sexual orientation isn't purely genetic. A person's genetic makeup and exposure to prenatal hormones may provide a propensity to queerness, but they aren't determinative. Other factors most likely also play a role. "Born this way" may, unfortunately, have been an oversimplification. It's probably closer to the truth to say that people are "formed this way." As the complexity of human sexuality has become clearer, scientists and writers have attempted to add necessary nuance to the subject. But the slogan remains entrenched. Just last year, Rolling Stone crowned "Born This Way" the most inspirational L.G.B.T.Q. song of all time, calling it a "battle cry" that "is as relevant as ever." But the time may have come to retire the phrase. It is not only unsupportable by science but also does not capture the full reality of queer experience and is unjust to some members of the queer community itself. As Lisa Diamond, a professor of developmental psychology, health psychology and gender studies at the University of Utah, explained in a 2018 TED talk, the argument is "unjust because it implies that L.G.B.T. individuals who fit a certain cultural stereotype, the ones who have been exclusively gay for as long as they can possibly remember, are somehow more deserving of acceptance and equality than someone who came out at age 60 or whose attractions have been more fluid or who is bisexual rather than exclusively gay." I fully understand how frightening relinquishing this phrase may be. "Born this way," as both a scientific concept and a political ideology, was easy to understand, accept and digest. A more nuanced explanation of attraction, one with a bit of mystery, opens the door to ambiguity and uncertainty that the opponents of gay rights will no doubt seek to exploit. Relinquishing such a powerful tool might feel like giving up too much. But the incoming Stony Brook University professor Joanna Wuest, the author of "Born This Way: Science, Citizenship and Inequality in the American L.G.B.T.Q.+ Movement," believes that retiring the idea may potentially not be much of a loss at all, because the science is so strong that things like conversion therapy "are extremely detrimental to mental health and even the lives of queer people." As she explained to me, "we don't need a strong biological theory of identity to understand that when you punch someone, they say it hurts." Now the argument has to be more sophisticated: We may choose how we identify and how we express -- or suppress -- our attractions, but our attractions themselves are not a choice. We must insist that people's right to exist, and our responsibility to affirm and protect them, doesn't hinge on the mechanisms by which they came to exist. The "end" exists, regardless of the "means."
Conservatives Think The Market Always Gets It Right. It Doesn't.
ON ITS FACE, there's nothing necessarily political about the mantra that the customer is always right. It can buck up the patience of an exasperated shopkeeper dealing with a finicky patron or push manufacturers to think harder about evolving consumer tastes. It fosters a service culture that, as visitors to the United States often remark, is notable for its niceness. But the idea that the customer is always right also contains a worldview, a kind of market fundamentalism that typifies much of the American right today. The more pervasive it becomes, the more pernicious it gets -- and the more it diminishes the values conservatives claim to hold dear. When are customers "always right"? When they want the beige interior but not the black one, or the subway tiles for the downstairs bathroom but not the upstairs one, or the sauce on the side -- that is, anywhere within the broad spectrum of personal preference that typify most consumer choices. The problem starts when our decisions are not merely subjective: when questions of truth, moral or factual, are involved. This is a particular concern when it comes to two American institutions that have come to grief in recent years by bowing too often to the demands of their customers: universities and the news media. There was a time when being a college student meant that you submitted to the rules, expectations and judgments of a professor or a department. You didn't get to grade your teachers at the end of the term: What mattered to the university was its opinion of you, not yours of it. The relationship was unabashedly hierarchical. As a student, you were presumed ignorant, but teachable. You paid the university for the opportunity to become a little less ignorant. Much of this has been overturned in recent years. Students today, whose parents often pay fortunes for their education, are treated like consumers, not apprentices. University curriculums have moved away from core requirements -- the idea that there are things all educated people ought to have read, understood and discussed together -- to a kind of mix-and-match set of offerings. Disciplines that don't double as explicit job training have endured frequent budgetary cuts. The result has been the hollowing out of higher ed. Professors cater to students, with higher grades and diminished expectations. At Yale, nearly four of five grades are in the "A" range. At Princeton, studying Latin or Greek is no longer a requirement for classics majors. During the recent student protests, I kept wondering: Where did these kids get their sense of total certitude? Part of it is youthful idealism, and part of it stems from ideological currents in elite academia. But an equal part is the substitution of critical thinking with the ceaseless affirmation fostered by applying "the customer is always right" to education. As for the news media, here too there was a time when Walter Cronkite could end his program by saying, "And that's the way it is . . . ," and be largely believed. His authority derived from the accuracy and quality of his reports. But his audience also understood that the news wasn't simply what they wanted it to be. Facts shaped opinions, not the other way around. That's a bygone world. Conservatives, including me, have long complained that "mainstream media" too often present a lefttilting slant on the news. But the right's answer hasn't been to seek or create news media that provide straighter news or a better balance of opinion. It's been to turn the tables. This has proved immensely profitable, especially on cable TV, radio airwaves and now podcasts. It has given previously disaffected consumers a much wider range of options for where they obtain their news, but it hasn't produced a better-informed country. It's a land of cacophony, confusion and conspiracy theories. When market forces provide you with alternative cushions or chocolates, the world is better for it. When those same forces provide you with alternative facts, it isn't. Can we reverse the trend? In "Memoirs of Hadrian," the novelist Marguerite Yourcenar's Roman emperor protagonist observes: "There is more than one kind of wisdom, and all are essential in the world; it is no bad thing that they should alternate." The wisdom of customers and markets has a lot to recommend it. But there's also a wisdom rooted in knowledge, expertise and experience that collectively goes by the name of authority. It's time to restore it. What if higher education responded to plummeting public confidence by demanding a whole lot more of students, especially through extensive core requirements? Or if professors gave grades that reflected actual performance? Or if administrators responded to rules-breaking with summary expulsions? What if the news media, also facing declining levels of trust, stopped catering to their least literate readers, stopped caring about their angriest ones, stopped publishing dumbed-down versions of news and stopped acting as if journalism was just another form of entertainment? Maybe moves like those would spell the death of academia and the news media. I think it would help save them both. The words today's consumers almost never hear -- "You are wrong" -- are sometimes the ones that, unknowingly, they most yearn for.
Don't Hate on the D.M.V. It's Actually Great.
YOU MAY DISAGREEwith me on a visceral level. You would not be alone. It is chic to roll your eyes at the D.M.V., to express exaggerated condolences when people say they have to renew their driver's licenses. Even more than other government services, the D.M.V. is characterized as a bureaucratic black hole with long lines, surly clerks, inefficiencies. D.M.V. hateration is so mainstream that it made it into a children's cartoon: In 2016, "Zootopia" anthropomorphized a pitiable sloth as a D.M.V. worker. (To the credit of those department workers' good humor, I've seen a photo of that sloth posted in my local D.M.V.) I hate the way people hate the D.M.V. I hate that it's cool to hate it. I hate what hating the D.M.V. says about our civic imagination. We are living in one of the most unequal periods in modern history. The gulf between the wealthy and everyone else is so wide that you'd need a private jet to cross it expeditiously. Wealthy interests have an outsize influence on our politics and our lawmaking. Corporations can buy more political influence than voters can demand for regular people. Whenever you see a radically unfit candidate running for office, you can usually find a wealthy donor making that person's campaign viable. In the middle, instead of fighting for equity, people who are not quite wealthy but not really poor compete with one another on razor-thin margins -- to buy houses in slightly better neighborhoods, to get their children into schools with slightly higher test scores so that they can get into colleges that are slightly more prestigious. All of this scrabbling by the not quite wealthy, who are desperate not to be grouped in with the unfortunate masses, is why we cannot have nice things, like public transportation and public bathrooms and safe, free public water access. Why upgrade the subway system when you can afford a car? Why bother with financing public parks when you can buy into a master-planned community with "green space"? This stratification is everywhere -- fast passes on toll roads, exclusive access at amusement parks, so-called black car premiums on ride-share apps, private dining clubs, fast lanes for loyal customers. Americans increasingly act like public spaces are for suckers because they can pay for exclusivity instead. The D.M.V. is so hated because it does not make status distinctions. You can't pay to separate yourself from the masses. Everyone has to search the same cumbersome websites for the right forms. You have to compete for an appointment or show up early, whether you have a high net worth or a negative bank balance. Best of all, everybody has to wait her turn. It is inconvenient, but everyone is equally inconvenienced. But that does not account for why it is cool to hate the D.M.V. The lowly municipal office invites eye rolls because it is one of the basic units of democracy. That invisible infrastructure is easy to stereotype as inefficient or useless precisely because most of the time it does what it is supposed to do without making a fuss. You only notice its deficiencies when it doesn't work as it's supposed to. You may not have a good time at the D.M.V., sure. It could be better, but so could the long lines at Target and the customer service for your appliance warranties. If the D.M.V. is slow or inefficient, it isn't because of the state. It is because so many D.M.V.s are chronically underfunded. Privatizing them can make service worse, as New Jersey discovered when it made the switch. Hating on the D.M.V. is also socially acceptable because of who often works at the D.M.V. Women and people of color disproportionately work in the public sector. The D.M.V. is one of the few places where privileged people -- especially privileged white people -- will ever encounter a woman of color with unquestionable authority. The D.M.V. is a beacon of equality in this country. Celebrate the place where you can watch a celebrity fill out the same forms that you do. We should revel in the fact that there is no express lane for beautiful, rich people to renew their licenses. When you sit in those hard chairs waiting for your number to appear on a screen, you should be delighted that no one else is sitting in a cushier chair. Look around that room and see your fellow Americans, the huddled masses, gathered at the feet of a woman asking for the paperwork to be a law-abiding citizen. See it, love it and admit that actually, the D.M.V. is pretty good.
The Saying Goes: Dogs Are Man's Best Friend. But Cats Are Better.
IT'S NOT EASY not being a dog person. Everyone loves a person who loves a dog. Dog people are fun-loving and down to earth. Dog lovers are all-American, and among animals living in people's houses, dogs are decidedly the popular favorite; they like to chase things and play catch. A dog, in turn, is man's best friend. I once moderated a conversation for The Times between Susan Orlean and Julie Klam, both authors of books about dogs. They chortled over the incomprehensibility of people not liking dogs. "Everybody who reads my book is a dog person," Klam, whom I also profiled for her memoir, "You Had Me at Woof," said at one point. I kept my mouth shut. Most cat people try not to make a show of it. It's fine to like both animals, but there's something distinctly suspect about people who outright prefer cats. Cats are considered finicky, standoffish, neurotic; their owners, too. To be catty is to be petty and spiteful. The black cat symbolizes misfortune and death. The very bad date in the story "Cat Person" has, of course, two cats. There is something distinctly questionable, unmanly, weird about the male cat owner. As the essayist Tim Kreider writes in "A Man and His Cat": "There is a certain stigma attached to Cat Bachelorhood," vehement about "not going to turn into some Cat Guy." (Despite this resistance, he later admits, "It is just about impossible, when I see her curled up asleep on the couch with her head upside down, not to bury my whole face directly in the center of the warm plush cat ball and say O mu mu mu mu mu.") The swinging dog owner is out and about at the dog run, but the single cat owner? Happy to stay at home. Give a guy a cat in the movies and that tells you he's a real schlub. Take the film "Hit Man": Glen Powell's lonely and sad loser Gary has two cats. Sexy, married Gary? He's got dogs. For women, the downsides are worse. "Single woman with cat" is practically a Keep Out sign. A woman with more than one cat? Either sad and embarrassing or sad and "Fatal Attraction"-level unsettling. Someone who knits and will be found dead in her apartment surrounded by kitty litter. Remember: The ignoble phrase "childless cat lady" was how JD Vance chose to hit Kamala Harris hard. I have three cats (I know), so permit me to be a little defensive. But three cats, one cat -- it's pretty much the same because cats are independent. They come toilet trained. You can drop them and they land on their feet. You can keep them indoors -- and you probably should; they're satisfied yarping at passing birds through the window without killing them. By contrast, I could see the appeal of dogs if they didn't need to be trained, didn't bark, didn't need to be walked, didn't shed, didn't smell, didn't require washing or grooming. Dogs need more, they take more, and I grant you, they give more in terms of slobber, tail wagging and unfettered loyalty. But forgive me if I find something unseemly in a dog's slavish devotion to its master. "Dogs, especially, live to please us," Tommy Tomlinson wrote recently in The Atlantic. "It is the way they have made themselves essential to our lives." They love us like children because they cannot do otherwise. "By what right has the dog come to be regarded as a 'noble' animal?" Mark Twain, cat loyalist, reportedly wrote when asked his opinion on dogs. "The more brutal and cruel and unjust you are to him the more your fawning and adoring slave he becomes; whereas, if you shamefully misuse a cat once she will always maintain a dignified reserve toward you afterward -- you can never get her full confidence again." In other words, cats are for adults. Cats are discriminating and rightfully so. They will enter a room without acknowledging those present. If you pet them too much or in the wrong fashion, they will let you know. Most cats do not want to be picked up nor care to be taken where you'd like them to go. Thou shalt not stuff an unwilling cat into a carrier. This doesn't mean cats aren't affectionate, but you must win them over and on their terms. You must pay attention to their signals and learn to intuit their moods. But the rewards! When you find the precise spot to nuzzle on a kvetchy old tom's scruff or when a cat bellies up on your lap knowing you're safe, the bliss. When a cat seeks you out for a non-food purpose, you have earned it. In one of the great children's books of all time, "The Story of Mrs. Lovewright and Purrless Her Cat" by Lore Segal, a lonely woman adopts a stray intending him to warm her lap and purr on command. Purrly, as she dubs him, will do no such thing, instead hogging the bed, refusing to purr and, having been imposed upon, biting Mrs. Lovewright one day on the nose. Only in learning to accommodate him, as we must do with those we love, do the two grow on each other. Only in truly knowing and accepting one another do we achieve deep love. Yes, what I'm saying is that cats are more like people. As with humans, so with cats, who can be adored but not mastered; responsive, but never controlled; truly loved only with mutual acceptance and respect. And why expect more from our animals than we would wish for ourselves?
We're Taught to Hate Hypocrisy. We Shouldn't.
UNTIL I MOVED to Manhattan about six months ago, I lived off a busy highway exit in Brooklyn that drove me crazy. Though the exit had a generous merge lane, drivers would inevitably cut in at the very last moment, making the wait longer for everyone who exercised common decency and followed the rules. Every time I took the exit I'd descend into a rage about the inconsiderate, selfish drivers. My rage, I knew, was also tinged with something else: a kind of selfcongratulatory smugness. I would never do such a thing. Except of course I have, many times, and doubtless will again. Not at that exit -- I have some principles! -- but just the other day I sneaked off the highway with a quick, opportunistic swerve into a honking lane of waiting drivers. I was distracted and in a hurry, so I almost missed the exit. What can I say? I'm a hypocrite. Guilty as charged. In these divided and censorious times there is scarcely a more common epithet hurled in public life than "hypocrite." It comes in many forms. Some are indisputable and relatively low stakes, if odious, like mine. Others have unbearably high stakes, like Mitch McConnell's decision to bar President Barack Obama from filling a Supreme Court vacancy almost a year before an election, then perform an about-face and allow President Donald Trump to appoint a justice after early voting in 2020 had already begun. These are the classic forms, finding their roots in the ancient Greek word from which hypocrisy is drawn, evoking the notion of dissembling or playing a part, as if onstage. It is a sin of such enduring power because it involves a most fundamental kind of deception: discovering that someone is pretending to be someone they are not. Catching someone in this deception can be deeply satisfying, bringing low a person who previously had a claim to the moral high ground. These days it feels as though we are living in the golden age of allegations of hypocrisy, perhaps because at no time in human history has it been possible to weigh the words against the deeds of so many people. The internet and social media have created a permanent record of publicly recorded stances, offering an all-you-can-eat buffet of human inconstancy, ready-made for our opprobrium. This is where things start to get very tricky, conflating hypocrisy with treating a complex situation with nuance, or simply changing your mind based on new facts or ideas. Nowhere is this happening with quite the fervor as among the left, where any deviation from supposed principle invites instant rebuke. Recently, Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who has been a staunch critic of Israel and has described its actions in the current conflict in Gaza as genocide, posted on social media about a protest held outside an exhibition commemorating the Nova music festival, where hundreds of people were killed in the Oct. 7 attack by Hamas. "The callousness, dehumanization, and targeting of Jews on display at last night's protest outside the Nova Festival exhibit was atrocious antisemitism -- plain and simple," she wrote. "Antisemitism has no place in our city nor any broader movement that centers human dignity and liberation." This post received a blistering response: "You are worse than any openly fascist politician," one of the protest leaders said in a social media post. "At least we know they are our enemies. Liberals like you will smile in our face as you lie to and backstab our communities." Others piled on, accusing Ocasio-Cortez of being influenced by donations from the pro-Israel group AIPAC, a laughable notion given that she does not take donations from AIPAC and her astonishing prowess as a grass-roots fund-raiser, hauling in around $ 40 million since 2019. The implication was clear: For all her talk of solidarity with Gaza, A.O.C. was just another politician, saying one thing and doing another. She was pretending, playing a part: At best, it is political cynicism. At worst, it is hypocrisy, a clear felony compared with my misdemeanor hypocrisy. The more likely explanation for A.O.C.'s post -- that she, like many others, was genuinely horrified by the protest even as she is deeply critical of Israel -- could not be accepted under this analysis. I have never been especially impressed by the accusation of hypocrisy, in no small part because this is the human condition: We are a collection of aspirations and failings, from which we try to be who we think we should be but constantly fall short. But I understand the appeal of calling out what looks like hypocrisy when we see it, especially now. We live under a penumbra of impotence, even as we face wall-to-wall crises: the heating planet; wars in Ukraine, Gaza and Sudan; the migrant crisis. In place of action and solutions, which seem totally out of reach, we substitute judgment. And what is more satisfying to adjudicate than the charge of hypocrisy? There is a temptation to police small hypocrisies to buttress our principles -- lecture an environmentalist who uses plastic straws, for example. To give hypocrisy a pass, one might argue, is to slide down a slope toward having no principles at all. A better question is: How do you decide which principles you should hold with an iron grip and which you can grasp more loosely, or even ignore, when good might come of doing so? One does not need to sign up for a conspiracy of meaninglessness or embrace a binary choice between principle and expediency. A Manichean devotion to principle brings its own peril. As Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote in his best-known essay, "A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds." But it is a less famous line from that essay, "Self-Reliance," that has always stuck with me. It suggests that finding yourself abandoning a principle may well be a necessary precursor to changing your mind based on something new. It is, Emerson wrote, "a rule of wisdom never to rely on your memory alone, scarcely even in acts of pure memory, but to bring the past for judgment into the thousand-eyed present." We do ourselves no favors when we use the same language to describe our human foibles and genuine moral conflictedness to true amorality, the kind of actions that clearly illustrate that one has no principles beyond naked gain. Sure, Mitch McConnell is a hypocrite. But calling him a hypocrite is a bit like calling Al Capone a tax cheat. It is technically correct, but hardly captures the moral atrocity of his actions. In these merciless political times we should focus our minds on the true betrayals that really matter. Perhaps if we embrace our inevitable inconsistencies, we can have a more generous, less purity-focused politics of practical good aimed at actual persuasion and real change. lergies and behavioral problems, shrink or disappear when studies adjust for maternal class and I.Q. Even if you distrust the natural-parenting movement, its pressures are hard to escape. Long before I was pregnant, my reporting on maternal health in countries without adequate obstetric care made me very suspicious of essentialist ideas about what Gaskin called "the ancient wisdom" of women's bodies. During my first pregnancy, my sudden obsessive interest in birth led me to a harrowing phenomenon that I wrote about for The Daily Beast: traumatized women who'd lost babies during home births with unqualified midwives. Nevertheless, when my first child needed more milk than I could produce, I was ashamed and hired a lactation consultant who had been profiled by this newspaper. She spoke to me with saccharine condescension and prescribed a regimen of round-theclock feeding and pumping that would have sent me spiraling into postpartum depression if I'd stuck to it. The encounter was one of my lowest moments of early parenthood. Ironically, while there's little evidence showing that breastfeeding is particularly important for babies, there's quite a bit showing that maternal happiness is. If the natural-parenting movement really cared about children, it would do some introspection about how often it makes their parents miserable. Some Think What You Preach Matters More Than What You Do. It Doesn't. WHAT WILL DEFINE the destiny of the American church: its beliefs or its conduct? The two concepts are so distinct within Christianity that they have different names -- orthodoxy (right belief) and orthopraxy (right conduct). Ideally, right conduct should flow from right belief. For example, honesty should flow naturally from the belief that lying is wrong. In messy reality, however, theology does not always dictate morality and sometimes the most religious people are among the most immoral -- in direct defiance of the beliefs they proclaim. Let's make this less abstract. In 1998, the Southern Baptist Convention issued a bold statement of belief, passing a resolution on the moral character of public officials that stated, "Tolerance of serious wrong by leaders sears the conscience of the culture, spawns unrestrained immorality and lawlessness in the society and surely results in God's judgment." Yet in 2016 and 2020, Southern Baptists were a key part of the evangelical coalition that overwhelmingly voted for Donald Trump, one of the lowest-character men ever to run for president. They're expected to do so again in 2024. The denomination declared an orthodoxy, but utterly failed at orthopraxy, and its compromised conduct is now, sadly, far more relevant to American life than its lofty ideals. Christians aren't the only ones tempted to act as if beliefs are more important than actions. They're following a broader cultural trend: a tendency to ignore their own side's hypocrisies for political reasons. The person who prioritizes orthodoxy says, "Hear my voice." The person who prioritizes orthopraxy says, "Watch my life." And two important recent developments in American Christianity demonstrate how the competing emphases can play out in concrete ways. First, Robert Morris, the senior pastor of one of the largest churches in the United States, resigned after confessing to engaging in "sexual behavior" with a child in the 1980s. Second, the State of Louisiana enacted a law requiring the display of the Ten Commandments in public schools. The person who prioritizes orthodoxy will tend to see the Morris scandal as unfortunate but largely irrelevant and the Ten Commandments legislation as momentous. There will always be bad apples, even in the best of orchards. The Ten Commandments, on the other hand, teach universal truths, and exposing children to those truths will change their lives. By contrast, for a person who prioritizes orthopraxy, the bad apples expose the rot in the orchard: The scandal is devastating and the legislation is frivolous. In the fundamentalist tradition of my youth in rural Kentucky, there was an enormous longing for the supposed better days of the past. I can't count the number of times I heard an older member of my congregation shake his or her head at the news and say, "We didn't have those problems when there was prayer and Bible reading in schools." But history teaches a different lesson. I recently had the privilege of hearing Sybil Jordan Hampton tell the harrowing story of what it was like to be one of only five Black children in her high school in Little Rock, Ark., in 1959, deep in the heart of the Bible Belt. Classmates rarely spoke to her and sometimes hissed the N-word at her. The atmosphere was so frightening that she spoke only when it was her turn to read the Bible in class. She always chose Psalm 121 and its cry for God's help in times of distress: "I lift my eyes toward the mountains. Where will my help come from? My help comes from the Lord, the Maker of heaven and earth." Her classmates were unmoved. Orthodoxy didn't inculcate orthopraxy. Instead, their public religiosity blinded them to their own sin. In 2023, I read my friend Russell Moore's powerful book "Losing Our Religion: An Altar Call for Evangelical America." He tells the story of the decline of Catholicism in Ireland after a horrifying sex abuse scandal: He writes that faith declined "because people who once revered the church came to believe that the church did not itself believe what it taught." Prioritizing orthopraxy isn't a secular idea. It's thoroughly biblical. The Apostle Paul declares that "If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have a faith that can move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing." And when Paul listed the "fruit" of God's presence in a believer's life, he did not list a set of theological propositions, but a collection of virtues: "love, joy, peace, forbearance, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and self-control." The American church is torn apart by conflict over theology. It should be united by a pursuit of virtue. The church that truly influences a nation will be one that focuses on doing good more than on being right.
Illustration
