"Hard Fork," a new Times podcast, brings two seasoned reporters together for analysis of the latest tech headlines.
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
The voices of Kevin Roose and Casey Newton come through the speakers clearly enough, but there is an unfamiliar timbre to their words. The two technology reporters are introducing a recent episode of their New York Times podcast, "Hard Fork," but their voices are generated through artificial intelligence.
"There's been an astounding number of breakthroughs in just what's possible to do with A.I.," Mr. Roose says later in the show (in his real voice).
"Hard Fork," named after a programming term to describe a back-to-square-one maneuver, explores industry milestones and weekly trends in tech. The show looks at both the specific and the broader implications of innovation with a mix of earnest analysis, humor and the chemistry that comes from two friends discussing their interests. Candid repartee is woven into interviews with experts, including a start-up founder who raised more than $ 100 million for his A.I. software and a Times reporter who spent dozens of hours inside Meta's so-called metaverse.
The goal, Mr. Roose said, is to help people understand what's happening in the tech world. The podcast should "feel like going out to the bar with your friends who are into technology and want to talk about everything that just happened in this crazy week," he said.
For a while, Mr. Roose and Mr. Newton had been toying with the idea of doing a podcast together. They are both seasoned tech reporters based in California -- Mr. Roose is a Times columnist who previously hosted the podcast "Rabbit Hole," which explored the internet's dark powers of influence, and Mr. Newton previously reported for The Verge and writes Platformer, a newsletter that covers Silicon Valley.
The two found themselves texting each other about interesting stories all the time, Mr. Newton said. Last year, Mr. Roose approached the Audio team at The Times with an idea for a show that would flow like those conversations.
Mr. Roose described his hosting relationship with Mr. Newton: "We're philosophically pretty aligned about the balance between skepticism and optimism; between tech not being all bad, but also not being an unqualified good thing for society."
Episodes of the show, which premiered on Oct. 7, are released on Fridays and feature analysis of big, recent events in the tech landscape, as well as interviews with Times correspondents and industry professionals. There is a short time span from concept to release each week.
That rhythm requires "a lot of thinking about what is going to be on people's minds," Davis Land, a producer on the show, said.
"We don't want to just rehash the headlines," Mr. Land added. "We want to actually provide real, clear analysis that's rooted in Kevin and Casey's reporting."
Throughout the week, the "Hard Fork" team members discuss the biggest news moments with each other. When Elon Musk announced his plans to try to buy Twitter (again), for example, Mr. Roose and Mr. Newton provided context and asked whether the sale was likely to take place. But even as the hosts provide serious insights and reporting, they also want to have fun. A team of music composers created an "Elon theme" that was played before the conversation about Mr. Musk. An interview with the New York Times tech reporter Kashmir Hill, who had just written about Meta's metaverse, started in a British pub -- in Meta's metaverse.
Those idiosyncrasies have helped the podcast settle into its own personality. The first episode featured a "transparency report," in which the two co-hosts explained their reporting processes. This was something Mr. Newton had done in his newsletter, and he and Mr. Roose decided to do the same in the podcast.
"We read that there's low trust in journalism in general," Mr. Newton said. "A way that we can increase trust is by explaining our process a little bit."
The podcast is "intimate in a way that writing a column is not often," Mr. Roose said. "It's easier in that setting to be vulnerable, to think out loud, to not have a fully formed take and to work through it."
Building his thoughts alongside a co-host, he added, "is where a lot of the magic happens."
Sarah Diamond contributed reporting.
