1. Tuesday's elections continued a winning streak for Democrats. Of the following, which was the only contest that Republicans won?
Kentucky governor
Mississippi governor
A Pennsylvania Supreme Court seat
Control of the Virginia House of Delegates
Control of the Virginia State Senate
2. Ohio voters approved ballot measures on which two topics in Tuesday's elections?
Artificial intelligence regulations
Constitutional right to abortion
Enactment of a right-to-work law
Recreational marijuana legalization
Sanctuary state declaration
3. The Supreme Court is generally friendly to gun rights. But the justices' questions at an argument this week suggested they were likely to uphold a federal law meant to do what?
Arm and train teachers to stop school shooters
Ban assault-style rifles nationwide
Incentivize states to adopt "red flag" laws
Let every American carry a concealed weapon
Stop domestic abusers from getting guns
4. The New York City Marathon took place last Sunday, with more than 50,000 runners participating. How many boroughs of the city do runners race through?
1
2
3
4
5
5. Which of the following did the U.S. secretary of state, Antony Blinken, say should govern Gaza after the Israel-Hamas war?
Egypt
Hamas
Israel
NATO
Palestinian Authority
6. "My Name is Barbra," the first memoir by Barbra Streisand (above), came out this week. How long is it?
350 pages
530 pages
775 pages
920 pages
1,650 pages
7. A New York Times/Siena College poll of voters in six battleground states showed President Biden losing to former President Donald J. Trump in five of them. On which of these issues did voters favor Mr. Biden over Mr. Trump?
The economy
Abortion
Immigration
National security
Israel and Palestine
8. A federal jury convicted Sam Bankman-Fried, who founded the FTX cryptocurrency exchange, of what?
Bribing an elected official
Evading taxes by converting his assets to Bitcoin
Failing to register as a lobbyist
Insider trading
Stealing billions of dollars from customers
9. Which senator announced this week that they would not seek re-election?
Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona
Dick Durbin of Illinois
Joe Manchin III of West Virginia
Bob Menendez of New Jersey
Bernie Sanders of Vermont
10. Tyson Foods is recalling nearly 30,000 pounds of food after some consumers said they found small metal pieces in the product. What was the product?
Bacon-stuffed croissants
Cheese-stuffed breadsticks
Dinosaur-shaped chicken nuggets
Jimmy Dean breakfast sandwiches
Mini corn dogs
The News Quiz is published on Fridays in the Morning newsletter. To sign up, visit nytimes.com/themorning. Solutions: 1. B; 2. B and D; 3. E; 4. E; 5. E; 6. D; 7. B; 8. E; 9. C; 10. C.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY COLUMBIA/KOBAL/SHUTTERSTOCK)
