FAST FOOD
Shake Shack's Chief Will Retire Next Year
Randy Garutti, the chief executive of Shake Shack, is set to retire next year while the burger and milkshake chain gains significant momentum as it undergoes a significant expansion.
Mr. Garutti, who is also a board member, has worked for Shake Shack for more than 20 years. He plans to spend more time with his family upon retirement.
Shake Shack has opened 30 new restaurants this year and has a goal of 40 new locations in 2023. It plans to open the 40 restaurants next year, as well.
There are now more than 500 Shake Shacks in 18 countries and 33 states. The company expects to surpass $ 1 billion in revenue this year for the first time with double digit percentage growth in every one of the past 10 years.
The chain got an upgrade from Raymond James analysts last week, which say they expect fatter profit margins and the potential to increase traffic next year. Associated Press
COMPUTER CHIPS
Nvidia Announces Support For Vietnam's Work in A.I.
Nvidia's chief executive, Jensen Huang (right), said on Monday that the company will expand its partnership with Vietnam's top tech firms and support the country in training talent for developing artificial intelligence and digital infrastructure.
Nvidia, which has already invested $ 250 million in Vietnam, has so far partnered with leading tech companies to deploy A.I. in the cloud, automotive and healthcare industries.
Reuters reported last week that Nvidia was set to discuss cooperation deals on semiconductors with Vietnamese tech companies and authorities in a meeting on Monday.
At Monday's event, Vietnam's investment minister Nguyen Chi Dzung said the country had been preparing mechanisms and incentives to attract investment projects in the semiconductor and artificial intelligence industries. Reuters
RETAIL CONTROVERSY
Zara Ad Campaign Sparks Outrage and a Boycott
Zara pulled an advertising campaign featuring mannequins with missing limbs and statues wrapped in white from the front page of its website and app on Monday after it prompted calls by pro-Palestine activists for a boycott of the fashion retailer.
Inditex, which owns Zara, said the change was part of its normal procedure of refreshing content. It did not comment on the boycott calls, but said the "Atelier" collection was conceived in July and the photos were taken in September. Zara said at the launch of the collection on Dec. 7 that it was inspired by men's tailoring from past centuries. The photos appear to show an artist studio with ladders, packing materials, wooden crates and cranes, and assistants wearing overalls.
Zara's Instagram account saw tens of thousands of comments posted about the photos, many with Palestinian flags, while "#BoycottZara" was trending on messaging platform X. Reuters
Credit: By The Associated Press and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY EDGAR SU/REUTERS)
