Visiting Syracuse, N.Y., the president praised advanced manufacturing and criticized Republican plans for rising prices.
SYRACUSE, N.Y. -- President Biden hailed a major chip manufacturer's pledge to invest $ 100 billion in new manufacturing facilities in upstate New York on Thursday, his latest attempt to try to convince voters ahead of the midterm elections that his administration has strengthened the American economy.
He also sought to deflect Republican attacks on his record on rapid inflation, the issue that has become a drag on Democratic candidates nationwide.
In a small gymnasium at Onondaga Community College, Mr. Biden said the investment from the company, Micron, was a result of his administration's effort to revitalize American manufacturing in certain industries, such as electric vehicles and semiconductors, in which the United States is competing with China for growing global markets.
Mr. Biden's remarks came at a pivotal moment, with the United States embarking on its most expensive foray into industrial policy since World War II. Mr. Biden has pinned much of his economic agenda on his ability to revitalize American manufacturing, in particular the semiconductor industry, which is critical to industries varying from automobiles to artificial intelligence.
And with control of Congress at stake in the midterm elections next month, Mr. Biden is trying to project a sense of economic optimism, praising America's potential for manufacturing growth and the strength of its job market.
In August, Mr. Biden signed into law the CHIPS and Science Act of 2022, which provides $ 52 billion in grants and subsidies for companies to build and expand computer chip factories in the country.
"It's a fundamental shift," Mr. Biden said. "And it's working, compared to what the very conservative Republicans are offering these days."
Still, despite the federal government's incentives, American semiconductor suppliers are facing obstacles, including an unexpected slowdown in consumer demand for electronics and new U.S. restrictions on sales to customers in China.
The visit came as the U.S. economy showed renewed signs of growth in a report issued on Thursday by the Commerce Department.
Republicans were quick to try to cast the growth numbers as a negative, saying they would not last and would soon be replaced by a recession. Many economists are forecasting an economic dip as the Federal Reserve raises interest rates rapidly in a bid to control inflation.
Republican candidates have campaigned on rolling back some of the tax increases Mr. Biden imposed to fund his agenda, extending business and individual tax cuts passed by Republicans in 2017 that are set to expire in the coming years, reducing federal regulations on energy development and other business and repealing the Inflation Reduction Act.
In a memo released by the White House on Thursday morning, officials sought to frame those proposals as potential fuel for further inflation, posing a risk to families struggling with high prices. "Their economic plan will raise costs and make inflation worse," administration officials wrote.
Mr. Biden has struggled in recent weeks to persuade voters to view inflation as an issue that shows the contrasts between him and Republicans, rather than a referendum on his presidency and policies.
Polls suggest the economy and rapid price growth, which touched a 40-year high this year, are top of mind for voters as they determine control of the House and Senate. Nearly half of all registered voters in a New York Times/Siena College poll this month named economic issues or inflation as the most important issue facing the country, dwarfing other issues in the survey, like abortion. Other polls have shown voters trust Republicans more than Mr. Biden and his party to handle inflation.
Through the start of this month, Republican candidates had spent nearly $ 150 million on inflation-themed television ads across the country this election cycle, according to data from AdImpact. Those ads blame Democratic policies under Mr. Biden, including the $ 1.9 trillion economic relief package he signed in 2021, for inflation; economists generally agree that the spending helped fuel some price growth but disagree on how much.
Mr. Biden previewed his renewed attacks on Republicans on Wednesday evening, in a trio of virtual fund-raisers for Democratic members of Congress. In each one, Mr. Biden focused almost exclusively on economic issues, championing the laws he has signed and warning that Republicans would seek to roll them back.
The president criticized Republicans for promoting what he called "mega-MAGA trickle-down economics," and he said the tax cuts Republicans support risk creating turmoil in financial markets.
Photograph President Biden spoke at Onondaga Community College in Syracuse, N.Y., on Thursday to promote his administration's effort to revitalize American manufacturing days before the midterms. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KENNY HOLSTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
