Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry , offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here .
Hello! I'm writing to you from Los Angeles, where the weather is sunny and the electric scooters are venture backed.
I spent most of the week at the Code Conference, where the tech world's elite gathered to discuss the current state of the tech industry. It was a fascinating event, less in the sense of newsy product announcements (which there weren't many of) and more in the general finger-in-the-wind sense of how the tech industry is thinking about itself.
Notable at this year's Code was that there seems to be a growing rift between the largest tech companies -- Apple, Amazon, Google, Facebook and Microsoft -- and the rest of the industry.
The shadow of the big tech companies loomed large over the conference, even if their presence was minimal. No executives from Apple, Amazon or Google spoke at Code, and when executives from Microsoft and Facebook did take the stage, they mostly talked about the past. (Brad Smith, Microsoft's president, offered some historical perspective on the company's antitrust woes from the late 1990s; Sheryl Sandberg and Mike Schroepfer from Facebook did yet another rote recitation of the company's post-Cambridge Analytica "we'll do better" script.)
Instead, much of the stage time went to leaders of companies just outside the tech A-list -- large, popular companies that in any other era would be considered enormous success stories, but that have spent years locked in a fight for survival against their bigger, more entrenched rivals.
From the perspective of the tech B-list, there are two huge fights to be won. First, you need to establish a foothold in a market, either by out-innovating old-line incumbents -- taxis, hotels, music labels -- or by creating a new market altogether. Then, once you're established and growing, a bigger worry emerges: What if one of the Big Five squashes you?
A good example of a tech B-lister is Spotify, which appears to be winning its battle with its biggest suppliers -- the three labels that provide the vast majority of Spotify's music -- but lives in perpetual danger of being steamrollered by a tech giant. Onstage at Code, Spotify's chief executive, Daniel Ek, fielded several questions about whether he worried about competitors like Apple, Amazon and Google, all of which have their own music streaming services and, more important, control the hardware platforms (iOS, Android, Alexa) on which people consume music.
Mr. Ek mostly deflected, saying that there are "very, very few opportunities that a billion-plus people around the world care about," and that the giants' interest in music streaming showed the attractiveness of the category.
But of course he's worried. The message of the past several years is clear: No matter how big and successful you are as a consumer-facing media, communications or advertising company,you'll eventually end up in the same boat, butting up against the shore of the island where Google, Amazon, Apple, Microsoft and Facebook have constructed their impregnable fortresses. (Side note: If you like reading about those five companies, you'll probably be glad that mycolleague Farhad Manjoo, who is writing an entire book on them, is returning from book leave next week.)
Evan Spiegel, Snap's chief executive, sounded a similar note at the conference when asked about Facebook's habit of blatantly copying Snapchat's most distinctive product features. (Mr. Spiegel's sassy comeback -- "We would really appreciate it if they copied our data protection practices also" -- was the best line there.)
But perhaps the clearest articulation of the tech B-list worldview came from Randall Stephenson, the chief executive of AT&T. Mr. Stephenson has been fighting to acquire Time Warner since November 2016 in an attempt to cobble together some combination of content libraries, mobile networks and advertising tech that is big enough to survive a battle with the Googles and Amazons of the world.
Asked by Recode's Peter Kafka how he thought about this battle, Mr. Stephenson (using an acronym for Facebook, Apple, Netflix and Google) answered:
"Well, I believe if you don't create a pure, vertical, integrated capability, vertically integrated capability -- from distribution all the way through content creation and advertising models -- you're going to have a hard time competing with these guys. And the statistic we throw out, and since we announced this deal in November of 2016, the FANG market caps have gone up over $1 trillion. You better figure out how to vertically integrate here if you want to compete with those players."
It's not unusual to see small firms complaining about the difficulty of breaking into established markets. It's more unusual to see those complaints coming from the leader of a $200 billion telecom giant. And it shows just how dominant the tech A-list has become, and how difficult overcoming its concentration of market power is proving to be.
Here are a few other tech stories of note this past week:
■ My colleagues Scott Shane, Cade Metz and Daisuke Wakabayashi had a great story about how Google's involvement in a Pentagon artificial intelligence project has sparked an "existential crisis" at the company, with leaders disagreeing about how and whether to allow Google's machine-learning technology to serve military interests. Watch this space -- the debate over Project Maven at Google is one of the first of what I suspect will be many employee-led revolts over ethics and corporate behavior at the largest tech firms.
■ My colleague Nathaniel Popper wrote about the chaos unfolding at Envion, a Swiss cryptocurrency company that raised $100 million in an initial coin offering this year and is now, in Nathaniel's words, "melting down, with the people who created it accusing one another of fraud." I, for one, am shocked.
■ The SoftBank Vision Fund, Silicon Valley's rich uncle, is taking its giant bags of money on the road. General Motors announced on Thursday that SoftBank was making a $2.25 billion investment in its Cruise self-driving car division, in exchange for an eventual 20 percent stake in the unit after its vehicles are commercially ready. That's a pretty nice validation for G.M., which bought Cruise for nearly $1 billion just two years ago, and a further sign that SoftBank is willing to keep spending money like an Instagram scammer in pursuit of the next big thing.
■ I enjoyed Taylor Lorenz's piece in The Atlantic about the struggling meme economy, where the shortening life cycle of memes has made it harder for merchandise hawkers on sites like DankMemeMerch.com and "Dank Tank" to sell their Tide Pod socks and Yanny vs. Laurel T-shirts. SoftBank Vision Fund, only you can invest in these struggling businesses and save the meme industry from ruin.
Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer at large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose .
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
