Three years after racial protests consumed Yale's campus and propelled a national conversation about free speech, Nicholas A. Christakis, a professor at the heart of the controversy, has been awarded the university's highest faculty honor, the Sterling Professorship. The appointment is the latest turn in Yale's continued reckoning with the fallout of the protests, which were ignited in 2015, in part, by an email from Professor Christakis's wife, Erika Christakis, but quickly spread to what students said was a broader culture of racism. As the protests gained national attention, they came to define Professor Christakis's reputation in certain circles, making him arguably just as well-known for his confrontation with students in a college courtyard as for his groundbreaking sociological research.
In the confrontation, videos of which went viral, Professor Christakis defended his wife's email, in which she questioned guidance that the school had sent to students about wearing what might be seen as culturally inappropriate Halloween costumes. In it she asked, "Is there no room anymore for a child or young person to be a little bit obnoxious ... a little bit inappropriate or provocative or, yes, offensive?"
In the years since, Professor Christakis has been both hero and pariah on Yale's campus, seen alternately as a fierce warrior of free expression or an unapologetic defender of ignorance. And Yale, suddenly a lightning rod for conservative and progressive critics alike, has repeatedly found itself forced to reaffirm its commitment to both ideological and racial diversity.
After the protests subsided, Professor Christakis stepped down from his post as the head of a residential college but retained his tenured teaching position.
Yale made no mention of the controversy in its decision, which was issued in a news release last month, when many students were away for the summer. The release cited Professor Christakis's extensive educational record and published works and his research into topics from public health to artificial intelligence. Professor Christakis is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and was named one of Time magazine's 100 most influential people in 2009.
Thomas Conroy, a university spokeswoman, said the decision was made purely on academic grounds. Candidates for endowed faculty chairs such as the Sterling are proposed by the university president and approved by the board of trustees, he said. "He's highly regarded in academic circles, he's an outstanding scholar worthy of Yale's highest faculty recognition," Mr. Conroy said of Professor Christakis, "and that's why he was named."
When asked if the 2015 protests had affected the decision, Mr. Conroy referred to a statement the university issued at the time, in which it declared that the Christakises were "deeply valued members of the university community" who had the "full support of the Yale University leadership."
But despite the university's insistence on the separation between Professor Christakis's academic record and his political notoriety, the controversy has continued to shape campus conversation.
The campus activism led to steps students considered victories, including changing the name of Calhoun College, a residential college that had been named for John C. Calhoun, the vice president who was an ardent proponent of slavery. Students have also loudly decried more recent racially tinged incidents, such as when a white graduate student called the police in May on a black student for napping in a common room.
Yale's president, Peter Salovey, has written numerous opinion pieces about his dedication to free speech, including one in The New York Times last November. Alumni have threatened to withhold donations, and at least one, James Kirchick, has mounted a petition campaign to join Yale's board of trustees, citing his concern for Yale's future in light of how it handled the 2015 protests.
"Professor Christakis deserves this honor irrespective of any controversy," Mr. Kirchick, who graduated in 2006, said of the Sterling professorship. But, he said, even if the award was intended to compensate for what happened during the protests, "I don't think it makes up for the way he was treated," adding that he thought Yale at the time had left Professor Christakis "hung out to dry."
The immediate response to Professor Christakis's appointment seemed muted. One recent alumna who participated in the 2015 protests told the Yale Daily News that she was shocked by what she called the "cowardice" of announcing the decision during the summer. Others told the student paper that they lauded the decision.
Professor Christakis did not return a request for comment. But he has continued to weigh in on the free speech debate, sometimes obliquely -- such as in an opinion piece in The Times about "teaching inclusion in a divided world," in which he did not mention the protests -- and sometimes more explicitly, like when he denounced on Twitter the "distortions and out-of-context quotes" he said people had drawn from his wife's original email.
His remarks in Yale's announcement of the recognition were brief.
"I am deeply honored by this recognition, which reflects Yale's substantial commitment to interdisciplinary science and also the vibrant contributions of the many students and scholars on my research team," he said. "I am eager to make myself useful to Yale's mission."
Follow Vivian Wang on Twitter: @vwang3
Nicholas Christakis
