YouTube has a 1-billion-hour day
Feb. 27, 2017
YouTube announces a milestone: People watched more than one billion hours of YouTube videos in a single day. Neal Mohan, YouTube's chief product officer: Setting a goal of watch time was really around user satisfaction.
Up until then, the visible currency of YouTube was views. That's how creators measured consumption of their videos. It's how users understood the popularity of a video. So the shift from views to watch time was really around: How do we move away from something that could create incentives like clickbaity thumbnails to something that was about satisfying our users?
Once the goal was set, it was figuring out a way for our systems to deliver. Guillaume Chaslot, a Google engineer who worked on YouTube's video recommendation engine: Basically, we were computing which recommendations people should see. There was a previous algorithm, and we were introducing a new algorithm. In the end, the metric that mattered was total watch time.
Let's say you like football and you like pizza; then the algorithm is going to infer that you like beer, too. It worked a bit, but the thing that seemed to work the best is to just push in one direction. So if you like video games, you click on another video game video, and we'll show you more video game videos. But if you don't like video games, or for some reason you're not in the mood for watching video games, you have no way of giving the signal to the algorithm. Mr. Mohan: It became clear that we were moving toward this goal of one billion hours and that we would hit it in a matter of a few weeks. We definitely recognized the milestone. It was something that a lot of people who had been here for years felt proud of achieving. Mr. Chaslot: We had a huge impact on the world by pushing people in some directions. What seems crazy is that we didn't even care where we were pushing them because we were just monitoring the watch times.
Some filter bubbles got really toxic. We saw, in particular, conspiracy theories; when you start watching a video telling you the earth is flat, YouTube was recommending hundreds of videos telling you the same thing. Mr. Mohan: What this milestone, to me, represents is a step along the way, where YouTube has gone from that village to this major metropolis, where not only is it a reflection of what's happening in the world, it also has this influence on the world. One of the challenges my teams have been working on is how does YouTube live up to that responsibility. Mr. Chaslot: They've changed a bunch of things. In January, they said that they would decrease the promotion of conspiracy theories. That's a really great improvement, but it's still far from being enough.
The problem is that the recommendation engine that handles 70 percent of views on YouTube is flawed by design. If the recommendation engine is not even able to understand that the earth is not flat, it's 2,000 years backward. So why would we want this algorithm to handle all of our political information? As told to JACK NICAS Mark Zuckerberg's mentor calls out Facebook Aug. 8, 2017
Roger McNamee, a onetime mentor to Facebook's chief executive, publicly denounces the social network in an opinion article in USA Today for hurting democracy and spreading misinformation. Mr. McNamee: I never expected to become an activist. I began my career as a technology investor in 1982. I spent 34 years as a true believer in what technology could do to make the world a better place.
In January 2016, I see things going on in the Democratic primary on Facebook -- in Facebook groups notionally associated with Bernie Sanders -- that appeared really inauthentic. And then I saw a series of civil rights things starting with Black Lives Matter in March 2016.
Then Brexit hits in June. And that's when I first realized, "Oh, my God," the same advertising tools that make marketers so successful on Facebook can be used to affect the outcome of an election, and that's when I freaked out.
Mr. McNamee is invited by the technology journalist Walt Mossberg to write an opinion article for the tech news site Recode.
Instead of publishing the op-ed, I sent it to Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook's chief operating officer. That's Oct. 30 of 2016. So that's when I go to them and say I've written this draft op-ed that basically says I believe that the algorithms and business model of Facebook, as well as the culture, are allowing bad actors to harm innocent people.
I spent three months pleading with them to do everything in their power to protect users from this. And I failed.
I might have said it was somebody else's problem. But for whatever reason, I chose to look at it a different way. I had helped Mark keep the company independent, and I'd helped to bring Sheryl in. And for three years I advised them. My firm had profited from it.
I never expected to become an activist, and the experience itself has been depressing in the extreme. I've worked with most of the companies that I'm now criticizing. I know a lot of the people who work there. I do not think they are bad people, but they have come to believe things that I do not understand. As told to NELLIE BOWLES Fortnite sweeps the world
Sept. 26, 2017
Epic Games releases the free-to-play Fortnite Battle Royale, an online video game in which 100 players compete to be the last one standing. It becomes a global phenomenon. Tyler "Ninja" Blevins, a gamer who live-streams himself playing Fortnite: My first game, I was terrible. I didn't know what I was doing. But it felt like a different, super-unique game right from the start. And as a streamer and a gamer and a YouTuber, when you're enjoying a game that you're playing, it really shows.
Once I started averaging like 20,000 viewers on Fortnite, that was when I was like, "O.K., this game is popping off."
Mr. Blevins learns that the rapper Drake is following him on Instagram.
He followed me on Instagram as @champagnepapi, and I had no idea that it was him. I woke up one morning and started streaming, and my chat was freaking out, like "Drake followed you on Instagram."
I was like, "All right guys, I'm sure he didn't." And I checked, and he did. And I followed him back right away, and I was freaking out. I ran upstairs. I was like, "Jess, Jess, Jess, Jess, Jess, what do I do?"
Jess is his wife.
Do I ask him to play? I'm like, no, I can't. I have to wait. I'm going to let him message me. And then like two days later he messaged me and was like, "Hey man, you want to play?"
More than 600,000 people watch their game simultaneously.
I really do think it encouraged a lot of athletes and other artists to admit and show their love for gaming. A lot of them started to stream and play with other streamers.
Before Fortnite, gaming was a multibillion-dollar industry, and it's always been really weird that it was a subculture. But over the last 10 years, especially with Fortnite, it's just made it so it's O.K. to be a gamer, right? I mean, everyone games. It's freaking great, man. As told to KEVIN ROOSE Deepfakes stun the internet
Dec. 11, 2017
News breaks of a video circulating on the internet that shows the "Wonder Woman" star Gal Gadot having sex with her stepbrother. The video is not real; someone had used artificial intelligence to superimpose Ms. Gadot's face on the body of a pornographic actress. Phillip Isola, one of the A.I. researchers who pioneered the techniques used to create deepfakes: In 2011, 2012, deep learning started taking off. The big event was, deep nets could recognize animals in photos.
It took a few years until people started to make systems that could do the opposite: not take an image and recognize that it was a cat, but take the label "cat" and synthesize an image that looks like a cat -- the inverse problem. You could make photos of really low-resolution faces.
Very rapidly after that, people were able to use these things for face-swapping and deepfakes and all of that.
The sudden attention catches researchers by surprise.
The technology advanced so quickly right around those years. It went from "O.K., this is a really interesting academic problem, but you can't possibly use this to make fake news. It's just going to produce a little blurry object" to "Oh, you can actually make photo-realistic faces."
It was quite a complicated pipeline to get it to work in that era. But it was really the release of an easy-to-use piece of code that made it so that the internet went wild with it.
Dr. Isola wrestles with the implications.
It definitely raised some concerns, because you get into a lot of difficult problems like "What is our ownership over our public image?" And there's also the issue that people are not calibrated to know what is real and what is not.
But if we restrict ourselves from working on these tools, we also take away all the positive usages. As told to CADE METZ Bitcoin's spike sets off a frenzy
Dec. 17, 2017
The price of the cryptocurrency skyrockets to more than $ 20,000 on some exchanges -- before coming down to earth a few months later. Brian Armstrong, co-founder and chief executive of Coinbase, an exchange company in San Francisco: The vibe in the office -- it was palpable. You didn't want to even go to the bathroom or go home because you might miss something historic.
There was a day where we had like 50,000 people sign up. That was the highest we'd ever seen sign up in a day at that time. I was trying to get a visual of what that even would look like. The Giants' stadium in San Francisco holds about 50,000 people, and so I sent a photo of that to the team.
Then a week went by -- and then we had a day where 500,000 people signed up in one day.
It was literally just like wartime. You try to make the best decisions you can. You catch a few hours of sleep and come back.
He worries that many people are risking too much on cryptocurrencies.
The prices were kind of getting so it felt like irrational exuberance, like a bubble.
Somebody came to my apartment to deliver a package. And the guy was like, "Sir, I have a question for you. I know that you run this company. Should I be buying Bitcoin right now?" And I was like, "Oh, my gosh, this is super uncomfortable."
He writes a blog post encouraging people not to get caught up in the hype.
It's sort of like a love-hate relationship with these kinds of trading things. On the one hand, it's a huge gift. Because every time it happens, it gets another order of magnitude of people into the crypto ecosystem.
But on the other hand, it's a little bit of a distraction from the overall potential of what this can really be. It's much more than just trading some new asset class. As told to NATHANIEL POPPER
