U.S. stocks edged back from record levels Monday as they head for the final stretch of what looks to be their latest winning month.
The S&P 500 slipped 19.27 points, or 0.4 percent, to 5,069.53 after closing last week at a high. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 62.30, or 0.2 percent, to 39,069.23, and the Nasdaq composite dipped 20.57, or 0.1 percent, to 15,976.25.
Berkshire Hathaway was one of the heaviest weights on the market, even though Warren Buffett's company reported stronger results for the end of 2023 than analysts expected. Class-B shares of the company, whose subsidiaries include GEICO, Fruit of the Loom and Brooks running shoes, initially jumped more than 3 percent but later fell back to a loss of 1.9 percent.
The famed investor warned shareholders not to expect any more "eye-popping performance" because there are no bargains available in the market of big enough size to make a meaningful difference. Mr. Buffett is notorious for buying companies when they're cheap.
That follows broader criticism from some financial analysts that prices all over Wall Street have soared too high in its big run since Halloween.
The S&P 500 is on track to close out its fourth straight winning month and is coming off its 15th winning week in the last 17. And the stock market may not have been cheap even when it bottomed out in October 2022. That marked the priciest bear-market low in history, according to some measures of stock prices against corporate earnings, says Doug Ramsey, chief investment officer of Leuthold.
This recent rally got going last October amid hopes that inflation is cooling enough for the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates several times this year. Such cuts would relax the pressure on the economy and financial system, while goosing investment prices.
Expectations are still high for rate cuts to come eventually this year, but traders have been delaying their forecasts following some stronger-than-expected reports on the economy. That data in the meantime raises hopes that growth in profits for companies can strengthen, which helps stock prices too.
Amazon's stock slipped 0.1 percent in its first day as a member of the Dow Jones industrial average. It replaced Walgreens Boots Alliance, which fell 3.4 percent.
Homebuilder stocks were mixed after a report showed sales of new homes strengthened last month by less than economists expected. Toll Brothers gained 1.1 percent, and Lennar fell 0.6 percent.
Intuitive Machines lost more than a third of its value after the company said its lunar lander may stop working Tuesday after it landed sideways near the south pole of the moon. The 34.6 percent drop, though, only trims what's been a moonshot for its stock so far this year. It's still up 145.4 percent since the end of 2023.
Last week, stocks got a big boost after another blowout report from Nvidia added more chum to the frenzy that's already built around artificial-intelligence technology. Nvidia, whose chips help power AI technologies, rose another 0.3 percent Monday, and it's already up nearly 60 percent so far this year.
Earnings reporting season for the big companies in the S&P 500 is in its tail end, but this week still offers updates from several big names. They include several that could give color on how well spending by U.S. households is holding up. Such spending has been one of the main reasons the U.S. economy has blasted through expectations for a possible recession.
Best Buy, Lowe's and TJX, the parent company of T.J. Maxx and Marshalls, will all report this week. So will several big tech-related companies, including Salesforce.com and HP.
Treasury yields ticked higher in the bond market. The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 4.28 percent from 4.25 percent late Friday.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
