Generate image description Jensen Huang, chief executive of Nvidia, at the company’s annual conference in San Jose, Calif., on March 18, 2024. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)
This summer, Wall Street and Silicon Valley began to question whether generative artificial intelligence could produce enough benefits to justify its staggering costs.
But chipmaker Nvidia showed Wednesday that enthusiasm for AI is still running hot. The company, a bellwether for AI spending, blew past Wall Street’s expectations for another quarter, reporting that its sales and profit had more than doubled during the three months that ended in July. It also projected that sales in the current quarter would increase 80% from a year ago, exceeding earlier estimates.
Revenue was $30.04 billion in the quarter, surpassing its $28 billion estimate in May. Net income rose to $16.95 billion from $6.19 billion a year ago, eclipsing the most recent quarterly profits of Meta and Amazon.
Shares in the company, which has been one of the market’s hottest stocks, fell by as much as 7% in after-hours trading, as the company acknowledged it had some production challenges with a forthcoming AI chip. It said the chip would still be available to customers this year.
The company said it would spend an additional $50 billion on repurchasing its own shares. In the quarter ending in July, it spent $15.4 billion on share repurchases and dividends.
The results speak to how Nvidia continues to dominate the market for AI chips, even as it faces rising competition and staggering expectations. Years before other big chip companies, Nvidia’s CEO, Jensen Huang, bet that semiconductors known as graphics processing units, or GPUs, would make AI systems possible. He built the company over the ensuing years to corner the market.
Nvidia now supplies more than 90% of the chips essential to building AI. It is raking in sales as bigger companies such as Microsoft, Meta, Amazon and Alphabet, the parent company of Google, pour more than $50 billion into building AI data centers to support endeavors as varied as chatbots including ChatGPT and pharmaceutical companies using the technology to develop new drugs.
Nvidia is at the forefront of what is expected to be $1 trillion in spending on data centers and energy costs to support AI, according to analysts.
Wall Street has rewarded Huang’s prescience. Nvidia’s value has tripled over the past year to more than $3 trillion, from $1 trillion, making it one of the three most valuable technology companies in the world along with Microsoft and Apple. But uncertainty about the sustainability of the AI expansion has made its stock price more unpredictable than that of its peers.
The company’s shares sank 10% on a single day in April, its largest decline on record at the time, amid a broader pullback on tech stocks. The stock later rebounded and jumped 4% on Aug. 19, after Goldman Sachs raised its outlook for the company in anticipation of Wednesday’s earnings report.
Customers want more of its chips than Nvidia can produce. The dynamic has raised concerns with government authorities about the company’s power to determine how its scarce but essential technology is being allocated. The Justice Department, the European Union, Britain and China have each begun looking into the company’s sales practices.
Nvidia is also contending with concerns that its chips are critical to national security. Officials in Washington fear that the chips could be used to help China take a lead in AI development.
Two years ago, the U.S. Commerce Department banned shipments of advanced chips to China, forcing Nvidia to create a less powerful chip for the Chinese market. Now, Huawei, one of China’s biggest tech companies, is beginning to make its own AI chips that rival the performance of Nvidia’s products, analysts say.
Competition is on the rise, as well. In the United States, AMD, Intel and smaller players like Cerebras, a startup in Silicon Valley, are releasing more powerful chips. And customers such as Microsoft and Amazon are developing custom chips that could lessen their dependence on Nvidia.
“With every passing quarter, everyone clenches their fist tighter and tighter, and asks, ‘How long can this go on for?’” said Timothy Arcuri, a senior semiconductor analyst with UBS. “The debate isn’t about their sales numbers being good but the bigger picture of whether next year is the peak and the music stops. I think the music goes on for a while.”
The biggest question hanging over Nvidia has been how long its customers will want more of its chips than it can produce. In May, Huang said the company wouldn’t have enough supply to meet customer demand until “well into next year.”
This month, Nvidia’s shares fell after reports that the company would delay shipments of its newest AI chip. The company said in a statement at the time that production for the chip, called Blackwell, was on track for later this year.
But during a call with analysts Wednesday, Nvidia’s chief financial officer, Colette Kress, acknowledged that the company had trouble with Blackwell, saying that it had made a change to the GPU production process to improve manufacturing. She said Nvidia would begin making larger volumes of the chip later this year, adding that “demand is well above supply.”
“There were no functional changes,” Huang said on the call. Customers are continuing to purchase Nvidia’s current line of GPUs, he said, because “they need accelerated computing.”
As pressure has risen on Nvidia, Huang has pushed to bolster its business and compete with its customers. Last year, the company developed its own cloud computing product, DGX Cloud, which charges customers $37,000 a month to have access to and control one of its supercomputers.
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
