Wall Street slipped as stocks slumped worldwide Wednesday on worries about the strength of the global economy and inflation.
The S&P 500 fell 0.6 percent, the Dow Jones industrial average dropped 0.4 percent, and the Nasdaq composite lost 0.6 percent.
Stock markets in Asia fell even more following discouraging data on manufacturing from China. The world's second-largest economy has not been rebounding as strongly as many investors had hoped. That raises worries when economies around the world are contending with inflation and higher interest rates.
Wall Street has weathered such concerns pretty well recently, largely because of gains for a handful of tech companies and others getting swept up in the buzz around artificial intelligence. The S&P 500 closed out May with a modest gain.
But some of the air seeped out of those big winners on Wednesday. Nvidia, whose chips are helping to power the surge into A.I., dropped 5.7 percent for its first fall since it gave a monster forecast last week for upcoming sales.
Worries are also rising for the U.S. economy, which has slowed under the weight of much higher interest rates. The Federal Reserve has raised rates at a furious pace since early last year in hopes of getting inflation under control. But high rates work by hurting the economy and hitting prices for investments.
"We see this as a race for weakness between inflation and economic activity," said Tony Roth, chief investment officer at Wilmington Trust.
Either inflation needs to break lower to return to the Fed's target, which would allow it to go easier on interest rates, or the economy will fall into recession. Mr. Roth said both the economy and inflation have remained strong for longer than he expected: "It's a very slow race to the bottom."
A report released Wednesday morning bolstered expectations for the Federal Reserve to raise rates at least one more time. It showed employers advertised more job openings than expected, the latest signal of a job market that has remained remarkably resilient.
While that's good news for workers and for the economy, it also gives the Fed more leeway to keep rates high. A strong job market could keep upward pressure on workers' wages, which Wall Street fears could keep inflation high.
"The increase in job openings is the worst news the Fed could have because that just puts more pressure on wages," Mr. Roth said.
But stocks pared their losses in the afternoon after a Fed official hinted the central bank may hold rates steady at its next meeting in two weeks.
"Indeed, skipping a rate hike at a coming meeting would allow the Committee to see more data before making decisions about the extent of additional policy firming," the Fed governor Philip Jefferson said in a speech. But he said the Fed could still raise rates again at a later meeting.
Other, smaller portions of the economy have shown much more pain in the face of higher rates. A report on Wednesday morning suggested manufacturing in the Chicago region is contracting by much more than economists feared.
The U.S. banking system has also come under pressure. The Fed-driven surge in rates means customers are pulling their deposits in hopes of making more in interest at money-market funds.
On Wall Street, Ford Motor fell 4.7 percent after its chief executive, Jim Farley, told the Bernstein Decisions Conference that electric cars will cost more to make than gas-powered vehicles until at least 2030.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury, which helps sets rates for mortgages and other important loans that influence the housing and other markets, fell to 3.64 percent. The two-year yield, which moves more on expectations of Fed action, fell to 4.39 percent.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph Ford Motor fell 4.7 percent after details from the company about the cost of producing electric cars. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID ZALUBOWSKI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
