Lisa Susanne Bridge and Gilad Berenstein were married Oct. 7 at the Crystal Gardens in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. Rabbi Daniel Weiner officiated. The bride, who is 32 and taking her husband's name, is the vice president of training and education, in Seattle, at Ben Bridge Jeweler, for which her father, Edward L. Bridge, is the president and a chief executive. The bride is also the designer of her namesake jewelry collection, which is sold online and in 11 western states. She graduated with honors from Washington University in St. Louis and received two gemological certificates, one from the Gemological Institute of America in Carlsbad, Calif., and the other from the American Gem Society in Las Vegas.
She is the daughter of Pamela S. Bridge and Mr. Bridge of Seattle.
The groom, 30, is the founder and chief executive of Utrip, a travel planning start-up in Seattle. He graduated from the University of Washington, from which he also received a master's degree in public accounting.
He is a son of Iris Berenstein and Yair Berenstein of Spokane, Wash. The groom's mother is the education director at Temple Beth Shalom in Spokane. His father is an artificial intelligence engineer at Commonwealth Associates, an engineering consultancy in Liberty Lake, Wash. He is also an adjunct professor of applied mathematics at Gonzaga University in Spokane, Wash.
Ms. Bridge and Mr. Berenstein met in April 2015 at a hoedown thrown by a mutual friend in Seattle.
"I had been invited and none of my friends could go," Ms. Bridge said. "But I had a new suede fringe skirt and I was determined to wear it."
Though Ms. Bridge knew no one at the party, she was introduced by the mutual friend to several of Mr. Berenstein's colleagues. "A few of them mentioned their founder, Gilad," she said, "but I assumed he had to be someone older."
At the end of the night, she did meet Mr. Berenstein. They chatted briefly and went their separate ways, but he had left an impression.
"I was definitely intrigued," Ms. Bridge said. "There was a real energy about him, and I liked him enough to tell my mom later that night that I had met this very interesting guy."
Mr. Berenstein was equally impressed. "I thought she was beautiful," he said. "She seemed very intelligent and energetic, and she had the world's happiest smile."
The next week, their mutual friend suggested to Mr. Berenstein that he call Ms. Bridge, giving him her number. Mr. Berenstein left a message on Ms. Bridge's cellphone, but she was unable to retrieve it.
"I tried to play the message for a couple of days before I finally gave up," she said.
A few days later, he called back. She missed it again, leaving Mr. Berenstein to believe that she wasn't interested.
Another week went by before Ms. Bridge finally heard the second message, and soon realized that it was Mr. Berenstein who had left the original message.
"I was horrified that this poor boy had now called me twice and I hadn't returned his calls," Ms. Bridge said. "I called him back immediately."
She, too, left a message. But he returned her call the next morning, jokingly suggesting "perhaps texting may be easier."
The following month they went on their first date to a bar and then a restaurant in Seattle. "The conversation just flowed," Ms. Bridge said. "He was a very kind soul."
They bonded over a shared love of entertaining family and friends as well as a love of travel. In March, they rode elephants in Chiang Mai, Thailand, during a trip to nearby Bangkok to check on a manufacturer of Ms. Bridge's jewelry collection.
"One of the things we had in common was a passion for exploring the world and learning new things," Ms. Bridge said. "Now we get to do all of that exploring together."
Lisa Bridge, Gilad Berenstein
