9 P.M. (Starz) FURY (2014) An American tank crew -- its leader, Sgt. Don Collier (Brad Pitt), a.k.a. Wardaddy, and his motley crew (Michael Peña, Jon Bernthal, Shia LaBeouf and Logan Lerman) -- fights its way across Germany in the spring of 1945 as the Nazis retreat toward Berlin in Hitler's suicidal last stand. Children are conscripted and uncooperative parents murdered. And while the Allies may have momentum, the Germans still have plenty of tanks, many superior to the Americans'. David Ayer, whose drama is less an epic than a series of tense episodes, "has a way of filming violence that is both intense and matter-of-fact," A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. "Like many other post-'Saving Private Ryan' combat movies, this one emphasizes the chaotic immediacy of battle, staking its claim to authenticity on the unflinching depiction of bloodshed: Heads are vaporized by mortar rounds. Limbs are severed by bursts of automatic-rifle fire. Human flesh is charred by flames and shredded by shrapnel. But within this gore-spattered, superficially nihilistic carapace is an old-fashioned platoon picture, a sensitive and superbly acted tale of male bonding under duress." (Image: Mr. Lerman, left, and Mr. Pitt.)
>
10 A.M. (CUNY) BASEBALL: THE NEW YORK GAME Tony Guida hosts this special, which distills the city's love of the game through interviews with Sharon Robinson, a daughter of Jackie Robinson; the former Dodgers pitcher Ralph Branca; the former New York Times sportswriter George Vecsey; the television sportscaster Sal Marchiano; the former Mets player Ed Kranepool; the Negro leagues third baseman James Robinson; and the historian John Thorn, who tells the story of New York's first baseball superstar, Jim Creighton (1841-1862). The show also visits the Major League Baseball Advanced Media center.
3 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) SAVAGES (2012) Two Southern California marijuana dealers -- Chon (Taylor Kitsch), a cynical combat veteran, and Ben (Aaron Johnson), a soulful Berkeley graduate -- and their gorgeous significant other, O (Blake Lively), take on Mexican traffickers in what Mr. Scott, writing in The Times, called "Oliver Stone's feverish, fully baked, half-great adaptation of Don Winslow's ferocious and funny drug-war novel of the same name." The film, he added, "is a daylight noir, a western, a stoner buddy movie and a love story, which is to say that it is a bit of a mess. But also a lot of fun, especially as its pulp elements rub up against some gritty geopolitical and economic themes." (Image: Ms. Lively.)
7:30 P.M. (CUNY) SCIENCE GOES TO THE MOVIES Christof Koch, president and chief scientific officer of the Allen Institute for Brain Science, joins Faith Salie, an NPR host, and Heather Berlin, a neuroscientist, to discuss artificial intelligence and the fluid nature of consciousness in films like "Ex Machina" and "Blade Runner."
9 P.M. (13) PEDRO E. GUERRERO: A PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNEY "American Masters" and "Voces" team up for the first time to explore the life and work of Mr. Guerrero (1917-2012), a Mexican-American photographer known for his collaborations with the architect Frank Lloyd Wright and the sculptors Alexander Calder and Louise Nevelson. The Oscar-nominated "Cutie and the Boxer" (2013), at 10 on "POV," chronicles the sometimes turbulent, undeniably productive 40-year marriage of the artists Ushio and Noriko Shinohara. "The great virtue of 'Cutie and the Boxer' is that it refuses to simplify the relationship at its center, or to take a side in the Shinoharas' marital drama and creative rivalry," Mr. Scott wrote in The Times. "But there is also warmth and steadfastness, and the exhilarating sense that, even after more than four decades, this lifetime collaboration is still a work in progress."
What's Streaming Now
EX MACHINA (2014) Alicia Vikander portrays Ava, an exquisite embodiment of artificial intelligence and the latest creation of a tech mogul (Oscar Isaac) living off the grid in wilderness splendor. But can Ava think for herself? He intends to find out by luring a young employee (Domhnall Gleeson) into his lair. Alex Garland's futuristic thriller is "a smart, sleek movie about men and the machines they make, but it's also about men and the women they dream up," Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. The movie "belongs to Ava, whose depths of meaning enrich the movie and then engulf it." (iTunes) (Image: Ms. Vikander.)
Photograph (Photograph by Giles Keyte/Columbia Pictures)
