Wall Street slipped Tuesday as worries about the banking system and the global economy forced more caution into financial markets worldwide.
The S&P 500 fell 0.4 percent and at one point was down nearly triple that. It was the fifth loss in the last six days for the index after it rocketed through the year's first seven months.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 0.4 percent after paring an even bigger earlier loss. The Nasdaq composite lost 0.8 percent.
Bank stocks fell after Moody's cut the credit ratings for 10 smaller and midsize ones. It cited a list of concerns about their financial strength, from the effects of higher interest rates to the work-from-home trend that is leaving office buildings vacant.
Across the Pacific, stocks sank after a report showed exports for China's troubled economy shrank by the most since the start of the pandemic in 2020. And in Europe, bank stocks dropped after Italy's Cabinet approved a proposal to tax a chunk of their profits this year.
The worries layered on top of a mixed set of earnings reports from big American companies.
Beyond Meat tumbled 14.3 percent after its revenue weakened by more during the spring than analysts expected. Demand is softening for its plant-based products.
The software company Palantir Technologies gave up some of its big gains for the year after it reported results for the spring that only matched analysts' expectations. It fell 5.3 percent, though it is still up more than 165 percent for the year so far on expectations for tremendous growth. Palantir is one of the companies that has been riding Wall Street's frenzy around artificial intelligence technology.
Helping to limit the stock market's losses was Eli Lilly, which jumped 14.9 percent. It reported profit and revenue for the spring that topped analysts' expectations. It benefited from booming sales for its diabetes treatment Mounjaro, which is widely used for weight loss.
Treasury yields fell in the bond market as investors moved into investments considered safer.
The Federal Reserve has raised its main interest rate to the highest level in more than two decades in hopes of grinding down inflation. The higher rates have hit banks particularly hard.
While downgrading credit ratings for 10 banks and putting six others under review, Moody's said the rapid rise in rates has led to conditions that hurt profits for the broad industry.
Higher rates also knock down the value of investments that banks made when rates were super low. Such conditions helped cause three high-profile failures for American banks last spring, which shook confidence in the system.
Moody's also said troubles may be coming for banks with lots of commercial real estate loans, which are threatened as work-from-home trends keep people out of offices.
"This comes as a mild U.S. recession is on the horizon for early 2024 and asset quality looks set to decline from solid but unsustainable levels," Moody's Jill Cetina and Ana Arsov wrote in a report.
M&T Bank, one of the banks whose credit rating was downgraded, fell 1.5 percent.
Northern Trust, one of the banks that Moody's said it was reviewing for a possible downgrade, fell 1.6 percent
Larger banks whose credit ratings weren't affected also sank. Bank of America dropped 1.9 percent.
Later this week, the government will release data on consumer and wholesale inflation, which could influence what the Federal Reserve does next with interest rates.
Economists expect Thursday's data to show that consumer prices rose by 3.3 percent in July over a year ago, an acceleration from June's inflation rate of 3 percent.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
