The move by Chinese regulators came a week after the Biden administration expanded curbs on the sale of advanced U.S. technology to China.
China's antimonopoly regulator announced on Monday that it was investigating potential violations of antitrust law by Nvidia, the American company that makes a vast majority of the computer chips that power artificial intelligence systems.
The inquiry, a rare move by Beijing, comes a week after the Biden administration expanded curbs on the sale of advanced American technology to China. In the days since, the Chinese government announced that it would ban the export of several rare minerals to the United States and imposed sanctions on more than a dozen U.S. defense firms and defense industry executives.
Together, the moves by Beijing signal its willingness to engage in supply chain warfare as the policy contest over trade and the control of technology escalates between the world's two largest economies.
The battle has made A.I. chips into one of the world's most sought-after technologies, and Nvidia has cornered the market, accounting for 90 percent of global sales by the end of last year. Nvidia's dominance helped it become one of the most valuable companies in the world over the past year.
Graham Webster, an academic focused on geopolitics and technology at Stanford University, said China had a variety of tools it could use to go after foreign companies and show its opposition to U.S. policy. "Nvidia is a pretty obvious target," he added.
China's State Administration for Market Regulation said on Monday that it was investigating Nvidia for violating commitments made during its acquisition of Mellanox Technologies, a company that makes computer networking equipment. The Chinese regulator approved Nvidia's acquisition of the company in 2020 with conditions to prevent anti-competitive practices and ensure supplies to China.
Nvidia said in a statement that it was "happy to answer" questions from China's regulators. "We work hard to provide the best products we can in every region and honor our commitments everywhere we do business," the statement said.
As the Biden administration has progressively tightened restrictions on Nvidia's chip sales to China, the company has responded by offering less powerful versions of its chips to the Chinese market.
Officials in Washington, in trying to prevent Chinese companies from buying advanced chips and the machines to make them, say that the technology is essential not just for smartphones and chatbots but also for military superiority.
Chinese tech companies have resorted to stockpiling the chips, while also turning to smugglers and front companies to secure supplies. At the same time, Beijing is pouring large sums of money into its own chip companies in an attempt to make its tech sector less reliant on foreign technology.
"Well before the Biden administration, the Chinese government wanted greater self-reliance on key technologies," said Mr. Webster, a scholar at the program on geopolitics, technology and governance at Stanford.
The Biden administration has been considering further restrictions on global sales of A.I. chips that could affect Nvidia and its competitors. One new rule could impose more requirements on companies from the United States and other countries when shipping advanced A.I. chips to China, to try to ensure they are not breaking existing U.S. rules, according to two people familiar with the plans who were not authorized to speak publicly.
The new rule would build on letters that the U.S. government sent to Samsung and Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, two of the world's largest chip companies, ordering them to stop sending advanced chips to China. The Biden administration had discovered that TSMC made some components for A.I. chips produced by Huawei, the Chinese telecommunications company, in violation of export controls.
Another pending rule from Washington could impose licensing requirements and caps on the number of chips that could be sold in certain countries, as well as security standards for those buying larger clusters of A.I. chips.
Alan Estevez, a U.S. Department of Commerce official who oversees export controls, declined to comment on the pending rules, but said that the department was continuing to investigate how TSMC chips could end up in Huawei's A.I. products.
The Chinese government's antitrust investigation of Nvidia is not the first time Beijing has targeted American chipmakers.
In October, a think tank with ties to China's internet regulatory agency called for a review of Intel, the American tech company, for selling products that "constantly harmed" China's national security and interests. The last company subject to a cybersecurity review was the American chip maker Micron, which was ultimately cut off from supplying chips to a significant portion of the Chinese market. Another American chipmaker, Qualcomm, paid a $ 975 million fine in 2015 after the Chinese government investigated it for antimonopoly violations.
Last week, Chinese industry groups representing companies in a range of business sectors, including semiconductors and auto manufacturing, called for Chinese companies to purchase more chips domestically or from countries other than the United States.
"American chip products are no longer safe and reliable, and related Chinese industries will have to be cautious in purchasing American chips," the China Semiconductor Industry Association said, following the U.S. decision to impose export controls.
As Nvidia has grown, revenue from China has become less important to the company overall. During its most recent fiscal year, Nvidia's sales there fell to 14 percent of its total business from 19 percent.
But no Chinese company has been able to make chips as advanced as Nvidia's.
"China still wants Nvidia technology, in part or in whole," said Kevin Xu, the U.S.-based founder of Interconnected Capital, a hedge fund that invests in artificial intelligence technologies. "Its market share dominance was well established in China long before export controls."
The U.S. Justice Department is investigating Nvidia's sales practices and its most recent acquisitions. The U.S. inquiry is largely concerned with the company's power to determine how a scarce but essential technology is being allocated.
Competitors and customers around the world have complained about Nvidia's ownership of critical pieces of the A.I. supply chain. In addition to making the chips crucial to building A.I. systems, the company controls software that manages data centers and sells some of the leading equipment that controls high-performance computers.
Photograph Jensen Huang, chief executive of Nvidia, which makes advanced chips. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B5)
