ENERGY
Clean Energy Jobs Grow
At Twice Rate of Others
Jobs in the U.S. clean energy industry in 2023 grew at more than double the rate of the country's overall jobs, and unionization in clean energy surpassed for the first time the rate in the wider energy industry, the Energy Department said on Wednesday.
Employment in clean energy businesses -- including wind, solar, nuclear and battery storage -- rose by 142,000 jobs, or 4.2 percent last year, up from a rise of 3.9 percent in 2022, the U.S. Energy and Employment Report said. The rate was above the overall U.S. job growth rate of 2 percent in 2023.
Overall energy jobs rose 250,000, with 56 percent being in clean energy.
Unionization rates in clean energy hit 12.4 percent, more than the 11 percent in the overall energy business, it said.
That was driven by growth in construction and utility industries and after legislation passed in 2022 including the bipartisan CHIPS Act and President Biden's Inflation Reduction Act, the department said.
Construction jobs in clean energy, driven by the legislation and private-sector investments, "is expected to continue for decades to build out the clean energy infrastructure that we need," Betony Jones, the Energy Department's head of energy jobs, told reporters in a call.
Employment in the utility scale and rooftop solar industries grew 5.3 percent, adding more than 18,000 jobs, it said. The solar installation industry in California, the country's most populous state, says it has lost more than 17,000 jobs due to high interest rates and the state's lowering of net meter rates that allow customers to be credited for excess power their rooftop panels generate.
New jobs in fossil fuels were mixed. The natural gas workforce grew by more than 77,000 or 13.3 percent, while jobs in petroleum fell more than 44,000 or 6 percent.
Coal jobs fell nearly 8,500, or 5.3 percent, as power generation continued to switch from coal to gas, wind and solar. Reuters
MEDIA
ESPN Plans to Add A.I. To Help 'SportsCenter'
ESPN is exploring the use of artificial intelligence to help personalize "SportsCenter" as younger audiences embrace streaming TV, the Disney-owned network's chairperson, Jimmy Pitaro, said on Wednesday.
As audiences shift away from cable TV, Disney is crafting a plan to offer ESPN as a standalone app for the first time starting next year. Disney aims to make the app the pre-eminent digital destination for sports fans, with a tailored version of "SportsCenter," the nightly news and recap show, based on users' interests, Mr. Pitaro told reporters at the company's headquarters in Bristol, Conn.
"A.I. will obviously help significantly in terms of that, not just in terms of the personalization and the clip generation, but also the narration," he said
A.I. can help generate clips for the vast array of sports that ESPN offers, Mr. Pitaro added. "A.I. is not the awful, terrible disruptor that many people think. I personally believe that A.I. will be very helpful and beneficial to the sports industry and to the sports fan."
Disney is also working to add features such as betting, fantasy sports and e-commerce, he said. Reuters
Credit: By Reuters
Illustration
