When Google imagines the future of Web search, it sees a search engine that understands human meaning and not just words, that can have a spoken conversation with computer users and that gives users results not just from the Web but also from their personal lives.
Last week Google showed a few steps it has taken toward making that all-knowing search engine a reality. The new tools, like a voice search that seems to outdo Apple's Siri, make Google more useful. But some, like a feature that incorporates personal Gmail messages in results, could also unnerve those concerned with privacy.
Speaking at an event for reporters in San Francisco, Amit Singhal, senior vice president in charge of search at Google, called the announcements "baby steps in the direction of making search truly universal" and of building artificial intelligence into the search engine.
The Gmail tool, which Google is still testing with a limited number of users, shows results from Gmail if a user is signed in to his or her Google account. Search for Amazon, for instance, and in addition to links to the shopping Web site and information about the river, you could see the receipt from your recent Amazon.com order. Search "my flights" and Google will cull information about your coming flight from your Gmail messages.
Google says it wants to be able to see in your Gmail in-box that you have a reservation at a restaurant an hour away and alert you that the traffic is bad so you need to leave early, an extension of Google Now, which the company introduced in June. Eventually it also plans to include personal information from other Google services like Docs and Drive.
Google is aware that the tool could raise privacy concerns, a problem it has faced in the past when it tested new products like Buzz, an ill-fated social network, only with its employees. That is why the company is first offering it to a million users who sign up at g.co/searchtrial. It also emphasized that users can turn it off.
"We have to do this very carefully, we know that," Mr. Singhal said.
