Aviation
Activist Investor Wants
To Oust Southwest C.E.O.
The activist shareholder Elliott Investment Management has bought a $ 1.9 billion stake in Southwest Airlines and is seeking to force out the chief executive of the struggling airline.
In a letter to Southwest's board, the investment firm complained that Southwest's stock price has dropped more than 50 percent in the last three years. The firm said Southwest failed to evolve, hurting its ability to compete with other carriers. Elliot blamed the Dallas-based carrier's large number of flight cancellations in December 2022 on what it described as the airline's outdated software and operational processes.
Southwest's C.E.O., Robert Jordan "has delivered unacceptable financial and operational performance quarter after quarter," the letter read.
Southwest said it was contacted by Elliott on Sunday and looked forward "to better understanding their views on our company." Associated Press
Technology
Meta Seeks Europe Data To Train Its A.I. Model
Meta wants to use data from users in privacy-conscious Europe to train its artificial intelligence models, the social media giant said on Monday as it faces concerns about data protection while battling to keep up with rivals like OpenAI and Google.
The company, which owns Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, said that to better reflect the "languages, geography and cultural references" of its users in Europe, it needs to use public data from those users to teach its Llama AI large language model.
Meta's AI training efforts are hampered by stringent European Union data privacy laws, which give people control over how their personal information is used. The Vienna-based group NOYB, led by the activist Max Schrems, complained last week to 11 national privacy watchdogs about Meta's AI training plans and urged them to stop the company.
Associated Press
International
Japan's Economy Shrinks 1.8% in the First Quarter
The Japanese economy shrank at an annual rate of 1.8 percent in the first quarter, slightly better than the initial estimate at a 2.0 percent contraction, according to revised government data on Monday. The revision was because of private sector investments, at minus 0.4 percent, up from the previous minus 0.5 percent.
Seasonally adjusted real gross domestic product, a measure of the value of a nation's products and services, remained in negative territory, as exports and consumption declined from the previous quarter.
Quarter-to-quarter, the economy slipped 0.5 percent in the January-March period, according to the Cabinet Office, unchanged from last month's results.
Wage growth has been slow, and prices on imports have risen amid a decline in the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar. The dollar is trading at nearly 157 yen lately, up from about 140 yen a year ago. Associated Press
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY THIBAULT CAMUS/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
