U.S. stock indexes rose to more records Wednesday after tech companies talked up how much of a boost they're getting from the artificial-intelligence boom.
The S&P 500 climbed 0.6 percent to add to what's set to be one of its best years of the millennium. It's the 56th time the index has hit a high this year after climbing in 11 of the last 12 days.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 308 points, or 0.7 percent, while the Nasdaq composite added 1.3 percent to its own record.
Salesforce helped pull the market higher after delivering stronger revenue for the latest quarter than analysts expected, though its profit fell just short.
Mark Benioff, the chief executive, highlighted the company's artificial-intelligence offering for customers, saying "the rise of autonomous A.I. agents is revolutionizing global labor, reshaping how industries operate and scale." The stock price of the company, which helps businesses manage customers, jumped 11 percent.
Marvell Technology leaped even more after delivering better results than expected, up 23.2 percent. Its chief executive, Matt Murphy, said the semiconductor supplier is seeing strong demand from A.I. and gave a forecast for profit in the coming quarter that topped analysts' expectations.
All the optimistic talk helped Nvidia, the company whose chips are powering much of the move into A.I., rally 3.5 percent. It was the strongest force pushing upward on the S&P 500 by far.
They helped offset an 8.9 percent drop for Foot Locker, which reported profit and revenue short of analysts' expectations.
The chief executive, Mary Dillon, said the company is taking a more cautious view, and it cut its forecasts for sales and profit this year. Ms. Dillon pointed to how keen customers are for discounts and how soft demand has been outside of Thanksgiving week and other key selling periods.
Retailers overall have offered mixed signals about how resilient U.S. shoppers can remain. Their spending has been one of the main reasons the U.S. economy has avoided a recession that seemed inevitable after the Federal Reserve hiked interest rates to crush inflation. But shoppers are now contending with still-high prices and a slowing job market.
This week's highlight for Wall Street will be Friday's jobs report from the U.S. government, which will show how many people employers hired and fired last month. A narrower report on Wednesday suggested employers in the private sector increased their payrolls by less last month than economists expected. Hiring in manufacturing was the weakest since the spring, according to Nela Richardson, chief economist at ADP. The report strengthened traders' expectations that the Fed will cut its main interest rate again in two weeks.
Fed Chair Jerome H. Powell said on Wednesday that the central bank can afford to cut rates cautiously because inflation has slowed from a peak two years ago and the economy remains sturdy.
A separate report on Wednesday said health care, finance and other businesses in the U.S. services sector are continuing to grow, but not by as much as before and not by as much as economists expected. One respondent from the construction industry told the survey from the Institute for Supply Management that the Fed's rate cuts haven't pulled down mortgage rates as much as hoped.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 4.18 percent from 4.23 percent late Tuesday.
Gains for airline stocks helped offset that drop after JetBlue Airways said it saw stronger bookings for travel in November and December after the presidential election. JetBlue jumped 8.3 percent, while Southwest Airlines climbed 3.5 percent.
In stock markets abroad, South Korea's Kospi sank 1.4 percent after a night full of drama in Seoul.
Bitcoin climbed near $ 99,000 after Donald J. Trump said he would nominate Paul Atkins, a cryptocurrency advocate, to chair the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
