Elon Musk's artificial intelligence company, xAI, announced last Sunday that it had raised $ 6 billion from investors, putting it in a position to compete with companies such as OpenAI and Anthropic, which have secured billions of dollars in funding from Microsoft and Amazon amid the "A.I. boom."
Mr. Musk founded xAI last July, and so far it has released a chatbot, Grok, that can be used on Mr. Musk's platform, X.
In a statement, the company said the most recent investment would be used to "take xAI's first products to market, build advanced infrastructure and accelerate the research and development of future technologies." Mr. Musk said on X that the company's valuation was $ 18 billion, before counting the new money.
Mr. Musk has long had an ambivalent history with A.I., at times even seeking to undermine its development. He was a founder of OpenAI but left the company in 2018 over philosophical differences with its direction. Since then, he has routinely referred to A.I. as a threat to humanity.
In March of last year, he signed an open letter calling for a pause on A.I. advancements, and this March he sued OpenAI and Sam Altman, its chief executive, accusing them of putting profits over the public interest. That same month, he released the source code behind Grok, in keeping with his long-held stance that A.I. systems should be open source.
(Last November, The New York Times sued OpenAI and Microsoft, claiming copyright infringement of news content related to A.I. systems.)
The latest round of funding for xAI highlights how Mr. Musk has preached caution around A.I. while often accelerating its development in his companies' products. Tesla, for example, uses the driver-assisted technology Autopilot to control its cars.
Still, Mr. Musk has often issued dire warnings about what unrestrained A.I. might do.
"It has the potential of civilizational destruction," he said in a 2023 interview on Fox News.
"The experienced cost of living is much greater than inflation as reflected by the Consumer Price Index."
Larry Summers, the Harvard economist, describing how many Americans view higher interest rates as another form of inflation.
"It was me first -- I'm getting in the lifeboat first. To heck with all those customers."
Judge Lewis A. Kaplan, describing how Ryan Salame, a top executive at the failed cryptocurrency exchange FTX, acted in his position.
"I'm very skeptical it makes business sense to turn BuzzFeed into a creator platform for inflammatory political pundits."
Jonah Peretti, the founder and chief executive of BuzzFeed, in a letter to the former Republican presidential candidate Vivek Ramaswamy, who owns 8.3 percent of the company and last week called on the outlet to hire commentators like Tucker Carlson.
