U.S. stocks fell on Wednesday as more steam came out of Wall Street's huge, record-breaking rally.
The S&P 500 sank 0.9 percent for its first three-day losing streak since early September. It was coming off two small losses since setting a high on Friday, and the pullback follows a superb run where the index had rallied to six straight winning weeks, its longest such streak of the year.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 409 points, or 1 percent, while the Nasdaq composite tumbled 1.6 percent. Nvidia and other Big Tech stocks were among the market's heaviest weights.
Momentum has reversed for stocks this week as pressure has increased from rising Treasury yields. Higher yields can make investors less willing to pay high prices for stocks, which critics say already look too expensive after they rose faster than corporate profits.
"Slowly, then suddenly," stock investors have been noticing the moves in the bond market, along with the rally for the U.S. dollar's value against other currencies, according to Jonathan Krinsky at BTIG.
McDonald's helped pull the market lower and dropped 5.1 percent after federal health officials linked its Quarter Pounder burgers with an E. coli outbreak that's affected at least 50 people in 10 states. Investigators are still trying to find what specific ingredient is contaminated, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said McDonald's stopped using fresh slivered onions and quarter pound beef patties in several states while the investigation is ongoing.
Coca-Cola fell 2.1 percent even though it reported stronger profit and revenue for the latest quarter than analysts expected. The company benefited from higher prices for its products, but a lot of focus was on how much product the company shipped during the quarter, and that fell short of some estimates.
Boeing slipped 1.8 percent in what could be one of the most consequential days in years for the troubled aerospace manufacturer.
The company reported a loss of more than $ 6 billion for the latest quarter, as it waited to see the results of a vote by machinists later in the day that could end a production-crippling strike. Boeing stock has lost nearly 40 percent this year.
The market's most impactful losses came from Big Tech stocks. They have been battling criticism for a while that their prices soared too high amid Wall Street's frenzy around artificial-intelligence technology. Nvidia's 2.8 percent drop and Apple's 2.2 percent fall were the two heaviest weights on the S&P 500.
Helping to limit the losses for indexes was AT&T, which rose 4.6 percent after reporting stronger profit for the latest quarter than analysts expected.
Texas Instruments climbed 4 percent after the semiconductor company reported stronger profit and revenue than analysts expected. While revenue from industrial users declined from the prior quarter, the chief executive Haviv Ilan said all other end markets grew.
Northern Trust rallied 7 percent after likewise topping analysts' estimates for profit and revenue in the latest quarter.
The S&P 500 fell 53.78 points to 5,797.42. The Dow dropped 409.94 to 42,514.95, and the Nasdaq composite fell 296.47 to 18,276.65.
In the bond market, the yield on the 10-year Treasury rose again to 4.23 percent from 4.21 percent late Tuesday and from just 4.08 percent Friday.
Treasury yields have been climbing after reports have shown the U.S. economy remains stronger than expected. That's good news for Wall Street because it bolsters hopes that the economy can escape from the worst inflation in generations without a painful recession.
Traders are now largely expecting the Fed to cut its main interest rate by half a percentage point more through the end of the year, according to CME Group.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
