A late-afternoon slide by some big tech companies cut into Wall Street's gains Thursday, leading to a mixed finish for stock indexes.
The S&P 500 ended flat after giving up an earlier gain of nearly 1 percent. The benchmark index is about 1.3 record away from its record set in July.
The Dow Jones industrial average managed a 0.6 percent gain, enough for its third record high since Monday. The Nasdaq composite, which is heavily weighted with technology stocks, slipped 0.2 percent. It had been up 1.3 percent in the early going.
Despite the mixed finish, gainers outnumbered decliners by roughly two to one on the New York Stock Exchange.
The Commerce Department upgraded its assessment of U.S. economic growth for the second quarter to 3 percent, compared with a previous estimate of 2.8 percent. It was another signal that the economy remained strong, despite pressure from stubborn inflation and high interest rates.
Nvidia, which has ridden the frenzy over artificial intelligence to become one of the S&P 500's most influential companies, was the biggest weight on the market. Its stock fell 6.4 percent despite stellar results for the second quarter. The stock, with a total market value topping $ 3 trillion, is still up 138 percent in 2024.
Nvidia's earnings beat and forecast may not have been a big enough surprise for some traders, but surging demand for its artificial intelligence chips show that "it is powering the A.I. revolution," said Wedbush Securities analyst Dan Ives, in a note to investors.
"The tech stalwart delivered massive 'drop the mic' numbers yet again," he said.
CrowdStrike Holdings jumped 2.8 percent after the cybersecurity company beat analysts' second-quarter financial forecasts. The company had a botched software update during its most recent quarter, which triggered a technology meltdown that stranded thousands of people in airports, among other disruptions.
Dollar General slumped 32.1 percent after cutting its earnings forecast. Best Buy jumped 14.1 percent after the nation's largest consumer electronics chain beat Wall Street forecasts, even as sales slipped and it cut guidance for the year.
The mostly solid earnings and economic growth updates are capping off a month of encouraging reports for the broader economy. Data from various reports in August have shown that retail sales, employment and consumer confidence remain strong.
"Solid growth of consumer spending propelled the economy forward in the second quarter, and the increase of consumer confidence in July suggests it will propel growth in the second half of the year as well," said Bill Adams, chief economist for Comerica Bank.
The key report this week comes on Friday, when the government releases its July data on inflation with the P.C.E., or personal consumption and expenditures report. Economists expect the P.C.E., which is the Federal Reserve's preferred measure of inflation, to show that inflation edged up to 2.6 percent in July from 2.5 percent in June. It was as high as 7.1 percent in the middle of 2022.
The solid economic data and easing of inflation have bolstered hopes for the Federal Reserve to achieve what it hopes is a "soft landing" for the economy after raising its benchmark interest rate to a two-decade high. The goal was to slow the economy and tame inflation without causing a recession.
The central bank has signaled that it intends to start cutting its benchmark interest rate. Traders expect the first cut to happen at the next meeting in September. The market is betting that the Fed will cut its benchmark rate by 1 percent by the end of the year.
Bond yields rose in the Treasury market. The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 3.87 percent from 3.84 percent late Wednesday.
Credit: By The Associated Press
Illustration
