It's the stuff of science-fiction fantasy, but also of high-tech reality: a personal helper robot with the power to process language and the capacity to learn over time, its responses ever more tailored to the needs of its master.
Given the messiness of human interactions, a machine like that might seem a safer alternative to a flesh-and-blood person. No matter how badly they're needed, people have an unsettling tendency to leave forever, or die, and there's no tech squad in the world that can restore them.
The promise and peril of traveling through life with another human being are at the heart of Madeleine George's time-jumping technological comedy, "The (curious case of the) Watson Intelligence," whose world-premiere production is in previews at Playwrights Horizons. Is it any wonder it was written by a newlywed?
In multiple plotlines, the play examines the fear of depending on another person and the allure of using machines to meet emotional needs. "There are all these elements of human relationship that are uncomfortable, that make us feel afraid," Ms. George, 38, said. "Technology is about improving comfort."
When she began writing the script in 2011, emotional discomfort was much on her mind. Last spring she married the playwright Lisa Kron, but back then the two were just moving in together -- a happy development, Ms. George said, but difficult as well.
"It just is very taxing if you maybe have a little bit of an issue with dependency," she said wryly one autumn evening, surrounded by hardcover books at the Library bar in the Flatiron district. "I told this story on the first day of rehearsal," she said. "When we moved in together, my stuff was so much lousier than hers that I just had to get rid of it all in order for us to merge households.
"It was fine. It was terrible stuff. I live so much better now. But that was really, really hard for me to do. Because I was like, obviously, when I get rid of this final sofa bed, I'll be her slave."
And yes, she added instantly, she realizes that's crazy. Her fears, Ms. George said, were no reflection on Ms. Kron.
"There's nothing risky about her as a person at all," she said. "But to me," she went on, with an expression of what looked like alarm on her face, "it is not a trajectory of safety to go deeper and deeper into intimacy. It's just rigorous."
Over drinks, Ms. George was friendly and game, if a touch wary, and cerebral, with the intensity of a smart girl grown up. As far back as high school, she found success in playwriting: Two decades ago, her work was onstage at Playwrights Horizons as part of the national Young Playwrights Festival. But as an undergraduate at Cornell, she flirted with linguistics before gravitating back to drama. For graduate school, she went to New York University's Tisch School of the Arts, where one of her classmates was the playwright Anne Washburn ("Mr. Burns, a Post-Electric Play").
Ms. George's previous plays include "Precious Little," "The Zero Hour" and "Seven Homeless Mammoths Wander New England," a finalist for the Susan Smith Blackburn Prize in 2012. A former member of the playwrights collective 13P, she is also the author of two well-received young-adult novels, "Looks" (2008) and "The Difference Between You and Me" (2012). A theme in each of those works is the need for human connection and the vulnerability that demands.
The "aha" moment that spurred "Watson Intelligence" came a couple of years ago, around the time that IBM's Watson was showing off its artificial intelligence as a "Jeopardy!" contestant. The existence of several notable Watsons seemed, she said, like a framework she could build on.
The play's various characters include a computer that is a sort of relative of the IBM supercomputer; Thomas A. Watson, the assistant summoned by Alexander Graham Bell when he invented the telephone; and the fictional John H. Watson, chronicler and faithful doctor sidekick to Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes. (Ms. George also invented a tech guy named Watson who makes house calls.)
The play's title is a whimsical homage to Conan Doyle's detective, whose adventures Ms. George listened to her neurobiologist father read aloud when she was a child in Amherst, Mass. Another wink to Sherlock is in the font Ms. George used to write the script: Baskerville.
All of the Watsons are what Ms. George called "helper figures," existing in the orbit of someone else's life.
The Playbill for "Watson Intelligence" lists a cast of three, each actor playing a single role: John Ellison Conlee as Watson, Amanda Quaid as Eliza, David Costabile as Merrick. In fact, each is playing a set of characters who share a name. One Eliza, for example, is a 21st-century woman building a prototype for a natural-language-processing computer system, which she teaches to respond pleasingly to her every cue. A 19th-century Eliza seeks the help of Sherlock Holmes, and in her troubles, too, technology has a role.
Doubling is a favorite theatrical conceit of Ms. George, and one she has learned to use with unusual skill, said Tim Sanford, artistic director of Playwrights Horizons, which commissioned "Watson Intelligence."
"There's a stage direction: 'Watson becomes Watson, and Eliza becomes Eliza,' " Mr. Sanford said. "That, in lesser hands, you might roll your eyes and think, 'Wow, how self-conscious is that.' But the delight is to see it just happen before your eyes."
The play's director, Leigh Silverman, has known Ms. George for years through both 13P and Ms. Kron. (She directed Ms. Kron's play "Well" on Broadway in 2006.) Much in Ms. George's earlier work is "dazzling and exciting," Ms. Silverman said, but here the playwright has moved beyond "an intellectual kind of exercise" to locate "a real dramatic beating heart."
"I think that she is willing in this play to explore and expose something that she really understands about human nature," Ms. Silverman said. "You can't do that until you've matured in a certain way, until you understand yourself well enough to be able to then write about it and extrapolate."
Like her play, Ms. George ultimately comes down on the side of embracing human relationships, demands and discomforts included.
"Sacrificing what you have for someone else, that's the transformative gesture," she said. "That's the thing that makes you more of a person."
Photograph "Sacrificing What You Have for Someone Else, That's the Transformative Gesture," Says the Playwright Madeleine George. (Photograph by Fred R. Conrad/the New York Times); Amanda Quaid and John Ellison Conlee in Ms. George's "the (Curious Case of the) Watson Intelligence," Now at Playwrights Horizon. (Photograph by Sara Krulwich/the New York Times) (Ar9); Ibm's Watson Computer, an Inspiration for the Playwright Madeleine George. (Photograph by Bob Goldberg/Feature Photo Service for Ibm) (Ar13)
