1. Noxious smoke enveloped much of the Eastern United States this week, turning the sky over New York City orange. What was the source of the smoke?
Wildfires in Canada
Wildfires in California
Wildfires in Mexico
A chemical fire in Pennsylvania
A burning oil rig in the Atlantic Ocean
2. The air quality index measures pollution on a scale of 0 to 500; anything above 150 is considered unhealthy. What was the average reading in New York City on Wednesday?
67
110
151
225
377
3. The Justice Department brought federal criminal charges against former President Donald J. Trump in connection with what?
His handling of classified documents
Efforts to fabricate votes in Georgia
Hush-money payments to a porn star
The Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol
Tax evasion at the Trump Organization
4. The Supreme Court rejected a congressional voting map in what state, saying that it had diluted the power of Black voters?
Alabama
Georgia
Louisiana
Mississippi
Missouri
5. Officials in Oklahoma approved a charter school that would become the first of its kind in the United States. What is unique about it?
All its classes are related to sports.
Children attend class in the metaverse.
It's a Catholic school.
Its goal is to train students to become astronauts.
It uses artificial intelligence instead of teachers.
6. The PGA Tour announced it would merge with LIV Golf, a league backed by which country?
Ireland
Japan
Saudi Arabia
Scotland
South Korea
7. Which Republicans formally joined the 2024 presidential race this week? Select all that apply.
Former Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey
Former Speaker John Boehner
Former Vice President Mike Pence
Gov. Doug Burgum of North Dakota
Senator Marco Rubio
8. Apple held an event this week to unveil its new device, a $ 3,500 _________. Fill in the blank.
3-D television
Electric bicycle
Pair of smart sneakers
Video game system
Virtual-reality headset
9. An explosion at what type of facility in Ukraine led to a disaster that forced thousands to flee?
A fertilizer warehouse
A hydroelectric dam
A nuclear power plant
A sulfur mine
A train depot
10. The Securities and Exchange Commission this week announced lawsuits against multiple companies in what field?
A.I. software
Cryptocurrency
Mobile payment systems
Mutual funds
Social media
11. Prince Harry appeared in court this week to testify about what?
His desire to resume life as a working royal
His interview with Oprah
Phone hacking by British tabloids
Paparazzi chasing him and his wife
Royalty fees for his memoir
The News Quiz is published on Fridays in the Morning newsletter. To sign up, visit nytimes.com/themorning.Solutions: 1. A; 2. E; 3. A; 4. A; 5. C; 6. C; 7. A, C and D; 8. E; 9. B; 10. B; 11. C.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
