BRUSSELS -- The highest court in the European Union ruled on Wednesday that Intel's $1.3 billion antitrust fine get a second look, a decision that could ease some of the legal pressure that American tech giants face in the region. The order, which will send the Intel case back to a lower court for review, is a blow to a sweeping regulatory crackdown in Europe that has ensnared American household names like Apple, Amazon, Google and Facebook. It could also embolden these technology companies, which have long complained that officials in Europe target them unfairly, to challenge the rulings and investigations against them.
The move by the Court of Justice of the European Union raises the prospect that the 1.06 billion euro fine on Intel in 2009, equivalent to $1.26 billion at current exchange rates, could be reduced or scrapped entirely. The penalty -- at the time the largest of its kind -- was upheld by a lower court in 2014 and is likely to be the subject of legal battles for years.
The case, and its outcome, plays to the legal headaches for Silicon Valley in Europe. The European Union's competition commissioner, Margrethe Vestager, has made technology companies a central focus, with investigations into tax avoidance, data privacy and abuse of market position.
Intel's record fine was overtaken in June by a [euro]2.4 billion penalty against Google, in a case that accused the search giant of giving preferential treatment to its internet shopping service over those of its rivals. Ms. Vestager's office has several other inquiries into Google as well.
It has opened an inquiry into the chipmaker Qualcomm for possible abuse of a dominant market position. European authorities have also demanded that Ireland recover about $14.5 billion in back taxes from Apple, started investigating Amazon's tax practices in Europe and raised questions about Facebook's handling of data.
The companies all deny any wrongdoing.
The case being considered on Wednesday centered on claims that Intel had abused its dominant position in the microchip market. The European Commission, the European Union's executive arm, found in 2009 that the company had offered rebates and incentives to computer makers to favor its products over those of a rival, Advanced Micro Devices.
The commission said that such rebates, offered to manufacturers like Dell, Lenovo, HP and NEC, were anticompetitive. That argument raised questions about whether some common practices in the digital world, such as the bundling of products or services, could violate antitrust rules.
In a statement on Wednesday, however, the Court of Justice said that a lower court would have to "examine, in the light of the arguments put forward by Intel, whether the rebates at issue are capable of restricting competition."
It did not strike down the original ruling, but experts said the decision to send the case back to a lower court was a good sign for businesses looking to offer rebates to customers in exchange for exclusivity deals.
"This decision is the right one for business, consumers, and E.U. antitrust law and policy," said Dave Anderson, an antitrust partner in the Brussels office of the law firm Berwin Leighton Paisner. "Exclusivity rebates are no longer considered in the E.U. as inherently anticompetitive."
"The bottom line for Intel," Mr. Anderson added, "is that Intel lives to fight another day."
The chipmaker's stock was up 2 percent, to $35.72, in midday trading in New York.
"We welcome today's landmark ruling," Steven R. Rodgers, Intel's general counsel, said. "While this case concerns events that happened more than a decade ago, we have always believed that our actions were lawful and did not harm competition. We look forward to the next step in this process."
European Union antitrust officials have sought to cultivate a reputation for sound and fair enforcement of competition rules, and their decisions resonate beyond the bloc's borders. Notably, Mr. Anderson said, China was heavily influenced by European laws and procedures when it set up its antimonopoly rules.
Still, some critics, particularly in the United States, say Europe's antitrust officials have too much power to levy fines and to force companies to change business practices without prior court orders.
The ruling on Wednesday will give businesses more confidence that they could win a case on appeal if they come under investigation, said Veronica Roberts, a London-based partner at Herbert Smith Freehills, a law firm.
"This gives them more confidence that a defense that they put forward could be reviewed," she said.
The European Commission gave a cautious response when asked what the latest ruling would mean for other technology companies under investigation in Europe, and whether it would give those firms confidence to pursue legal challenges rather than to reach financial settlements.
"I cannot comment how companies will proceed or assess the judgment," Ricardo Cardoso, a spokesman for the commission, said at a news conference. "We ourselves still have to look carefully into the details of the judgment."
The chip-making industry, including Intel, has changed markedly since the case was brought.
Intel was being investigated for its actions from 2002 to 2007. At one point, the company controlled 70 percent of the market for microchips, according to the European Commission. Known for its "Intel Inside" advertising slogan, the company dominated the market for personal computers.
But since then, Intel has seen demand for PCs deteriorate, as consumers have shifted to buying increasingly powerful smartphones and tablets, a sector in which chip makers like Qualcomm, ARM and Samsung are major suppliers.
As a result, Intel has made a series of bets in recent years to try to ensure it is well placed to deliver the computing power required in the future. It is the premier supplier of chips to modern data centers, bought Mobileye in a $15.3 billion deal to corner the market on the technology that underlies autonomous cars, and is looking to make inroads in artificial intelligence.
JAMES KANTER and AMIE TSANG Follow James Kanter @jameskanter and Amie Tsang @amietsang on Twitter.
Credit: JAMES KANTER and AMIE TSANG; James Kanter reported from Brussels, and Amie Tsang from London.
The European Commission Found in 2009 That Intel Had Offered Incentives to Computer Makers to Favor Its Products Over Those of a Rival. (Photograph by Mike Blake/Reuters) (B7)
