While Americans are intensely focused on our own elections, President Vladimir Putin of Russia played host to leaders who represent nearly half of the world’s population this week. It was more than a photo op — it was a neon sign pointing to just how much has changed in a decade.
Ten years ago, Russia and China were part of the U.S.-led coalition that was isolating Iran in a bid to curtail its nuclear weapons program. This week, Russia and China welcomed Iran as a new member of a club of emerging economies that demands a bigger say in how the world is run. The group is known as BRICS, named after its founding countries of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.
As far as international meetings go, the summit, held in Kazan, Russia, was a success, and not just because of four new members, consequential meetings on the sidelines and a joint communiqué that pledged to cooperate more closely on several fronts, including artificial intelligence. Representatives of three dozen countries attended.
What struck me most was the way it allowed President Xi Jinping of China, the real power behind BRICS, to cast himself as the true protector of a just world order. In his speech, Xi called for the “swift de-escalation” of the war in Ukraine as well as “an end to the killing” in Gaza and a “comprehensive, just and lasting resolution of the Palestinian question.” He also called for reforming the international financial architecture to give non-Western economies like — yes, you guessed it — China more power.
In the West, Xi’s words will sound empty or cynical. After all, China helped Putin weather the storm of Western sanctions following the brutal invasion of Ukraine. But much of the developing world will agree with him. The destruction in Gaza and now southern Lebanon — by a U.S. ally with U.S. bombs — has outraged many and made it impossible to keep the focus on Putin’s crimes. When Gaza City looks like Mariupol, you’ve lost the moral high ground.
Xi might be cynical or opportunistic, but he’s not wrong when he says that the world needs de-escalation in Ukraine, a cease-fire in Gaza and global governance reforms. The International Monetary Fund and other Western-led institutions have been frozen in time, reflecting the power dynamics that existed when those institutions were built, not the world of today.
That’s why the discussion at the other big diplomatic event this week — the I.M.F. and World Bank meetings in Washington — is about changing the quota system that makes the United States the largest shareholder and biggest voice in those institutions. The United States must find a way to make room for emerging economies without capitulating to China. Without that, the appeal of BRICS will only grow.
By Farah Stockman
