Looking for something to do in New York? Have a picnic with the Vijay Iyer Trio at Bryant Park or revisit the films of the king of the summer box office, Steven Spielberg.
Comedy
'Fembots'
Aug. 31 at 9:30 p.m. at Caveat, 21A Clinton Street, Manhattan; caveat.nyc.
Though artificial intelligence has yet to threaten the status of live comedy, comedians are already having a bit of fun at the technology's expense.
"Fembots" takes an updated shot at the sci-fi fetish for sexy female robots. This new monthly showcase at Caveat features Emma Rogers, Maria DeCotis and Alexandria Curtwright as A.I.-generated versions whose purpose is to sate the questionable desires of their misogynistic creator, played by Anthony Atamanuik (who was Donald Trump in Comedy Central's "The President Show"). These fembots are programmed to carry out their orders: to host each show and appear in sketches slated between stand-up performances by their guests. This month, they include Tatiana Frank, Carmen Lagala, Zubi Ahmed and Sarah Barnitt.
Tickets are $ 15 on Eventbrite. SEAN L. McCARTHY
Music
Asake
Aug. 30 at 8 p.m. at Madison Square Garden, 4 Pennsylvania Plaza, Manhattan; msg.com.
One of the biggest music stars to emerge from West Africa in recent years, the Nigerian singer Asake, is prone to narrating his own success. On his latest album, "Lungu Boy," which means "ghetto boy," he sings the CliffsNotes version: "Original boy from lungu to space."
As he has ascended to the world stage, Asake's fluid, rhythmic music has increasingly bridged the local and the global. His eclectic blend of influences includes bits of fuji, a Yoruban tradition heavy on polyrhythms and choral vocals, and amapiano, the South African spin on house music. He sings in Yoruba, Naija (Nigerian Pidgin), English and Spanish, and on "Lungu Boy," he racks up guest appearances from an international cohort of stars, including Travis Scott, the British M.C.s Stormzy and Central Cee, and the Brazilian singer-songwriter Ludmilla.
On tour in support of his new album, Asake will headline the Garden on Friday. Tickets start at $ 44.50 on Ticketmaster. OLIVIA HORN
Vijay Iyer Trio
Aug. 30 at 7 p.m. at Bryant Park, Manhattan; bryantpark.org.
Musicologist, Harvard professor, composer, pianist, MacArthur fellow -- the multitalented jazz artist Vijay Iyer has an undeniably impressive résumé. But Iyer's most vital strength within his expansive skill set may be his ability to ground a rotating cast of illustrious collaborators. He refracts and focuses his fellow artists, revealing a greater richness.
On Friday, the current iteration of the Vijay Iyer Trio, featuring the composer Devon Gates on bass, the bandleader Jeremy Dutton on drums and vocals by Arooj Aftab, will play in Bryant Park. Iyer's music has always been both intelligent and unpretentious, complex without being opaque; Iyer ponders a phrase with a scholar's obsessive rumination, unveiling layers of shifting, subtle emotion, before letting it fly with joyous abandon. With Gates and Dutton now in the mix, another facet of Iyer's work may be discovered.
This free concert is billed as a picnic performance. Don't forget to bring a blanket so that you can stretch out on the park's lawn. GABRIELLE FERRARI
Kids
'It's a Kid's World! Play, Imagine, Create'
Through Sept. 3, 9 a.m.-5 p.m., at the Art and Design Gallery, Pomerantz Center, Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street, Manhattan; fitnyc.edu.
Most of the clothing, picture books and playthings intended for American children are created by adults who are at least a generation older. But the designs in the exhibition "It's a Kid's World" were made by inventors not so far removed from childhood themselves: the students at the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Curated by Lauren Zodel, this free, interactive installation displays the work of young people who have concentrated on subjects like toy design, children's wear and illustration. Ana Tejeda and Bonnie Wong, members of F.I.T.'s class of 2024, drew and hand-painted colorful archways, called storybook tunnels, that welcome everyone into the show.
One corner contains an enormous loom, as well as several smaller versions, on which gallerygoers can practice weaving. Another space, illustrated by Wong, represents a walk-in sketchbook page that is surrounded by real children's fashions as well as a rack of outfits made of Tyvek, a paperlike synthetic material. Peshi Kendall, '25, created the Tyvek garments, which little fashionistas can model in front of a mirror.
Visitors to the exhibition can also enjoy a reading nook and view a display of students' picture books accompanied by toys that represent the stories' characters. LAUREL GRAEBER
Film
Spielberg
Aug. 30-Sept. 12 at Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, Manhattan; filmforum.org.
Like no other director, Steven Spielberg earned a reputation as the king of the summer box office, so Film Forum is cutting against the grain a bit by opening this two-week retrospective on Labor Day weekend, after most of the season has passed. No matter. "The Sugarland Express," his first theatrical feature -- with Goldie Hawn and William Atherton as an outlaw couple whose calamitous run across Texas to rescue their son from foster care becomes a spectacle -- turns 50 this year. It is showing multiple times in a new digital reissue beginning on Friday.
"Jaws," the ultimate beach weekend movie, is naturally on the docket: The first of several screenings in 35 millimeter is on Friday, and there's one in digital 3-D on Monday. (For purists, that last prospect is scarier than getting in the water with a great white shark.) The series does not neglect the "grown-up" Spielberg titles, either, with showings of "Bridge of Spies" (on Wednesday and Sept. 6) and "Schindler's List" (on Sept. 6 and 8), among others. BEN KENIGSBERG
Photograph Vijay Iyer, above at the 2019 Winter Jazzfest Marathon at Le Poisson Rouge, will play a free concert with his trio in Bryant Park on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NINA WESTERVELT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); William Atherton and Goldie Hawn in "The Sugarland Express." (PHOTOGRAPH BY UNIVERSAL PICTURES)
