Watch Dogs, set for release on Tuesday, represents more than five years of development by hundreds of workers at an estimated cost of at least $150 million.
Imagine living an all-consuming existence as a supremely intelligent yet vengeful, tormented computer hacker who is armed with the technology to control nearly anything and anyone.
In a bustling former textile mill here, where the French video game studio Ubisoft has its North American headquarters, designers staring into large computer monitors have been trying to bring that vision to life through the new video game Watch Dogs. The stakes are as high as they come in this industry: The game, released on Tuesday, represents more than five years of development by hundreds of workers at an estimated cost of at least $150 million.
Ubisoft, which also publishes the popular Assassin's Creed series, seeks to create a tent pole akin to blockbuster movies that spawn lucrative sequels. It was supposed to release Watch Dogs last November, when the Sony PlayStation 4 and Microsoft Xbox One consoles were introduced, but the game was delayed for work on the software and storytelling.
The game's creative director, Jonathan Morin, was among those who reported the news to Yves Guillemot, Ubisoft's chief executive in Paris. "He played the game and understood," Mr. Morin said. "But he also had to tell investors that we needed more time." The company's stock price tumbled more than 26 percent.
John Taylor, a video game analyst for the Arcadia Investment Corporation who provided the budget estimate for Watch Dogs, suggested that the postponed release would not hurt sales. That is because hungry game console owners, he said, are "starved for new content." The stock price has since recovered.
Watch Dogs features a troubled antihero named Aiden Pearce, a Belfast immigrant bent on avenging the murder of his young niece when he coincidentally uncovers the Big Brother-like Blume Corporation. As a castigator of violence in the name of justice, Pearce takes the player on 50 missions through Chicago's autumn streets, back alleys and a decrepit housing project.
A life-size poster of this conflicted protagonist looms on a conference room wall at Ubisoft. Pearce is clad in a trench coat, a baseball cap and a scarf that cover all but his menacing, judgmental eyes. While his obscured visage is meant to frighten, it also makes him seem somehow paranoid.
There's reason for that: Watch Dogs allows the player to hack into cellphones, A.T.M.s, drawbridges, even helicopters. Through cameras in laptops and televisions, players can peer into someone's fictional files and bedroom, to wholly envelop the lives of others. The game's primary goals are to track down the killers of Aiden's niece and halt the potential evil of the all-seeing corporation. That much is apparent after several interviews with Ubisoft staff members and an exclusive two-hour peek at the game.
Mr. Morin said the lost time and money caused by the delayed release would be worth it. "If you do everything in the game," he said, "you'll have spent over 100 hours in our world."
Players will be asked to understand the motivation of those involved in technology, from a tattoo artist hacker to the sketchy Blume Corporation, which places security cameras on the street and collects everyone's information. Every individual on the street is hackable, and each has been created to have a distinctive personality that reacts to your presence. A multiplayer mode will let another player drop into your game at any time, sneak up on you and steal what you've worked so hard to hack.
Danny Belanger, the lead designer, described the past few months as "a tense time" at Ubisoft. The designers had worked on "hundreds of things" to get the game ready, Mr. Belanger said, from fixing bugs to streamlining missions.
Numerous games have involved digital revelry and detective work through the years, from Activision's Hacker in 1985 to Quadrilateral Cowboy, a coming independent game. But beyond the looming technology and nonplayable characters with artificial intelligence in Watch Dogs, Ubisoft sought to create an expansive, realistic world for that action.
Chicago was considered a compelling setting because of its big, drivable roads -- essential to a modern day open-world game -- and its history. Players will hear music by Chicagoans, including the Smashing Pumpkins, the nasally punk rockers the Vindictives and the blues legend Elmore James. They will also discover landmarks like the gruesome locations of the St. Valentine's Day Massacre and the laboratory of the serial killer H.H. Holmes.
The observant gamer will see the autumn wind blow desiccated maple leaves around the streets as the Willis Tower gleams in the distance. Then, as the weather turns, and driving rain soaks Pearce's trench coat, the player will find that many cameras must be linked in a certain order to hack a system that manages transportation, utilities and the like.
Some puzzles were put on the clock, to add a kind of panic-ridden excitement -- and difficulty. And later, the player must use a big gun to deal with armed guards and steal a car to get around. That treads into territory dominated by Rockstar Games and its Grand Theft Auto franchise.
While what is on screen in Watch Dogs is full of strategizing, storytelling and blood-drenched action, Mr. Morin likened playing to being enthralled by a painting.
"I sometimes feel more interactivity in a static painting, interpreting it the way I want based on my own life," he said. "When you finish the game, you're a bit like that guy in the gallery. Your life experience merges with your experience in the game."
Mr. Morin said he would like those players "to have one of those after-cinema beer discussions." But he does not want them to talk about technology's supremacy over society as much as the effect Watch Dogs had on their ethical and moral codes.
"A great game should remind people that they are human beings," he said, "not just players."
