Since 2022, Tripp Mickle has covered news surrounding one of the biggest technology companies in Silicon Valley.
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
Some journalists have broad beats -- animals, the entire state of California, even the cosmos.
Tripp Mickle, however, focuses on just one company: Apple. But there's still more than enough to write about. Since joining the Business desk at The New York Times in April 2022, Mr. Mickle has reported on Apple's flashy new Vision Pro headset, its foray into artificial intelligence and the ongoing antitrust case against the company, which has been accused by U.S. regulators of running a smartphone monopoly.
Despite having a specific beat, Mr. Mickle's work still finds a wide audience. "It's this incredible company that has such influence in our lives," Mr. Mickle said in an interview. "And it's a fortress of secrecy."
Before writing for The Times, he dabbled in other topics, including NASCAR for Sports Business Journal, and the tobacco and alcohol industries for The Wall Street Journal. It was during his time at The Journal that Mr. Mickle decided to take a bite of the Apple beat.
In a phone conversation from his home in the Glen Park district of San Francisco, Mr. Mickle discussed how his beat has changed over the years and his experience staking out the offices of OpenAI. These are edited excerpts.
What made you decide to become a journalist?
I've wanted to become a journalist since I was in the fifth grade. I had a teacher who gave ribbons to students at the end of the year that tried to predict what you would pursue professionally in the future. Some of the ribbons were jokes, and some of them were serious. I was really obsessed with current events, and I liked writing, so she gave me a ribbon that read "future editor at The New York Times." That became a point of direction for me as I looked out on the horizon and tried to figure out what to do.
Can you explain your beat to readers?
I cover Apple and now, Nvidia. One of the most fascinating things about the technology industry is that, without fail, it changes almost every three years thematically. There was a period when the major theme was regulators scrutinizing big tech firms. Now the entire tech industry has changed because of the introduction of ChatGPT and the rush to develop generative A.I.
More broadly, I'll also write an occasional story about what's happening in the business of A.I. For example, I recently wrote about how consultants at firms like McKinsey and Boston Consulting Group are making money from the rush to develop generative A.I.
What are some of the biggest challenges of your beat?
The biggest challenge is always getting people to talk. Apple has what I call a culture of corporate omertà, where they collectively take a vow of secrecy and don't talk about the work that they're doing. That makes it really challenging to write about the company in a way that's illuminating for readers. You have to find people who are willing to open up and share stories about their work.
Do you have an article that you're particularly proud of?
The most thrilling story that I've had a chance to work on since I've been at The Times was the OpenAI saga around Sam Altman's dismissal and return. The story played out over five intense days. It's rare when you're at a newspaper to get a chance to cover a story that a bunch of people are working on collectively. There were elements of the story that moved so fast that we were writing up to three pieces a day over a five-day period.
There was one Sunday when Sam was meeting with officials at the company. Their headquarters are in the Mission District of San Francisco, and we needed somebody to go stake out the headquarters and observe. I spent a day in my car in the neighborhood, like a cop on a stakeout, hoping that I could divine what was going to play out in this very upside-down scenario where the C.E.O. was trying to get back into the company that he helped found.
Did you spot Sam?
I did not catch a sighting of Sam, but I was able to talk to some employees as they were leaving. I interviewed a former board member outside the building. I also observed that the company ordered a ton of boba tea. I saw three deliveries at one point. There was this tongue-in-cheek joke about OpenAI's obsession with boba. It was almost like their celebratory drink for Sam's return. If I hadn't been there to observe it, it wouldn't have made its way into the newspaper.
How has your coverage changed over the years?
Apple has reached a stage of maturation where it is still leaning on products that are familiar while trying to transition into a new future. It's taking various swings, so my coverage is more about scrutinizing that potential and promise, and less on the devices in our pockets. This year, it's centered more on the Vision Pro, a virtual reality headset that Apple developed, and the company's plan to revamp Siri and make it more of a vehicle for artificial intelligence.
What are your favorite and least favorite parts of living in the San Francisco Bay Area?
The proximity to so many amazing and beautiful places, whether it's Lake Tahoe, Napa, Sonoma, Point Reyes or Santa Cruz. San Francisco itself is stunning. You can be on a hiking trail within 30 minutes.
My least favorite thing is just the absurdity of life in San Francisco. You see some ridiculous things from time to time. I didn't see this in person, but this month, there were two nudists in the Castro district who rescued a tourist from a man who was wielding a blowtorch. Things like that happen here.
Illustration
