Raised threshold of civilian harm
In previous conflicts with Hamas, Israeli officers were usually only allowed to endanger fewer than 10 civilians in a pre-emptive strike. In many cases the limit had been five, or even zero. At the start of this war, the Israeli military increased that threshold to 20, before reducing it in certain contexts a month later. Strikes that could harm more than 100 civilians would also be permitted on a case-by-case basis.
Israel vastly increased the number of military targets that it proactively sought to strike. Officers could now pursue not only the smaller pool of senior Hamas commanders, arms depots and rocket launchers that were the focus of earlier campaigns -- but also thousands of low-ranking fighters as well as those indirectly involved in military matters.Removed limits on how many civilians could be put at risk each day The military leadership briefly ordered that its forces could cumulatively risk killing up to 500 civilians a day in preplanned strikes. Two days later, even this limit was lifted, allowing officers to conduct as many strikes as they deemed lawful.
The pace of the bombing campaign was one of the most intense in 21st century warfare, which officers said made it far harder to vet targets properly. Israel dropped or fired nearly 30,000 munitions into Gaza in the first seven weeks, at least 30 times more than the U.S.-led coalition fired in the first 15 weeks of its campaign against ISIS.
Israel often used a simplistic statistical model to assess the risk of civilian harm: It regularly estimated the number of civilians in a building where a target was believed to be hiding by using a formula based largely on the level of cellphone usage in the surrounding neighborhood.
In previous wars, the air force would often use a "roof knock," a smaller munition to give civilians some time to flee an imminent attack. From the first day of this war, Israel significantly reduced its use of roof knocks. The military also routinely used less-accurate "dumb bombs," as well as 2,000-pound bombs.
Israel used an artificial intelligence system in a widespread way for the first time. It helped officers to analyze and sign off on targets exponentially quicker, increasing the number of targets that officers could propose each day. Often dropped large, inaccurate bombs In this war Israel regularly used 2,000- pound bombs, which form 40-foot craters and can spread lethal shrapnel 400 yards. In previous wars Residents may have received a roof knock, or a warning shot, first, before an attack. Humans would then analyze and sign off on the target. But the automated system made that process exponentially quicker. It also depended on unreliable data. One version of the system automatically tracked the phones of targets. When the phone appeared to be at the target's home, the system would alert intelligence officers. The machine was taught to identify certain phrases in the phone calls. 1. 2. 3.
Often relied on outdated intelligence Hours often passed between when an officer vetted a target and when the air force struck the person. This meant strikes often relied on outdated intelligence.
