Stock markets continued their march higher Friday, with the Standard & Poor's 500 index passing the threshold of 2,500 for the first time in its 60-year history. Wall Street is riding the second-longest bull market in history, with investors repeatedly shrugging off domestic and international turmoil as they pile into shares of technology and other companies. On Friday, for example, the rally continued despite news that North Korea had launched its second missile in a month over Japan. Instead, the market focused on strong performances from tech stocks.
Standard & Poor's bellwether stocks index spent much of the day flirting with 2,500. In the final moments of the trading day, investors nudged the benchmark to 2,500.23, up nearly five points on the day. Other indexes, including the Dow Jones industrial average, also closed at record highs.
While the stock-buying spree continues, the market's upward march has left some investors nervous that a geopolitical crisis or a sudden bout of bad financial or economic news could spark a downturn.
"It doesn't appear to be alarmingly overvalued, but it's possible things have gone too far," said Paul Ashworth, chief United States economist at Capital Economics. "Though obviously that's hard to judge, because it's something we'll only realize in hindsight."
The S.&P. index has gained nearly 270 percent since March 2009, when the last bear market ended. A bull market is defined by a prolonged rally uninterrupted by any decline of 20 percent or more. The longest bull market lasted for roughly a decade between 1990 and 2000.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 22,268.34, rising 0.29 percent, or 64.86 points. The Nasdaq composite narrowly missed the record of 6,460.19 it set on Wednesday, closing up 0.30 percent, or 19.38 points, at 6,448.47.
Behind the recent rally are at least two trends. First, the technology sector has been on a tear, with investors racing to get a piece of companies that could become the next Apple or Google.
Among Friday's biggest winners was Nvidia, a chip maker in California. Its shares rose 6.3 percent, or $10.71, to $180.11 after its leadership in artificial-intelligence development was lauded in a client note from Evercore ISI.
Second, the extended period of ultralow interest rates has been a boon. The question is how long that will continue. Traders will closely monitor the Federal Reserve's meeting next week for any signs about its intentions. Inflation rose in August, increasing the likelihood that the Fed will lift rates by the end of the year.
Meanwhile, some investors are increasingly optimistic that Congress will enact some sort of tax reform, especially as President Trump courts support from Democrats. Such legislation has the potential to be a boon to corporate America and therefore to stocks.
"The good times should keep on rolling for a while," said Barry Sine, director of research at Drexel Hamilton. "This is going to head to 2,800 by year end."
Investors seemed to overlook recent economic indicators -- retail sales dipped 0.2 percent last month, and industrial output took its deepest dive in eight years -- in the belief that hurricanes had muddied the data.
"The initial impact of Harvey and Irma will be negative, but there's going to be a lot of economic activity -- a huge number of cars getting replaced, more building," Mr. Sine said. "And as that happens, we'll be going into the Christmas season."
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
The Dow Minute by Minute: Position of the Dow Jones Industrial Average at 1-Minute Intervals On Friday. (Source: Reuters)
