BANKING
After Years, U.S. Eases
Wells Fargo Restrictions
The Biden administration has eased some of the restrictions on the banking giant Wells Fargo, saying the bank has sufficiently fixed its toxic culture after years of scandals.
The news sent Wells Fargo's stock up sharply Thursday as investors speculated that the bank may be able to rebuild its reputation and start growing again.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the regulator of big national banks like Wells, on Thursday terminated a consent order that had been in place since September 2016. The order required Wells to overhaul how it sold financial products to customers and provide additional consumer protections, as well as protections for whistle-blowers.
That consent order stemmed from investigations that found Wells to have a poisonous sales culture that pressured employees into selling multiple unnecessary products to customers. ASSOCIATED PRESS
TECHNOLOGY
Microsoft to Spend
$ 3.5 Billion in Germany
Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany, right, welcomed an announcement Thursday by Microsoft that it would invest almost 3.3 billion euros, or $ 3.5 billion, in Germany over the next two years to massively expand its data center capacities for applications in the field of artificial intelligence and cloud computing.
"This is a really good commitment to progress, to growth, to modernity and to global openness as the basis for these opportunities," he said, adding it was also linked to the "fact that Germany remains very determined to be an open economy."
Brad Smith, the company's president, made the announcement in Berlin during a presentation with Mr. Scholz. The largest single investment in Microsoft's 40-year history in Germany also includes an A.I. training program that aims to reach up to 1.2 million people, the German news agency dpa reported. ASSOCIATED PRESS
AUTOMOBILES
G.M. Expands Roads
For Automated System
General Motors is adding about 350,000 miles of roads in the U.S. and Canada to the area where drivers can use the company's "Super Cruise" partially automated driving system.
The expansion nearly doubles the road miles where the system can run. It includes limited-access divided highways as well as some two-lane roads connecting cities and smaller towns, the company said.
G.M. said the system was ready to handle some roads with intersections and crossing traffic, which have been troublesome for systems from other companies.
With the system, drivers can take their hands off the steering wheel, although they must be ready to intervene at all times because the vehicles can't drive themselves, G.M. said.
Tesla's Autopilot system has had trouble spotting and stopping for crossing tractor-trailers, with at least three deaths reported. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY LIESA JOHANNSSEN/REUTERS)
