INTERNATIONAL
Hedlyne Goes For Maximum of Two Lines
China's leading state-owned airlines posted losses in the first half of the year, weighed down by a slower-than-expected rebound in international travel, domestic oversupply, and more intense competition as aviation capacity returns globally.
China's top three airlines -- Air China, China Southern Airlines and China Eastern Airlines -- last reported annual net profits in 2019 before the Covid-19 pandemic took hold.
China Eastern reported a first-half loss of 2.8 billion yuan ( $ 395 million) on Friday, compared with a loss of 6.2 billion a year earlier.
"Ticket prices in the domestic market have decreased year-on-year ... due to intensified competition in the domestic passenger transportation market, lower-than-expected recovery of some international markets, as well as the competition from high-speed rail," it said in a filing.
The country's flagship carrier, Air China, said international traffic grew in the first half, with passenger numbers above 80 percent of 2019's pre-pandemic levels. REUTERS
COMPANIES
Hedlyne Goes For Maximum of Two Lines
Shares of Dell Technologies rose 4 percent on Friday, after robust demand for its artificial intelligence-powered servers prompted the company to raise its full-year earnings and revenue forecasts.
Dell, which supplies servers and related infrastructure to enterprises, bolstered its AI push through a partnership with chip giant Nvidia this year. With Nvidia's tech stack, Dell is attracting mid-sized customers to upgrade their servers with AI capabilities.
"Dell's beat was entirely due to AI servers, with storage and PC revenues both coming in below consensus," Bernstein analysts wrote in a note.
They said 80 percent to 90 percent of the company's server customers appear to be tier 2 cloud services providers and new deal opportunities appear to be competitive bids against Super Micro Computer.
Revenue from Dell's infrastructure solution group, which includes sale of servers, rose 38 percent over the year earlier in the second quarter. Demand for AI-optimized servers, including the flagship PowerEdge XE9680, rose 23 percent sequentially to $ 3.2 billion, the company said on Thursday.
Its AI pipeline now appears to be $ 11 billion to $ 13 billion, up from an estimated $ 8 billion to $ 10 billion in the first quarter, according to Bernstein.
Overall, Dell earned $ 1.89 per share on an adjusted basis and posted revenue of $ 25.03 billion, both exceeding LSEG estimates.
At least three brokerages raised their price targets after the results. The stock has a median target price of $ 155, with 19 of the 22 analysts rating it "buy" or higher, according to LSEG data. REUTERS
AUTOMOTIVE
Hedlyne Goes For Maximum of Two Lines
Lithium Americas said on Friday that General Motors had agreed to delay an additional investment worth $ 330 million in the miner until the end of the year.
The U.S. automaker in January 2023 announced an investment of $ 650 million in Lithium Americas to help the miner develop the Thacker Pass project in Nevada, which holds enough of the battery metal to build 1 million electric vehicles annually.
The first of the two-tranche investment closed in February last year.
The lithium miner said on Friday it was exploring alternative structures for the second tranche and extended the date for deal close to Dec. 20. Lithium Americas will have to grant additional rights to the automaker, if the company fails to close the deal by then.
"They are making good progress toward scaling commercial production. This agreement will support the successful completion of the project," GM said an emailed statement.
The conditions for the second tranche include the successful execution of a $ 2.26 billion loan agreement with the U.S. Energy Department, which the company is rushing to finish amid uncertainties fueled by the November U.S. presidential election.
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has pledged to "end the electric vehicle mandate" and plans laid out by former Trump administration officials in the Project 2025 document to shutter the Loans Program Office have forced miners to try to close agreements before President Biden leaves office.
Toronto-listed shares of Lithium Americas were down 6.3 percent. REUTERS
Credit: By Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANN WANG/REUTERS)
