IN a campaign for IBM by Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide, the actor Dominic Cooper discusses subjects like Big Data that have increasingly becoming hot topics on Madison Avenue. "Watson," Mr. Cooper proclaims in a commercial, referring to IBM's artificial intelligence technology, "turns Big Data into new ideas."
Ogilvy & Mather, it turns out, has a new idea about stepping up a longstanding commitment to data-driven decision-making by forming a unit named OgilvyAmp; "Amp" is short for "Amplify." The unit, which is to be formally announced on Tuesday, is being led by Todd Cullen, who joined Ogilvy & Mather last year in the new post of global chief data officer.
More than 300 employees of Ogilvy & Mather are being devoted to OgilvyAmp, the agency says, handling tasks that include data strategy and planning, analytics services and data management. They are working for clients that include, in addition to IBM, British Airways, E*Trade, Kimberly-Clark, Merck, Nestlé and T-Mobile.
Ogilvy & Mather, part of WPP, is the world's 10th largest agency by global revenue. It has for decades prided itself as a leading disciple of the way data can, well, amplify the creative process when advertising is developed, inspired by the beliefs of David Ogilvy, known for exhorting his employees to pay attention to data with sayings like "Advertising people who ignore research are as dangerous as generals who ignore decodes of enemy signals." It is no coincidence that the Advertising Research Foundation annually presents honors known as the David Ogilvy Awards.
Although "data is sort of a life fluid these days," said Miles Young, worldwide chairman and chief executive of Ogilvy & Mather, many marketers "are afraid to dive into it," worried that they will be unable to "understand which pieces of Big Data have value."
That is understandable in that "not all data matters," Mr. Young said, citing what he described as "the Stasi syndrome," referring to the East German secret police and its philosophy that "the more data you collected, the more useful it would be."
OgilvyAmp will serve to sift and sort through data, big and small, he added, along with helping data act "as an integrator as the digital revolution dissolves the traditional boundaries between the disciplines like advertising, direct marketing, public relations."
The OgilvyAmp headquarters is in New York, and the unit is also present in 50 to 60 of the agency's largest offices around the world. The OgilvyAmp main offices include Beijing, Frankfurt, London, Paris and Singapore.
"This is a huge opportunity for clients and for us," Mr. Cullen said, to "remove data as a distraction and position it as a tool in the creative palette."
The goal is "using data to inspire creative work or creative thinking," he added, and dispel concerns that it is "an unnatural act to combine data and creativity." Those doubts were brought to life recently in a headline on the website of The Drum, a Scottish marketing trade publication, which asked, "Is creativity under threat from marketing's increasing obsession with data?" As an example, Mr. Cullen offered a campaign produced for British Airways, "Ticket to Visit Mum," which featured an online video developed after a "heavy-duty analytics project" examined flight segments that the airline deemed underperforming and determined that trips between New York and Mumbai, India, offered growth potential.
There were "over a million and a half views in the first few weeks," Mr. Cullen said, along with a 65 percent increase in bookings on the route on the British Airways website and a 75 percent sales increase through online travel agents.
Mr. Cullen, who reports to Mr. Young, has hired three senior executives to work with him at OgilvyAmp. They are: Mark Donatelli, global head of data strategy, who had been president of a company called Science of Bacon, named after the scientist and statesman rather than the meat; Brady Gadberry, global head of product development, whose résumé includes working for the data broker Acxiom; and Tom Hutchison, global head of data management technology, who had also been at Acxiom.
OgilvyAmp will collaborate with a WPP division, the WPP Data Alliance, which Nick Nyhan, chief executive of the WPP Data Alliance, likens to "the Star Alliance in the airline world" in that it is "a bridge for data and best practices across" WPP, whose holdings also include Grey, Kantar, MediaCom, Millward Brown, Mindshare, J. Walter Thompson, Y&R and Wunderman.
"I think David Ogilvy would be proud" of OgilvyAmp "because he was early to that game of elevating data in service to the consumer," Mr. Nyhan said, adding: "As data becomes more complex, with more techniques and tools, we want to move data up in the process in support of the creatives. You need someone to translate stories out of the data instead of just giving the creatives a dashboard."
At the same time, Mr. Nyhan said, the creative departments should "embrace data as part of their raw material, instead of seeing it as taking their power away."
"The smart ones will do that," he added. "David Ogilvy did."
Still, it must be remembered that "data doesn't replace creativity," Mr. Nyhan said, in that, for instance, "great creative has lasting power that data may not have predicted."
"If the creative is bad," he added, "even if it's well-targeted it's still going to bomb."
Photograph From Left, Mark Donatelli, Tom Hutchison, Todd Cullen and Brady Gadberry Will Collaborate in the New Unit, Ogilvyamp. (Photograph by A.E. Fletcher Photography)
