AVIATION
No Bonus for Boeing Chief
Over Delays on the 777X
Boeing's chief executive, Dave Calhoun, will not receive a $ 7 million bonus, the company said Friday, because of Boeing's failure to enter the 777X into service by the end of 2023.
Boeing offered Mr. Calhoun the incentive when he replaced Dennis Muilenburg as chief executive in January 2020, requiring that he achieve seven milestones by the end of this year.
Mr. Calhoun took home $ 7 million in pay last year, slightly less than his $ 7.4 million compensation in 2021, Boeing stated in a filing on Friday. His total compensation, which includes long-term incentives that have not yet vested, was $ 22.5 million in 2022, an increase from about $ 21 million the previous year.
In 2022, Boeing confirmed that the first delivery of the wide-body 777X had slipped to 2025, most recently because of a setback in its certification timeline. The plane is a larger version of the original 777 aircraft that has been in development since 2013. REUTERS
TECHNOLOGY
OpenAI Board Member
Exits to Avoid Conflicts
Reid Hoffman, a co-founder of LinkedIn, is leaving the board of OpenAI to avoid conflicts of interest as he backs more artificial intelligence companies, he said in an online post on Friday.
Mr. Hoffman, who has invested in and advised OpenAI since the artificial intelligence lab's founding in 2015, said his venture capital firm Greylock was funding companies, such as the presentation generator Tome, that were paying for tools from OpenAI, the creator of the ChatGPT chatbot. Mr. Hoffman also co-founded Inflection AI, one of the highest-profile start-ups working on technology similar to OpenAI's.
"By stepping off the board, I can proactively put to rest any downstream potential issues for both OpenAI and all Greylock portfolio companies I've backed," he said, noting OpenAI had avoided conflicts to date.
Mr. Hoffman's departure underscored the competition among an increasing number of companies to reshape content production as well as entire industries through A.I. REUTERS
AUTOMOBILES
Ford Increases Production
Of 6 Vehicles, 3 Electric
Ford will increase production of six models this year, half of them electric, as the company and the auto industry start to rebound from sluggish U.S. sales in 2022.
The automaker announced Friday that it planned to build more of the Mustang Mach-E, the Bronco Sport S.U.V., the Maverick small pickup, the F-150 Lightning electric pickup, and the Transit and E-Transit gas and electric full-size vans.
To help increase production, Ford said last year that it would add a third shift and 1,100 jobs at its full-size van plant in Claycomo, Mo., near Kansas City, and another 3,200 jobs related to building the F-150 Lightning, which is made in Dearborn, Mich.
Ford will also hire an unspecified number of new workers this year at plants in Cuautitlán and Hermosillo, Mexico, where the Mach-E, Maverick and Bronco Sport are made, according to a spokesman. Production line speeds will increase shortly to raise output, with more workers coming later. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Reuters and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRENDAN MCDERMID/REUTERS)
