IF this column were a TV show, what kind of TV show would it be? The Haggler is thinking dark comedy, laugh track optional. But sometimes the material here feels more like the stuff of farce. Laugh till you cry farce. As it does with the continuing Whirlpool ordeal experienced by Shira London, who e-mailed an update last week.
To summarize, Ms. London was promised a new refrigerator by Whirlpool after she wrote to the Haggler, complaining that the one she'd recently bought made an intolerable buzzing noise. Several repairmen could not fix it, and when she called the third-party company that administers her warranty, a rep there told her that she was out of luck because the fridge had "a pre-existing condition."
After those marvelously absurd words appeared in this space, Whirlpool wisely and generously reached out to Ms. London and promised to deliver a new refrigerator. Well, it arrived on Monday. Unfortunately, it had what she described as a one-inch dent on the inside of the freezer door, along with a hairline crack.
"Talk about a pre-existing condition!" she wrote.
So she -- or, more specifically, her husband -- declined delivery. Which was the right move, said Kristine Vernier, a Whirlpool spokeswoman. "We are in the process of getting her a new refrigerator," Ms. Vernier added, "and apologize for the inconvenience."
Our main topic in this episode, though, is not icebox madness. We're going to return to robocalling, the subject of an episode in February. Many readers later e-mailed to ask why technology had not long ago put robocallers out of business. As it happens, the Federal Trade Commission has been pondering that very question, and last year it started a competition, inviting citizens to submit ideas about how this perpetual nuisance could be stopped.
On April 2, the commission announced two winners, who each pocketed $25,000. Both solutions, according to the F.T.C. news release, "focus on intercepting and filtering out illegal prerecorded calls using technology to 'blacklist' robocaller phone numbers and 'whitelist' numbers associated with acceptable incoming calls."
Sounds promising, right? But these solutions may have a serious problem:
They won't work, or so says Brad Herrmann, president and founder of Call-Em-All, a robocalling company in Frisco, Tex. Call-Em-All is a legitimate robocall company -- and, yes, there is such a thing. It is hired, for instance, by businesses, like delivery services that want to tell customers about delays. Or by school districts that want to quickly alert families about snow days. The list goes on.
Mr. Herrmann says he'd be delighted by any technology that could stymie illegal robocallers, which, of course give the legitimate ones a bad name. But he says he doesn't believe that such a technology exists. His engineers thought long and hard about this, and would have submitted their own entry to the F.T.C. had they succeeded.
"We didn't come up with anything better because there isn't anything better," he said.
The problem with the two winners -- a service called Nomorobo and the inelegantly named Robocall Filtering System and Device With Autonomous Blacklisting, Whitelisting, GrayListing and Caller ID Spoof Detection -- is that they both rely heavily on caller ID. Which makes both ideas vulnerable to spoofing, an industry word that translates to "fooling your caller ID."
"Every robocaller, legitimate or not, they plug in what number a call is coming from and what number a call is going to," Mr. Herrmann said. "Whatever number that a robocaller would like to appear on your caller ID will appear on your caller ID. I could launch a call to your home phone right now and make it look like it came from your cellphone."
So if a particular incoming number winds up on a blacklist, no problem. There are millions of phone numbers, and a robocaller doesn't need to "own" them to appear to be calling from them.
Mr. Herrmann said he could not comment specifically on the system with the long name, as the F.T.C.'s Web site posted little about it, so he focused on the Nomorobo system, which could be called anti-spoofing plus. The plus part is this: Every call is split, heading to both your phone and a Nomorobo filter that analyzes the call and determines whether it is from an illegal robocaller. If the filter gives the call a thumbs up, your phone rings. If thumbs down, the filter hangs up "before the consumer's phone even has the chance to ring," as a promotional video for Nomorobo puts it.
The video says the system will "use machine learning" to analyze the frequency of every call, comparing the number to those on blacklists and whitelists. Blacklisted numbers are presented with a Captcha-style test, like the little reading comprehension quizzes on Web sites to prove you're human.
Mr. Herrmann describes this as "conceptually, a wonderful idea." But it's like saying you're going to cure famine by making sure everyone has food -- easy to say, all but impossible to do. Once a number winds up on a blacklist, robocallers will just use a different number, Mr. Herrmann says. And any robocalled number that winds up on a whitelist -- say, for a school system coping with a snow day -- will quickly be scooped up and used by illegal robocallers.
Aaron Foss, 34, a software developer who is Nomorobo's creator, is more optimistic. He says his system can detect bad actors further upstream than caller ID, though he acknowledged that this element is in the "proof of concept" phase. He added that Nomorobo could suss out the widespread use of a single outgoing number and quickly flag it as spam.
What if illegitimate robocallers just start using randomized outgoing numbers, instead of relying on a few of them? That's a tough one, he said.
"Is it foolproof?" he asked. "No. But maybe we can eliminate half the robocalls, and at least we're making them work a little harder."
Attempts to reach Serdar Danis, developer of the other contest winner, were unsuccessful last week.
Ideal answers to robocalling are elusive because of the telephony infrastructure, which was built for analog calls over copper wire. It was installed long before there was a World Wide Web -- and before there was robocalling. The infrastructure lacks the smarts to determine the actual source of a call, like an Internet Protocol address.
"And nobody has the financial motivation to yank out that infrastructure," Mr. Herrmann said. So, apparently, illegal robocallers will be sticking around. Like common colds, and those intensely annoying people who get in line to board planes before it's their turn, we're just going to have to live with them.
E-mail: haggler@nytimes.com. Keep it brief and family-friendly, include your hometown and go easy on the caps-lock key. Letters may be edited for clarity and length.
Illustration Drawing (Drawing by Christoph Hitz)
