TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Verizon to Buy Frontier
To Boost Fiber Network
Verizon is buying Frontier Communications in a $ 20 billion deal to strengthen its fiber network.
Verizon Communications Inc. said Thursday that the acquisition will also shore up its foray into artificial intelligence as well as connected smart devices.
Frontier has concentrated heavily on its fiber network capabilities over about four years, investing $ 4.1 billion upgrading and expanding its fiber network. It now gets more than half of its revenue from fiber products.
The price tag for Frontier, based in Dallas, is sizable given its 2.2 million fiber subscribers across 25 states. Verizon has approximately 7.4 million Fios connections in nine states and Washington, D.C.
Frontier has 7.2 million fiber locations and has plans to build out an additional 2.8 million fiber locations by the end of 2026.
Verizon will pay $ 38.50 for each Frontier share. The deal is expected to close in about 18 months. ASSOCIATED PRESS
AVIATION
JetBlue Raises Forecast On Robust Bookings
JetBlue Airways raised its third-quarter revenue forecast on Thursday as the company benefited from streamlining operations, strong summer travel and demand from travelers seeking alternatives during a global outage.
The company's bookings were bolstered as JetBlue was not one of the primary carriers affected by the flight delays and cancellations in July, following the outage caused by a software update by cybersecurity firm CrowdStrike.
JetBlue now expects September-quarter revenue in the range of a 2.5 percent decline to 1 percent growth year-on-year. It had earlier forecast revenue to drop somewhere between 1.5 percent and 5 percent.
JetBlue cited stronger bookings in Latin America, one of its major markets, and gains from previously announced cost cuts and cancellations of less-profitable routes for the forecast raise. REUTERS
MEDIA
Newsmax Cable Network Has Filed for I.P.O.
The cable news channel Newsmax said on Thursday that it had confidentially filed for an initial public offering in the United States.
The conservative network, which reaches more than 40 million Americans through its television, streaming, online and print platforms, is seeking to raise up to $ 75 million in the public offering, which is expected to take place this year or in early 2025.
Founded in 1998 by Christopher Ruddy, Newsmax started as a digital brand and launched its cable news channel in 2014. The network also streams for free on its app and platforms like YouTube.
The company expects revenue of $ 180.5 million in 2024, compared with $ 135.3 million last year, according to an investor presentation.
Newsmax's broadcasting business makes up about two-thirds of its total revenue, with the rest coming from its digital operations. REUTERS
Credit: By Associated Press
Illustration
