Not enough hardware eye candy. That was the undertone of disappointment that surrounded the introduction of Apple's new iPhone on Tuesday.
But look beyond that to something really significant: Siri, the personal assistant application that Apple also showed off. Siri matters for two reasons. First, it represents the future of Apple as a business. Second, Siri potentially is the future of what is now called search.
Apple, no doubt, will continue to design great hardware. But its profit margins from selling devices will most likely erode. It's an iron law of computing: hardware becomes commoditized, and the only question is how quickly.
So Apple is broadening its reach by offering iPhones in a wider price range, including the 3GS free with a two-year contract, and adding more carriers, like Sprint. Thus the iPhone becomes a larger -- and yes, stylish -- delivery vehicle for software and services, like Siri.
"In the long term, the best strategy for Apple will be to get more and more of its revenue and profit from its software and services platform," said Michael Cusumano, a professor at M.I.T.'s Sloan School of Management.
Siri, put simply, listens to voice commands, searches the Web and online services, and delivers answers. Even today, it is an impressive technology, and one that was nurtured for years by America's tax dollars -- it originated as a program in the Pentagon's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
Siri is an evolving artificial intelligence application for things like making restaurant reservations and answering simple questions. And it has been impressing technologists long before Apple bought it last year. My colleague John Markoff and I described Siri as one example of advances in artificial intelligence in an article we wrote last year, before Apple bought the company.
If mobile computing is the future, as everyone says, then Siri or something like it is going to be crucial. Typing in commands and conventional search are limited on smartphones. When Microsoft talks about making Bing a "decision engine," something like Siri is what it has in mind. And Google, of course, is aggressively pursuing the same goal; it is the larger Android vision.
For Apple, Siri opens the door to getting into the search business in the future. And the way it makes money need not be in click-throughs on intrusive ads. That's the old business model. The new model may well be sharing transaction revenues on all kinds of online commerce, for example.
We'll see how things play out, but Siri says a lot about where Apple is headed.
.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
