1. The chief executive of what social media platform testified before Congress this week?
Facebook
Instagram
Snapchat
TikTok
Twitter
2. Which country's parliament passed a strict anti-gay bill this week, with punishments as severe as the death penalty?
Hungary
Iraq
Malaysia
Uganda
Venezuela
3. Four schools had both their men's and women's basketball teams reach the Sweet Sixteen round of the N.C.A.A. tournaments. Which of these is not one of them?
Miami
Purdue
Tennessee
U.C.L.A.
UConn
4. Wyoming last Friday became the first state to explicitly ban the use of pills for what?
Abortions
Gender-affirming care
Managing pain
Treating depression
Reversing male pattern baldness
5. Vladimir Putin referred to which world leader as a "good, old friend" ahead of a three-day state visit in Moscow this week?
António Guterres, the U.N. secretary general
President Aleksandr Lukashenko of Belarus
Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine
President Xi Jinping of China
6. Tens of thousands of Los Angeles school employees went on a three-day strike this week. What were they striking for?
A halt on future book bans
Smaller class sizes
A ban on critical race theory
An end to standardized testing
A 30 percent pay increase
7. Google released its A.I. chatbot this week, a competitor to ChatGPT. What's it called?
Bard
Bing
Beta
Boop
Burpo
8. A new U.N. climate report says the Earth is likely to hit a critical warming threshold -- 1.5 degrees Celsius, or 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit, above preindustrial levels -- by approximately which year?
2025
2035
2045
2085
2285
9. Which bank agreed to purchase one of its rivals, Credit Suisse, last weekend?
Deutsche Bank
JPMorgan Chase Bank
Santander
Silicon Valley Bank
UBS
10. Scientists analyzed hair from Ludwig van Beethoven. What did they learn about the composer?
He had a secret twin.
He had an extra Y chromosome.
He had hepatitis B.
He had lead poisoning.
He was Black.
The News Quiz is published on Fridays in the Morning newsletter. To sign up, visit nytimes.com/themorning.Solutions: 1. D; 2. D; 3. B; 4. A; 5. E; 6. E; 7. A; 8. B; 9. E; 10. C.
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEX WELSH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
