Erika Verzutti
Through Saturday. Andrew Kreps Gallery, 537 West 22nd Street, Manhattan; 212-741-8849, andrewkreps.com.
The Brazilian artist Erika Verzutti is in her late 40s, but her work exudes the exploratory energy of youth, mellowed by older, wiser emotional warmth, especially in her unusual combination of materials. In "Ex Gurus," her first commercial gallery solo in New York, Ms. Verzutti uses raw bronze, gold in color, as canvas; combines papier-mâché with concrete; and in "Cemetery Inline," makes a bumpy Carl Andre floor piece resembling a ragtag row of tombstones from chunks of cobblestone, unbaked clay and papier-mâché with color added. More subtly, Ms. Verzutti pits the translucence of oil paint against the implacable opacity of acrylic.
This contrast is especially evident in "Floral," where the shapes of a wilting flower and perhaps a beehive carved into the surface of raw bronze, are veiled in blue or yellow; dots of acrylic jump all around them like bees. Ms. Verzutti usually creates a specific physical place for color in her bronze surfaces (see the extremely satisfying "Astrology"). Except when she doesn't: In "Homeopatia," arguably the show's star, lozenge-shaped indentations of brilliant color dot the raw bronze surface while other lozenges are painted flat on the surface, which creates strange spatial ambiguities. It resembles a painter's palette and an entomologist's beetle collection.
Despite Ms. Verzutti's love of color, her mind seems alive with sculpture. Past works have referred to Robert Gober and Jeff Koons. "Dias da Semana" evokes some of Brancusi's sexier sculptures while also -- seen from a certain angle -- recalling her penchant for casting fruits and vegetables. In two dark bronze reliefs named "Witch" and "Pilates" she drags little stones or clumps of bronze down the surface, creating deep ruts and leaving the forming implements in place. They're mini-earthworks that pay tribute to the Italian artist Lucio Fontana. Combined with the show's title, the works' names suggest paths to health that Ms. Verzutti has tried and discarded. They also suggest an artist who leaves no stone unturned.
ROBERTA SMITH
Robert Bechtle
Through April 21. Gladstone 64, 130 East 64th Street, Manhattan; 212-753-2200, gladstone64.com.
Each of the 12 new charcoal drawings in the pioneering photorealist Robert Bechtle's latest show is a meticulously rendered view of an empty suburban street in Northern California. Boxy parked cars, single-story houses, and low-hanging power lines crowd together inside modest squares on warm gray paper.
The occasional small overlap or gap in the thin lines that circumscribe the squares are almost the only uncontrolled expressiveness in pictures as studiously devoid of spontaneous gestures as an engineering diagram. Things like the lush foliage in "Alameda Light" or the wrinkled tarp thrown over a car in "Dogpatch Wrap" might seem to offer the artist more occasion to let himself go, but in fact he records those less regular objects with the same straight-faced fidelity he applies to the shifting gray-tone planes of a sidewalk or wall.
But well-placed details like those gaps, or like the little dots of white with which Mr. Bechtle heightens streetlights and shiny fenders, can have disproportionate effects. In this case they make the drawings feel as thrillingly precarious as a high-wire act. They also imbue empty cars and opaque windows, which might otherwise read simply as easy metaphors for loneliness and alienation, with a real, if mysterious, presence.
In the show's strangest and most memorable drawing, "Covered Car, San Francisco," the 85-year-old Mr. Bechtle confronts that ambiguous presence directly, picturing it as a sleek, almost unbroken black silhouette divided from its own shadow by only a thin white speck.
WILL HEINRICH
Fia Backström
Through April 8. Callicoon Fine Arts, 49 Delancey Street, Manhattan; 212-219-0326, callicoonfinearts.com.
In this post-truth moment, science fiction is particularly popular with artists. In her current exhibition, "A Vaudeville on Mankind in Time and Space," Fia Backström draws upon the work of the Swedish Nobel laureate Harry Martinson, whose epic science fiction poem "Aniara: A Vaudeville on Mankind in Time and Space" provides both a title and a springboard for thinking about time, history and the fate of humanity.
A broadsheet available to visitors at the front of the gallery describes Mr. Martinson's 1956 poem, in which a spaceship populated with Earthlings escaping the wreckage of nuclear war and ecological disasters hits a meteorite labeled Hondo. The collision destroys the vessel's navigation system, then the spaceship flies through deep space, toward doom, entertained by a female artificial intelligence system named Mima.
Accompanying the broadsheet (which also wanders into Scandinavian folklore, pagan rituals and quantum physics) are abstract photographs on the wall as well as fuzzy brown works made by sticking parchment paper in the oven. The photographs feature real subjects -- mucous, cuticles, newspaper clippings -- often captured at microscopic levels to create a fossilized, distorted effect.
Together, the parts of Ms. Backström's show serve as powerful analogues for our own era of refugees and migrants moving across a globe ravaged by despots, war and ecological disaster. Rather than addressing this directly, Ms. Backström gains power through the subtlety of suggestion. Change a few details, and "Aniara" sounds like reportage rather than fiction. Ms. Backström's photographs could be scientific evidence of lost civilizations, gathered by future generations.
MARTHA SCHWENDENER
Bogosi Sekhukhuni
Through May 6. Foxy Production, 2 East Broadway, Suite 200, Manhattan; 212-239-2758, foxyproduction.com.
The globe is ever more networked, and has reduced unfathomable distances to the breadth of a screen; the globe is ever more riven, and political and social identities have solidified into stereotypes and dogmas. These two statements are no contradiction for the young South African artist Bogosi Sekhukhuni, whose New York debut, following on promising appearances in a number of international biennials, plumbs the shortcomings of digital technologies, neoliberal economics and multiracial democracy through videos, drawings, sculpture and a single painting.
Mr. Sekhukhuni, born in Johannesburg in 1991, has a particular interest in how spirituality fills the gaps in lives pitted by economic hardship or technological isolation. For some, that takes the form of evangelical Christianity -- the video "Thus Saith the Lord (Overunity)" (2015) introduces a real-life Zimbabwean entrepreneur who relies on divine guidance, rather than scientific know-how, to build helicopters and electric cars. Or it can take the form of post-apartheid New Age ancestor worship, which the artist delivers in the character of a deadpan talk show host.
The emotional wages of technology also inform the two psychedelically colored videos of "Consciousness Engine 2: absentblackfatherbot" (2013), in which disembodied heads voice a series of Facebook chats between Mr. Sekhukhuni and his estranged father. (His father went on to block him on the app.) Their conversation is rendered via a text-to-speech engine that strips away both personality and cultural specificity; the artist's "Howzit?" -- a common South African greeting -- sounds clanging when the software voices it in white-boy Americanese. When Mr. Sekhukhuni asks his father for help with tuition fees, the anonymizing software makes him a stand-in for the current generation of protesting South African students.
In purely visual terms, Mr. Sekhukhuni has ample room to mature; his videos rely too heavily on plug-and-play personal computing software, and need to stand further from a million Tumblr memes. But his art already displays a sensitivity to the confluence of personal circumstances and political systems that would be the envy of artists twice his tender age.
JASON FARAGO
Photograph Top, Fia Backström's "Fossil; x4 View (Secreted nasal mucus from mucous membranes), Dec. 14th, 2017" (2018), pigment print mounted on plexiglass. Left, Robert Bechtle's charcoal drawing "Alameda Light" (2017). Above, Erika Verzutti's "Homeopatia" (2018), in bronze, oil and acrylic paint. Below, installation of Fia Backström's "A Vaudeville on Mankind in Time and Space." (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CALLICOON FINE ARTS; THE ARTIST AND GLADSTONE GALLERY; CALLICOON FINE ARTS)
