Former President Donald J. Trump's penchant for amplifying easily debunked conspiracy theories is well known. But an extensive analysis of his posts and reposts on Truth Social reveals a candidate who promotes sinister conspiracy theories at a scale and frequency well beyond his already infamous playbook.
The New York Times's examination of Mr. Trump's activity on Truth Social shows that, often multiple times a day, the former president is concocting or promoting dark, paranoid material and pushing it out to his millions of followers. Mr. Trump is so hungry for this content that he appears to be willing to share outlandish information from anyone, including both well-known conspiracists and anonymous accounts that tag him.
The Times analyzed thousands of Mr. Trump's posts and reposts over a six-month period in 2024 and found that at least 330 of them met two tightly defined and striking criteria: They each described both a false, secretive plot against Mr. Trump or the American people and a specific entity supposedly responsible for it. The unfounded theories ranged from suggestions that the F.B.I. had ordered his assassination to accusations that government officials had orchestrated the Capitol riot on Jan. 6, 2021.
About 75 percent of the conspiracy-theory posts came directly from Mr. Trump's account. The rest Mr. Trump reposted from other social media accounts. The Times also analyzed hundreds more of his posts and reposts that didn't strictly meet both criteria but still invoked the theories with slogans and subtle references.
In addition to the posts themselves, the analysis zeroed in on the 170 Truth Social accounts that Mr. Trump had amplified on the platform. Some are ones he follows; others have just come across his radar. The vast majority of the accounts regularly promoted conspiracy theories, the analysis showed.
The Trump campaign did not respond to a request for comment from The Times.
A spokeswoman for Truth Social did not answer questions from The Times about the company's policies on conspiratorial content and the accounts that spread it. Instead, the spokeswoman criticized reporters.
Since Mr. Trump inaugurated the platform with its first post in 2022, Truth Social has attracted the kinds of users, and the kinds of posts, that mainstream and more heavily moderated social networks might not have tolerated. Mr. Trump's use of the platform is near constant; he averaged 30 posts a day in the six-month period The Times analyzed. That frequency far surpasses his posting on any other social media network this year, and shows how much Mr. Trump relies on the platform, and its users, to bolster his conspiratorial worldview.
From July to September, Truth Social received an average of about 4.7 million unique monthly visitors, according to the web analytics firm Similarweb. Those users are, in general, part of a group whose fealty to Mr. Trump sets the network apart from larger ones like Facebook or X, which have monthly user counts orders of magnitude higher. While Truth Social is populated by many everyday fans and supporters of Mr. Trump's, there are also sensationalist right-wing media upstarts, Covid deniers and devotees of QAnon, a far-right conspiracy theory whose adherents think that satanic pedophiles control the "deep state."
"He's building a coalition of people who just see the world in a very dark way," said Joseph Uscinski, who is a co-author of the book "American Conspiracy Theories" and a professor of political science at the University of Miami. Mr. Trump's rhetoric, he said, isn't meant to cater to traditional Republican values, but instead appeals to those "who just want to see the system blown up."
The conspiracy theories that Mr. Trump is exposed to on Truth Social have made their way into his campaign speeches and public appearances. He has repeatedly referred, both online and off, to an "enemy from within" that includes Democrats and government officials, and suggested that the military might be needed to handle them. In October, Mr. Trump described the Jan. 6 riot as a day of "love" at a town hall event and two days later shared a Truth Social post that claimed the attack had been staged by the federal government.
To analyze Mr. Trump's account, The Times collected all 5,641 of his Truth Social posts and reposts from March 12 to Sept. 12 using computer code. Reporters also manually analyzed hundreds of posts from each profile Mr. Trump amplified to identify whether those accounts had displayed a pattern of propagating conspiratorial content.
Much of the activity on Mr. Trump's feed consisted of general campaign-related fare, like videos from rallies or endorsements of other political candidates. It also included disinformation and hateful rhetoric about immigrants, his political opponents and other targets.
But over and over -- almost twice a day on average -- Mr. Trump's account went one step further and promoted conspiracy theories to his 7.9 million followers.
A grab bag of false conspiracies: George Soros, the Nord Stream pipeline and a 'rigged' election
The Times's analysis identified 10 distinct themes in the conspiracy theories shared by Mr. Trump. Some of the posts depicted below referred to multiple false theories.
More than 300 additional posts not depicted above used language to refer to conspiracy theories but did not spell out the full theory on their own. This included using slogans and phrases that a believer of the theory would understand, but that an average person might not.
The common thread through most of the conspiracy theories is a belief that Mr. Trump is the protagonist of every moment and that his political adversaries are the villains.
Experts said that it was particularly concerning that some of the theories shared on Mr. Trump's account sought to undermine institutions the public relies on, including the Federal Emergency Management Agency during Hurricane Helene, and the institutions holding the former president to account, like the Justice Department.
Mr. Trump also -- with stunning frequency -- sowed doubt about American democracy itself.
In more than 260 posts in the six-month period The Times analyzed, Mr. Trump shared conspiracy theories that supported his frequently stated claim that the 2024 presidential election would be fraudulent. That includes saying the criminal cases against him are Biden administration plots to interfere in the election.
Some posts falsely alleged that Democrats were relying on undocumented immigrants to vote and sway the election. Mr. Trump also shared posts with references to replacement theory, a far-right false claim often promoted by white supremacists that says powerful forces are trying to replace American citizens with immigrants.
It's unclear whether Mr. Trump or one of his campaign staffers wrote any individual post, but each one had been sent from the former president's official account.
Max Read, a senior research manager at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue who studies election disinformation, said that after months of Mr. Trump's false assertions about election integrity, some Truth Social users may accept only a Trump victory.
"Who are you going to go to to trust election results?" Mr. Read said. "It's not going to be the media. It's not going to be the professionals doing the elections. If you're living in that reality and getting that information on Truth Social, you're going to trust Trump and only Trump."
Other conspiracy theories Mr. Trump shared included claims that the Biden administration had blown up the Nord Stream pipeline to start a world war; that George Soros, a billionaire Democratic donor, was devising plots to undermine Mr. Trump (a claim that often has antisemitic undertones because Mr. Soros is Jewish); and that Vice President Kamala Harris had used artificial intelligence to fake the size of her crowds at rallies.
The posts from Mr. Trump that did not meet the threshold of conspiracy theory on their own, but still referred to conspiratorial viewpoints, touched on some of the most dangerous and persistent false claims. For example, he has called the people in prison for their actions on Jan. 6 "hostages," implying they had been falsely imprisoned in a plot against him. In one of those posts, Mr. Trump shared a song that combined his voice with a choir made up of people charged for their alleged roles in the attack on the Capitol.
In more than a dozen instances, Mr. Trump shared posts that included known QAnon slogans and imagery, like the acronym "NCSWIC," meaning "Nothing can stop what is coming," and "Q+," the movement's nickname for Mr. Trump.
"He's able to reference a series of claims and characters and so forth now," said Brendan Nyhan, a professor of government at Dartmouth College who studies misinformation and conspiracy theories. "There's an incredible conceptual apparatus that has been built up around the various villains that he thinks are persecuting him and his followers."
The far-right universe Trump amplifies: real-life confidants and anonymous sycophants
Not everything Mr. Trump posts to Truth Social is a conspiracy theory. But almost every voice he amplifies at least dabbles in them -- some even more extreme than what Mr. Trump shares from their accounts.
The Times's analysis found that in the same six-month period this year, Mr. Trump reposted or quote-posted messages from 170 accounts, about 85 percent of which regularly promote conspiracy theories on their own feeds.
About one-third of those 170 accounts were run by people or organizations that Mr. Trump knows in real life, follows on Truth Social or both. They include some of the most extreme figures in the MAGA wing of the Republican Party, many of whom regularly visit his Mar-a-Lago resort, like the far-right activist Laura Loomer and Michael T. Flynn, his former national security adviser.
Mr. Trump reposted a campaign endorsement from Mr. Flynn that alleged that children "will be enslaved by a corrupt, wasteful government of woke globalists" if he is not elected.
Most of the other accounts reposted by Mr. Trump were not as well known, including 15 that had fewer than 500 followers. Because Truth Social allows for anonymity in its users' public profiles, determining the identities of the owners of many of these accounts can be difficult.
U.S. officials have said that foreign nations have injected disinformation in dozens of social media platforms ahead of the 2024 election. It was unclear if any of these accounts were part of that effort.
In April, "Ultra MAGA Truther" tagged Mr. Trump in a post with a litany of conspiracy theories about Mr. Biden, including that "he stole the election" and "sold the influence of his office to China for millions." Mr. Trump reposted it.
"Ultra MAGA Truther" is one of at least three dozen accounts amplified by Mr. Trump that either included a reference to QAnon in its bio or repeatedly posted messages with slogans and imagery associated with the conspiracy theory.
Mr. Trump also posts screenshots of content from Truth Social or other social media platforms without linking to the original post, or visual content that includes watermarks of social media handles. The Times looked at nearly 300 accounts identified in these kinds of posts, dozens of which also trafficked in conspiracy theories. They include well-known figures such as Elon Musk, whom Mr. Trump has suggested would have a job in his administration if he wins.
In one post in August, Mr. Trump shared an image of a post on X that used the phrase "too big to rig," a conspiratorial shorthand that promotes the baseless idea that the 2024 election will be fair only if Mr. Trump wins in a landslide. The Times found that the account behind the image had posted antisemitic content on X, including a post that said "Adolf Hitler was right."
As Americans vote, Trump ramps up threats and undermines election
Truth Social hails itself as a "free speech haven" and publicly says it doesn't moderate content unless it is illegal or otherwise prohibited by its terms of service. In addition to the conspiracy theories, The Times found multiple posts from social media accounts Mr. Trump amplified that included crude sexual comments about Ms. Harris, racist disinformation about immigrants and manipulated images and videos used to attack his opponents.
Mr. Trump's use of the platform continues to be constant: He posted more than 240 times last week.
On Friday, Mr. Trump took to Truth Social to repeat his false claims that the 2020 election had been stolen and that he would seek retribution on anyone who had been involved once elected. He said those people, including lawyers, donors, election officials and "illegal voters," would be "sought out, caught, and prosecuted at levels, unfortunately, never seen before in our Country."
The post quickly gathered thousands of replies from other users who shared additional conspiracy theories and cheered on Mr. Trump's call for retribution.
Though most of these accounts are not household names, at least eight -- including one that called former President Barack Obama "a sleeper cell terrorist" in a reply -- may have looked familiar to Mr. Trump. He has reposted their content before.
Illustration
