Can a single movie haunt an entire film festival? "Steve Jobs," Danny Boyle's scathing, scary, biographical portrait starring Michael Fassbender, may leave you with the creepy sensation that its subject has crawled inside your head and hijacked your mind. As I watched the movie -- the New York Film Festival's centerpiece, to be shown Saturday at Lincoln Center -- I thought of a cult leader wheedling his worshipful flock to follow him and drink the Kool-Aid. The alternative was expulsion from Jobs's inner circle, which for those in his orbit was the equivalent of banishment to Siberia.
A counterbalance to that film's futuristic chill is Michael Moore's jolly new travelogue, "Where to Invade Next," in which this left-wing filmmaker jokingly imagines "invading" other countries, mostly in Europe and Scandinavia, and importing their advantages. The happy interviewees voice their belief in community responsibility rather than the American dream of individual wealth and achievement. There is hardly a digital product to be seen.
"Steve Jobs" draws a cinematic dividing line between a shiny new digital future and the scruffy old past, and it envisions a man-machine interface in which people merge with devices that ultimately separate them from others.
In the revolution he helped bring about, Jobs, who died in 2011 at the age of 56, can be seen as either a demon or a savior, although the movie paints him as more satanic than saintly. In Mr. Fassbender's fierce performance, Jobs seems to suffer from Asperger syndrome. Controlling, paranoid, hypercompetitive, selfish and manipulative, he suggests a robotic artificial intelligence pretending to be human and often failing miserably.
Mr. Fassbender's Jobs, however powerful, pales beside the complexity and hypnotic power of the actual man depicted in Alex Gibney's recent documentary "Steve Jobs: The Man in the Machine," a must-see companion piece to Mr. Boyle's film. The figure straddling the line between old and new in Jobs's personal pantheon is Bob Dylan, as mysterious and enigmatic today as in the early 1960s. Both films suggest that the energy and creativity that fueled rock 'n' roll has been diverted to technology.
The last time a movie so dominated the New York Film Festival was five years ago, when "The Social Network" was its opening-night selection. "Steve Jobs," like "The Social Network," has a voluble, fast-talking screenplay by Aaron Sorkin (working from Walter Isaacson's 2011 biography), and focuses on three moments in Jobs's life, each constructed around the rollout of different products: the Macintosh, in 1984; the NeXT cube, in 1988; and the iMac, in 1998. Kate Winslet plays Joanna Hoffman, his marketing guru; Seth Rogen his early partner, Steve Wozniak; and Jeff Daniels the Apple chief executive John Sculley, with whom Jobs had a stormy relationship.
The film in the festival's middle section that most strongly echoes Jobs's obsession with science and technology is Michael Almereyda's "Experimenter," a portrait of the social scientist Stanley Milgram (a mesmerizing Peter Sarsgaard), who in one of many surreal touches is seen being followed around by an elephant.
Milgram created the notorious 1961 obedience study at Yale in which test subjects, situated out of sight of one another, were assigned the roles of "teacher" and "learner." The learner was asked multiple-choice questions that, if answered incorrectly, provoked remote-controlled electric shocks administered by the teacher. Or seemed to.
Unbeknown to the teacher, the learner was actually an assistant who simulated the agonized cries of someone being tortured, and no shocks were delivered. When the teacher protested, Milgram declared in an authoritarian voice that the experiment must continue. In most cases, the teacher reluctantly obeyed and cringed each time he heard the groans from the other room. The experiment's conclusions about people's reflexive obedience to authority were grim.
On the other side of what might be called the festival's digital divide are three French films, two of which concern that favorite Gallic topic, l'amour. Arnaud Desplechin's autobiographical "My Golden Days" is the sequel to his 1996 film, "My Sex Life ... or How I Got Into an Argument." His middle-aged stand-in, Paul Dedalus (Mathieu Amalric), looks back to his emotionally turbulent youth (Quentin Dolmaire plays the young Paul) growing up with a suicidal mother and a depressed father.
The most intense of several interlocking stories is Paul's tormented relationship with Esther (the charismatic Lou Roy-Lecollinet), an irresistible teenage siren. In Mr. Desplechin's universe, young love is not something to look back on with fond amusement but the pinnacle of life experience.
Philippe Garrel's perceptive black-and-white "In the Shadow of Women" examines marital infidelity and the different ways a couple, Pierre (Stanislas Merhar) and Manon (Clotilde Courau), documentary filmmakers, deal with it. The characters in Michel Gondry's likable comedy "Microbe & Gasoline" are teenage misfits who build a house on wheels and visit a camp one of them attended as a child.
An American movie that in places has the flavor of a French farce is Rebecca Miller's serious screwball comedy, "Maggie's Plan," set in New York City and starring Greta Gerwig as the title character. Maggie, a single woman and control freak, falls in love with John (Ethan Hawke), a married professor and aspiring novelist just as she is about to impregnate herself with donated sperm. Julianne Moore, adopting a Danish accent, plays Georgette, the high-strung wife John abandons.
At its best, this frantic movie, sprinkled with hilarious one-liners, rises to the level of vintage Woody Allen. To quote its unofficial Bruce Springsteen theme song, which is heard twice in the film, its characters are all "dancing in the dark."
On the festival's low-tech end, "Don't Blink -- Robert Frank" is an informal portrait of Mr. Frank, now 90, in which the photographer and documentary filmmaker tells the editor-director Laura Israel his own story. Mr. Frank's book "The Americans," his groundbreaking survey of everyday American faces photographed in the tradition of Walker Evans, remains his crowning achievement. Mr. Frank personifies a defiant individuality that the festival celebrates.
The most upbeat film in the festival's midsection turns to be Mr. Moore's documentary. An impassioned humanistic tract, it compares many aspects of American life unfavorably with their European counterparts. French schoolchildren are served nutritious gourmet meals; Italian factory workers are given long vacations and generous benefits. Finland's youth receive a superior education but spend less time in the classroom and have little or no homework. Higher education in Slovenia is free.
In the wake of the financial meltdown that destroyed Iceland's economy, the bankers responsible were prosecuted, and prosperity returned. Because the prison system in Norway emphasizes rehabilitation instead of punishment, prisoners are housed in modest but comfortable rooms. As hyperbolic and simplistic as it often sounds, "Where to Invade Next" offers hope and is Mr. Moore's most far-reaching film.
­The New York Film Festival runs through Oct. 11; filmlinc­.org­/nyff2015.
Photograph Michael Fassbender Portrays the Title Role in "Steve Jobs," Directed by Danny Boyle. The Movie Is the Centerpiece of the New York Film Festival. (Photograph by Universal Pictures) (C1); Experimenter': Peter Sarsgaard in Michael Almereyda's Film. (Photograph by Magnolia Pictures); 'Where to Invade Next': Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Documentary. (Photograph by Robert D. Ward/Department of Defense); 'Don't Blink -- Robert Frank': The Title Subject in This Portrait. (Photograph by Lisa Rinzler) (C2)
