Large language model: A type of neural network that learns skills -- including generating prose, conducting conversations and writing computer code -- by analyzing vast amounts of text from across the internet. The basic function is to predict the next word in a sequence, but these models have surprised experts by learning new abilities.
Generative A.I.: Technology that creates content -- including text, images, video and computer code -- by identifying patterns in large quantities of training data, and then creating new, original material that has similar characteristics. Examples include ChatGPT for text and DALL-E and Midjourney for images.
Transformer model: A neural network architecture useful for understanding language, which does not have to analyze words one at a time but can look at an entire sentence at once. A technique called self-attention allows the model to focus on the particular words that are important in understanding the meaning of the sentence.
Parameters: Numerical values that define a large language model's structure and behavior, like clues that help it guess what words come next. Modern systems like GPT-4 are thought to have hundreds of billions of parameters.
Reinforcement learning: A technique that teaches an A.I. model to find the best result by trial and error, receiving rewards or punishments from an algorithm based on its results. This system can be enhanced by humans giving feedback on its performance.
Hallucination: A well-known phenomenon in large language models, in which the system provides an answer that is factually incorrect, irrelevant or nonsensical, because of limitations in its training data and architecture.
Bias: A type of error that can occur in a large language model if its output is skewed by the model's training data. For example, a model may associate specific traits or professions with a certain race or gender, leading to inaccurate predictions and offensive responses.
Anthropomorphism: The tendency for people to attribute humanlike qualities or characteristics to an A.I. chatbot. For example, you may assume it is kind or cruel based on its answers, even though it is not capable of having emotions, or you may believe the A.I. is sentient because it is very good at mimicking human language.
Natural language processing: Techniques used by large language models to understand and generate human language, including text classification and sentiment analysis. These methods often use a combination of machine learning algorithms, statistical models and linguistic rules.
Emergent behavior: Unexpected or unintended abilities in a large language model, enabled by the model's learning patterns and rules from its training data. For example, L.L.M.s that are trained on programming and coding sites can write new code. Other examples include creative abilities like composing poetry, music and fictional stories.
Alignment: Attempts by A.I. researchers and ethicists to ensure that artificial intelligences act in accordance with the values and goals of the people who create them.
Multimodal systems: A.I.s similar to ChatGPT that can also process images, video, audio, and other non-text inputs and outputs.
Artificial general intelligence: An artificial intelligence that matches human intellect and can do anything the human brain can do.
Illustration
