Whether leaving a job is voluntary or pink-slipped, anyone with Facebook, Twitter or Tumblr account can issue a very public kiss-off to a former boss or company.
When Richard M. Nixon lost the race for California governor in 1962, he famously (and, as it turned out, prematurely) held a news conference avowing, "You don't have Nixon to kick around anymore."
Fifty years later, he probably would have tweeted it.
The exit strategies of the recently unemployed have taken a new tack: Social media are proving to be an outlet for those who decide that they do not want to go quietly. Whether the leave-taking is voluntary or pink-slipped, anyone with a Facebook page, Twitter account or Tumblr feed can issue a very public kiss-off to a former boss or company, abandoning the conventional career advice about not bad-mouthing an employer when leaving a job.
After four years at a hotel in Providence, Rhode Island, Joey DeFrancesco handed in his notice, accompanied by a dozen members of the band in which he plays trumpet, along with a friend to act as a videographer.
"My manager really hated me, and I wanted a big send-off," he said. He posted the video on Facebook ("for a few friends who are fellow hotel workers") and uploaded it to YouTube, where it went viral.
"The band was playing a Serbian song," he said, "so I'm even a weird minor celebrity in Serbia."
It seems unlikely that Dan Harmon will be working for NBC anytime soon. In May, after he was fired from "Community," the TV comedy he had created, he took to Tumblr contradicting a statement from the network president that implied he would have a continuing role in the show.
"I think he meant to say he's sure cookies are yummy," Mr. Harmon wrote.
"Guys like me can't actually just be shot and left in a ditch by Skynet," he added, referring to the artificial intelligence system in "The Terminator." "We're still allowed to have a title on the things we create and 'help out,' like, I guess sharpening pencils and stuff."
When Aaron Brown was fired as a CNN anchor, he was contractually precluded from speaking about it for several years. With the muzzle taken off, he was reproachful on The Huffington Post ("I didn't think the viewers were behind me when we did dumb television") and downright cheeky on Mediabistro, where he scoffed: "I know the difference between journalism and a slogan. 'Keeping them honest' is a slogan," a reference to the tagline for "Anderson Cooper 360" on CNN. (To which CNN responded that its coverage "speaks for itself.")
"I clearly took a pop at CNN," said Mr. Brown, who now teaches journalism at Arizona State University. "There was no higher purpose there. When I thought about it, that's not how I wanted to be. I was trying to make a larger point, I think. One of the things I hate about TV is that everything is branded. You turn on two morning shows and see the same interview, but both shows call it 'exclusive."'
Unsurprisingly, a few denizens of Silicon Valley have engaged in digital bomb-throwing. Google's former engineering director James Whittaker blogged about his last months on the job as "a whirlwind of desperation, trying in vain to get my passion back."
"As I wrote, the process became cathartic," Mr. Whitaker said in an e-mail. "I don't think I fully understood why I left until I wrote it down. Repercussions have been interesting. I have received a lot of praise from many friends who, like me, really miss the Google of old. There are those who are convinced I did it out of spite, and I will never change their mind."
For sheer audacity, nothing beats the financial world, which has engendered a cacophony of tweets from executives who leave with briefcases full of golden-parachute money and seem to notice the industry's problems only when looking back over their shoulders.
Once called the most powerful woman on Wall Street, Sallie Krawcheck took to Twitter this year after being fired from Bank of America, needing far fewer than 140 characters to take satisfying bites from the hand that no longer feeds her. ("More on the theme of big bank complexity: not Too Big to Fail, but Too Complex to Exist?")
The "sayonara, sucker" postings have spawned their own form of response and retribution. Greg Smith punctuated his departure from Goldman Sachs with an op-ed article in this newspaper about what he characterized as his former firm's "moral bankruptcy." That same day, a British Web site called The Daily Mash published a parody titled "Why I am leaving the Empire" by Darth Vader. ("The Empire today has become too much about shortcuts and not enough about remote strangulation. It just doesn't feel right to me anymore.")
Joshua Brown has some advice for disgruntled Wall Streeters on his blog The Reformed Broker: "Deal with it or leave and open an Etsy store," referring to the Web site where users sell handmade items. Mr. Brown spent about a dozen years as a retail stockbroker, only to conclude: "The business is one giant conflict. Even someone who wanted to do right by his clients couldn't."
As a senior vice president at Yahoo, Brad Garlinghouse wrote an internal memo accusing the company of spreading its resources too thinly, like peanut butter on a slice of bread, with a focus "on nothing in particular." As with many "internal" memos, the Peanut Butter Manifesto, as it came to be called, found a wide online audience, although Mr. Garlinghouse points out that he waited two more years before leaving.
"I'm generally opposed to the 'rant' or scorched earth approach when leaving a job," he wrote in an e-mail. But he pointed out what he calls "a big delta," or variance, between a genuine effort to identify problems and come up with solutions, versus telling your boss off on the way out the door.
