Two billionaire Democratic donors have publicly pressured Vice President Kamala Harris to replace the F.T.C. chair, Lina Khan. Wall Street insiders are worried that could backfire.
Wall Street Democrats have spent the last eight years complaining about their relationship with Washington. They found former President Donald Trump's presidency unpredictable, and then became estranged from the Democratic Party as President Biden hired the most aggressive antitrust regulators in recent memory. But now that Vice President Kamala Harris is the party's presumptive presidential nominee, they see a chance to regain influence.
Some have returned to a long tradition of writing checks, scheduling fund-raising dinners and orchestrating subtle campaigns. But others, embracing the public lobbying welcomed by Trump and employed by outspoken C.E.O.s like Elon Musk and Bill Ackman, are openly calling for Harris to oust Lina Khan, the chair of the Federal Trade Commission: "I think she's a dope," Barry Diller, the chairman of IAC, told CNBC. (He later apologized for calling her a dope, but not for critiquing her policies.)
Reid Hoffman, the LinkedIn co-founder, spoke to CNN twice about his Khan concerns. "Antitrust is fine," Hoffman said. "Waging war is not." (He later clarified that he would support Harris regardless of whether she replaced Khan.)
Few on Wall Street would disagree with that stance -- Khan has moved to block deals with seemingly little concern over losing in court. But behind the scenes, many are irked by this kind of public lobbying, arguing that it exposes a misunderstanding of the way the Washington game is played, and that it could backfire.
Their concerns are echoed by strategists: "I'm not really sure if it's very effective," Stuart Stevens, a political consultant who previously worked for Mitt Romney, told DealBook. "I've always felt once you make these things public, it makes it harder for politicians to do."
Critics immediately called the public lobbying self-interested. The F.T.C. has reportedly opened multiple investigations that involve subsidiaries of Diller's IAC, according to CNN, and Hoffman has a seat on the board of Microsoft, whose investment in OpenAI is also under scrutiny from the F.T.C.
"We didn't see this in recent elections, because the Democratic Party was Wall Street-friendly on issues like antitrust and trade," said Michael Sandel, a professor at Harvard and the author of "Democracy's Discontent," speaking about the public lobbying around Khan. "The Biden administration broke with these policies, which is why the donors are complaining."
Khan's detractors on Wall Street argue that their frustration is warranted. Deal activity has dropped precipitously under the Biden administration as regulators have demonstrated an eagerness to test the law by taking proposed mergers to trial.
But expressing the desire to oust Khan so publicly, some Wall Street insiders say, makes it nearly impossible for Harris to do so without it seeming as if she's kowtowing to donor interests. It also reinforces Khan's stature as a celebrity in her own right.
Donor concern extends beyond Khan's vocation. Not since Teddy Roosevelt has antitrust enforcement been a cornerstone election issue, and it is not clear it will be in 2024, either. But a clumsy approach could complicate Wall Street's nascent relationship with a potential Harris administration, particularly if she views it as one that threatens her election chances.
Harris needs to win votes in Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania, where the administration's antitrust policies and Trump-era tariffs remain popular.
"It seems to me that the last thing Kamala Harris needs is to take direction from plutocrat donors and cryptocurrency fans," Chris Whipple, author of "The Fight of His Life: Inside Joe Biden's White House," told DealBook. "She should be listening instead to working-class voters in battleground states."
The pressure campaign comes as Trump redeploys a winning tactic from 2016 by courting the populist vote. He invited Sean O'Brien, the president of the Teamsters union, to speak at the Republican National Convention. His pick for vice president, JD Vance, has applauded Khan's take on big business.
Executives are increasingly becoming their own lobbyists. Companies typically try to influence antitrust policy behind closed doors. Google executives frequented the Obama White House during its antitrust investigation of the internet giant. Amazon, Apple, Facebook and Google fortified their Washington presence during Trump's presidency, spending millions on congressional calls, advertising and think-tank funding.
But Trump's more blatantly transactional tenure was followed by a rise in public pleading, as Ackman, Musk and Silicon Valley billionaires have used social media to proclaim their political views on everything from the war in Ukraine to tax policy.
It's "a continuation of social media where you have a forum that no thought can go unexpressed," said Stevens. "This is what we used to pay lobbyists to do."
Washington insiders prefer the art of subtle pressure. DealBook asked donors, lobbyists and insiders how they would pressure the vice president to replace Khan. Their hypothetical strategies involved highlighting economic studies that question Khan's policies; enlisting support from organizations of smaller companies; and containing the ire that replacing Khan would provoke from progressive politicians like Senator Elizabeth Warren.
The latter is easier said than done, adding to the significant political and logistical challenges in replacing Khan.
Those surveyed said a more easily achieved goal might be pushing for appointments in roles that could curb the administration's antitrust priorities, like the director of the national economic council.
As for the potential political problem created by donors, a longtime Washington policy strategist, who asked not to be named because he was not authorized by his employer to speak publicly, had a recommendation.
"It's a huge problem for Harris," he told DealBook of public calls for Khan's removal. He offered his thoughts on how the vice president should handle them: Reject executives publicly, and then tell donors privately, "Sorry, I had to do that." -- Lauren Hirsch
IN CASE YOU MISSED IT
A lackluster jobs report sank stocks, and put pressure on the Fed. Employers added 114,000 jobs in July, well below economists' forecasts. That, and a revision showing 29,000 fewer hires in May and June, led to more calls for the central bank to lower interest rates at the next policy meeting in September as concerns grow that the U.S. economy is slowing.
Journalist Evan Gershkovich and two other Americans were freed from Russia in an elaborate prisoner swap. Gershkovich, the Wall Street Journal reporter, plus the former Marine Paul Whelan and the radio journalist Alsu Kurmasheva, landed in the U.S. late on Thursday, following a six-nation deal that President Biden called a triumph of international diplomacy. Republican congressional leaders warned though that "the costs of hostage diplomacy will continue to rise" and that the swap would do nothing to dissuade Russia's president, Vladimir Putin, from wrongfully detaining political prisoners.
Kamala Harris won the votes needed to secure the Democratic Party's nomination, setting Harris up to become the first Black woman and person of South Asian heritage to run for president on a major political ticket. Speculation that she will pick Gov. Josh Shapiro of Pennsylvania as her running mate gained steam as he canceled a fund-raising trip, though some pro-Palestinian activists oppose his selection.
Katie Ledecky became the most decorated U.S. female Olympian. She reached the milestone after winning her 13th Olympic medal, in the 4x200 freestyle relay. In other Olympic highlights: Simone Biles and the U.S. women's team each won gold in the Olympics gymnastics all-around competitions; the U.S. men's gymnastics team won its first medal in 16 years; and the U.S. won its first women's rugby medal.
Big Tech's big spending
For nearly two years, Wall Street hasn't blinked when tech C.E.O.s pledged to invest whatever it takes to realize the potential of artificial intelligence. And this week many of the industry's titans confirmed double-digit percentage increases in capital expenditures, the bulk tied to A.I. spending, over the same time last year.
Shares in Alphabet, Microsoft and Amazon all fell after they reported earnings, despite delivering good news about their bottom lines. Only Meta, which both exceeded expectations and made the case for A.I. helping its core business, and Apple, which hasn't defined the technology as existential to its future, avoided earnings-related stock slumps.
Ticket resellers are sitting out this Olympics
When Andrew covered the 2000 Olympic Games, scalping tickets was as competitive as some of the athletic events, with an army of resellers descending on Sydney from all around the world to hustle tickets. The marketplace for the Paris Games couldn't look more different.
QR codes, distributed via an official Olympics app, have replaced paper tickets. If you want to sell a ticket, your only option is in the app, for face value. Trying your luck with an unsanctioned sales channel could be viewed as a crime, the Olympics website warns. The threat seems to be working: The biggest online ticket resellers, including StubHub, Ticketmaster and SeatGeek, have no inventory.
By adopting such a restrictive stance, the Olympics may be circumventing problems that have plagued the events industry, like deceptive pricing (the District of Columbia's attorney general sued StubHub this week over what he calls junk fees); scalpers using bots to monopolize the supply of hot tickets; and speculative resellers who buy tickets only after they've sold them at a higher price.
But you're not likely to see the Paris approach at the next Summer Games in Los Angeles, or trending at venues across the U.S. any time soon. Here's why.
The U.S. is generally more open to resellers. A handful of states, including Connecticut, Illinois, Virginia, New Jersey and Colorado, make it unlawful to limit or restrict a consumer's right to resell tickets, says Laura Nemeth, a partner at the law firm Squire Patton Boggs who represents clients in the event ticketing industries. That said, there is no U.S. federal law that spells out consumers' rights to resell tickets or that prohibits event organizers from restricting them.
In Europe, consumers are generally more skeptical about ticket reselling and regulations that govern it are more restrictive.
Some U.S. professional sports rely on the resale market. "Going to all 81 home baseball games is a challenge, even for the most dedicated fans," says Russ D'Souza, a co-founder of the ticketing platform SeatGeek. The option to resell tickets makes season tickets more valuable.
Rights holders often pocket from the practice. When events name official reselling partners, they typically get a cut of the sales fee a platform charges. As such, the platform is often integrated into the event's ticketing system, or gets other preferential positioning.
The Eras Tour has put the spotlight on ticketing. Sky-high prices at Taylor Swift concerts are commonly cited to show how predatory resellers can box out all but those willing to pay well above face value for entry. Some popular U.S. artists, like Billie Eilish, have requested that all tickets be restricted from transfer to "give fans, not scalpers, the best chance to buy tickets at face value."
Paris is facing a different problem. Some of the buzzier events -- including the men's and women's 100-meter finals this weekend -- had a stockpile of tickets available as of Thursday.
Could dynamic pricing on an open resale market have put more fans in the Stade de France?
"What's so powerful about the secondary market is that it's a true marketplace," D'Souza says. "And the price will reflect supply and demand."
Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.
Thanks for reading! We'll see you Monday.
We'd like your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.
Photograph Lina Khan, the chair of the Federal Trade Commission, has come under fire for her aggressive antitrust actions. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMIR HAMJA/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
