Peter Thiel is shunning popular Internet start-ups -- because they are not "taking civilization to the next level" -- and is betting on health care, biotechnology and artificial intelligence companies
As investors clamor for shares of social media darlings, Peter Thiel is avoiding the frenzy.
"Is Twitter worth $7 billion?" the venture capitalist said. "The broader question is: Is it going to help people have a much higher quality of living? And I think on that score, its benefit is a lot less."
Mr. Thiel -- Facebook's first outside investor and the co-founder of PayPal -- is not just knocking the competition. He has a visceral aversion to market exuberance. By the time an idea is widely accepted, like social networking, Mr. Thiel, 43, already thinks it is passe. "He's always starting with the premise of: What does everyone else believe that's erroneous?" said Keith Rabois, a friend and former PayPal executive.
Still, the entrepreneur turned investor is more than a simple iconoclast. Mr. Thiel, who is also the founder of the hedge fund Clarium Capital, is a full-time prognosticator who says he makes "determinant views of the future." The macro perspective defines his investments in start-ups and securities.
He is currently focused on what he sees as a lack of innovation in the United States. Although the last 40 years have seen advancements in computers and the Web, Mr. Thiel is nostalgic for the 1960s, when people were still dreaming of putting a man on the moon. He describes the decade -- and the 200 years that preceded it -- as a "golden era" for technology. "Innovation slowed down dramatically after the 1960s," Mr. Thiel said. "We are not focused enough on getting back to a culture of innovation -- people are just trying to figure out ways to coast."
Mr. Thiel is currently shunning the most popular Internet start-ups because they are not "taking civilization to the next level." Instead, he is placing bets on health care, biotechnology and artificial intelligence companies -- areas most of his peers have shied away from.
His venture capital firm, Founders Fund, has made investments in Halcyon Molecular, a DNA sequencing start-up; Practice Fusion, an electronic health record system; and SpaceX, a spaceship builder. According to Mr. Thiel, most people are not spending enough energy on tackling the big, challenging problems, like space exploration. Instead, they are chasing incremental progress and short-term gains.
Part of the problem is society's faith in the higher education system, which he has long called "a great bubble." Colleges and universities, Mr. Thiel argues, are lulling the younger generation into a false sense of security and chaining them to hefty student loans, which pushes them into low-risk jobs.
"Universities are like the General Motors of the 1970s," said Mr. Thiel, a graduate of Stanford University and Stanford Law School in California. "They're incredibly dominant, incredibly arrogant and impervious to change."
His nonprofit organization, the Thiel Foundation, is vetting candidates for 20 fellowships, all of whom are under the age of 20. Each recipient will be awarded $100,000 grants to leave college and pursue entrepreneurial projects.
Although the initiative caused controversy among staunch supporters of higher education, the program has attracted 400 applicants, many from top-tier schools. Mr. Thiel, who plans to announce the winners next week, says he is not advocating that everyone drop out. But he does want students to consider their options more carefully.
"I don't think there's anything controversial about an education bubble; price is up by a factor of 10, quality hasn't really changed, there's something really crazy going on here," he said.
What is intriguing about Mr. Thiel is that for all his titles -- and there are many, including entrepreneur, movie producer, lawyer and derivatives trader -- his approach is generally consistent. According to several former employees and friends, Mr. Thiel ponders major societal and economic issues and then identifies the contrarian strands.
He also places a huge premium on intellectuals who, like him, think of the big picture. Mr. Rabois, who worked at Clarium in 2003, recalls a wave of new employees, "brainiacs," who were hired without specific roles at the hedge fund.
"People would show up for work and nobody had any idea what they were supposed to do," Mr. Rabois said. "Peter is a people investor. His basic philosophy is that you wouldn't just sit there, you would create value."
Despite his consistent strategy, results have been mixed. As a venture capitalist, he has realized outsize gains, but as a hedge fund manager, he has struggled to stay ahead. His singular stake in Facebook, a $500,000 investment, is now worth about 3 percent of the company, or roughly $1.5 billion, based on conservative estimates. Mr. Thiel, an investor in Zynga and LinkedIn, also sold PayPal to eBay for $1.5 billion in 2002.
In stark contrast, his San Francisco-based hedge fund, Clarium Capital, has posted three consecutive years of declines. The macro fund surged in the first half of 2008 to more than $7 billion in assets, according to several former employees who were not authorized to talk publicly. But it tumbled soon after. In late 2008, Mr. Thiel bought stock futures too soon amid the panic. "When the financial markets were collapsing, Peter thought that since all the problems were now out, the authorities would throw everything they could against it," said Patrick Wolff, a former managing director of Clarium. "He was right, but he made that bet at the wrong time."
By the end of 2010, the fund had about $680 million, with his personal assets as the bulk. Mr. Thiel declined to comment on Clarium's performance. "When you make a venture capital investment, no one values it day to day," said Tammer Kamel, a hedge fund advisor whose clients include former Clarium investors. "The liquid financial markets have little patience for contrarian investors."
Mr. Thiel is still active at Clarium, but those close to the company say his day-to-day involvement has diminished. Mr. Thiel says he is logging more hours in the office but admits that he is spending more time on his venture capital and philanthropic pursuits.
