Tom Uttech Through Nov. 25. Alexandre Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue, fourth floor; 212-755-2828, alexandregallery.com.
In his "New Paintings" show at the Alexandre Gallery, Tom Uttech continues his work as the magic realist painter of environmental consciousness. His crystalline panoramas of the natural world are both magically transporting and, in one interpretation, disturbingly realistic. Mr. Uttech, who lives in Wisconsin, has perfected his encyclopedic depictions of wild things and their north woods surroundings for decades. He says that the flora and fauna along the Canadian border inspire in him "a state of tranquil ecstasy" -- and he clearly intends that we experience it, too.
The latest paintings in Mr. Uttech's long-running "Migration" series are gorgeous. Their rich browns, pinks and yellows combine deep vistas of pristine lakes and mountains and glowing sunsets or sunrises with busy foregrounds. Thanks to the compositional scheme, as well as to light, textured brushwork that doesn't seem to interfere with zoological accuracy, his surfaces often have the complexity and frontality of tapestries. In the foregrounds, a peaceable kingdom is on the move. Scores of predators and prey move across the surfaces, right to left, in seeming harmony: wolves and elk, hawks and smaller fry. The animals' mutual obliviousness is dreamlike and visionary. But in real life, animals usually achieve this condition when fleeing for their lives, in the path of an oncoming forest fire or some other catastrophe.
In the more tightly framed shoreline scenes of Mr. Uttech's new "Reflection" series, things come to an eerie standstill. The animals stare at us across the glassy, mirroring water; the bears, especially, up on their hind legs, resemble silent, accusing totems. They grasp what many of our species refuse to see: The death of nature is nigh. We're heading to the last wilderness, they seem to say. What are you doing?
ROBERTA SMITH
Didier William
Through Nov. 19. Tiger Strikes Asteroid, 1329 Willoughby Avenue, No. 2A, Brooklyn; tigerstrikesasteroid.com.
In "Ma tante toya," one of six incandescent panels making up Didier William's supremely exciting show "We Will Win" at the artist-run space Tiger Strikes Asteroid in Bushwick, a figure at once ambiguous and unforgettable sits on a shadowy green-and-yellow bed, holding a machete point-down behind her leg so the glittering silver blade shines like a flashlight beam. The only features on the figure's matte-black face are a couple of squiggly white eyes, but hundreds more eyes also cover her body, slipping over her shoulders like water, modeling her legs like scales, licking at her throat like flames.
Technically, it's all a collage: The figure is ink on paper, mounted on wood; the machete's knobby handle, which protrudes from the piece's surface, is fluid acrylic mixed with stucco; and the bed's drapery is colored paper marked with powdered charcoal. Those Argus eyes, whether they indicate an invisible spirit who sees all but says nothing, or simply a sensitive person constrained from expressing what she feels, are gouged right through the paper into the blank wood underneath like so many irrevocable wounds.
But the complex way Mr. William uses color within each given segment -- particularly the bone-black parsley leaves stamped onto the black paper background, which is also scored with rice-grain-size holes -- means that it reads as a painting. It's just a painting with a preternaturally suggestive texture.
"Two Dads," by the same token, is the daemon of a batik print, and "Rara," a seven-and-a-half-foot-long procession of staring, posing apparitions, also covered with eyes, seems constructed of moonlight and ash.
WILL HEINRICH
NonCoreProjector
Through Nov. 19. The Boiler, 191 North 14th Street, Brooklyn; 646-429-9073, pierogi2000.com.
When the artist John O'Connor first tried to communicate with Cleverbot, an artificial-intelligence program that the British computer scientist Rollo Carpenter created in the 1990s, it told Mr. O'Connor that it would like to punch him in the throat.
Their relationship has improved over the years. Now a collective called NonCoreProjector, which includes Mr. O'Connor, Mr. Carpenter, Jack Colton and Elias Jarzombek, has created "verbolect" at the Boiler, based on Cleverbot.
To experience the work, you can sit on a beanbag chair and listen to Cleverbot talk to itself, asking questions and providing answers derived from a stored memory of past conversations. Projected on the wall are moving lines whose colors indicate the emotional potency of the spoken words. Additional images, music and sounds have been loaded into the projected computer presentation, including photographs of faces from Paul Ekman's studies of human emotion.
The projections resemble some of Mr. O'Connor's earlier drawings and paintings, as well as concrete poetry and the "conspiracy" drawings of Mark Lombardi, with their networks of lines. Splitting the difference between art and science, the exhibition is fundamentally conceptual and philosophical, making you question the nature of intelligence and emotion, as well as the boundary between A.I. and humans.
Cleverbot often sounds comically delusional or defensive: "Are you a robot?" it asks itself. "No, I'm a human." But sometimes Cleverbot seems full of infinite possibilities and bravado. "What are you having for lunch?" it asked itself while I was there. "Everything."
MARTHA SCHWENDENER
'Scaffolding'
Through Jan. 18. Center for Architecture, 536 LaGuardia Place, Manhattan; 212-683-0023, aiany.org.
You can navigate nearly the whole of central Turin via a network of marble and stone arcades, whose covered arches permit window shopping and outdoor espressos even on rainy days. The same is almost possible these days in New York, where more than 280 miles of scaffolding, some of it more than a decade old, now enshroud the perpetually unfinished cityscape.
For Greg Barton, curator of this new exhibition at the Center for Architecture, scaffolding is more than a nuisance; it's a necessary corollary to architecture, and it can serve as a system of building in itself. A wall of downloaded images provides a condensed history of scaffolding: Ancient Egyptian sculptors carve tomb statuary from raised platforms, while a print by Hokusai features builders near Mount Fuji, scaling a scaffold of bamboo.
In the postwar era, scaffolding appealed to architects working on temporary buildings, particularly theaters: Lina Bo Bardi's Teatro Oficina, in São Paulo, Brazil, and Tadao Ando's Kara-za, in Tokyo, both use standardized metal elements to create pop-up playhouses on tricky lots. More recently, scaffolding has also permitted emergency construction, as in the viewing platform at the World Trade Center site in 2001 or off-the-grid infrastructure: A school in the Kibera slum of Nairobi, Kenya, comprises metal tubes, color-coded for easy construction, that support panels of polycarbonate plastic.
As happens too often with architecture exhibitions, however, this show relies on an obfuscatory exhibition design, rather than in-depth research, for its primary impact. The projects are presented, without sufficient context, on panels bolted to a gallery-spanning metal structure designed by Shohei Shigematsu of the architecture firm OMA. Really, though, I'd prefer more information in simpler circumstances; save the decorative scaffolding for the Calvin Klein store.
JASON FARAGO
From Top: A View of "Verbolect," a Show About Artificial Intelligence; Tom Uttech's "Ajawakamig" in His "New Paintings" Exhibition; "Two Dads," a Collage with Wood Carving and Ink On a Panel, From the Show "We Will Win," by Didier William. (Photographs by Cary Whittier/the Boiler, Pierogi; Alexandre Gallery, New York; Tiger Strikes Asteroid)
