SOCIAL MEDIA
Facebook Apologizes for Offensive Video Label
Facebook users who recently watched a video from a British tabloid featuring Black men saw an automated prompt from the social network that asked if they would like to "keep seeing videos about Primates," causing the company to investigate and disable the artificial intelligencepowered feature that pushed the message.
On Friday, Facebook apologized for what it called "an unacceptable error" and said it was looking into the recommendation feature to "prevent this from happening again."
The video, dated June 27, 2020, was by The Daily Mail and featured clips of Black men in altercations with white civilians and police officers. It had no connection to primates.
Google, Amazon and other technology companies have been under scrutiny for years for biases within their artificial intelligence systems, particularly around issues of race. Studies have shown that facial recognition technology is biased against people of color and has more trouble identifying them, leading to incidents where Black people have been discriminated against or arrested because of computer error.
In one example in 2015, Google Photos mistakenly labeled pictures of Black people as "gorillas," for which Google said it was "genuinely sorry" and would work to fix the issue immediately. More than two years later, Wired found that Google's solution was to censor the word "gorilla" from searches, while also blocking "chimp," "chimpanzee" and "monkey."
Facebook has one of the world's largest repositories of user-uploaded images on which to train its facial- and object-recognition algorithms. The company, which tailors content to users based on their past browsing and viewing habits, sometimes asks people if they would like to continue seeing posts under related categories. It was unclear whether messages like the "primates" one were widespread.
Dani Lever, a Facebook spokeswoman, said in a statement: "As we have said, while we have made improvements to our A.I., we know it's not perfect, and we have more progress to make. We apologize to anyone who may have seen these offensive recommendations." RYAN MAC
AUTOMOBILES
Daimler Rejects Demand To Speed Climate Progress
The German automaker Daimler on Friday dismissed a "cease and desist" demand from two environmental groups to commit to ending the sale of combustion engine vehicles by 2030.
Lawyers for the groups, Greenpeace and Deutsche Umwelthilfe, have threatened to sue Daimler, BMW and Volkswagen unless they sign a legal pledge.
The groups argue companies are bound by the same rules as governments when it comes to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The same lawyers successfully sued the German government earlier this year, forcing it to adjust its emissions reduction plans to shift more of the burden onto older generations.
Daimler said in a statement that it saw "no basis" for the groups' demand, adding that it is committed to the goals of the 2015 Paris climate accord and aims to make its entire vehicle fleet climateneutral by 2039, more than a decade before European Union rules require it. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Ryan Mac and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY THOMAS KIENZLE/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES)
