As the Seattle Seahawks prepared to play the San Francisco 49ers in the N.F.C. championship game two weeks ago, the anticipation at CenturyLink Field was palpable. The fans roared as the home team was introduced. They chanted fight songs. They booed the visitors.
But the cheering reached a high point when an unassuming man in a ski jacket and cap emerged on a platform at the south end of the stadium and raised a "12th Man" flag to honor the team's loyal fans.
Most N.F.L. owners roam the sidelines before games and then retire to their suites to sit with family, friends and business partners. But Paul Allen, 61, the immensely private owner of the Seahawks, was more than an owner that day. He was a patron, a cheerleader and a good-luck charm rolled into one.
For the second time since Allen bought the team in 1997, the Seahawks were on the verge of making it to the Super Bowl, and the fans showed him their gratitude for helping turn the often middling franchise into a perennial powerhouse.
"Long periods can pass between the times you play for a championship, so you have to savor those moments," Allen said in a rare interview. "Sports is such a cyclical thing; it's often feast or famine. But what you try and do as an owner is build a winning organization."
That organization will have to beat Peyton Manning and the Denver Broncos on Sunday if it is going to claim its first N.F.L. title. But regardless of the outcome, the team's success in recent years -- it tied a franchise record with 13 wins during the regular season -- has helped cement Allen's legacy in Seattle sports and made this year's Super Bowl a coming-out party of sorts for Allen, who is rarely seen, even at N.F.L. owners meetings.
Allen, a Seattle native, has reasons to smile. The Portland Trail Blazers, which he bought a quarter-century ago, are off to their best start in years, and the Seattle Sounders of Major League Soccer, of which he owns a part, continue to draw record crowds.
Sports mogul is an unlikely role for Allen, who helped found Microsoft and has become one of the richest men in the world. He also founded the Allen Institute for Brain Science, which, at first blush, might be at odds with his ownership of a professional football team. Add that to a portfolio of companies, philanthropic pursuits and an eclectic set of hobbies that includes a love of Jimi Hendrix, and it would seem he does not need the attention that comes with owning professional sports teams.
Yet while he sidesteps the spotlight and leaves most of the details of running his teams to specialists, Allen flies to Portland to sit courtside at Blazers games, and he approves all major club decisions. He also built the team a new arena, and after several rough years, he has found the right formula of front-office acumen and talent on the court.
"In Portland, I am more involved in the details of trade discussions because I've been around that sport longer and can watch tape and can give some input to the drafting process," Allen said. "In football, not at all. It's so specialized."
While Allen is less involved in the Seahawks' personnel decisions, he is increasingly visible in the locker room and on the sideline. Seahawks offensive tackle Russell Okung said Allen was available to answer questions from players about investing and starting a business. He talks to Coach Pete Carroll before games but does not dispense advice.
"He's a great owner in the sense that he lets the people he hires really, for the most part, run the team and do their jobs," center Max Unger said.
Unger and his teammates were aware of Allen's role in keeping the team in Seattle. When the previous owner threatened to move the Seahawks to California in the mid-1990s, Allen bought the club, lobbied for -- and helped build -- a modern stadium and hired top personnel, including Mike Holmgren, the coach who led the Seahawks to their other Super Bowl appearance, in 2006.
That playoff run felt more serendipitous, while this Seahawks team has the feel of a dynasty in the making.
"The first time it happened, you are really gobsmacked, stunned, you're really pinching yourself," Allen said. "This time, with the organization today, there's more of a thinking of building a franchise that has staying power, a younger team."
With success come financial rewards. The team has sold out 95 consecutive games, and season-ticket renewals are at 98 percent. Retail sales have doubled in the past year, and spending on food and drinks at the stadium rose 28 percent.
"He doesn't micromanage, but he holds us accountable, and he's very, very pleased," said Peter McLoughlin, the president of the Seahawks and the Sounders, who speaks to Allen daily about the operations of his teams.
Demand is so strong that Allen is considering whether to add as many as 2,000 seats at CenturyLink Field, which would give Seattle a better chance of hosting the Super Bowl.
Some civic leaders in Seattle have expressed interest in hosting the game, but Allen was more equivocal. "We left a provision to put in extra seating for a Super Bowl," he said, "but who knows if a Super Bowl is in the cards in the future?"
Hosting a Super Bowl would thrust Allen further into the limelight that he seems to shy away from. Allen sends McLoughlin to N.F.L. owners meetings in his place, and although he is not deeply involved in N.B.A. matters, he played an active role behind the scenes during the N.B.A. lockout in 2011, said David Stern, who was set to retire Saturday as the league's commissioner.
Stern recalled a meeting in his office in 1988, when Allen came to New York to be interviewed by several N.B.A. owners. One of them asked Allen to explain how he took just three weeks to write a software program.
Stern said of Allen's response, "Without skipping a beat, he said, 'No, it was 19 days.' "
Although Allen has not been a mover and a shaker in the often clubby world of team owners, he has been an asset to both the N.B.A. and the N.F.L. because he has deep pockets and is willing to delegate to professionals.
"From the league's perspective, Allen represents the perfect modern owner because he has a high valuation, enjoys it and is happy to remain in the shadows," said Robert A. Boland, who teaches sports management at New York University.
While never in doubt, Allen's intellect is evident in his many nonsports-related efforts, which include wildlife conservation, artificial intelligence and oceanography. He has also poured hundreds of millions of dollars into the Allen Institute for Brain Science and donated several million to researchers in Seattle who are investigating the lasting effects of traumatic brain injuries. Seattle has become a hub for such research, and Washington was the first state to pass strict return-to-play rules for young athletes -- a law, named in honor of Zackery Lystedt, a Washington high school football player who sustained a catastrophic brain injury in 2006, that has been adopted by states across the country.
Some critics might claim that owning a team and funding brain-trauma research amount to a conflict of interest. Allen said his donations were a way to help not just the league but also soldiers and many others who have been injured.
"I have hundreds of scientists here doing fundamental research," he said. "As a sports team owner, I just felt that if there was something that could bring forward the knowledge or create different protocols," it would be helpful.
He emphasized that any solutions would take years of work.
"The brain is the most complex, challenging scientific puzzle we have ever tried to decode," he said.
Allen no doubt hopes the Seahawks can decode the Broncos on Sunday and deliver Seattle its first N.F.L. championship trophy.
Photograph The Seahawks' Owner, Paul Allen, Before the N.F.C. Title Game Against the 49ers. (Photograph by Ted S. Warren/Associated Press) (D1); Paul Allen Founded the Allen Institute for Brain Science to Delve Into the Lasting Effects of Traumatic Brain Injuries. (Photograph by Beatrice de Gea for the New York Times) (D4)
