Generate image description Microsoft, once again a juggernaut thanks to artificial intelligence, wants to be seen as an ethical employer, but is there a catch? (Carl Godfrey/The New York Times)
The December day in 2021 that set off a revolution across the video game industry appeared to start innocuously enough. Managers at a Wisconsin studio called Raven began meeting one by one with quality-assurance testers, who vet video games for bugs, to announce that the company was overhauling their department. Going forward, managers said, the lucky testers would be permanent employees, not temps. They would earn an extra $1.50 an hour.
Later that morning, the catch became apparent: One-third of the studio’s roughly 35 testers were being let go as part of the overhaul. The workers were stunned. Raven was owned by Activision Blizzard, one of the industry’s largest companies, and there appeared to be plenty of work to go around.
The testers announced a strike. After returning to work seven weeks later, they filed paperwork to hold a union election. Raven never rehired the laid-off workers, but the other testers won their election in May 2022, forming the first union at a major U.S. video game company.
Large American companies typically challenge union campaigns, as Activision had at Raven. But in this case, Activision’s days as the sole decision-maker were numbered. In January 2022, Microsoft had announced a nearly $70 billion deal to purchase it, and the would-be owners seemed to take a more permissive view of labor organizing.
The month after the union election, Microsoft announced that it would stay neutral if any of Activision’s roughly 7,000 eligible employees sought to unionize with the Communications Workers of America — meaning the company would not try to stop the organizing.
Quality-assurance (or QA) testers can work grueling hours for low pay, and testers at other studios were considering unionizing. Two more groups of testers — one at Activision and one at a Microsoft subsidiary called ZeniMax — voted to unionize after the company’s neutrality announcements.
Now that Activision is part of Microsoft — it closed the purchase in October — testers at several parts of the combined company are seeking to unionize as well. Union officials say that the company has bargained in good faith and that the two sides have made considerable progress toward a first contract. Within a few years, Microsoft could have over 1,000 union employees working under collective bargaining agreements, making it an outlier in big tech.
On one level, it seemed obvious why Microsoft, once a poster child for corporate ruthlessness, would go this route: The company wanted regulators to bless its deal with Activision. Given the Biden administration’s close ties with labor, a truce with unions might help. Cynics noted that the company laid off nearly 10% of its video game workers, most of them from Activision, once the deal was in hand.
Still, many large tech companies have business before the federal government — and almost all have taken steps to discourage unionization. Like Microsoft, these companies routinely position themselves as progressive employers, pointing to corporate diversity initiatives and support for LGBTQ rights. Yet only Microsoft, whose leaders say they have been on a “journey” rooted in the principle that “people have a fundamental right to organize,” has taken a permissive path on unions.
And for some employees, that’s a key distinction. Workers who have sought to unionize at Amazon, Apple and Google don’t seem convinced of their employers’ benevolence, pointing to evidence of retaliation. (The companies have denied these accusations and say they respect workers’ right to organize.)
By contrast, employees who have sought to unionize at Microsoft have raved about the company’s treatment of its workers. “When Microsoft and ZeniMax displayed neutrality, it was nothing short of an absolute gift,” said Autumn Mitchell, a QA employee who was part of the organizing campaign.
All of which raises a question: In an age when companies routinely proclaim their commitments to civil rights and the environment, what does it even mean to be a woke employer? And can Microsoft, with a history of squeezing competitors, truly claim to be more evolved than most?
Remaking a Corporate Image
In a case that went to trial in 1998, the Justice Department said Microsoft had illegally schemed to crush Netscape after the smaller company rejected its offer to divvy up the browser market.
Microsoft successfully appealed a judge’s decision to break up the company, but the ordeal still proved costly and cast a shadow over future deals. A court monitored the company for nearly a decade.
It was during the antitrust litigation that a Microsoft lawyer named Brad Smith auditioned for the job of general counsel on the basis of a simple philosophy: “Make peace,” he urged his higher-ups. Smith got the job, and Microsoft began to cultivate better relationships with government overseers.
Underlying the approach was Smith’s feel for the shifting ideological tides — and his sense that shifting with them would serve the company best. One colleague recalled a 2021 presentation to the company’s top executives in which Smith predicted that the coming wave of tech regulation would be like the wave of New Deal-era financial regulations, and that “the next five years of regulation will define next the 50 years.” Smith said the company should help shape the new rules and adapt to them rather than resist them.
When a new CEO, Satya Nadella, took over in 2014, he seemed determined to help complete the reinvention.
In 2015, Microsoft, a pioneer among tech companies in hiring temporary workers and contractors to work for less pay and job security than long-term employees, became one of the first tech giants to require large contractors to provide paid time off for workers assigned to its projects.
Amazon appeared to be a particular foil. Smith noted in his 2019 book “Tools and Weapons” that Amazon had fought a proposed Seattle tax to fund affordable housing the year before. Shortly after, Microsoft made a financial pledge, which eventually reached $750 million, to expand such housing. (Amazon declined to comment other than to say it had invested more than $600 million in affordable housing to date.)
Liberal policymakers noted the contrast between the two companies. “The level of engagement is totally different,” said Rep. Pramila Jayapal, D-Wash., chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus. “It’s like night and day from Amazon.”
‘It Was Weird, but Good Weird’
If someone were to design a tech job with the goal of maximizing interest in a union, there’s a good chance it would look like “quality-assurance tester.” Within the industry, the work is regarded as a physical and mental slog. Testers frequently play sections of games over and over for hours in search of subtle glitches.
At times they must do this during punishing stretches known as “crunch,” when a game release is imminent and the work lasts 10 or 12 hours most days, often six days a week.
And the work comes with some of the lowest pay in the industry. After their raise in late 2021, many testers at Activision still made under $19 an hour. Testers typically remain for years in the position with little prospect of promotion.
These frustrations had provoked a union campaign at Activision when Microsoft announced its acquisition. CWA officials worried that the tech giant, which had no unionized U.S. employees, would promptly squelch it.
But the opposition of the politically powerful union was not absolute. In early 2022, two top union officials told Portia Wu, a Microsoft policy executive who is now Maryland’s labor secretary, that a neutrality agreement at Activision would help reassure them.
She told colleagues that employees tend to win once they get to a union election, which some Activision employees were seeking, and that a contentious election process can damage morale. By reaching a deal with the communications workers’ union, she added, Microsoft could retain more control over the narrative as well as the timing of union elections.
Smith and other executives appeared receptive. “Every time we’ve talked about this, we’ve all come to the same point of view that this is the right path for Microsoft,” he said in an interview with The New York Times. “That we have way more that we can potentially gain than put at risk.”
Chris Shelton, the union’s president at the time, and Smith announced in June 2022 that Microsoft would stay neutral in union campaigns at Activision if the acquisition was finalized. Not long after, the union informed Microsoft that a group of QA testers had also been organizing at ZeniMax Media, a video game company Microsoft already owned. The company agreed to grant workers at ZeniMax the same neutrality deal it had negotiated for Activision.
Dayberry, a leader of the union campaign at ZeniMax, said the company was good to its word: Managers never so much as mentioned the union, much less sought to discourage support for it. After years in which workers had clashed with managers over issues including pay, promotions and scheduling, he said, “It was weird, but good weird.” The workers officially unionized in January 2023.
In Favor of Paternalism
Even companies often cited for their generosity to employees have spurned organized labor. Whole Foods and other progressive-minded companies, including Starbucks and Trader Joe’s, have at times offered retail workers above-market wages or benefits.
But Whole Foods fought unionization in the early 2000s, while Starbucks has been accused of violating employees’ labor rights hundreds of times since its workers began unionizing in 2021. (Starbucks denies the accusations; Whole Foods has said it does not believe a union is in employees’ interests.)
When it comes to their employees, said Matthew Bodie, a law professor at the University of Minnesota, these companies favor a kind of corporate paternalism. “We want to be beneficent, but we want to do it on our terms,” he said, channeling executives.
Even tech companies famous for pampering employees have almost entirely resisted unionization.
When I asked Smith why Microsoft was willing to embrace neutrality when its competitors were not, he told me that “the tech sector has often been built by founders, and founders have often been very focused on retaining a level of control over their enterprises.” By contrast, he said, “I think the fact that Microsoft is a little bit older, sometimes a little bit wiser, at least gives us an opportunity to think more broadly.”
Activision may have been the immediate impetus for Microsoft’s labor stance, but the neutrality deal may be a relatively cost-effective way to cast the company as pro-worker. Noting that unions are not a topic raised by analysts on the company’s earnings calls, Gil Luria, who follows Microsoft for the investment bank D.A. Davidson, said, “I don’t expect this to be a material issue.”
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
Generate image description Mellody Hobson, Starbucks CorporationÕs current board chair, at a hearing in Washington on March 29, 2023 to examine whether the chain violated employeeÕs labor rights. (Kenny Holston/The New York Times)
Generate image description Satya Nadella, who took over as chief executive of Microsoft in 2014, at the tech giantÕs campus in Redmond, Wash., Feb. 7, 2023 (Kyle Johnson/The New York Times)
Generate image description Autumn Mitchell, a quality assurance employee who was part of the union organizing campaign, at home in Germantown, Md., Feb. 22, 2024. (Alyssa Schukar/The New York Times)
Generate image description Wayne Dayberry, a quality tester at a Microsoft-owned game studio, at his home in Gaithersburg, Md., Feb. 22, 2024. (Samuel Corum/The New York Times)
Generate image description Brad Smith, president of Microsoft, at the tech giantÕs campus in Redmond, Wash., Sept. 5, 2019. (Kyle Johnson/The New York Times)
