Generate image description Sam Altman, the chief executive of OpenAI, at the company’s headquarters in San Francisco, March 13, 2023. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)
The leaders of OpenAI, the artificial intelligence research lab that developed the chatbot ChatGPT, have called for regulation of “superintelligent” AI technology, saying it “will be more powerful than other technologies humanity has had to contend with in the past.”
To regulate the risks of AI systems, there should be an international watchdog, similar to the International Atomic Energy Agency, the organization that promotes the peaceful use of nuclear energy, OpenAI’s founders, Greg Brockman and Ilya Sutskever, and its CEO, Sam Altman, wrote in a note posted Monday on the company’s website.
“Given the possibility of existential risk, we can’t just be reactive,” they wrote.
Altman appeared before Congress on May 16 to implore lawmakers to regulate artificial intelligence. Congressional leaders shared their worries about the threats that AI could pose, including the spread of misinformation and privacy violations.
“I think if this technology goes wrong, it can go quite wrong. And we want to be vocal about that,” Altman said in his testimony before members of a Senate subcommittee.
In March, more than 1,000 technology leaders and researchers, including Elon Musk, the CEO of Tesla and owner of Twitter, called for a moratorium on the development of the most advanced AI systems, warning in an open letter that the tools presented “profound risks to society and humanity.”
In their latest note, the OpenAI leaders said that “it’s conceivable that within the next 10 years, AI systems will exceed expert skill level in most domains, and carry out as much productive activity as one of today’s largest corporations.”
The latest AI tools could upend the economics of the internet, turning today’s tech giants into has-beens and creating the industry’s next powerhouses.
Tech companies have spent billions of dollars on AI, amid the rising concerns about its potential to match human reasoning and destroy jobs. Goldman Sachs estimated recently that AI could expose 300 million full-time jobs to automation.
BuzzFeed just introduced a chatbot that offers recipe recommendations.
At last week’s hearing, Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn., chair of the Senate panel, acknowledged that Congress had failed to keep up with new technologies. He added that the hearing was the first in a series to explore the potential of AI and eventually “write the rules” for it.
“Our goal is to demystify and hold accountable those new technologies to avoid some of the mistakes of the past,” he said.
But over the years, partisan squabbles and intense lobbying by the tech industry have stalled dozens of bills intended to strengthen privacy, speech and safety rules.
This article originally appeared in The New York Times.
