Two books explore how multigenerational and one-person households are on the rise.
The Accordion Family. Boomerang Kids, Anxious Parents and the Private Toll of Global Competition. By Katherine S. Newman. 261 pages. Beacon Press. $25.95.
Going Solo. The Extraordinary Rise and Surprising Appeal of Living Alone. By Eric Klinenberg. 273 pages. The Penguin Press. $27.95.
So these two sociologists go into a bar and the man says to the woman, "What have you been up to?"
"I've been studying 'accordion families,"' she says. "Right now something like three and a half million American parents are sharing a house with adult kids who've either come back home or never left."
"You want to talk about trends?" the man counters. "Did you know that aside from childless couples the most common household type in America is an adult living alone? That's one out of seven adults, over 30 million people."
Wishing to avoid an argument, the sociologists appeal to the bartender. Which trend seems more significant to him? "Beats me," he says, "but I liked this place a lot better when the customers were political economists."
It's not funny, I know, but it's not the punch line, either. That comes when the two sociologists I have in mind -- Katherine S. Newman of Johns Hopkins University and Eric Klinenberg of New York University -- conclude their fascinating studies with a nod each to the bartender. Except by then they're no longer in a bar; they're in Sweden. We'll get to that.
First let's look at those so-called accordion families, which Ms. Newman evaluates both as a transnational phenomenon and in the nuanced particulars of individual households. Like Mr. Klinenberg, she devotes a good portion of her book to personal interviews, but where he goes deep in his emphasis on the United States, she goes wide. At the extreme end of her analysis is a country like Italy, where 37 percent of 30-year-old men live with their parents, and have never lived anywhere else. Less striking but certainly notable is a parallel trend in the United States, where a higher proportion of adult children now live with parents than at any time since the 1950s.
Ms. Newman states her thesis plainly: "Global competition is the most profound structural force affecting the residential location of young adults in the developed world (or the underdeveloped world, for that matter)" -- but one is impressed by her refusal to turn thesis into dogma. She acknowledges that different cultures define adulthood in different ways, with Americans tending to see it as "a process of self-discovery" and Europeans as "a station defined by the way one relates to others." She also appreciates the mutual benefits of multigenerational households, as suggested by a survey showing that 76 percent of American parents of 21-year-olds say they feel close to their child, as opposed to a mere quarter of their own parents saying the same.
Still, Ms. Newman does not shy away from the larger effects of a child's "failure to launch" into the world. Not the least of these is a generation's failure to generate. At present there are four workers in Europe for every pensioner; by 2050 there will be two workers for every retiree. Birthrates in the United States would also be falling if not for Mexican immigrants -- yet another job they've taken on, along with those of lawn- and elder-care and scapegoat. But in Japan, the fastest-aging country in the world, where only one percent of the population is foreign-born, the future looks more bleak.
Ms. Newman also takes pains to show how accordion families shape up across class lines -- the difference between an upper-middle-class family providing rent-free space to a child earning a law degree and a subsistence family hanging on to a child to make the rent. Part of this difference is that "working-class kids do not boomerang back into the family home" but "like their Spanish or Italian counterparts ... do not leave home at all until much later in life."
Ms. Newman's class consciousness is no less pronounced in Mr. Klinenberg, who maintains it at far greater risk to his argument. Where she views her subject with qualified concern, he is more celebratory about "going solo," which he tends to see as "a remarkable social experiment" on the part of more than 200 million adults worldwide -- a 33 percent increase in the decade between 1996 and 2006. "For the first time in human history, great numbers of people ... have begun settling down as singletons," a development rich with "new possibilities for our personal, romantic and social lives," and a potential corrective to the "hyper-networked, ultra-active, 24/7 culture" of the World Wide Mind. But just when a reader might grow restive hearing the testimonies of entrepreneurial singletons in pristine health, Mr. Klinenberg takes us on a Dantean tour of S.R.O.'s (single-room-occupancy hotels) and nursing homes, some of which "lie in the shadows of the most safe and prosperous communities on earth." Here he shows us the terrors of languishing, ailing and dying alone. Mr. Klinenberg can make going solo look sexy, but "Sex and the City" this ain't.
Taking issue with Joseph Schumpeter, who saw late capitalism's "disintegration of the bourgeois family" as part of a broader "decomposition" of collective life, Mr. Klinenberg nevertheless exemplifies Schumpeter's famous definition of a "civilized man" (in distinction to a "barbarian") as one who recognizes the "relative validity" of his "convictions" while being able to "stand for them unflinchingly."
On those terms, Mr. Klinenberg is a civilized man indeed. His only false note for this reader -- though hardly an exception to his civility -- is his willingness to give serious consideration to the use of robots as companions for the aged. But even here his intelligence allows him no more than a formal bow ("By the time the current generation of young adults reaches old age, their comfort with machines will make robotic companions even more attractive") as opposed to the groveling prostration often observed in the presence of the All-High Tech.
With unassailable judgment he says that "questions raised by critics" like me "should be directed at all of us, not merely at artificial intelligence researchers." The same might be said of the issues raised by social researchers -- and Mr. Klinenberg says it.
"The extraordinary rise of living alone is not in itself a social problem," he insists. "But it is a dramatic social change that's already exacerbating serious problems for which there are no easy solutions: Social isolation for the elderly and frail. Reclusiveness for the poor and vulnerable. Self-doubt for those who worry that going solo will leave them childless, or unhappy, or alone." In searching out possible solutions, he takes us to alternative housing experiments like New York City's Common Ground, where formerly homeless residents live as neighbors to "the working poor, including aspiring actors and artists and a variety of blue-collar laborers."
He also takes us to Sweden. The country interests Mr. Klinenberg for what he finds there -- 47 percent of households with one occupant, as opposed to 28 percent in the United States -- just as it interests Ms. Newman for what she doesn't find there: A large enough incidence of accordion families to count as a phenomenon. In fact, Ms. Newman sees a direct correlation between a country's proportion of adult children living at home and the frailty of its social safety net, with the Scandinavian social democracies having the least incidence and the weak welfare states of Spain, Italy and Japan the greatest.
"'All for one and one for all -- because no one else is looking out for any of us' might as well be the motto" for families "in the laissez-faire countries of the developed world," she writes, referring to the family as "the welfare state of the first resort."
In Sweden the welfare state does not live over the family garage.The high number of Swedes who leave home at 18 is doubtless the result of social policies that provide affordable housing for single people, subsidized tuition and housing for students, and support for parents that obviates what many American women see as an unavoidable choice between motherhood and career. Sweden boasts one of the highest birthrates per woman in Europe, and one of the highest percentages of women in the work force in the world. The high cost of housing frequently cited by young adults as the main obstacle to independence is much less formidable for the young Swede.
In other words, as Ms. Newman says: "The choice of the 'accordion solution' is political, even if it doesn't feel like it. Americans could decide to go the way of the social democracies, placing the burden of youth independence on the state and hence on all taxpaying shoulders. Or we can slice deep, right to the fiscal bone, and cut the deficit by taking away those supports that enable whatever independence or transitional time we provide for young adults."
This can be read as a starkly specific answer to a rhetorical question that Mr. Klinenberg poses near the end of his book, and implicitly throughout it: "What if, instead of indulging the social reformer's fantasy that we would all just be better off together, we accepted the fact that living alone is a fundamental feature of modern societies and we simply did more to shield those who go solo from the main hazards of the condition?" As he points out repeatedly, those hazards can befall any of us, especially when going solo chooses us instead of the other way around. We cannot count on death not to take the ones we count on.
What both authors strongly imply is that our debates about the family, which are nothing if not debates about how people take care of one another, are nothing indeed if we lack the collective political will to take care of one another in the fullest sense. Mr. Klinenberg and Ms. Newman flesh out their subjects with expertise and devotion, but neither forgets that "accordion family" and "going solo" are always less definitive terms than rich and poor. Should they walk into any bar where I happen to be sitting, their drinks are on me.
