MEDIA
NPR Names New C.E.O., Former Wikimedia Chief
NPR announced on Wednesday that Katherine Maher would be its next chief executive, picking a leader with an extensive track record in the nonprofit world but without one in the realm of public radio.
Ms. Maher was previously the chief executive of the Wikimedia Foundation, a nonprofit that supports the popular online resource Wikipedia by raising money and providing technology infrastructure, among other services. She is the chief executive of Web Summit, an organization that holds technology events around the world.
Jennifer Ferro, the chair of NPR's board, said in a statement that Ms. Maher stood out because of her experience tackling "issues around reliable and accessible information," adding that the search focused on candidates who could "reach audiences on new and existing platforms."
Ms. Maher, 40, will take over at NPR during a critical period. Listenership of traditional radio is waning as Americans adopt alternatives like Spotify and other on-demand services, pressuring NPR to reach its audiences in new formats.
Last year, NPR announced that it was laying off 10 percent of its staff to make up for a $ 30 million budget shortfall amid a bearish advertising market.
But the network's revenue has grown steadily in recent years, partly because of more sponsorships -- the public radio equivalent of advertising -- on digital platforms.
In a statement, Ms. Maher called NPR "a lifelong part of my soundscape" that expanded her worldview and stoked her curiosity. She said that the network needed to "reinvent and reimagine ourselves in step with our ever-changing world."
Ms. Maher starts on March 25. BENJAMIN MULLEN
TECHNOLOGY
Google Settles Lawsuit
Over a Chip Patent
Google reached a settlement on Wednesday in a patent infringement lawsuit over chips that power the company's artificial intelligence technology, according to a filing in Massachusetts federal court.
Closing arguments were scheduled to begin on Wednesday in a trial on Singular Computing's lawsuit, which had sought $ 1.67 billion in damages for Google's alleged misuse of its computer-processing innovations.
Representatives for Google and Singular confirmed the settlement.
A Google spokesman, Jose Castaneda, said that the company did not violate Singular's patent rights and that it was "pleased to have resolved this matter."
Singular, founded by a Massachusetts computer scientist, Joseph Bates, claimed that Google incorporated his technology into processing units that support A.I. features in Google Search, Gmail, Google Translate and other Google services.
The 2019 lawsuit said that Bates shared his inventions with the company between 2010 and 2014. It argued that Google's Tensor Processing Units copied Bates' technology and infringed two patents.
Google said its technology was "fundamentally different than what is described in Singular's patents." REUTERS
Credit: By Benjamin Mullin and Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLINE BREHMAN/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)
