Here's a look at what's coming up this week. ECONOMY
Construction in April is expected to show strength.
New home and condominium construction slipped in March, but many economists think that was partly because of bad winter weather that delayed projects. The residential construction market is up for the year and contributed to economic growth in the first quarter. Economists expect that trend to continue when the data on April housing starts is released on Tuesday. Conor Dougherty
A rise in industrial production is forecast for April.
On Tuesday morning, the Federal Reserve will release data on industrial production in April. Buoyed by stronger demand for products from overseas customers and a recovering domestic energy sector, manufacturing has been healthy this year, and economists are looking for a 0.4 percent increase in industrial production for the month. Some experts, including those at Morgan Stanley, suggest that the rise may be bigger, especially in light of healthy hiring and an uptick in auto production despite softer car sales. Nelson D. Schwartz
BANKING
Shareholders will gather for JPMorgan Chase's annual meeting.
JPMorgan Chase shareholders will gather on Tuesday in Wilmington, Del., for the bank's annual meeting. The agenda is relatively noncontroversial this year, though the meeting could be a chance for the bank's chief executive, Jamie Dimon, to weigh in on the discussions brewing in the Trump administration about breaking up the biggest banks and bringing back a version of the Glass-Steagall Act, as well as other regulatory issues facing the financial sector and broader economy. Michael Corkery
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
Puerto Rican officials will meet with creditors.
Puerto Rican officials will meet the island's many creditors in court in San Juan on Wednesday to start the process of restructuring its debt. It is the first meeting with creditors since the island sought bankruptcy-like protection under Title III of a new law informally known as Promesa. Congress enacted the law last year because Puerto Rico needed a methodical way to adjust its $123 billion in bond debt and unfunded pension obligations, but is legally barred from the usual route taken by insolvent local governments, Chapter 9 bankruptcy. The Title III proceedings have already stayed previous creditor lawsuits so the various parties can come together in a consolidated case. Mary Williams Walsh
TECHNOLOGY
Artificial intelligence is likely to dominate Google's festival.
Google will hold its annual developers' conference in Silicon Valley on Wednesday, an extravaganza in a campus amphitheater that is staged like a rock concert. This year's show is likely to focus on how artificial intelligence is being integrated into Google products like Google Home, the smart speaker controlled by voice commands, which was introduced last year. Amazon dominates this nascent market, which Microsoft has just entered as well. But the battle for the living room has barely begun, and analysts will be watching closely to see how Google's team aims to close the gap. David Streitfeld
ECONOMY
The Bank of Mexico is expected to raise interest rates.
With inflation running at the highest rate in eight years, Mexico's central bank is expected to raise interest rates at its monetary policy meeting on Thursday. The Bank of Mexico has been steadily raising interest rates over the past 18 months, and its governor, Agustín Carstens, said recently that there was room for additional tightening. Inflation figures in April showed an annual rate of almost 6 percent, driven in part by price spikes for several basic foods, including tomatoes and avocados. But there is less pressure from rising prices for imports because the Mexican peso, which dropped to a record low after the election of President Trump, has recovered and appears to have stabilized. Elisabeth Malkin
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Credit: THE NEW YORK TIMES
Jamie Dimon Could Address Federal Regulatory Discussions. (Photograph by Mike Blake/Reuters)
