On tour celebrating the 1998 LP, the group is creating "arguments about where we've been and where we are now," its leader, Robert Del Naja, said.
Since it was released in 1998, Massive Attack's third album, "Mezzanine," has endured as a bleak milestone.
"We all tend to look back 20 years. It's a generational thing," said Robert Del Naja, the band's leader, by phone from Washington, D.C. "The question was asked, would we play it live. And I made it quite clear that there was only one point in playing it live, and that would be to use the opportunity to do something completely new and complete the cycle."
That mandate turned into an international tour concluding Thursday and Friday at Radio City Music Hall in New York that probes and expands on the album. Massive Attack is rejoined by two guest singers who appeared on "Mezzanine": Elizabeth Fraser of the Cocteau Twins and the reggae songwriter Horace Andy. The set list includes songs -- from the Velvet Underground, Pete Seeger, the Cure and Ultravox -- that were sampled or quoted on "Mezzanine." And the stage production, featuring films that Del Naja collaborated on with the documentarian and essayist Adam Curtis, connects the album's solitary, inward-looking songs to larger issues: power, technology, mechanisms of deception and control.
When "Mezzanine" appeared, its songs hovered in their own cavernous voids: at once dynamic and methodical, implacable and precarious, urgent yet stubbornly unhurried. The tracks were also so richly atmospheric that they found a continuing afterlife on film and TV soundtracks; "Teardrop" became the theme for the series "House."
Massive Attack was formed in Bristol, England, in the late 1980s, coalescing out of a sound-system culture of D.J.s and musicians and pulling together enough styles on its first two albums, "Blue Lines" and "Protection," to generate hits and to help establish Bristol's own genre: trip-hop. But with "Mezzanine," Massive Attack's music radically deepened and expanded. It became an amalgam of previously disparate avant-gardes: hip-hop, post-punk, dub reggae, electronica and just enough pop to provide melodic discipline and skeletal structures. Barbed, noisy guitars and subtle, nearly buried ones infiltrated the mixes.
"Mezzanine" was also the sound of a group coming apart. Del Naja and the other producer-songwriters in Massive Attack -- Grant Marshall (Daddy G) and Andrew Vowles (Mushroom) -- ended up working separately while barely speaking to one another, and Vowles went on to leave the group. Personal, musical and societal friction all suffused "Mezzanine," and two decades later, its tensions have not resolved.
Massive Attack has continued to make music, and Del Naja has expanded his fascination with technology. For an exhibition this year at the Barbican in London, "A.I.: More Than Human," the tracks of the "Mezzanine" album were programmed into a neural net that remixed the music with the movement of the audience. The "Mezzanine" concert production uses deepfake videos of political figures and other images generated with artificial-intelligence algorithms. Even as the group looks back to "Mezzanine," Massive Attack is living in the present.
These are edited excerpts from a conversation with Del Naja between tour dates.
[Video: Watch on YouTube.]
You've been calling the "Mezzanine" tour a "ghost story." Can you explain that?
The intention of the show was to take a second look back at the past and re-examine ourselves and re-examine the idea of nostalgia, which is actually a quite powerful emotion. I thought that this was an opportunity to use something which was familiar and create a sense of subtle disorientation at the same time.
The idea was to revisit the album, but instead of just wallowing in the past, to actually take the past and treat it forensically. What went into it musically -- to use those reference points and extract them, in order to expose the organs and limbs, the samples and the loops and the things that went into the album. We could turn those into tracks with which we could create a piece of art. And to look at the historical past in which the album was written, and to examine the time between then and now, and then create arguments about where we've been and where we are now.
When we played "Mezzanine" originally, we didn't do that. It was about that moment in our lives. This is much more of a collage of then and since.
A lot of the songs on the album were about the classic pop subject: love troubles. But the tour imagery takes on a lot more: information and disinformation, war, surveillance, consumption, persuasion.
Yeah, we've definitely gone off. [Laughs.] In an honest assessment of it, "Mezzanine" was very much a self-examination of the way the band was at the time: the dysfunction of the band, the way our lives had changed, the place we came from. Now this self-examination has got a much wider arc beam, if you will. We're examining the audience, we're examining ourselves, we're examining the past, we're questioning the past and what we believe to be true. What we remember of the past, how much of that is real? What is real now -- our sense of what we make of reality -- and what is information? If we no longer trust what we used to think were reliable sources, what becomes of reality?
"Mezzanine" was about that space where things weren't real. For me it's a bit of the limbo between the night and the day. And now it's about the same thing in a way, the limbo between what is real and what isn't real.
The band was falling apart as you were making the album. Without that tension, would the album have been as durable?
The tension on that record was inevitable because I was determined to change the fabric of the band. I was forcing completely new ideas into the studio. Where we'd been, before that, had been soul and funk and reggae, and that was a legitimate part of what we were. I felt that this time around, it was also relevant to mine from our punk history and new wave history and to force these different cultural points into the studio. That was always going to disrupt the peace.
One of the through-lines in Adam Curtis's documentaries is how information is shaped and how it then shapes us.
Absolutely. In terms of technology defining us and our behavior, it's really relevant to us as a band who was defined by technology. Without loops and samples we never would have made a single record. We've been around technology since the very beginning, and we're very keenly aware of how technology shapes the way we behave in the studio and as human beings outside of there. A lot of the ideas in the show are about control of behavior, and about recommendation engines that steer you toward more of the same -- predictive systems.
Bands now are defined by the way they share their data, as opposed to being an object which challenges everything around itself. Everything has become even more predictable because if a band is sharing its data on Instagram, or wherever, with everyone else, then that's all become part of the same source. The source is hard to distinguish from the output; the output and the input seem to be the same. There's very little information appearing -- it all seems to be recycled. The feedback loop created by that becomes very predictable and everything starts to become the same in that situation. That's why you see, culturally, everything becoming very similar.
So algorithms are leading to homogenization.
Convenience means consent, and we all agree, and we all use the apps and they make our lives a lot easier. At the same time they're very clever at reinforcing the idea of the self, and making us feel that we're all behaving completely uniquely as individuals, when we're actually doing the same thing.
At one point during the show you use an analog reel-to-reel tape recorder.
That's just to play the "Teardrop" scratch record rimshot loop, because there's no way of replicating that. Some samples are so pure they have to stay as they are.
But it's a sample on analog tape: pure impurity.
At hip-hop's very core is that sense of taking something from the past and completely flipping it, but you keep the essence of it. That's what was always cool about hip-hop, that's what made it so punk rock and so wild.
On the tour, you're trying to take the essence of "Mezzanine" and flip it too.
There's a dishonesty in the way it's being billed. The opportunity is to do something completely unique with this moment and take this moment and harvest it. You're not trying to relive "Mezzanine," and you're not trying redeliver "Mezzanine" to the audience. You're not trying to conjure up 1998 -- it's not like a séance. You're using the opportunity to harvest lots of other ideas. It's a very manipulative event.
In a good way?
Let's hope so.
Above, the British group Massive Attack in Washington during its world tour. The band's Robert Del Naja, left, said performing music from their album "Mezzanine" now was an "opportunity to do something completely new." (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KYLE GUSTAFSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
