The directors of the London Contemporary Music Festival discuss this year’s edition, the event’s 10th anniversary.
Recently, the London Contemporary Music Festival released a limited run of merchandise. There was a graphic T-shirt featuring the names of musicians whose creations have appeared at past festivals, plotted on a graph with two axes: the Y labeled “twee” to “brutal,” and the X “top” to “bottom.” Brian Ferneyhough was a brutal top, Cornelius Cardew a twee bottom, and Laurie Anderson was somewhere in between.
The festival — equal parts adventurous and provocative — leans further into artistic trolling for this year’s 10th anniversary edition. Titled “LET’S CREATE,” it focuses on the trickster figure in art, which it describes as “shape-shifter, border-crosser, mischief-maker, lord of misrule.” This is a return to what the festival’s directors, Igor Toronyi-Lalic and Jack Sheen, see as its essence.
“The trickster is our patron saint, for all experimental music,” Toronyi-Lalic said in an interview. “That is the impetus.”
“LET’S CREATE” is a nod to the much-discussed set of principles and desired outcomes used by Arts Council England to inform their funding decisions. Similar trickery streaks through the program. Take Wednesday’s concert, “Sorry.” After the British premiere of Philip Corner’s 1969 performance “During This Concert the Hall Will Be Bombed — or Blown Up,” there’s a sci-fi opera (featuring Spam and the cost of living crisis) by the noise artist Russell Haswell and a pantomime by Adam de la Cour inspired by the Garbage Pail Kids, (which themselves are a 1980s parody of the Cabbage Patch Kids). Then, closing the evening, the electronic producer Aya plays music by the other 45 Ayas listed ahead of her on music database Discogs.
Holding together a packed festival program — the music spans from the final notes that Plato heard to the present, with nearly 50 world premieres — are similar feats of niche trolling. To introduce “LET’S CREATE,” Toronyi-Lalic and Sheen asked ChatGPT what the 19th-century music critic Eduard Hanslick might have made of it. “It is not music they are creating but a chaotic charade masquerading as artistic rebellion,” the digital Hanslick replied.
The initial impulse for the festival came as a reaction to the “Rest Is Noise” festival at the Southbank Center in 2013; Toronyi-Lalic thought that it was too focused on music written before 1940. Over a decade later, the London Contemporary Music Festival still feels driven by its directors’ dissatisfaction with programming, commissioning and even taste in England.
“I just don’t trust anyone else to put on contemporary music in London,” Toronyi-Lalic said. (This isn’t strictly true. Later, he praised the series Music We’d Like To Hear and the experimental venue Cafe OTO.) “I feel like we know how to do it, and we know who’s good. It’s part of the deal — ruthless gatekeeping, you know? Not just allowing the fashionable new thing to come in.”
In an interview Toronyi-Lalic and Sheen discussed their festival’s history and spirit. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.
Why the name? It sounds very established.
IGOR TORONYI-LALIC I guess it was an attempt to reclaim the contemporary music festival from the reputation it has of being really stiff, formal and slightly dry, and say, “No, you’ve got it completely wrong.” On the first weekend, we had Laurie Anderson, Glenn Branca, Kurt Schwitters, Charlemagne Palestine. This is stuff that would never be put on at any of the major institutions, or wouldn’t be considered contemporary music.
Even if the A.I. Hanslick hated the content of your festival, in terms of aesthetics, there’s a lot that he might have enjoyed about it. Aesthetics are at the foreground, and it’s a sort-of manifesto against the instrumentalization of music.
TORONYI-LALIC Fundamentally, the A.I. Hanslick thing is a troll. But it’s weird how that battle in the 19th century is configured. In a way, we’re anti the Wagnerians who are like, “We need all these other arts forms to replenish music,” where Hanslick was like: “No! Music can exist without that.”
A lot of our themes oscillate between the Michael Fried idea of art being between poles of absorption and theatricality: Classicism is absorptive, you don’t need an audience, and then the Baroque is theatrical, and so on. In a way, that’s what’s happened here. “The Big Sad” [the 2022 festival] was this inward-looking thing — melancholy doesn’t need an audience — whereas “LET’S CREATE” is social.
Humor requires an audience. The trickster requires someone to laugh or not laugh, or someone to be tricked, so this is our attempt at being social.
JACK SHEEN Attempt being the crucial word.
TORONYI-LALIC But you know, modernism started as a project of trolling. Charles Ives was a troll! You read his biography, and the stuff he was doing in the 1890s? He was just joking about.
JACK SHEEN Particularly in Britain, I think a lot of people think of contemporary art in general as a con: “I can’t believe that people are saying this is art”; “I can’t believe this is in a gallery”; “I can’t believe this is getting funding”; “Surely this can’t be serious.” Someone’s always getting away with something. I think that’s interesting and worth nodding toward in some way.
TORONYI-LALIC Art is a con. That’s why it’s great. I’ve always said art should lower gross domestic product; it shouldn’t be there to bolster efficiency, or do a certain thing. It’s a shamanistic thing that is essentially founded on a belief that you can buy into, or not.
Has anything ever gone wrong with the festival?
TORONYI-LALIC Are you joking? That’s why no one does a festival like we do — because it is so risky.
SHEEN The better question is, have you ever done a festival right?
TORONYI-LALIC Experimental artists are on the fringes of society — they’re outsiders — and we’ve had to deal with a higher rate of alcoholics, and people who have really serious mental problems than most other places. Luckily, because they are so neglected, almost 99 percent of them are just the most generous people you’ll ever meet. I mean, we had Glenn Branca, totally drunk, whiskey bottle in one hand, cigarette in the other, screaming at all of us — in the best way. He’s a legend. He’s allowed to do that.
That’s part of the risk of bringing over these people who are pushed to the edges because they’re too difficult. Their difficulty is intrinsic to the music they make. I’m a romantic in that sense: If you live an easy life, I think you probably can’t make great music.
In 2018, ahead of the first festival concerts with orchestra, you wrote a striking provocation entitled “ Proposition for a 21st-Century Orchestra .” I’m interested in comparing that gesture with where you seem to have landed this year, from a critique of something external, to trolling for trolling’s sake.
SHEEN It’s trolling for aesthetics’ sake, I’d say.
TORONYI-LALIC Play is back — playfulness, mischief in general. But in every festival, we always push things in terms of aesthetic juxtaposition, and the juxtaposition of seriousness with flippancy is crucial to how the festival plays itself out.
SHEEN The festival is always quite provocative, no matter what the themes are, no matter what we program. There are people from a lot of different audiences, some of whom come wishing it was more like a straight contemporary music festival perhaps, and they find it all a bit provocative.
Others come with a more generous sense of curiosity. Maybe some art school kid that came for an Eve Stainton performance and left raving about the five-minute Lachenmann violin piece. They see that through a very different lens to someone who grew up playing Beethoven on the violin. People see things from very different cultural backgrounds, and I think that’s important.
By Hugh Morris
