Beijing ordered companies around the world not to allow critical minerals mined in China to reach the U.S., while deepening its efforts to replace imports with domestic products.
Alarm is rising among multinational companies doing business with China about Beijing's decision last week to order a trade embargo on the export of four critical minerals to the United States. The central subject of concern is a provision extending the ban to companies in other countries that transfer minerals to American firms after acquiring them from China.
The order is the first time China has included a broad ban on so-called transshipment in a government regulation on exports. It also underlines Beijing's readiness to escalate its tit-for-tat response to the tougher trade policies promised by President-elect Donald J. Trump.
China has long condemned attempts by other countries, particularly the United States, to impose similar limits on transshipment by companies outside their borders.
The ban by Beijing threatens to divide global supply chains further, by forcing companies to choose whether products with certain materials and components can be supplied only to the American market or only to the Chinese market.
China has been trying to persuade companies elsewhere, particularly in Europe, that they should invest and build supply chains in China, not the United States.
"The move marks a significant escalation of the ongoing tech war between the U.S. and China, and E.U. businesses are increasingly worried about being caught in the crossfire," said Jens Eskelund, the president of the European Union Chamber of Commerce in China.
The mineral embargo is the latest piece of an extensive initiative by China over the past nearly two decades to replace imports with domestic production.
On Dec. 3, the same day the Ministry of Commerce published the minerals ban, four government-linked trade associations directed companies to avoid buying American computer chips. Two days later, the Ministry of Finance unveiled a draft plan to overhaul the bidding on government contracts, heavily favoring companies that produce in China.
Joerg Wuttke, a former president of the European Union Chamber of Commerce in China, said the closest China had previously come to a prohibition of indirect shipments was last May. But that applied to only one company, an American importer of custom molded plastic parts from China.
In yet another indication that the Chinese government is ready to take a tough stance in response to U.S. policy, it said on Monday that it had started an antimonopoly investigation into Nvidia, the American giant that dominates the world's market for the most advanced chips needed for artificial intelligence.
The volley of measures could also signal Beijing's willingness to make a deal with the United States.
The spokesman for China's Commerce Ministry, He Jiandao, defended the new regulations on minerals exports as "a reasonable measure" and said China was "willing to strengthen dialogue with all parties in the field of export controls and jointly maintain the stability and smooth flow of global production and supply chains."
The Biden administration has imposed a series of increasingly broad restrictions on the export to China of "dual-use" products, which are those with civilian and military applications. These restrictions have included transshipment bans.
On Dec. 2, Washington added more than 100 Chinese companies to a restricted trade list and banned the sale to China of some of the fastest semiconductors and the equipment to make them. The administration portrayed the action as a technical adjustment to address problems like the creation of shell companies to bypass previously imposed sanctions against existing enterprises.
China's Ministry of Commerce imposed the minerals embargo on Tuesday in response to the latest of these restrictions. "Any organization or individual from any country or region that violates the above provisions and transfers or provides relevant dual-use items originating in the People's Republic of China to organizations or individuals in the United States will be held accountable according to law," said the ministry's order, using China's official name.
Export embargoes on critical minerals have a long history in international relations.
When China halted the export of "rare earth" metals to Japan in 2010 during a territorial dispute, the Commerce Ministry gathered senior managers from rare earth exporters and ordered them not to ship directly to Japan and also not to increase shipments to other countries that might then reship the metals to Japan. But the ministry never published any regulation that imposed the embargo or that banned transshipment.
In 1973, Arab countries imposed a six-month embargo on oil shipments to the United States in response to American support for Israel during a Mideast war that year, contributing to a quadrupling of gasoline prices. And in August 1941, the United States, in response to Japan's aggression on China, placed an embargo on oil and gasoline exports to Japan, four months before Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor.
China's decision to impose its first broad transshipment ban could prove more important than the actual critical minerals embargo. When the Commerce Ministry issued the embargo last week, it chose minerals, such as gallium and germanium, that were used in only a few narrow categories of semiconductors. Some companies already have stockpiles in anticipation of a Chinese ban.
Still, China dominates the global mining and refining of those minerals, as well as of graphite and antimony, the other two minerals embargoed last week.
In addition to the four minerals, the export embargo also includes "superhard materials," a category of chemical compounds for which China is a leading producer, often using minerals mined mainly within its borders.
Like the critical minerals, superhard materials have applications in the manufacture of semiconductors. Some of them, notably compounds that include tungsten, are also used in munitions.
China has been pouring money into the development of a domestic semiconductor industry. The country is now a leading manufacturer of the semiconductors used in cars and other high-volume applications. But Chinese companies are still struggling to make the fastest semiconductors, and the Biden administration has restricted the export to China of the fastest 5 percent or so of the world's semiconductors, which are used in military applications as well as in artificial intelligence.
China's critical minerals embargo is "a direct threat to Japanese and European interests to push them away from the U.S. -- with the hope and expectation the Trump team will further that objective," said Susan C. Schwab, who was the United States trade representative during President George W. Bush's second term. "Still, I'm not certain this is the wisest move for a government seeking to reassure potential foreign investors."
Berry Wang and Li You contributed research.
Berry Wang and Li You contributed research.
Photograph A semiconductor chips factory in China. The embargo names minerals used for a few categories of semiconductors. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); China dominates the global mining and refining of gallium, germanium, graphite and antimony, critical minerals that it embargoed last week. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WANG JIAN/VISUAL CHINA GROUP, VIA GETTY IMAGES) (B4)
