ECONOMY
I.M.F. Recommends Cutting Rates at Year-End
The International Monetary Fund on Thursday said the U.S. Federal Reserve should not cut interest rates until late 2024 and the government needed to raise taxes to slow the growing federal debt, including on households earning less than President Biden's $ 400,000-a-year threshold.
The prescriptions came in the detailed staff report from the I.M.F.'s annual "Article IV" review of U.S. economic policies released on Thursday. The organization has been emphasizing in recent weeks the need for more fiscal prudence as deficits continue to grow despite robust economic growth and as Republicans and Democrats formulate tax and spending proposals ahead of November's presidential election.
The chief economist for the I.M.F., Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, told Reuters on Tuesday that the Fed could afford to wait longer to start easing monetary policy because of a strong labor market. REUTERS
EARNINGS
TSMC Beats Forecasts, Citing 'Hot' A.I. Market
TSMC, the world's largest contract chipmaker, raised its full-year revenue forecast on Thursday given surging demand for chips used in artificial intelligence, and rejected the idea of a joint venture factory in the U.S.
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, a major Apple and Nvidia supplier, has benefited from the global A.I. boom that has helped it weather a post-pandemic slowdown.
The bellwether for the chip industry earlier on Thursday posted net profit that beat market expectations. It raised its 2024 revenue forecast to growth of slight to above the mid-20 percent range in U.S. dollar terms, versus a previous prediction of an increase in the low to mid-20 percent range.
"A.I. is so hot; right now everybody, all my customers, want to put A.I. functionality into their devices," C.C. Wei, the chairman and chief executive, said at an earnings conference. REUTERS
POLICY
Another $ 1.2 Billion
In Student Loans Canceled
The Biden administration is canceling an additional $ 1.2 billion in student loans for borrowers who work in public service through changes to an existing forgiveness program.
The relief for roughly 35,000 borrowers was announced Thursday by the Education Department and made through changes to the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program, which benefits workers such as teachers, nurses and firefighters. Those qualifying for forgiveness have their remaining loan balance eliminated after making 120 payments.
With this latest round of loan cancellation, the administration has now forgiven $ 168.5 billion in student debt for 4.76 million borrowers, including $ 69.2 billion for 946,000 million borrowers through the public service forgiveness program.
President Biden's original plan for one-time debt cancellation was overturned by the Supreme Court. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By Reuters and The Associated Press
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAM YEH/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES)
