COMPANIES
Waymo Funding Round Valued at $ 5.6 Billion
Alphabet's self-driving unit, Waymo, said on Friday that it had closed a $ 5.6 billion funding round led by Alphabet, the Google parent, as it looks to expand its autonomous ride-hailing service.
Automakers and technology companies are investing in autonomous ride-hailing services to capitalize on the technology to drive commercial success, even as it faces regulatory scrutiny.
The investment round also saw participation from existing investors including Andreessen Horowitz, Fidelity, Perry Creek and T. Rowe Price, Waymo said.
"With this latest investment, we will continue to welcome more riders into our Waymo One ride-hailing service in San Francisco, Phoenix, and Los Angeles, and in Austin and Atlanta through our expanded partnership with Uber," the company said.
Alphabet had planned a $ 5 billion investment in Waymo over a multiyear period, an executive said in July. REUTERS
AUTOMOTIVE
Mercedes-Benz Plans
To Ramp Up Cost Cuts
Mercedes-Benz will step up cost cuts after earnings halved in the third quarter hit by tepid demand and fierce competition in China, it said on Friday.
The luxury carmaker cut its full-year profit margin target twice during the third quarter, joining a growing number of European rivals blaming a weakening Chinese car market for falling profits and margins.
Union Investment, which according to LSEG is among the 30 top investors in Mercedes, called on the management to amend its strategy as it sees no market for 2 million luxury cars any longer.
"We are clearly in favor of adjusting the strategy and adapting it to the new market conditions and the new competition from China," said portfolio manager Moritz Kronenberger.
Mercedes refuses to participate in the price war in China and prefers to stick to its "value over volume" strategy. REUTERS
TECHNOLOGY
Meta Platforms to Use Reuters for Chatbot
Meta Platforms said on Friday its artificial intelligence chatbot will use Reuters content to answer user questions in real time about news and current events, the latest AI tie-up between a big technology company and a news publisher.
Neither Meta nor Reuters-parent Thomson Reuters disclosed the financial details of the partnership. The arrangement would be its first news deal in years. It comes at a time when the Facebook parent has been reducing news content on its services after criticism from regulators and publishers over misinformation.
Meta AI, the company's chatbot, is available across its services including Facebook, WhatsApp and Instagram. The social media giant did not disclose whether it plans to use Reuters content to train its large-language model.
Reuters already has a fact-checking partnership with Meta, which began in 2020. REUTERS
Credit: By Reuters
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY TINGSHU WANG/REUTERS)
