"The Blazing World," Siri Hustvedt's sixth novel, plays on gender bias in the art world.
The Blazing World.By Siri Hustvedt.357 pages. Simon & Schuster. $26.
In the 1980s, a series of posters began appearing on the streets of New York. The most arresting one -- a yellow-and-crimson image of Ingres's "Odalisque" wearing a gorilla mask that demanded, "Do women have to be naked to get into the Met. Museum?" -- informed the viewer that "less than 5 percent of the artists in the Modern Art sections are women, but 85 percent of the nudes are female."
"The Blazing World," Siri Hustvedt's sixth novel, plays on the same art-world gender bias as this protest campaign by a group called the Guerrilla Girls. Harriet Burden, Ms. Hustvedt's pugnacious heroine, is an artist whose phantasmagoric multimedia installations, created from the 1970s to her death in 2004, have never received the acclaim they deserve. "The Blazing World," presented as a posthumous sampler of Burden's diaries, critics' discussions of her work and interviews with her family, friends and collaborators, is a portrait of a creative titan whose career and reputation have seemingly been blighted by the art establishment's ingrained sexism.
The novel's opening salvo is delivered by "Harry" Burden herself: "All intellectual and artistic endeavors, even jokes, ironies and parodies, fare better in the mind of the crowd when the crowd knows that somewhere behind the great work or the great spoof it can locate" -- and she then goes on to describe, in common slang, certain male appendages. "The Blazing World" examines the complex proliferation of truths surrounding this inflammatory statement.
Constructed as a Nabokovian cat's cradle, the novel purports to be the work of a professor of aesthetics named I. V. Hess (a play, perhaps, on the name of the artist Eva Hesse). The professor's inquiry into the life and career of Harriet Burden has been prompted by a 2003 letter to an arts journal in which the correspondent, who supposedly teaches philosophy at St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minn. (Ms. Hustvedt's own alma mater), claims to have discovered an elaborate hoax.
According to this letter (written, Hess eventually concludes, under one of Burden's many male aliases), the artist, embittered by her lack of recognition, embarked on an experiment. Over the course of five years, from 1998 to 2003, she produced three series of installations, called respectively "The History of Western Art," "The Suffocation Rooms" and "Beneath," enlisting for each series a different male artist who would present it as his own sole creation.
The results were telling. Whereas the homely, middle-aged Harriet had been dropped by galleries because her work was deemed "high-flown, sentimental and embarrassing," not to mention painfully earnest, no sooner is her art signed by a 24-year-old "hunk" than it wins sold-out solo shows and critical raves. More damning still, even once Burden is outed as the true author, reviewers and gallery owners refuse to admit they've been had. As one journalist puts it, "A 50-ish woman who's been hanging around the art world all her life can't really be called a prodigy, can she?" Like so many inconvenient women before her, Burden is labeled a hysterical fantasist.
Siri Hustvedt is far too subtle and multifaceted a raconteur to present us with a simple tale of institutional misogyny. "The path to the truth," in her heroine's words, "is doubled, masked, ironic." Harry Burden, as revealed through both her own testimony and that of others, is a self-sabotaging bundle of confusion. "Loud, lecturing, unpleasant," prone to haranguing or snapping at people who might be useful to her, alternating between gawky silence and explosive rage, the 6-foot-2-inch-tall Harry looks "like a cartoon character, big bust and hips,... a galumphing jump-shot-sized broad with long, muscular arms and giant hands, an unhappy combination of Mae West and Lennie in 'Of Mice and Men."' In one of the novel's most heartbreaking passages, Burden's childhood friend, now a psychoanalyst, tells us that the literary character with whom the teenage Harry most identified was Frankenstein's monster. "The terrible being Frankenstein makes is so lonely and misunderstood that his very existence is cursed.... His awful isolation is transformed into vengeance."
And yet, despite her XXL personality and her formidable intellect, Burden, like many of the heroines in Ms. Hustvedt's fiction, has spent her life fighting to win the approval of cool, remote men, subordinating her own ambitions to play perfect daughter, "wife and helpmeet." Burden's "burden," we come to realize, is not simply that she is a woman but that she has chosen to marry a rich, much older art dealer. It's no surprise if the artists she entertains in a Park Avenue apartment boasting a Paul Klee are more interested in whether her husband is going to buy their work than in asking after hers. Only when her husband, the aptly named Felix Lord, dies and the 60-something Burden has fled the "incestuous, moneyed, whirring globule composed of persons who buy and sell aesthetic objets" in Manhattan in favor of a grittier life in Brooklyn's Red Hook does she feel emboldened to restart her own career, this time under assorted male personas.
Burden's three forays into heteronymity have a fairy-tale flavor, and their neatly calibrated degrees of success seem to vindicate her thesis about the art world's biases. Anton Tisch, the "skinny kid in loose jeans" who agrees to father her first body of work, gets a sold-out solo exhibition and his face splashed all over hip downtown magazines. He poses for Gap-style ads for sneakers, gets "invited to countless parties" and sleeps with "girls who wouldn't have looked at him before." Phineas Q. Eldridge, the gay biracial performance artist who fronts her next series, lands a gallery show, but none of the critical attention bestowed on his straight white predecessor. The third, a media-savvy art-world darling "known only as Rune," sees "his" latest work greeted with the awe befitting "a swaggering tower of talent," an "avatar walking the earth."
Yet, as in a fairy tale, Harry Burden's hoax brings misery to almost all involved. This self-proclaimed "trickster," who has used her money to buy young men's compliance, winds up trapped in the mind games of a far more ruthless player. "Three masks, three wishes, always three," as she notes in her diary. "And the story will have bloody teeth."
"The Blazing World" offers a spirited romp through art history, Continental philosophy, psychiatry and neurobiology as its initial premise widens into extended meditations on how perception is determined by cultural preconceptions, on the limits of artificial intelligence and on the dialogic nature of artistic creation. Burden, like the first-person narrator of Ms. Hustvedt's 2011 novel "The Summer Without Men," is possessed of a mind that's "a storehouse for multiloquy, the flux de mots of myriad contrarians who argued and debated and skewered one another with mordant parley." Many of these same stalwarts -- including the philosophers Kierkegaard, Husserl and Merleau-Ponty; the neuroscientist Jaak Panksepp; the metaphysical poet Thomas Traherne -- appear regularly in Ms. Hustvedt's fiction and essays, and readers of her work may balk at being told yet again about the 19th-century neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot's study of hysterics at the Salpetriere Hospital or the real-life story of Freud's Anna O.
Yet if the theorizing in "The Blazing World" sometimes feels like a reworking of familiar ground, Ms. Hustvedt's portrait of the artist as a middle-aged widow is searingly fresh. It's rare to encounter a female protagonist who throws her weight around quite so grandiloquently as Harriet Burden, a heroine who is -- well, more like the hero of a Philip Roth or a Saul Bellow novel. Egomaniacal, lustful, intellectually omnivorous, alternately bullying and tenderhearted, self-lacerating and bold, Harriet Burden is an outsize Everywoman, raging against her own mortality. "I wanted to bite the world bloody, but I have bitten myself, made my own poor tragedy of things," she laments in a moment of almost Shakespearean self-knowledge.
In an odd twist, the final -- and most forgiving -- verdict on Burden's work is delivered not by a critic but by an uncultured young New Age healer who comes to calm the ravaged artist's death throes. "I turned around to take one last look at Harry's artworks, and then I saw their auras blazing out all around them," Sweet Autumn Pinkney recalls in the novel's concluding words, "and I knew for certain that each and every one of those wild, nutty, sad things Harry had made was alive with the spirit. For a second there, I could almost hear them breathing."
