With its lush green fields and trees, slate-gray roads and tiny blue backyard swimming pool, this aerial shot over Blue Ridge, Va., looks like any number of places in the United States.
It seems strange that an ordinary patch of land like this could offer clues about the political leanings of its inhabitants. But to some degree, it can. Think of it as the aerial-image version of those red-and-blue electoral maps.
Asked to describe this landscape, you might say it's mostly green. Sorting the image's pixels by color and brightness renders this impression even more precisely. In the image above where this sorting has been done, the lightest colors from pavement and rooftops appear at the bottom. Moving up the picture, the grays give way to the deeper greens of trees and fields. At the top, the darkest bands of color represent the shadows in the landscape.
This photograph and its corresponding color palette resemble many other places in America, but over all, the United States is a patchwork of built and natural landscapes, with a variety of features and hues.
You'll notice a general trend in these images above: from predominantly gray pavement at left to greener, more open spaces on the right.
But this grid represents less than one-tenth of 1 percent of the land cover of the country. To verify whether this gray-to-green, Democratic-to-Republican-leaning color trend applies to the contiguous United States, we had powerful computers process imagery of every square meter in precincts where votes were cast.
The pattern we observe below is consistent with the urban-rural divide we're accustomed to seeing on traditional maps of election results. What spans the divide -- the suburbs represented by transition colors -- can be crucial to winning elections. It's part of why President Trump, seeking to appeal to swing voters, has portrayed the suburbs as under siege and menaced by crime. But the suburbs are neither politically nor geographically monolithic. They are where Democratic and Republican voters meet and overlap, in a variety of ways.
At each extreme of the political spectrum, the most Democratic areas tend to be heavily developed, while the most Republican areas are a more varied mix: not only suburbs, but also farms and forests, as well as lands dominated by rock, sand or clay.
Lookalikes
Lookalikes exist across the political spectrum. When some landscapes are compared from above, their resemblances are striking, but on the ground, the political leanings of the precincts they are part of couldn't be more different.
Lookalikes are anomalies, though, in the sea of palettes that we can now use to help us visualize the urban-rural voter divide. Thanks to our growing ability to process enormous amounts of data, that phenomenon is now more accurately expressed not in blues and reds, but in grays and greens.
When you move around where you live, think about what colors you see. Those hues may say something about how your neighbors (and even you) might vote this November.
And that patch of green we began with in Blue Ridge, Va.? The precinct it is part of went for Donald J. Trump by a margin of 51 points in 2016.
Tim Wallace is a senior editor for geography at The New York Times. Krishna Karra is a machine learning scientist at WattTime. Additional production by Guilbert Gates and Alicia Parlapiano. About this project All images were derived from the National Agricultural Imagery Program (N.A.I.P.) and accessed via the Descartes Labs geospatial data platform. The Department of Agriculture collects high-resolution aerial imagery across the contiguous United States every two years. The images shown here were collected in 2016 and 2017. All imagery collection does not occur simultaneously; the process is split into multiple collections across states, which vary seasonally. Colors from multiple seasons may be incorporated into a single chart. To generate each color gradient map: N.A.I.P. imagery was indexed to 2016 precinct-level election results, creating a searchable set of image tiles, half a kilometer across, that cover nearly every square meter of the contiguous 48 states. Images were sorted into bins based on 2016 voter margin. For each bin, each image tile was processed to create a histogram that shows how many times each unique color value appears. The most frequent 100,000 colors for each voter margin class were sorted by luminance, from least to most bright.
