LONDON -- "Alexa, how do I treat a migraine?"
When British users ask Amazon's voice assistant system for medical advice, it can respond as of Wednesday with the authority of an organization once described as "the closest thing the English have to a religion": the country's National Health Service.
The collaboration, described by Britain's Department of Health and Social Care as a world first, has prompted immediate questions about medical privacy, and about the propriety of a state-run service forming a partnership with an overseas technology corporation.
Health advice from Alexa is not new -- Amazon has worked with the American medical site WebMB since 2017 -- but this time it represents a connection with a universal state health service, revered even as it creaks under the strain of tight budgets and an aging population.
The British health secretary, Matt Hancock, said Alexa could help reduce strain on doctors and pharmacists. "We want to empower every patient to take better control of their health care," he said in a statement, "and technology like this is a great example of how people can access reliable, world-leading N.H.S. advice from the comfort of their home."
His department added that voice-assistant advice would be particularly useful for "the elderly, blind and those who cannot access the internet through traditional means."
But social media users received news of the partnership with caution and disdain, especially given past concerns about how Alexa-enabled devices handle their users' information. In one case, for instance, Alexa appeared to have recorded and sent out a private conversation without the users' consent.
"Matt Hancock's N.H.S. deal with Amazon -- one of the most aggressive corporate data guzzlers -- risks people being profiled & targeted based on health concerns," Big Brother Watch, a nonprofit privacy campaigning organization, said on Twitter on Wednesday. "It's a data protection disaster waiting to happen."
"Entrusting Amazon's Alexa to dispense health advice to patients simply opens the door to the holy grail -- our N.H.S. data," Tom Watson, the deputy leader of the opposition Labour Party, wrote in a tweet.
A spokesman for the N.H.S. said no patient data would be shared and the partnership, which is not exclusive, would come at no cost to taxpayers.
Amazon also denied these charges on Wednesday.
The company insisted that they are not building health profiles, that no health information will be used to sell merchandise or make product recommendations, and that none of the information will be shared with third parties.
"Customer trust is of utmost importance, and Amazon take privacy seriously," said Gemma Cook, a spokeswoman for Alexa, on Wednesday, adding that customers could also control their voice history by reviewing or deleting voice recordings.
Professor Helen Stokes-Lampard, chair of the Royal College of General Practitioners, agreed that the system could help free up more doctors' appointments "for those patients who need them most."
But she said that N.H.S. advice from Alexa could "create a 'digital divide,"' with better service available to those who could afford a smart speaker. The cheapest Echo device currently costs just under 25 pounds, about $ 31, in Britain.
Rachel Coldicutt, the chief executive of Doteveryone, a research institute that advocates for responsible technology, said that the system "gives Amazon an opportunity to understand much more about people's illnesses, behaviors and problems," and could give the company data to help it start a health care business or a pharmacy.
Amazon bought PillPack, an online pharmacy, last year.
But Ms. Coldicutt said that she was less concerned about the privacy implications of Alexa's offering N.H.S. advice than "the comparative advantage it gives to Amazon."
"If an elderly person is choosing between smart speakers, they are more likely to get an Echo," she added.
Some of the skepticism around the announcement, Ms. Coldicutt said, could be related to the minister responsible for it, Mr. Hancock, who has a record of sometimes naïve enthusiasm for technology.
He was mocked last year after releasing an app offering information about his activities, also called Matt Hancock, which was found to have privacy problems of its own.
"He quite often mistakes things that seem innovative with things that are good," Ms. Coldicutt said.
