Parent-Teacher Association
By Jessica Powell
WE ONLY WANTED what was best for our children.
When they came to us at the start of the school year, looking for suggestions for their class science project, we had lots of ideas. "Make an app! Build a light bulb from a potato! Use your knowledge of physics to construct a 20-foot toothpick structure with no glue!"
But Ms. Perel, the new kindergarten teacher, had something else in mind. She lined our 6-year-olds up along the wall and measured their feet with a wooden ruler. The students graphed the measurements on a long sheet of paper, which Ms. Perel then presented to us at Back to School Night.
"We're learning about measurement!" chirped Ms. Perel.
Ms. Perel was an ex-engineer from a big tech company in California; our school had hired her as its top draft pick, beating out St. Ignatius, Choatham Academy and the liberal rich kid school with the small farm. And she was a woman, which ticked our Role Model box. But we didn't get it -- why was an engineer making dots on a piece of paper? Shouldn't she be teaching the kids how to code?
Then it hit us: This was obviously so much more than a chart. This was STEM for transcendence, STEM for understanding. Despite differences in class, race and their parents' political leanings, there was only a 0.5-inch foot-length difference between the tallest and shortest student in the class. If you connected the dots, the graph told a simple message: We are more alike than we are different. This was STEM for diversity.
"We should bring rulers into more parts of our children's lives," said one mother. "Show them more about their world. Show us more about their world."
Ms. Perel's face broke into a smile. This was probably her first real teaching victory, her first taste of the myriad benefits of the parent-teacher partnership. "I'd love to do that," she said.
Unfortunately, the unifying glow of the measurement project quickly wore off. The day after Back to School Night, Charles Marza -- whose foot was only 0.1 inch larger than Gia Morello's -- told Gia she smelled like old shoes. As a result, Gia refused to join in circle time, and missed the day's Spanish lesson because she was hiding under her desk. By the time her mother came to pick her up, little Gia was uno, dos, tres words behind the rest of the class.
"We should know right when these things happen," Charles's mother told Ms. Perel, glaring across the room at little Gia. The rest of us, gathered in the classroom for after-school pickup, nodded. We could help our children best if we could address their bad behavior in the moment it was happening.
We gently surrounded Ms. Perel like a warm hug. Would it be possible, we suggested, for her to implement a real-time behavioral monitoring tool? It'd be like the foot measurement experiment, but for behavior. Like a nifty wooden measuring implement, but online, and better.
Ms. Perel mumbled something about there only being so many hours in the school day to take on extra projects. We smiled and inched closer. "I guess I could build that," she said faintly.
Three weeks later, Ms. Perel was ready to demo it for us. We arrived promptly at 3:15 p.m., right after class had ended, and squeezed into our children's desks. Then, on a screen above the whiteboard, she projected her new student monitoring app, which used image recognition to classify and log each behavioral plus or minus. It assigned and tabulated scores for each child throughout the day, for everything from hair-pulling and name-calling to sharing and kindness. Any two-point shift in score triggered a notification to the parent.
"Here's an example from today," she said, pressing a button on the app. Charles Marza's gap-toothed smile materialized on the projector screen. To the right of Charles's picture was his behavior log. He had made faces during the Pledge of Allegiance at 8 a.m. (-1), but shared his sandwich with Kaylen at noon (+2). He hit Lucinda at 3 p.m. (-5), but showed empathy toward Pedro, who had stained his favorite dinosaur T-shirt during lunch (+4). Charles ended the day at zero.
"But I was never near Lucinda!" Charles wailed, burrowing his face in his mother's lap.
"My son doesn't lie," his mother said stiffly, wrapping her arms around him.
We spoke among ourselves. Charles could be lying. His mother could be lying. Did we have more data on Charles? Historical behavior patterns? Frequency of proximity to Lucinda?
Ms. Perel waved her hands, trying to get everyone's attention. She reminded us of a cute little bird learning to fly, furiously flapping its arms to keep itself in the air. We let her flap and continued our brainstorm. If we had the locations of each child, we would have a better idea of which were close to each other, close enough to hit.
"But I can already see the kids," Ms. Perel protested, "I know where they are."
"But what if someone kidnaps them?" asked Lucy Bouhouch's father.
"A babysitter gone rogue!" said someone else.
"An estranged mother-in-law!"
We murmured in agreement. A location tracker could save our children's lives.
We looked at Ms. Perel. She looked around the room, like a bird searching for an open window. Finally, she spoke. "So what you want is ..."
"More data," we responded. We surrounded Ms. Perel. She stepped back, bumping into her desk.
The next week, Ms. Perel arranged the children in an assembly line during arts and crafts period. Then, as she played songs about ducks on her ukulele, the children constructed their digital badges.
When we came to pick up the kids later that day, the badges were ready to be worn, attached to rope necklaces made in bright colors. They were a little heavy for 6-year-old necks, but Rob Jones's dad reminded us that a bit of tension in the neck was good for developing grit.
The children's badges were synchronized with Ms. Perel's behavior monitoring app, and worked just as we had requested. Through the app, we could track the location of each child and see which other children they were playing with.
"Using your tool, it seems you could easily tell whether a child was associating with someone who has low behavior scores," Nat Diamond's father said. "You could assign good scores for proper friend choices."
Ms. Perel's eyes bulged. "I don't think I'd feel comfortable deciding who the children should play with."
Of course she shouldn't, we told her. That was a parent's role.
"So you want access to the app," sighed Ms. Perel.
"Just an itsy-bitsy parent account," said Stella Marino's mother.
"I love technology, and I'm happy to use it in the classroom," said Ms. Perel. "But do we really need to track everything? How will your kids feel about it when they're older?"
"What is parenting if not constant data collection?" said Nat Jones's father.
Stella Marino's mother smiled warmly and placed her hand on Ms. Perel's wrist. "Brown bear, brown bear, what do you see? I see a parent account looking at me!"
After we made a few calls to the principal, Ms. Perel updated her software. Through the new parent console, we could now track the children's location, monitor their behavior and even send them digital hugs or strong admonishments in response to their actions.
We quickly became power users of the app. Each night at the dinner table, we parents would pull out our phones and review the day's behavior score and a time-lapse synthesis of our children's dotted movements on the map -- a much more interesting graph than the one the children had made a few months earlier with their little feet. This is your network, we told our kids. Each dot is an opportunity, a chance to connect; the more you connect, the larger your network.
A week after launching the console, Ms. Perel called an after-school meeting. She looked at us and took a deep breath.
"I'm finding the app disruptive. Some of you show up at school and follow the children around without looking up from your phone, bumping into the kids and other parents. And then there's the parental intervention feature -- sometimes you all press the admonishment button at the same time and the room sounds like a bunch of barking dogs."
Someone slid a plate of gluten-free cupcakes in front of Ms. Perel. Another pressed a gift certificate for a massage into her hand. We wanted to show her that the gratitude of empowered parents knows no bounds.
But a week later, the parental intervention features suddenly disappeared. Ms. Perel provided little explanation. At morning drop-off, she mumbled something to us about bugs and cloud infrastructure. When we protested, she reminded us that we'd still be able to see the children's scores each day and track their locations. But from now on, she said, the parents would have to trust her to discipline the children on her own.
"Besides," she said, "we can find other ways to use technology. There's a great writing app that I'd like to try."
"An app built by a private company?" scoffed Stella Marino's mom. "I'm not giving them my child's data."
Ms. Perel shook her head. "It's just an app where children use their fingers to trace letters on a screen. It's far more innocent than what you had me build."
But there was no way she could convince us. That handwriting app would probably track the evolution of our children's signatures as they grew up and sell needless, invasive ads for cartoon-festooned writing implements.
"Don't try to distract us," Charles's mom said to Ms. Perel. "This conversation is about our ability to use the parental console in the app. If we don't have access, how are we going to get the children to behave better?"
"Gold star stickers," Ms. Perel said flatly.
But someone else had a better idea. Sandra Lute's mother ran a social network that we used to post pictures of our vacations, our children and their diverse friend groups. She marched us down to the coffee shop one day and showed us how she had used deep learning neural something-or-other to analyze our pictures to determine our children's friend networks, interests, and preferences for cupcakes versus cake. It was a gold mine of information.
At that moment, we realized that if we could combine Ms. Perel's location and behavior data with our children's interests and social connections, we would know, and be able to anticipate, everything. We would be able to send microtargeted messages to our children -- pixelated love notes encouraging them to behave better, to brush their teeth, to love themselves and their classmates, to embrace difference and climate change and intersectionality and vegetables. We would surround our children with a cocoon of positive affirmations that would surely have a positive impact on their life trajectories.
We marched back to the school and confronted Ms. Perel in the classroom. "Absolutely not," she said angrily. "There are rules around these things. I checked, and, you know, I'm not even supposed to be building apps."
"Yes you are," said James's dad. "It's called 'STEM."'
"STEM! STEM! STEM!" we chanted.
"This has nothing to do with STEM!" Ms. Perel shrieked. "I should be teaching your kids about volcanoes and weather and climate change and how dinosaurs became extinct!"
"The dinosaurs wouldn't have died if they'd had access to the right data," snapped Stella's mom.
The next day, around 10 a.m., Ms. Perel's student monitoring app disappeared from our phones. We rushed to the school, images of disaster filling our heads -- of lice, an earthquake, kidnapping, the Rapture. We dashed to the kindergarten classroom, tripping over each other, pushing a few fourth graders as we ran to the large blue door with poorly drawn pictures of sunflowers.
The classroom was empty. The digital tracking badges that had connected us to our children were spilling out of the trash can. We rummaged through the pile, looking for our children, clutching their badges to our chest. Ms. Perel had left us a message on the whiteboard: Off to smell the flowers.
Stella's mother screamed. Rob's dad called the police. "Wait," someone said. "There's a garden somewhere around here. There might be flowers there."
We ran around the building until we found a fenced-in garden behind the school gym. We pushed past the rickety door and rushed in, stumbling into a small, grassy enclosure of ferns and flowers. Our 19 little angels -- and Charles Marza -- were lying on their backs, looking up at the blue sky; their fingers playing with the grass, the knees of their pants covered in dirt. No one was fighting. The notes of a ukulele skipped across the marigolds as Ms. Perel played her song about ducks and the children sang along.
We breathed a collective sigh of relief. Wasn't this what we had always wanted for them? To run free, breathe the fresh air and dream of life's possibilities?
We tiptoed through the garden and encircled their necks with their digital badges. Then we drew back, pushing ourselves along the fence. We watched our children float in and out of the day, watched their badges' gentle blue lights blink in anticipation of connection.
___
Jessica Powell (@themoko) is the former head of communications for Google and the author of "The Big Disruption: A Totally Fictional but Essentially True Silicon Valley Story."
