Artificial intelligence is not something found every day in the jewelry and watch sectors -- but then De Grisogono doesn't consider itself to be one of your everyday brands.
Last year the Geneva house made a splash at the Baselworld watch and jewelry fair with the Samsung Gear S2, a connected watch developed with Samsung Electronics. The Wi-Fi-enabled timepiece, with a rotating black- and white-diamond bezel and sharkskin strap, came with a host of applications.
Now the company has introduced the De Grisogono Botler, a Facebook Messenger application that delivers real-time advice and insider tips about the Swiss resort of St. Moritz. The ski destination is a beloved haunt of Fawaz Gruosi, the house's founder and creative director, and the Botler is designed around his lifestyle and artistic inspirations. (The name Botler is a play on "bot," for robot, and "butler.")
"The idea was to share Fawaz's secret -- or not so secret -- addresses," said Gianluca Maina, the company's marketing director.
Users asking, for example, "What is today's weather?" will receive not only the forecast and current snow conditions, but also suggestions for restaurants on the slopes, reservation links and ways to share locations with friends. Not a good ski day? The Botler will suggest down-mountain activities.
Of course the app also showcases De Grisogono's jewelry, and allows users to book boutique appointments.
Mr. Maina said the Botler, introduced in December, has been especially effective in communicating with customers after business hours. And the house hopes it will attract new clients who do not live near its 14 stores or, perhaps, win over younger, more digitally inclined audiences. Other destinations are planned.
The Botler learns by itself, and its accuracy of advice improves with use. "It's fun, interactive and sometimes a little bit surprising," Mr. Maina said.
Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion and Weddings) and Instagram.
Credit: By MING LIU

Identifier / keyword: Jewels and Jewelry; Artificial Intelligence; De Grisogono; Gruosi, Fawaz; Advertising and Marketing; Skiing; Alpine Skiing; Facebook Inc; Samsung Electronics Co; Geneva (Switzerland); St Moritz (Switzerland); Botler
