Email haggler@nytimes.com. Keep it brief and family-friendly, include your hometown and go easy on the caps-lock key. Letters may be edited for clarity and length.
_____
In this episode, the Haggler plays a hunch as he tries to help a weary international traveler. And in the process, the Haggler learns a valuable lesson: Don't play a hunch when trying to help a weary international traveler.
Q. After a long flight, I landed in Rome and headed to an American Express foreign-exchange counter in the airport. I expected to pay a premium to convert dollars to euros, but when I later looked at the receipt I discovered that, factoring in commissions and fees -- not to mention a truly awful exchange rate -- I had paid close to $200 for about $600 worth of euros.
An online chat with an American Express rep didn't yield any satisfaction. Maybe you can do better.
JAMES DESSER
POINT REYES STATION, CALIF.
A. Mr. Desser attached a transcript of the online chat he conducted with that American Express rep, and that's what really caught the Haggler's eye. Here is an excerpt. Let's see if the same idea occurred to you while reading it:
Melanie: Hi. Welcome to American Express Chat. My name is Melanie. How can I help you today?
[Mr. Desser explains the issue.]
Melanie: I will check your account to assist you.
Mr. Desser: Thanks.
Melanie: I apologize for the inconvenience caused to you.
Melanie: My pleasure.
Mr. Desser: BTW, I don't normally change money at airports, but I saw the logo and I knew I needed to get right on a train so I figured I would not be taken advantage of too badly.
Melanie: I completely understand your concern and I am afraid to share that we won't be able to comment on the exchange rate or percentage as it depends on counter and that day's rate.
Mr. Desser then says he feels gouged and expects better of American Express. Melanie replies with some pat-sounding mollifiers, including "I really appreciate your notifying this to us," and "I will certainly take this feedback and ensure it isn't repeated."
O.K., anyone else get the sense that Melanie is a computer? The transcript reads as though some algorithm is just picking up keywords, like "exchange rate," and spitting back canned responses, like "we won't be able to comment." Expressions of anger are deflected with rote replies.
If, in fact, American Express has substituted software for humans, it has achieved something remarkable. Specifically, it has created a customer service program that can pass the Turing Test.
Introduced in 1950, in the early stages of computer science, by the British logician and code-breaker Alan Turing, the test is intended to answer the question, "If a computer could think, how could we tell?" One answer, according to Mr. Turing, is that the machine could carry on a text-only conversation with a human, and the human would have no idea that he or she was interacting with a computer.
The test is simplicity itself: A person chats through text with a computer. The more people the machine can fool, and the more sophisticated conversations it can handle, the better.
There are annual Turing Test competitions for something called the Loebner Prize. And more than a few companies use chat bots to answer customer questions. But it's typically obvious to users that they are dealing with a computer. The Haggler is unaware of any major corporation using Turing-optimized software and, in effect, fobbing off the algorithm as a person. Is American Express? Before hearing back from the company, the Haggler conducted his own experiment. He opened an online chat with an American Express rep named Bruce:
Bruce: Hello! I am Bruce. How can I help you today?
The Haggler: Hi! Are you a human?
Bruce: How can I prove that I am a human?
Bruce: :)
Bruce: Yes, I am.
The Haggler: Really? What's your astrological sign?
Bruce: Virgo.
The Haggler: Shoe size?
Bruce: 9.
The Haggler: Mother's maiden name?
Bruce: If you have any confusion further, you can also speak to us over the call by calling on the number at the back of the card.
The Haggler: That sounded kind of computerish.
In hindsight, the Haggler was not posing very good Turing Test questions. Any computer faking a pulse would have ready answers to shoe-size-type queries. But this whole computer theory started to seem unlikely as the chat continued. At one point, Bruce typed, "I'm afraid, we are not supposed to help with the personal information."
Suddenly, the Haggler had a new idea.
"Where are you sitting, I mean geographically?" the Haggler asked.
"I am located in New Delhi," Bruce said.
Ah. This isn't a computer problem. This is an English-as-a-second-language problem.
Which was confirmed by American Express.
"We are not using computer programs to respond to Live Chat customers," an American Express spokesman, Thomas Sclafani, wrote a day later. "This servicing interaction, like all of our online chat interactions, was handled by a live customer care professional. This particular interaction is clearly not up to our standards, and we are following up with the individual to provide additional training."
As for Mr. Desser's money-exchange complaint, the American Express response boils down to "Tough luck, dude." Or, maybe "Exchanger beware" is more accurate.
"These rates and fees are clearly disclosed and competitive with other foreign-exchange bureaus in the airport," Mr. Sclafani continued. "The rates and fees also reflect the high costs associated with operating our foreign-currency exchange service at the airport."
And so our adventure comes to a thoroughly anticlimactic end. Mr. Desser is not getting any of his money back, and American Express has not quietly achieved a landmark in artificial intelligence.
The world, in some tales, is revealed as a place of justice and technological wonders. This, alas, isn't one of them. If you'd like to complain, please contact Melanie at American Express. She will take your feedback and ensure that it isn't repeated.
Illustration Drawing (Drawing by Christoph Hitz)
