ECONOMY
Services Sector Expands At Record Monthly Pace
The rate of expansion in the American services sector, where most Americans work, hit a record high in October as demand remained strong even as supply chain problems persisted.
The Institute for Supply Management reported Wednesday that its monthly survey of service industries -- which includes restaurants and bars, trucking companies, hotels and many other businesses -- jumped to a reading of 66.7 from September's reading of 61.9.
Under the index, which measures economic activity, a reading above 50 indicates growth.
Although business activity, new orders and supplier deliveries all surpassed previous records, sticky issues that have plagued economic activity since infections began to ease continued: labor shortages, supply chain bottlenecks and higher prices.
The reading for employment grew for the fourth straight month, but dipped slightly from September, creeping closer to contraction at 51.6. ASSOCIATED PRESS
MEME STOCKS
Shares Surge for Avis And Bed, Bath & Beyond
Shares of the rental car company Avis Budget Group more than doubled on Tuesday, in an unexpected surge that recalled earlier trading manias in GameStop, AMC Entertainment and other socalled meme stocks. Bed Bath & Beyond, the retailer that attracted interest during previous memestock episodes, also rose sharply.
The moves appeared linked to several factors, including positive corporate announcements, a surge in interest from retail investors and the squeezing of short sellers. Avis released better-thanexpected earnings and executives hinted at plans to buy more electric cars. Bed Bath & Beyond announced a partnership with the grocery chain Kroger.
More pertinently, perhaps, both companies are popular targets of short sellers, which also makes them appealing for "meme-stock" traders -- who get their name because they share ideas, team up and encourage each other on social media, adopting the inscrutable, joke-laden language of viral internet trends. JASON KARAIAN
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Australia Tells Clearview To Stop Scanning Faces
An Australian privacy authority has ordered facial recognition company Clearview AI to stop scanning the faces of Australians and destroy the images and related data it has already collected.
It's the latest challenge for the New York startup that has angered privacy advocates over its practice of "scraping" photos from social media to identify people wanted by police.
Australian Information Commissioner and Privacy Commissioner Angelene Falk said Wednesday that the company breached Australians' privacy by pulling their personal data from the web and disclosing it through its facial recognition tool.
Clearview said it would appeal the decision and challenged whether the regulator had jurisdiction over the company, which doesn't do business in Australia. Clearview, however, had provided its tool to some Australian police forces, but halted those trials. ASSOCIATED PRESS
Credit: By The Associated Press and Jason Karaian
Photograph (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID ZALUBOWSKI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
