Formula One's technological innovations are extending far beyond the realm of auto racing.
Formula One has always been an innovative force in technology for road cars, as the sport's teams seek quick, reliable solutions to create better, faster cars in an environment that is more competitive and evolves faster than that of the consumer car industry.
In recent years, however, as the series has moved away from purely mechanical to electronic systems in the racing car, in the pit-lane garages and the whole team environment of a race, innovations from the series have expanded far beyond the realm of the automobile.
They now extend into many other aspects of daily life, from training the military and hospital operating-room staff using pit-stop tactics to designing watches and luggage with Formula One car materials and techniques.
One of the most advanced extensions of the lessons learned through the harsh, competitive environment of a Formula One race is now helping to create a future that will touch on just about every aspect of life.
Known as the internet of things, it has to do with the electronic connectivity of our everyday lives and the vast network that has already begun to connect everything from our cars to the roads to our home and hospitals and even agriculture, with the "smart cows," with biometric monitoring and analysis, watching grazing rotations and milk solids data analysis.
The McLaren Formula One team has even connected sick babies with their telemetry system in a hospital in Britain to provide early warning of ailments, like a heart attack.
In fact, no other team of the sport's elite racing teams is as deeply involved in the study of improving the internet of things as is the McLaren team, through its sister company, McLaren Electronic Systems.
The company, which is based in Britain, provides the engine control unit, or ECU, to all of the other Formula One teams and, since last year, to the Nascar teams in the U.S.-based auto racing series.
An ECU is the electronic brain of a racing car that controls the engine to ensure optimal performance. It also sends data back to the team garage and the team factory, and that is one of the links to the internet of things.
The internet of things consists of the billions of connections, a kind of universal global neural network in the computing cloud, that is expected to make almost every aspect of our lives "connected" in the future.
McLaren's racing environment is branching out into the larger world via its work with the Freescale Semiconductor company of Austin, Texas, which considers itself the internet of things company.
Freescale provides the computer chips that are the brains and channels of this electronic equipment.
In a report on the internet of things by Kaivan Karimi, a director of Freescale Semiconductor, and Gary Atkinson, a director at ARM, a British semiconductor and software company, the authors use one of the most common examples to illustrate the functioning of the Internet of Things: a toaster.
"Your old toaster that mechanically controlled the color of your toast now has an MCU (a micro-controller) in it, and the MCU controls the color of your toast," the authors wrote. "The toaster completes its task more consistently and reliably, and because it is now a smart toaster, it has the ability to communicate with you electronically using its touchpad or switches."
"After a device becomes smart through the integration of embedded processing, the next logical step is remote communication with the smart device to help make life easier," they added. "For example, if I am running late at the office, can I turn on my house lights for security reasons using my laptop or mobile phone?"
That is precisely where the connection to Formula One and the ECU and other electronic sensors and telemetry of a Formula One car come into play. Freescale uses Formula One, something of a microcosm of the wider world of the Internet of Things, as a laboratory for developing its chips. >>
"A Formula One event is increasingly one in which everything is connected, just like the internet of things," said Peter van Manen, the managing director of McLaren Electronic Systems.
"You have the cars at the edges of the network, with more than 100 sensors, which are measuring all sorts of things about the vehicle," he continued. "And the reason you are measuring it is that you want to make the car faster and you want to be able to detect and deal with any problems that come up."
The sensors check hundreds of parameters on the car, everything from engine revs to engine temperature and from tire temperature and air pressure to fuel consumption and gearbox behavior. The data is sent to the garage for processing to develop an idea of when or if a problem might develop, or in the case of the tires, when they are most likely to begin wearing out and need to be changed.
A deeper layer of analysis is done in computers at the team's factory, where the same data may be analyzed in terms of how it had reacted to the environment at the track in the same race the previous year.
But while Freescale and McLaren Electronics use the Formula One environment to learn about future applications in the real world, they have not stopped at the track. They have developed work outside of racing that applies the Formula One racing environment and telemetry systems to an internet of things project at Birmingham Children's Hospital in Britain.
Since 2011, they have worked with the hospital to save the lives of babies under observation with serious illnesses.
Essentially, McLaren has taken its telemetry system that it uses to monitor the "health" of the racing car during a Formula One race and introduced it at the hospital to monitor the health of the babies there.
Sensors from the system are attached to the babies, monitoring breathing, heart rate, body heat, and other indictors. The data is processed in relation to normal readings. Doctors are thus warned well in advance by a signal if the babies may have a problem -- like an impending heart attack.
"Decisions taken in a moment can have a huge impact on the life of a child; it can be the difference between recovery or a lifetime of care," said van Manen of McLaren Electronic Systems.
"Acting quickly and decisively to an emerging situation lies at the heart of racing," he added.
Freescale uses its relationship with Formula One as a way to develop and stay ahead in the market and development of the internet of things.
"The thing that is interesting is that we make components, we understand the software that drives those components," said Steve Wainwright, Freescale's general manager for Europe.
"But it is always about systems," he added. "It's great to have this important part of the car but what happens in the car is where you really learn on what you can do to adapt. So what we get is application knowledge from somebody like McLaren because they will talk to us from a car level and it's up to us to see what that means for us, and how we will change our processor."
Wainwright said Formula One "has always been for us this great live environment, so you get to do R&D and these guys are do things quicker."
"They are changing the rules every year so there's always some adaptation you have to do, so it is usually higher frequency to test anything, trying to do it faster than you want to do it in real life," he added. "And you have to keep innovating."

Company: Freescale Semiconductor
