Siri is perfectly lovely bit of artificial intelligence, but she isn't always cooperative. Ask Siri to book airplane tickets, make a dinner reservation or find a song on Pandora, and she politely declines.
This is where Dragon Go comes in. It's a less personable but more capable app for people who like to speak instructions to the phone.
Dragon Go works differently from Siri. For one thing, it doesn't talk back. You issue instructions and it carries them out. The other is that it tells you where it is getting its information. So if you ask it to book a table at a restaurant, it returns results from OpenTable, which you know because of what's indicated in a tab at the top of the screen.
Try asking Siri to book you a table at a specific restaurant, and the best you'll get is a map with an unattributed star rating or, at worst, an apology, "I can't search near businesses. Sorry about that." I'm not convinced she means it.
Other tasks Dragon Go can help with is booking flights and hotels. The reason it can do more than Siri is Nuance has teamed up with 200 Web sites to make sure they play well with Dragon. The app has a full list on the settings page (touch the gear symbol in the upper left corner).
A neat feature is if you don't have the app you need to complete a request, Dragon Go Gives you a link so you can download without searching the App Store. Dragon Go is also available for Android. Both versions are free.
The app does a pretty good job with voice recognition, but it struggled with certain names and phrases. It had a terrible time with Chazz Palminteri's nearby pizza joint Chazz, for instance. And when I asked for songs not stored in iTunes it played the wrong thing or failed as often as it succeeded. The app works best if you learn how it likes to have questions asked. There are directions on the settings page.
Apple is likely to expand Siri's abilities, but for now, using Dragon Go Means never having to hear, "I'm sorry."
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph Photo
