How to create more diverse workplaces and how to use artificial intelligence ethically are among the more challenging dilemmas facing business and government.
While the issues may appear to have little in common besides their complexity, they do overlap. Recently, for example, according to news reports Amazon abandoned a hiring tool that used artificial inbtellgience because it favored men.
These topics were the subject of two separate task forces that met at last week's DealBook conference. Each task force, composed of about a dozen experts and industry leaders, met for an hour, emerging with some specific guidelines and focus areas that were shared with the conference and could be taken back to companies and other organizations for discussion.
Artificial Intelligence
Companies must be aware of and recognize that algorithms are not neutral, but created by humans with biases and beliefs and make every effort to eliminate those biases. It is far too easy to assume that technology has an objectivity that humans don't. But the reality is that "artificial intelligence and machine learning and algorithms in general are designed by none other than us -- people," said Dipayan Ghosh, a fellow at the Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy at the Harvard Kennedy School.
"A.I. takes input data and races off to make inference and decision making about the world at lightening pace," he said, and those inferences will include unacknowledged biases unless people are willing to recognize them and invest the time and money to weed them out.
Frida Polli, co-founder and chief executive of Pymetrics, which uses A.I. to recruit employees for companies, showed how biases could arise and how they could be diminished.
Algorithms used in A.I. are created using training data sets. If a training data has an overrepresentation of any gender or ethnicity, the features that distinguish that group may be overweighted.
To confront the problem, she said her company tested an algorithm on a reference group of people of different genders and ethnicities to check for bias. If there's an imbalance in the test run -- far more men, for example, or whites are predicted to be good hires rather than women or other races -- then "we can look at de-weighting features," she said, that alter the algorithm.
Technology companies can and should help the government -- and the military in particular -- develop and use artificial intelligence, but it must be done thoughtfully and carefully. One of the first issues to arise in the task force was Microsoft's decision announced last month to bid on a $10 billion cloud computing contract for the Pentagon. This was after Google dropped out of the bid and told the military it would not provide A.I. products to build more accurate drones or compete with China in creating weaponry.
"The debate is ongoing about when and how to share technology with the government and specifically should companies share digital technology with the military," said Peggy Johnson, executive vice president of business development at Microsoft.
Most of the task force agreed that partnerships between technology companies and government on A.I. could be beneficial, but Serkan Piantino, founder and chief executive of Spell, a company that builds tools for those building A.I. technology, said there should be limits.
"Automating the process to use lethal force is something I wouldn't be comfortable doing, given how little we know with what is going on with A.I. algorithms," he said.
A.I. requires transparency within the companies building and using it and with the public. Having company employees debate and speak out on potentially controversial issues involving A.I. -- such as at Microsoft -- is one form of transparency. Dennis Crowley, co-founder and executive chairman of Foursquare, said his company had internal discussions when making business decisions that might have ethical implications.
"Sometimes we have the opportunity to create more evil than good, and we need to talk about that," he said. One example, he said, was whether his company would work with fast-food chains that wanted to target those using cannabis dispensaries where it was legal. It hadn't been done before.
"This was right on the edge, so we went to the ethics committee," Mr. Crowley said. In the end, "we decided to do the campaign. It was legal and clever and a good use of technology around a category where we don't see a lot of advertising."
Cordell Schachter, the chief technology officer for the New York City Transportation Department, noted that transparency would be crucial with those creating the city's future transportation technology, which would be driven by A.I.
"We want to see the data -- and not cherry-picked data -- before it goes on the streets," he said.
Diversity and Inclusion
Companies should set targets and goals, along with incentives, as a way to foster a more diverse staff, but they shouldn't be used in a vacuum. "Aspirational goals are important, but " it's just not enough," said Stephanie Cohen, chief strategy officer for Goldman Sachs. "It's not enough to say you want to get the world or your company to 50-50 -- there needs to be transparency around that."
That means what specifically is the goal, and what is the company doing to achieve that goal -- "both good and bad," she said.
"There is a growing body of evidence that suggests cognitive diversity contributes to better decision making at the board level," said Cyrus Taraporevala, president and chief executive of State Street Global Advisors. "Studies show that diverse boards pay more attention to risk management and are less susceptible to cronyism and group think."
But there's a danger that goals become items to be checked rather than real change. Damien Hooper-Campbell, chief diversity officer at eBay, said that while setting goals and targets for diversity was important -- and backing it up with real costs, such as bonus deductions, if the goals aren't met -- you also have to "meet a company where it is."
If a company has just begun to focus on diversifying its work force, it needs to be educated on how to do it over time, he said. "People talk about how businesses measure widgets and productivity, so they can measure this, too. But there's a big difference between widgets and human beings."
Federal policies and legislation can play a role in promoting diversity in the workplace. Developing laws and policy to create diversity is not always a popular idea, but some say they believe that there are areas where government can help. John Hope Bryant, founder and chairman of Operation HOPE, a community organization, said there was a need for a federal policy to give credit to companies that offer internships and apprenticeships. When the effort is aimed at women and people of color, "you should get double credit for that double reach."
A federal policy to encourage paid family leave would also play a crucial role in promoting diversity, said Sallie Krawcheck, chief executive and co-founder of Ellevest, a digital financial adviser for women.
Federal policy could also help ensure that the information companies report on the makeup of their work forces and the compensation are truly transparent. For example, in Britain, many public-, private- and voluntary-sector companies are required to disclose average pay for men and women, including bonuses.
In the United States, said Lauren Taylor Wolfe, managing partner of Impactive Capital, "a lot of companies decide what they disclose and what not to disclose. If it's not done by level, it's not real transparency."
To be truly diverse and inclusive, a company must change its culture -- and that has to come from the top down. "You can have policy and tactics, but if the culture is not ready to receive it, it will be an organ reject," said Thasunda Duckett, the chief executive of consumer banking at JPMorgan Chase.
Or as Ms. Taylor Wolfe noted, "companies get what they celebrate, and if they celebrate diversity, they'll get it."
No one expects cultural change to happen quickly, but one of the important elements, Ms. Duckett said, is that bosses need to "manage to the difference." Don't manage everyone the same and expect the same results.
After all, parents don't expect each child to be the same -- they parent differently depending on a child's personality, strengths and weaknesses, she said. Managers have to do the same.
She also noted that diversity was not the same as inclusion and companies must be aware of that. "Diversity," she said, "is being invited to the party. Inclusion is being asked to dance."
Finally, change may seem glacially slow, but Mr. Hooper-Campbell said people shouldn't be surprised. "It wasn't but 100 years ago that I couldn't go to school with some of the people in this room."
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Top, the workplace diversity task force meeting on Thursday at the DealBook conference; above, Sara Menker, founder and chief executive of Gro Intelligence at the ethical A.I. task force; and an illustration for it.; Cyrus Taraporevala, president and chief executive of State Street Global Advisors, speaking at the diversity task force. At top, its illustration. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SEAN SMITH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
