ALBANY -- Charging headfirst into the modern world -- sort of -- the New York State Legislature went partly digital on Wednesday, as the Assembly established itself as "an electronic chamber," complete with tablet computers, touch screens and exceptionally limited web-surfing options.
"This is a good day for us," said James N. Tedisco, 64, a longtime Republican Assemblyman, whose district runs north from Schenectady. "Because it's a day where there's no scandal, hopefully; it's Earth Day; and it's a day when we've shown our constituents that we are going to save them a lot of money and accomplish what they asked us to."
Indeed, especially by Albany standards, Wednesday's rollout of the new technology seemed to be a success for members and Mr. Tedisco, who pushed for a paperless Legislature as a way to save taxpayer dollars and safeguard the environment.
"I'm an old man so I'm not computer literate," joked Peter Lawrence, 64, a first-term Republican assemblyman from Monroe County, peering at his newly installed screen. "But the times force you to keep up. And I think this is going to be very useful."
The change was years in the making in Albany, and still has not taken hold in the State Senate, the smaller, more staid chamber on the other side of the Capitol. And it came about, in typically tortured Albany fashion, with a caveat and a constitutional change: a wrinkle in the State Constitution, after all, requires that bills "shall have been printed and upon the desks of the members" for three days before any vote.
And so in November, the state's voters widely approved a measure to allow "electronic distribution" of bills, now accomplished via tablet computers installed this week at Assembly members' desks. (The tablets, and thus, the bills, are physically -- and constitutionally -- attached to the desk with a small docking station and a flexible tether.)
The information available on the tablets, however, is probably fairly disappointing for anyone accustomed to the wide world of Internet procrastination. The tablets' home screen has a single button leading to an internal website for the Assembly, with no access to external sites, meaning no cat videos, no video games and no snarky celebrity gossip.
On the internal Assembly website, the options are varied. Legislators can look up legislative calendar, bill information and text, and even the laws of New York.
The changeover came after decades of avid paper consumption by the Legislature, which printed approximately 9.5 million sheets of paper a year, or nearly 1,650 miles worth, laid end to end in 8 ½-by-11-inch sheets. It also comes even as other states and government entities have moved to reduce their paper use, including the federal government, where efforts date from at least the late 1990s.
But paper-pushing is still more common in statehouses than boardrooms, said Carl Malamud, a longtime advocate of the free distribution of public information.
"Government has always been far behind other organizations in embracing digital," Mr. Malamud said. "If you send paper copy in Silicon Valley before a meeting, you're going to lose your job."
Likewise, Paul E. Ceruzzi, the author of "A History of Modern Computing" (MIT Press, 2003), suggested that legislators might have another motivation for stemming the rise of the machines.
"They come from legal backgrounds, and they are very nervous about the percentage of their work being taken over by computers, especially with A.I.," said Mr. Ceruzzi, referring to artificial intelligence. "Unlike other professions where the workers have no choice to be pushed out by robots, the legal profession has medieval protections that they guard."
On Wednesday, there was no sense that the 150 members of the Assembly themselves were likely to be automated anytime soon. And sure enough, paper is not completely gone from the chamber: To guard against glitches, the Assembly plans to test the computer tablets through the rest of this legislative session, scheduled to end in June, before completely phasing out paper. (The Senate expects its own tablets in May.)
In the meantime, younger Assembly members -- some born well after the Apple II -- praised the new technology on their desks, which they said was overdue, but very welcome.
"The Assembly is finally keeping up with the times," said Nily Rozic, 29, a Democratic assemblywoman from Queens, who said she liked having legislative data at her fingertips. "And I look forward to giving tutorials."
Photograph Tablets and Touch Screens Were Rolled Out On Wednesday to the Assembly Members' Desks. The Electronic Filing and Processing of Bills Required an Amendment to the State Constitution. (Photograph by Nathaniel Brooks for the New York Times)
